Uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock is an important mechanical parameter required for the design of geotechnical, mining engineering and petroleum reservoir projects. In geotechnical and mining projects, rock cores are usually available to be tested for such purposes. In the petroleum reservoirs, however, the extreme high cost and time-consuming of coring operation is a main issue and thus, rock core for mechanical destructive testing are rarely available. In this study, a new technique is proposed for measuring the uniaxial compressive strength of reconstructed cores from rock cuttings. For this purpose, a total of 23 blocks of limestone having different densities including Asmari and Sarvak Formations from Western part of Iran and also Cretaceous limestone from Northern part of the country were used. After preparing appropriate cores from the blocks, uniaxial compressive strength test was performed on rock cores. Next, rock cuttings were produced from the same blocks and were reconstructed into artificial cylindrical specimens. The size of the rock cuttings varied between 0.075mm and 0.4mm, since it proved promising in preparing specimens with a maximum density of about 80% of the intact rock. Thus, cylindrical specimens with the diameter of 38mm and the length of 76mm were built from the cuttings using standard compaction test. Cores with the same dimensions were taken from the same rock blocks. The two sets of samples were next subjected to the uniaxial compression test.
                  Results showed an acceptable relationship between uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock cores and the unconfined compressive strength of reconstructed cores (qu). A correlation coefficient of about or higher than 0.85 was obtained between UCS and qu for all samples tested. The proposed method can be used for determining the UCS of rocks whenever no cores are available.Unconfined compressive strength (UCS) of intact rock is a key parameter required for the design of various geomechanical problems ranging from wellbore instabilities during drilling ( Cores are not readily available from the majority of oil and gas wells, Preparation and testing of core samples are time-consuming and expensive ( Preparation of standard cylindrical samples from the jointed rock mass is not possible, Appropriate geophysical logs are not always available for the reservoir interval ( Well logs are run after drilling, thus are affected by the reservoir status and do not provide geomechanical understanding of rock properties being drilled in real time ( Mechanical properties of overburden material have a major role in well stability, but no cores or logs (except temperature and density) are run in the well above reservoir level ( This study presents a new methodology for estimating UCS of rocks from drill cuttings. Firstly, core specimens are reconstructed from rock cuttings. Secondly, the reconstructed cores are subjected to uniaxial compression test and the results are compared with the UCS of intact cores. Strength of material is dependent upon different parameters such as cohesion, friction and existing fractures. Among these, the proposed methodology utilizes friction between rock fragments and tries to correlate this to the UCS of intact cores. Friction between rock particles can partly be function of the rock properties (in addition to particle shape) and thus allow us to correlate it to other rock characters like UCS. This method, however, cannot capture cohesion of the intact rock, neither the natural fractures. This paper presents a new laboratory method for measuring the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rocks from drill cuttings. The methodology has also been presented in Preparation of rock cuttings and rock cores, Determination of the appropriate size of cuttings, optimum water content and maximum density of cuttings for reconstructing cylindrical specimens, Building artificial cores and conducting uniaxial compression tests on reconstructed cores as well as on intact rock cores. A total of 23 blocks of limestone were collected from different parts of Asmari and Sarvak Formations, two major Iranian petroleum reservoirs, from Western Iran as well as samples of Cretaceous Limestone from Northern Iran. Some details of the samples including sample location, formation, rock type and average porosity are given in Rock cuttings were produced from the natural blocks using a crushing machine. The size of produced cuttings covered a wide range; from clay to gravel, but a special size was used for core reconstruction as described in next section. Rock cores from the same blocks were drilled out for uniaxial compression testing. An extensive laboratory study was conducted to determine which fractions of rock cutting are the most suitable for core reconstruction. The criterion was set to build cylindrical specimens with the maximum possible density. Construction of high density cores depends on several factors. The most important ones are grain size and optimum water content. Various size fractions of the produced cuttings were separated to be examined for core reconstruction. For determination of optimum water content, the standard compaction test was carried out according to A few types of limestone with different physical properties were tested ( The reconstructed specimens (diameter of 38 The uniaxial compressive strength of intact cores ranged from 63 to 212 The uniaxial compressive strength of intact core specimens (UCS) was plotted against the compressive strength of the reconstructed cores (q The best quadratic curve from This implies that physical properties of original samples are pronounced in the structure of the reconstructed cores. Therefore, it should be possible to estimate the uniaxial compressive strength (and probably other mechanical characteristics) of the rocks from rock cuttings. For this reason, we verify these equations for a few rock samples in the next section. In order to verify Eqs. Rock cores of sample E (E1 through E5) were provided in the same way as the samples tested and reported in The predicted UCS values derived from Eqs. For further verification of the predicted UCS of intact cores from reconstructed specimens, the linear correlation between the two was examined for samples E1–E5 (see There is a strong correlation between the estimated and measured UCS which confirms the potential of using this method, UCS estimated from both linear and nonlinear modes are lower than that of the laboratory tests, and UCS estimated from nonlinear equation is closer to the measured laboratory values. Results of the tested specimens show that values of predicted and direct measured uniaxial compressive strength are reasonably close together. Hence, estimating the UCS of rocks from drill cuttings with an error of less than 10% could be a good achievement for cases where no cores are available. A new method is introduced to estimate the uniaxial compressive strength of rocks from rock cuttings. The method includes reconstruction of artificial cylindrical specimens from rock cuttings with a density approaching about 80% of the density of intact rocks. For this purpose, drill cuttings are compacted in the standard compaction apparatus. The reconstructed cylinders are then subjected to unconfined compressive test. The obtained value is called the compressive strength of reconstructed core, q The q