Utilization of dusts generated by steelmaking industries prevents the disposal of wastes and enhances the use of secondary raw material. This work aimed to study the simultaneous recycling of steelmaking dust and blast furnace sludge (BFS) by using microwave heating. The possibility of utilizing BFS as a reducing agent to remove zinc from the dusts was studied. Three steelmaking dusts obtained from steel plants in Finland with varying zinc concentrations and zinc-containing phases were studied.
                  Mixtures of the dusts and graphite, bulk BFS, >250 µm BFS, and >125–250 µm BFS reductants were heated for 20 min at the microwave power of 1100 W. The results indicated that the zinc removal efficiency depends on the amounts of iron oxide and calcium oxide in the mixtures. The highest zinc removal was observed for mixtures with high calcium oxide and low iron oxide contents. Zinc removal of 92.79–96.06% was achieved for mixtures with >125–250 µm BFS and >250 µm BFS reductants. Therefore, to achieve efficient zinc removal, coarser fractions (>125 µm) of BFS should be utilized. Owing to the excellent microwave absorption and high carbon content of the sludge, BFS can be applied effectively in the processing of steelmaking dusts.Dusts and sludges with different compositions are generated in iron and steelmaking processes in Finland. In Tornio steel plant, chromium converter (CRC) is used to treat liquid ferrochrome from ferrochrome melting shop, whereas an electric arc furnace (EAF) is used to melt the scrap Blast furnace sludge (BFS) is generated during the purification of flue gas leaving the blast furnaces used in pig iron production The direct recycling of dust back to steel production is hindered owing to the presence of zinc, which causes operational difficulties in the steelmaking processes The objective of this work is to study the simultaneous recycling of steelmaking dust (CRC and EAF) and BFS by using microwave heating. Owing to the high economic value of Zn and Fe, this study aimed to separate Zn as a valuable element and reuse the remaining material in steelmaking processes. The present work proposes the possibility of utilizing BFS as a reducing agent to remove zinc from the steelmaking dusts, owing to the high carbon content of the sludge. Microwave irradiation is applied as a heating source; the main advantages of microwave heating are volumetric, selective, and fast heating Three steelmaking dusts and a BFS sample were used in this study: Ferrochrome converter (CRC) and EAF stainless steel (EAFSS) dusts were obtained from Outokumpu Tornio stainless steel plant, Finland. EAF carbon steel (EAFCS) dust was obtained from Ovako Imatra, Finland. A BFS sample was obtained from SSAB Europe Oy, Raahe, Finland. Each dust is a representative sample of the average dust composition. The sludge sample was obtained from the discharge of a centrifuge. In this study, BFS was used as a reducing agent. The percentage of reductants in the mixtures was calculated according to the stoichiometric amount of carbon required to reduce all the zinc oxide (as both zincite and zinc ferrite) in the sample. Therefore, the amounts of reductants added varied depending on the carbon contents of the reductants and the zinc contents of the dusts. The amount of carbon added was twice the stoichiometric amount required to reduce all the zinc oxide (as zincite and zinc ferrite) to elemental zinc. The diagram of the microwave experimental setup is shown in The samples were placed in a microwave transparent alumina crucible. At the end of the experiment, the residue remaining in the crucible was cooled to room temperature in the microwave oven. Subsequently, the residue was sent for chemical analysis to determine the chemical composition and rate of zinc removal. The removal of zinc from steelmaking dusts is based on a carbothermic reduction of ZnO/ZnFe The mineralogical composition was measured using X-ray diffraction (XRD); Rigaku SmartLab, 9 kW). The measurements were obtained with cobalt tube in the 2θ range of 4–90°. The chemical composition of the raw samples were determined using Bruker AXS S4 Pioneer X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. The zinc contents in the residues after the experiments were measured using atomic absorption spectroscopy (ASS). Perkin Elmer A Analyst 400 flame atomic absorption spectrometer +S10 autosampler was used. Zn was inserted into HNO The microstructure and microanalyses of the raw samples and residues were investigated using a Zeiss ULTRA plus field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), attached to an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) unit for chemical analysis. The particle diameters were determined via a laser diffraction and scattering method using a Beckman Coulter LS 13 The chemical composition of the steelmaking dusts are listed in The identified phases in CRC, EAFSS, and EAFCS dusts are shown in The chemical composition of BFS demonstrated that Fe and C were the dominant elements in BFS. The contents of Fe and C were 38.95 and 24.90 wt.%, respectively. The BFS also contained Si, Ca, and minor amounts of Zn ( The behavior of CRC, EAFSS, and EAFCS dusts as a function of temperature is shown in Both Ca(OH) The behavior of the dusts with a reducing agent is shown in The behavior of CRC under reducing conditions is shown in This reaction is a combination of the following reactions: The reaction at the high temperatures of 1222–1297 °C is attributed to the formation of calcium ferrite. At high temperature, the calcium carbonate contained in the sample began to decompose and the free calcium oxide combined with the free iron oxide to form calcium ferrites The behavior of EAFSS and EAFCS with a reducing agent is shown in First, ZnFe In the case of EAFSS dust, at the high temperature of 1235–1391 °C, a deep valley was observed in the DSC ( The heating behavior of a material in a microwave field is determined by its dielectric properties or dielectric permittivity The temperature (T) profiles with time at the microwave power of 1100 W are shown in The effect of the addition of BFS on the heating efficiency of steelmaking dusts was studied at the power of 1100 W. The amount of BFS added to the dusts was 20% of the total mixture mass. The main results of microwave heating of the mixtures of CRC at the power of 1100 W are presented in The chemical compositions of residues demonstrated that the residues of the mixtures with bulk BFS reductant were rich in Fe content (29 wt.%) owing to the high Fe content in raw BFS, whereas the residues of other mixtures contained significant chromium. The overall lead contents in all the residues was reduced from 0.11 to 0.025–0.029 wt.%. The chloride level was reduced from 0.29 to 0.05 wt.%. The alkaline elements Na and K were significantly reduced from 1.25 and 0.61 wt.% to 0.48 and 0.20 wt.%, respectively. A comparison between the XRD patterns of raw CRC dust and the residues showed that ZnO peaks disappeared completely after microwave heating of the mixtures of CRC:>125–250 µm BFS and CRC:>250 µm BFS for 20 min ( The SEM images of the residues obtained after heating the mixtures of CRC:graphite and CRC:>250 µm BFS are shown in The main results of microwave heating of the mixtures of EAFSS for 20 min at the power of 1100 W are presented in The residues of all the mixtures were rich in Fe contents (about 35–39 wt.%), in addition to calcium, magnesium, and silica. The lead contents in all the residues were significantly reduced from 0.60 to 0.10 wt.%. The chloride level was reduced from 1.25 to 0.07 wt.%. The alkaline elements Na and K were reduced from 3.67 and 1.23 wt.% to 0.62 and 0.20 wt.%, respectively. The XRD of the solid residues of the EAFSS mixtures after microwave heating are shown in  The main results of microwave heating of the mixtures of EAFCS are presented in Chemical analysis showed that the residues in all the mixtures were rich in Fe (approximately 37–42 wt.%) and calcium (6–12 wt.%) contents. The lead content in all the residues was reduced from 2.15 to 0.16 wt.%. The chloride level was reduced from 1.69 to 0.05 wt.%. The alkaline elements Na and K were reduced from 6.36 and 2.66 wt.% to 2.01 and 1.21 wt.%, respectively. XRD indicated that the diffraction peaks of ZnO disappeared after microwave heating in all the mixtures (  The heating behavior of the samples with microwave is in accordance with the measured dielectric values of the samples. In comparison to the BFS dielectric values, the dielectric values of the CRC, EAFSS, and EAFCS dusts were low ( The effect of the addition of BFS on the zinc removal from steelmaking dusts was evaluated for different mixtures ( The amounts of iron oxide phases in the mixtures were observed to have a strong influence on the zinc removal rate. The results revealed that the zinc removal in the case of mixtures with >125–250 µm BFS and >250 µm BFS reductants was higher than that in the case of mixtures with bulk BFS reductant ( The amounts of calcium oxide in the mixtures can influence the efficiency of zinc removal. The highest zinc removal was observed in mixtures with high CaO contents. The free calcium oxide in the mixtures can combine with the free iron oxide to form calcium ferrites ( The particle size, carbon content, and type of the reductant can also affect the Zn removal reaction The residual carbon content for the tests is shown in In summary, the efficiencies of zinc removal in the case of mixtures with >125–250 µm BFS and >250 µm BFS reductants were due to low iron oxide and high coke and calcium oxide contents in these fractions, as indicated by the investigation of different size fractions of BFS. Therefore, in order to achieve efficient zinc removal, coarser fractions (>125 µm) of BFS should be used. The present work aimed to study the possibility of utilizing BFS to remove zinc from steelmaking dusts by using microwave heating. On the one hand, the steelmaking dusts CRC, EAFSS, and EAFCS are composed mainly of zincite, franklinite, and chromite, which are classified as difficult-to-heat materials. On the other hand, BFS consists mainly of carbon and iron oxide, which are classified as excellent microwave absorbers. The results indicated that the addition of BFS to the steelmaking dusts significantly improved the microwave heating efficiencies of the dusts. The results indicated that zinc removal efficiency was influenced by the amounts of iron oxide and calcium oxide present in the mixtures. The highest zinc removal percentages in the case of mixtures with >125–250 µm BFS and >250 µm BFS reductants were due to low iron oxide and high coke and calcium oxide contents; therefore, more reducing agent was available to reduce all the zinc oxide. In order to achieve an efficient zinc reduction rate, coarser fractions (>125 µm) of BFS should be used. The results indicated that BFS can be applied effectively in the removal of zinc from steelmaking dusts. The proposed method has economic and environmental advantages such as utilizing BFS as a reductant and saving the cost of reducing agent, and reducing the environmental impact of sludge landfilling. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of