Purpose
                  To review the techniques and outcomes of percutaneous fixation, with the modified Essex-Lopresti technique, in isolated, displaced tongue-type calcaneal fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  This is a retrospective review of 24 patients who received percutaneous calcaneal screw fixation in our hospital, from April 2003 to June 2009. One patient had bilateral fixation performed. All patients had a serial of X-rays of the injured foot, which included anteroposterior, axial, lateral, and Broden’s views. Preoperative and post-operative Bohler’s and Gissane’s angles were measured. The patients’ conditions were continuously assessed in serial follow-ups, and the Maryland Foot Score was used to evaluate the clinical outcome.
               
                  Results
                  Bohler’s and Gissane’s angles were fully restored in 13 and 17 out of 25 fractures, respectively. The mean duration of post-operative hospital stay was 4 days. There were no major post-operative complications. Sixteen patients were able to resume their original jobs. The Maryland Foot Score rated 13 out of 25 injured limbs (52%) as excellent, 9 (36%) as good, and 3 (12%) as fair. There were no patients rated as poor. The three patients with fair results complained of pain and stiffness at the subtalar joint.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Percutaneous fixation of displaced tongue-type calcaneal fractures is an effective treatment with acceptable clinical outcome, short hospital stay, minimal skin complications, and quick recovery.Traditionally, calcaneal fractures were only treated by compression wrapping. In 1975, Soeur and Remy Posterior facet displacement is considered the key prognostic factor, as illustrated by a prospective study. Controversies have been existing concerning the standard operative treatment for calcaneal fractures. In the past, several reports encouraged open reduction and internal fixation as the treatment for displaced calcaneal fractures. However, some catastrophic complications, including wound complications and sural neuritis, were questioned. The percutaneous technique may take advantage of minimising complications from open procedures. The purpose of the current study was to review the techniques and clinical outcomes after percutaneous fixation of calcaneal fractures. From April 2003 to June 2009, 24 male patients with displaced tongue-type calcaneal fractures received percutaneous screw fixation in our hospital. Exclusion criteria include multiple injuries, fractures with comminution or having more than one primary fracture lines. A standard series of plain X-rays of the ankle and foot were taken. The anteroposterior view allows the assessment of the calcaneocuboid joint. The lateral view facilitates the measurement of both Bohler’s and Gissane’s angles, which indicates the severity of the injury and may have a prognostic value. Under general or spinal anaesthesia, the patients were in prone position. Split-legs operative table was used to facilitate lateral X-ray imaging by C-arm fluoroscopy ( The first step was to insert a 3-mm Steinmann pin superolateral to the Achilles tendon ( A guide pin was inserted parallel to the Steinmann pin, through the tongue fragment and across the fracture site, in fixing the superomedial fragment. Lateral and axial X-ray screening was performed to confirm correct placement of the guide pin. A self-tapping 4.5-mm cannulated screw was inserted after drilling. The Steinmann pin was removed, and the same entry site was used for the placement of the second guide pin across the fracture line, similar to the first pin. The second screw was then inserted. In patients with excessive heel widening, another bone clamp was used to compress the primary fracture line, and the fracture was subsequently fixed with one to two transverse cannulated screws. This screw can only be applied if there is no comminution of the lateral wall. Careful fluoroscopic screening was essential to avoid screw penetration into the sinus tarsi. Active range of movement exercises of the ankle and foot were commenced on post-operative Days 1–2. Patients were referred to outpatient physiotherapy on discharge. Full weight-bearing walking was initiated at 6–8 weeks depending on the progress of bone healing. Patients had first follow-up at 2 weeks for wound assessment; second follow-up at 6 weeks for plain radiographic evaluation of fracture healing and whether weight-bearing walking should be initiated; and subsequent follow-ups at 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year. The average age of the patients was 47 years, ranging from 27 years to 60 years. Injury mechanisms included falling from height in 19 patients and slipping in five patients. Five patients had bilateral involvement, with one being operated bilaterally. For radiographic evaluation, bone union was present in all 24 patients. Bohler’s and Gissane’s angles were fully restored in 13 and 17 out of 25 fractures, respectively ( The average length of post-operative hospital stay was 4 days, ranging from 1 day to 13 days. All except two patients were discharged from acute ward within the first week after operation. There were no wound complications and no sural nerve or peroneal tendons injury. No osteomyelitis was reported. One patient was noted to have loss of reduction with a persistent 3-mm fracture gap in post-operative X-rays. Screw revision was performed 1 month later, and subsequent X-ray and CT imaging showed that the fracture had finally united with minimal displacement. Removal of implant was performed 1 year after the initial injury. This patient had a fair result using the Maryland Foot Score, and finally, returned to his original job as a waiter. The mean length of follow-up was 2 years, ranging from 17 months to 28 months. Sixteen out of 24 patients (67%) were able to resume their original jobs, including four construction site workers, four decoration workers, and others being waiter, bus repairer, clerk, electrician, and security guard. Three patients have changed jobs, and three have quit their original jobs. Two patients originally had no job. Four patients were pain free on the latest follow-up. There were 16 patients with mild pain, four patients with moderate pain, and none with severe pain. Twenty-three patients were walking unaided. There were 10 patients with subjective ankle stiffness, four with reduced ankle movement, 12 with reduced ankle eversion and inversion, and none with ankle instability. Twenty-four operated limbs had normal calcaneal height, width, and length, compared with those of the contralateral side, excluding one patient with a bulging lateral wall of the calcaneum. The Maryland Foot Score rated 13 patients (52%) as excellent, 9 (36%) as good, and 3 (12%) as fair ( Although there is no consensus on the best treatment for calcaneal fractures, in general, it is well accepted that treatment should aim at anatomical restoration of the joint articular surface and width-height-length of the heel to achieve functional recovery. It is common that open fixation of calcaneal fractures may be associated with wound and neurovascular complications. To reduce such complications, Essex-Lopresti Tornetta Radiographic evaluation was performed by measuring preoperative and post-operative Bohler’s angle and the crucial angle of Gissane. In our study, Bohler’s angle was fully restored in 13 out of 25 fractures and crucial angle of Gissane in 17 out of 25 fractures ( By using the Maryland Foot Score, there were 13 (52%) excellent, 9 (36%) good, and 3 (12%) fair results. The numbers of good or excellent clinical results were comparable to the results in a series of tongue-type calcaneal fractures using similar percutaneous fixation technique in the literature ( In our review, the introduction of the Essex-Lopresti percutaneous technique helps to decrease scar formation resulting in reduced residual stiffness with improved clinical and cosmetic outcomes ( Patient selection is important for the success of this operative technique. Preoperative radiological analysis of fracture pattern is necessary. Use of intra-operative fluoroscopy facilitates correct anatomical implant placement. Before screw insertion, the use of bone clamps helps to provide traction and temporary stabilisation of the reduced fracture fragments. For Chinese patients, application of smaller 4.5-mm screws can provide adequate fixation stability while diminishing the chance of screw head impingement. For fractures with an intact lateral wall, we recommend the insertion of one to two additional transverse screws in fixing the primary fracture line. In conclusion, percutaneous fixation of displaced tongue-type calcaneal fractures is an effective treatment with short hospital stay, minimal skin complications, and acceptable clinical outcome. The authors thank Dr Chan Sai-Keung [FHKAM (Orth), FHKCOS], private specialist.