A diagnostic leaching showed that partial oxidation of the sulphide minerals in a gold ore was beneficial for thiosulphate leaching of gold. A pre-treatment process with oxidative ammoniacal solution enhanced the thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore, while the thiosulphate consumption was substantially reduced. The sulphide minerals partially decomposed in the pre-treatment process, exposing gold to the leach solution. Oxygen input by air bubbling and a longer contact time enhanced the oxidative ammonia pre-treatment process and hence accelerated subsequent thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore. Gold extraction in 0.8M ammonia and 0.1M thiosulphate solution after 24h increased from 69% without pre-treatment to 81%, 84%, 90% and 94% respectively after 1, 3, 7 and 22h pre-treatment. The consumption of sodium thiosulphate was 2.37kg/t after 24h leaching without pre-treatment, but was negligible after over 1h oxidative ammonia pre-treatment. A counter-current leaching process was conducted in the leaching of the sulphide ore. The fresh leachant still gave higher leaching rates in contact with the pre-leached ore, while the pre-used leachant had significantly lower leaching kinetics and overall gold extraction in contact with the fresh ore. This 2-step counter-current leaching process proved that the leachant, other than the passivation, was the determinant factor causing the gold leaching rates to decrease after a certain time of leaching. The findings enable the thiosulphate leaching of high sulphide containing gold ores to be more efficient at lower thiosulphate consumption following the oxidative ammoniacal pre-treatment.Thiosulphate gold leaching has received much attention as an alternative technology to the cyanidation of gold ores in recent years due to the growing environmental and public concerns over the use of cyanide. Acceptable gold leaching rates using thiosulphate have been achieved in the presence of ammonia with cupric ion acting as the oxidant. Successful large-scale pilot plant testing of thiosulphate leaching of gold has been carried out by Newmont Mining Corporation ( The successful application of the thiosulphate leaching of sulphide ores depends not only on the dissolution behaviour of gold and silver, but also critically on the behaviour of the associated minerals. Pyrite, chalcopyrite, chalcocite, bornite, pyrrhotite and arsenopyrite are the main sulphide minerals locking gold in refractory sulphide gold ores. The refractoriness of these ores is due to fine patches of gold in the sulphides. In order to recover gold, these high sulphide containing ores require at least partial oxidation prior to thiosulphate leaching, by chemical oxidation, dissociation or roasting as well as by bacterial or acidic leaching. Newmont Gold Co patented a microbial inoculation/agglomeration process for rapid initiation of bio-oxidation of refractory ores in heaps followed by thiosulphate leaching ( Sulphide minerals partly dissolve in ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions ( Ammonia, as one of the reagents for the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching, is required to stabilise copper(II) in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching. It is expected that a pre-treatment with oxidative ammoniacal solutions could improve gold leaching and lower thiosulphate consumption due to the partial oxidisation of sulphides prior to the addition of thiosulphate. It is the objective of this paper to investigate the effect of pre-treatment with oxidative ammoniacal solutions on thiosulphate leaching of a sulphide gold ore. Also examined is the effect of the step-wise addition of thiosulphate on gold leaching as well as thiosulphate consumption. A two-step counter-current leaching process is attempted to investigate the leaching behaviour of the pre-leached ores in contact with the fresh leaching solutions and the fresh ores in contact with the pre-used leach solutions. A sulphide gold ore was obtained from a Newcrest gold mine with a particle size of 80% passing 75 Laboratory grade sodium thiosulphate and ammonia water (25%) were provided by Westlab Chem Supply Pty Ltd, Australia. Analytically pure cupric sulphate, hydrogen peroxide (30% W/V), hydrochloric acid and nitric acid were obtained from Merck. Distilled water was used in the experiments. Elemental concentrations in solutions were determined by ICP-OES, involving the oxidation of sulphur species as stable sulphates prior to the analysis. After oxidation by hydrogen peroxide, solutions were acidified with aqua regia and boiled to ensure conversion of the metal species to their chloride forms. The thiosulphate concentration was determined by an iodometric method. In order to eliminate the effect of the cupric ammonia complex on iodine titration, acetic acid (10% solution) was added prior to the titration with the indicator Vitex. A platinum electrode (M21Pt, Radiometer) was used to measure the solution potential with a double-junction reference electrode (Ag/AgCl, saturated KCl, Orion) to eliminate the interference of thiosulphate with the reference electrode. All potentials were given with respect to the Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE). The concentration of the cupric ammonia complex was monitored at 618 Leaching of the sulphide ore was performed in a 1.5 Diagnostic leaching was applied for the sulphide ore, in order to determine the deportment of gold in the ore. Three types of diagnostic leaching were performed and the results summarised in Acid washing with 2 Ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching with varied reagent concentrations — to determine the leachable portion of gold, i.e. the gold that is readily accessible to ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions; Hot 5 The acid wash did not dissolve any gold showing that no adsorbed gold complexes were present on the mineral surfaces in the sulphide ore. A gold recovery of 91% was achieved in the direct ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching with 0.25 In the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching, sulphide minerals oxidatively decompose to partially or completely release gold from the sulphide matrices. In this process, the sulphide minerals will, however, consume dissolved oxygen in the solution and catalyse the decomposition of thiosulphate. This will cause the excessive thiosulphate consumption and leaching passivation due to thiosulphate decomposition in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of sulphide ores. Thus, the implementation of an oxidative pre-treatment is necessary for partial breakdown of the sulphide matrices to release gold. The pre-oxidised sulphide ores will be more amenable to the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching with higher gold recoveries and less thiosulphate consumption. The sulphide ore of 400 The oxidation reactions of chalcopyrite and pyrite in the oxidative ammonia leaching are expressed as follows ( The oxidative dissolution of the sulphides in the ammoniacal solutions was confirmed by the SEM images of the pre-oxidised sulphides in After the oxidative pre-treatment with the ammoniacal solution, the solution potential increased in the thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore, as shown in The consumption of sodium thiosulphate was 2.37 It is interesting to note that some thiosulphate formed in the pre-treatment of the sulphide ore with the ammoniacal solution, and more thiosulphate was generated with an increase in the pre-treatment time, as indicated in During the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching, dissolved oxygen is required to convert the cuprous ions to cupric tetra-ammine ions for the further catalytic oxidation of gold. Controlled aeration/oxygenation was beneficial for gold oxidation, as observed in previous studies ( As can be seen from the above results, the air input was beneficial for the leaching of the sulphide ore, but caused excessive thiosulphate consumption. This problem is avoidable for the oxidative ammoniacal pre-oxidation with air input followed by thiosulphate leaching. Oxygen is required for the dissolution of sulphide minerals in ammoniacal solutions (Eqs. After the pre-treatment with air bubbling, the slurry pH was adjusted with ammonia to about 11 for the sulphide ore, and then 0.1 In the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore, the leaching rate was initially fast and afterwards decreased with time (  The diagnostic leaching of the sulphide ore indicated that the majority of gold was readily accessible by ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions, and only a small amount of gold was locked in the sulphide matrix, which partially degraded to release gold at raised reagent concentrations. The pre-treatment process with the oxidative ammoniacal solution largely improved the leaching kinetics and overall gold extraction in subsequent ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore, while the thiosulphate consumption was reduced to a great extent in the leaching after the pre-treatment. The sulphide minerals in the sulphide ore partially decomposed in the pre-treatment process with the oxidative ammonia solution, generating some thiosulphate and exposing gold to the leach solution. Input of oxygen by air bubbling and a prolonged contact time enhanced the oxidative ammonia pre-treatment process and hence, accelerating subsequent thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore. Gold extraction in 0.8 The counter-current leaching process consisted of the fresh ore being in contact with pre-used leachant and the pre-leached ore receiving the fresh leachant. The pre-leached ore showed an instant increase in the gold leaching rate in contact with the fresh leachant, while the pre-used leachant gave significantly lower gold leaching kinetics and gold extraction in contact with the fresh ore. The leachant, other than the passivation, was the determining factor causing the decrease of the gold leaching rate after a certain time of leaching. Pre-treatment with oxidative ammoniacal solutions followed by thiosulphate leaching provided an efficient approach for the treatment of sulphide containing gold ores. The financial support from