In the flotation separation of chalcopyrite and talc, depressants are usually added to selectively prevent talc from floating. Commonly used depressants lack selectivity, resulting in the depression of both talc and sulfide minerals. To solve this problem, the role of locust bean gum in the flotation separation of chalcopyrite and talc was studied and its mechanism of talc depression discussed. Single mineral flotation test results showed that both chalcopyrite and talc were floatable in the tested pH range of 3–11 and that locust bean gum depressed the flotation of both minerals; however, locust bean gum showed a strong depressing effect on talc in the pH range of 5–9 at a dosage of 2000 g/t. The results of flotation tests performed on mixed minerals indicated that the use of locust bean gum as a depressant can achieve flotation separation of chalcopyrite from talc. A concentrate of 30.1% Cu was achieved at 88.1% recovery from a feed material containing 15.2% Cu. This was attributed to greater adsorption of locust bean gum on the surface of talc compared with that on the chalcopyrite. Zeta potential and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements showed that the locust bean gum adsorbed on talc mainly through physical interactions; hydrophobic interactions were considered the main driving force and hydrogen bonds also played a role.The separation of sulfides and talc by froth flotation is difficult because talc is naturally hydrophobic and easily reports to flotation concentrates, thus reducing concentrate grade ( Locust bean gum is a vegetable gum extracted from the seeds of the carob tree. It consists chiefly of high-molecular-mass hydrocolloidal polysaccharides, composed of galactose and mannose units combined through glycosidic linkages ( The aim of this study was to investigate if locust bean gum possesses unique selectivity for single mineral flotation of chalcopyrite and talc, and whether it can separate these two minerals in a mixture. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and zeta potential measurements were conducted to define the mechanism of depression of talc by locust bean gum and to provide a reference for reagent selection for flotation separation of chalcopyrite and talc. The chalcopyrite was obtained from Saishitang, Qinghai Province, China, and the talc was obtained from Haicheng, Liaoning Province, China. According to X-ray diffraction (XRD) and elemental analyses ( The locust bean gum (molecular mass: 250000–300 000) was obtained from Aladdin Chemical Technology Co., Ltd., China. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as pH regulators. Deionized water was used for all tests. The flotation tests were carried out in a mechanically agitated flotation machine (FGC5-35, Yunhao Mining and Metallurgical Equipment Co., Ltd., China). Both single and mixed mineral tests (chalcopyrite and talc at a mass ratio of 1:1) employed a sample mass of 2 g. The mineral samples were mixed with 40-mL deionized water and conditioned for 2 min while the desired pH value was adjusted using HCl or NaOH. Locust bean gum and potassium butyl xanthate (PBX) (376 g/t) solutions were added sequentially, with 5 min stirring after each addition. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), utilized as the frother, was then added at 204 g/t, followed by 1 min of conditioning, and then flotation was carried out for a total time period of 5 min. For single mineral flotation, both the floated and unfloated particles were collected, filtered, and dried. The flotation recovery was calculated based on solid mass distributions between the two products. For mixed mineral flotation, the copper grades of the concentrates and tailings were analyzed using the volumetric titration method described by For the adsorption tests, 1 g of mineral powder was mixed with locust bean gum solution in a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask. The total volume of the slurry was 100 mL. The suspensions were placed on a rotator and mixed for 1 h to ensure that the adsorption process had reached equilibrium. The slurry was then centrifuged and the concentration of locust bean gum remaining in the supernatant was measured by determining the total organic carbon (TOC) using a TOC analyzer (Vario TOC, Elementar, Germany) and compared with the value of a known calibration standard. Zeta potential measurements on talc and chalcopyrite were carried out using a Zeta Plus zeta potential meter (Colloidal Dynamics, USA). One gram of −10-μm mineral was added to 50 mL of 10 For the XPS tests, 1-g talc was added into 100-mL distilled water and then locust bean gum added to a concentration of 1000 g/t. After adjusting to pH 7, the suspension was conditioned for 30 min at 25 °C. The minerals were then filtered, washed with 100-mL distilled water, and dried in a vacuum desiccator. XPS measurements were conducted using a K-Alpha 1063 X-ray spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, UK). The vacuum in the analyzer chamber was maintained at ∼10 The flotation behaviors of chalcopyrite and talc in the absence and presence of depressant are shown in When 2000-g/t locust bean gum was added, differences in the flotation recoveries at the same pH values were observed. For chalcopyrite, the depression effect of locust bean gum was minor in the pH range of 3–9. With an increase in pH from 9 to 11, chalcopyrite recovery dropped from 77% to 2.5%. Many studies have confirmed that oxidation of chalcopyrite occurs at high pH and more hydroxides appear on its surface ( Locust bean gum significantly depressed the floatability of talc and its recovery dropped to 2–15% in the presence of locust bean gum. This result indicated that locust bean gum could be utilized as a depressant to separate chalcopyrite from talc in the pH range of 5–9. The effects of locust bean gum dosage on chalcopyrite and talc flotation at pH 7 were studied and the results are shown in Based on the findings of the single mineral flotation tests, additional tests were performed on mixed chalcopyrite and talc minerals at a 1:1 mass ratio to verify the selectivity of locust bean gum. Guar gum is a commonly used depressant in copper–nickel sulfide flotation and its depression of talc is independent of pH (  Zeta potential measurements were performed on chalcopyrite and talc before and after the addition of locust bean gum. The results are shown in XPS was utilized to investigate the adsorption of locust bean gum on the talc surface. The C 1s, Si 1s, Mg 1s XPS spectra were collected on talc before and after it was treated by locust bean gum. As can be seen from  The mechanism of adsorption between polysaccharides and minerals has been studied by many researchers. The most widely proposed mechanisms are hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interaction, chemical complexation, and electrostatic interaction ( Many researchers have suggested that hydrogen bonding plays an important role in the adsorption of polysaccharides on mineral surfaces ( Locust bean gum can adsorb on the surfaces of both chalcopyrite and talc and depress their flotation; however, the depressing ability of locust bean gum on chalcopyrite is weaker than that on talc, which allows their flotation separation by control of pulp pH at 7. A concentrate with Cu grade of 30.1% and recovery of 88.1% was achieved with the addition of 1000-g/t locust bean gum at pH 7. According to zeta potential and XPS results, the adsorption of locust bean gum on talc occurs through physical interactions; hydrophobic interactions are considered as the main driving force and hydrogen bonds may also play a role. The authors acknowledge the support of