Mineralization of 2,4-dichlorophenol (DCP) was studied by ozone with Mn2+ as an ozonation catalyst. Laboratory scale semi-batch ozonation experiments were conducted at room temperature. The results showed that trace amount of Mn2+ accelerated the mineralization of DCP. Total organic carbon removal rate was independent on Mn2+ dosage at its range of 0.1–0.5mgL−1. Dissolved ozone concentration in the solution remained low level in the catalytic ozonation process, which indicated that Mn2+ catalyzed decomposition of ozone. DCP mineralization was inhibited in catalytic ozonation by the addition of carbonate. Electron spin resonance/spin-trapping technique was used to determine hydroxyl radicals, and the results showed that larger amounts of hydroxyl radicals were produced in catalytic ozonation system than those of single ozonation. Intermediates mainly including aliphatic carboxylic acids were determined qualitatively and semi-quantitatively by GC–MS. And, a general pathway for mineralization of DCP was proposed.Chlorophenols have been widely used in the production of wood preservatives, pesticides, and other industrial chemicals ( Catalytic ozonation, which combines a transition metal with ozone to degrade organic pollutants, has been received extensive interests in recent two decades. DCP (99.9%) was used as a model compound for catalytic ozonation. It was purchased from Beijing Chemical Co. (Beijing, China). A stock solution of 400 The catalytic ozonation experiments were carried out in a 2.5 ESR experiment was applied to determine hydroxyl radicals generated in ozonation process by using a nitron spin-trapping reagent DMPO. In ozone-saturated aqueous solution containing DCP and Mn Aqueous dissolved ozone concentration was determined by using the indigo method ( Firstly, degradation of DCP was compared between the catalytic and non-catalytic ozonation. DCP is characterized by hydroxyl substituent and the hydroxyl group activates the electrophilic reaction through which ozone reacts directly with aromatic compounds, so the direct reaction between DCP and ozone contributes greatly to the degradation of DCP. As observed from The addition of Mn To further clarify why Mn Soon after the reaction of Mn Ozone is a powerful oxidant, but it does not cause complete mineralization of organic acids owing to its selective oxidation. Hydroxyl radical is more effective oxidant without selectivity. It is well-known that carbonate is radical scavenger ( According to above experiment result, it was known that dissolved ozone decomposed much faster in catalytic ozonation than in single ozonation, and the addition of carbonate greatly inhibited TOC removal in catalytic ozonation. So it was necessary to know whether much more hydroxyl radicals were produced in the presence of Mn Organic products corresponding to different reaction times were measured by GC–MS. Three samples at 10, 20 and 30 With the oxidation of DCP, the chloride atoms break off from phenyl ring to be formed into chloride ions. The evolution of chloride ion in single ozonation and catalytic ozonation is shown in Based on the results of intermediates analysis, it was suggested that DCP experienced similar mineralization process in single ozonation and catalytic ozonation. Referring to published work ( The process is initiated by the hydroxylation of DCP yielding chlorohydroquinone or 4,6-dichlororesorcinol ( Mn Mn This work was supported by the Funds for Creative Research Groups of China (Grant No. 50621804) and by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50538090).