By summarizing studies of surfactants used for emulsion liquid membrane, a new polyamine-type surfactant called LMA has been developed. This type of surfactant is composed of copolymer of isobutene and isoprene in hydrophobic site and polyethylene polyamine [NH2(CH2CH2NH)
                        n
                     CH2CH2NH2, n≥1] in hydrophilic site. Experimental results show that the characteristics of this surfactant mainly depends on its mean molecular weight and its distribution of molecular weight, and the suitable surfactants are those with number-average molecular weight (M
                     n) of 5000–9000 and proper molecular weight distribution (usually M
                     w/M
                     n=3.0–6.0).Emulsion liquid membrane(ELM) as a separation technique can be widely used in fractionation of hydrocarbons, environmental engineering, hydrometallurgy, pharmaceutical engineering and biological engineering etc. Recently, the important role of surfactant in ELM has been recognized and a growing interest has been focused on the development of new surfactants suitable for ELM separation processes Based on the above-mentioned analysis, the desired new polyamine-type polymeric surfactant (called LMA) developed in this study have the following structure The commercial butyl rubber (mean molecular weight 520,000) was purchased from the market without further purification. Polyamine ENJ-3029 was kindly provided by Exxon Chemical Co. The kerosene used with a boiling point range of 200–240°C was obtained from the distillation of commercial product. Other chemicals were all of reagent grade. The synthesis of new polyamine-type polymeric surfactants LMA was conducted as follows: the commercial butyl rubber was firstly placed in an oven and nitrogen gas was employed to maintain an inert atmosphere during the degradation of butyl rubber. The degradation temperature was kept at 280–300°C for 1.5–2 Experiments were conducted in a batch-type stirred glass vessel with an 11 IR spectra were recorded in a RFX-65 type FTIR spectrometer (Amalect Company, USA). The molecular weight and molecular weight distribution were measured by Waters ALC/GPC 244 Liquid Chromatograph. The concentration of K According to the above-mentioned synthetic route, a series of surfactants with triethylene tetramine in hydrophilic site were synthesized. In order to monitor reaction process, the IR spectra of the copolymer (degraded butyl rubber), the intermediate product (product of the copolymer reacting with maleic anhydride) and the final product LMA are presented in From  Stability of ELM to acid and base are particularly important to the operation of ELM separation processes. In general, a tracer method is used to determine the stability of an ELM, which is evaluated by the break-up ratio of an emulsion (  Swelling is a common phenomenon in the operation of ELM system. Some papers have dealt with the effects of surfactants on the swelling of ELM and found that swelling ratio varies with surfactants The comparison of swelling ratios of ELMs prepared with different surfactants are presented in Usually, hydrophilic group is a main factor determining the properties of a surfactant. It is of significance to explore the effect of hydrophilic group of this type surfactant. In the synthesis of this polyamine-type surfactants, their mean molecular weight and molecular weight distribution can be controlled as desired by selecting suitable technological conditions such as reaction temperature and time. A series of surfactants with different hydrophilic groups ( As can be seen in According to classic emulsion theory and practice, an ideal surfactant should form an elastic film at the water/oil interface, and the adoption of mixed surfactants favours the preparation of more stable emulsion than the sole use of a single surfactants. It has been found that the combination of different surfactants in ELM system could improve the stability of liquid membrane and extraction efficiency Based on the results mentioned above, it is concluded that a series of new polyamine-type polymeric surfactants with expected structure have been synthesized and these surfactants have satisfactory overall performances in ELM systems, such as high stability, low swelling ratio, and resistance to strong acid and strong base, especially when its mean molecular weight is high up to 5000–9000, its molecular weight distribution in the range of 3.0–6.0 and the hydrophilic group mainly composed of diethylene triamine or triethylene tetramine or tetraethylene pentamine. On the basis of summarizing studies of surfactants used for emulsion liquid membranes, a new series of polyamine-type polymeric surfactants LMA were designed and then developed in order to improve the performances of ELMs to meet the requirements in practical uses. The stability and swelling of ELMs prepared with these synthesized surfactants in connection with their composition, molecular weight and molecular weight distribution were examined, and the following results were obtained. The synthesized surfactants had definite molecular weight distributions, hence being mixture of surfactant molecules with different molecular weight. IR spectra analysis demonstrated that these surfactants could be synthesized in the proposed scheme and the surfactant product LMA had the desired structure. As compared with commercial surfactants such as Span-80 and polyamine ENJ-3029, the synthesized surfactants, though affected by their molecular weight and molecular weight distribution, had better performances in ELM systems, such as higher stability, lower swelling ratio and resistance to strong acid and strong base. The characteristics of the synthesized surfactants mainly depended on their molecular weight and molecular weight distribution, and the most suitable surfactants were those with number-average molecular weight ( This work was financially supported by the Guangdong Provincial Foundation of Natural Science and Technology (Grant No. 950137).