Enhanced gravity, or centrifugal, separators have revolutionised gold processing over the past decades, significantly increasing the recovery of fine (−100μm) free gold. One of the main drawbacks of centrifugal gravity concentrators is the large volume of water required (even if it is all recycled). With water becoming an ever increasingly important “commodity”, reducing this is of importance both from an environmental and a monetary point of view. This work investigated operating a laboratory scale Knelson Concentrator with a dry feed and using air as the fluidising medium. The feed used was a synthetic mixture of tungsten and quartz, used to mimic a gold ore. The response surface method and central composite design techniques were used to design the experiments and to model the results, with the experimental variables being the bowl speed (G-Level), air fluidising pressure and the feed rate. The models corresponded well to the experimental results, indicating that for this experimental setup, the optimal conditions were a bowl G-Level of 40G, a feed rate of 220g/min and an air fluidising pressure of 8psi.Gravity concentration, one of the oldest techniques in mineral processing, utilizes differences in density of minerals to facilitate a separation. This method has some major advantages such as high efficiency (dependent on the feed size), generally low capital and operating costs, and because of the lack of chemicals and excessive heating requirements it is generally considered to be environmentally friendly ( The Knelson Concentrator, one of the most common enhanced gravity separators, is essentially a vertical axis bowl-type centrifugal concentrator that uses a fluidized bed to concentrate the fine size material. The bowl consists of a conical inner shell, with a series of riffles, attached to a rotating outer shell. Feed material, most commonly cyclone underflow or ball mill discharge, is introduced through a central tube as slurry into the rapidly rotating bowl, which generates an enhanced gravity field. This produces a significantly increased sedimentation velocity differential, so enhanced gravity separators can process fine particles with high separation efficiency. The force generated by the increased acceleration causes the feed solids to fill the inter-riffle spaces from bottom to top. Once the riffles are full of solids, the sorting stage starts, where heavy minerals displace the light minerals and as a result the heavy minerals are trapped in the inter-riffle spaces to become the concentrate while the lighter minerals are carried by water to the top of the unit as tailings. The sorting is achieved by the fluidization of the bed in the riffle, allowing for the substitution of dense particles for those of a lower density. The fluidization is by water injected through holes in the riffles. This fluidization water must be strong enough to inhibit severe compaction of the heavy mineral bed due to the strong centrifugal force ( Even though enhanced gravity separators have achieved a quality product with high recovery and good separation efficiency, they have some disadvantages. One of the drawbacks of these separators as they currently operate is the volume of water required. At a laboratory scale, processing 24 Dry separation processes have been widely investigated and developed in the past decades. The main goal has been to develop a feasible dry separation technology for ores such as coal ( Recently, Nevertheless, this promising result needs to be expanded and the system investigated thoroughly, under different operating variables. An effective approach is to adopt an experimental design methodology. One of the methodologies for determining the optimum operating parameters is the response surface technique ( Response surface methodology (RSM) describes a collection of statistical and mathematical methods for modelling and analysing the relationship between the input parameters and the output variables, and the main objective is to optimize the process through developing a second order mathematical model and representing the direct and interactive effects through two and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) plots. A typical second-order model can be expressed by Eq. Experimental design methods and response surface methodologies have been used in many areas, such as chemistry and chemical engineering ( This project is based on It has been shown previously that synthetic tungsten/quartz ore can accurately simulate gold ore under gravity test conditions ( Quartz (Unimin Canada Ltd.) was used as the low-density gangue (2.65 A modified 3″ laboratory Knelson Concentrator was used in this investigation ( The concentrate of each test was screened to narrow size fractions (−425 In this study, central composite experimental design (CCD), which is the most popular and well suited RSM design for fitting second-order response surface ( The number of tests required for the CCD include the standard 2 The number of tests was calculated for the three independent variables, therefore, is 20 (2 The coded and corresponding actual values were calculated as shown in For each Knelson test, 1 The mathematical relationship between the three independent variables and responses can be approximated by the second order model based Eq. The coefficients, i.e. the main effect ( Two second-order regression models were produced. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the regression coefficients and to detect the harmony of the second-order regression models. By using the Fischer (F) test and The response variables (grade and recovery) were calculated and listed as shown in The second order response functions representing the grade of the concentrate and recovery of tungsten, were expressed as a function of bowl speed, solid feed rate and air fluidizing pressure. The uncoded model equations for grade ( In order to estimate the significance of the models, ANOVA was applied as shown in From The qualities of the fit of the polynomial models were expressed by The normal probability plot of the residuals and the plot of the residuals versus the fitted response for both the concentrate grade and tungsten recovery are presented in With the models verified, the Student’s From Additionally, the quadratic term of bowl speed ( From In order to obtain a better understanding of the results and for optimization, the fitted models are presented in   In the first optimization studies, all optimum operation ranges for all independent variables are determined separately using contour and surface plots and the selected optimum operation ranges values are given in From these results, it can be seen that the optimized values for the concentration with the highest grade and recovery of bowl speed, solid feed rate and air fluidizing pressure are 40  Optimization studies using a more mathematical approach are given in Once the optimum conditions of the factors were estimated, to confirm the validity of the proposed equations, experiments were carried out using the optimum, worst and a random condition within their working limits. The comparisons between the actual and model predicted data at different combinations of variables are presented in It has been shown to be possible to operate a centrifugal separators with a dry feed, and using air as fluidizing media instead of water. Using response surface design experiments the effect of bowl speed (G), solid feed rate (g/min) and air fluidizing pressure (psi) on the concentrate grade and the tungsten recovery for a dry separation in a Knelson Concentrator were examined. The main conclusions are as follows: The empirical regression equations as a function of the independent process variables were derived by the RSM model for the grade of the concentrate and recovery of the tungsten. The analysis of the variance (ANOVA) showed the regression models are considered to be acceptable. The The independent process variables exhibited the same effects on each of the response variables. In the models, bowl speed ( The ANOVA model for the grade revealed that the two linear terms – bowl speed ( The ANOVA model for the recovery revealed that the two linear terms ( Surface plots confirmed that a low bowl speed (<40 It was found that the optimized values for the highest grade and recovery of bowl speed, solid feed rate and air fluidizing pressure were 40 From the validation experiment, it can be considered that for the optimum conditions the proposed quadratic equations do indeed predict the concentrate grade and tungsten recovery within reasonable error values. The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) in conjunction with SGS Canada Inc., Shell Canada, Barrick Gold Corp, COREM, Teck Resources Ltd., Vale Base Metals, CheMIQA, and Xstrata Process Support for funding this work through the Finding the optimum condition (stationary point) of a design can be calculated in different ways. First, partial derivatives of the   These uncoded values will be converted to the coded (actual) values as BS The second method is to write the second order model in matrix notation (    The derivative of The stationary point Applying to model equations;   After using this method, the same results are found as those from Option 1 The general approach is to first convert each response If the objective or target The two-sided desirability function assumes that the target is located between the lower ( The statistical software package “Minitab® Statistical Software” was used to solve the equations using the desirability function approach. The conditions and solutions are given in the following tables. BS