Workplace evacuation is a significant emergency response strategy and evacuation planning is mandatory for the emergency safety plan. It is known that the evacuation effectiveness depends directly on the effective location and functionality of the exit route, which includes exit access and exit discharge. Apparently, the exit doors location affect both these elements.
                  The exit doors position is ruled by standards and regulations and depends on workplace use, building type, occupants’ number and type, etc. In underground constructions, the selection of the appropriate location of the exits is not easy. The land surface, the area topography and the fact that emergency exits are involved in the space’s ventilation, increase the engineers’ difficulty to design.
                  The regulations mentioned above provide information about installing exits so that the workplace complies with the restrictions imposed. However, up to now a tool to help engineers select the best alternative combination of exits location for a given workplace does not exist.
                  The purpose of this paper is to present a new software application that takes into account the basic parameters of exit routes regulations (such as distance, exit routes angle, dead end - common path of travel distance limitation) and therefore providing all the possible combination of exit doors location. In addition, each combination acquires an efficient grade through a mathematical function. That mathematical function has derived from a study on the evacuation affecting parameters and provides optimized results for exits location. Therefore, on one hand, the users may observe those combinations that comply with the standards restrictions and on the other hand, they can choose the best alternative.An effective safety and emergency plan offers a comfortable and safe workplace that increases employee productivity and, at the same time, reduces the financial loss, as well as the probability of occupants’ injury (both employees and visitors) in case of an emergency. Although a safety plan should focus on prevention, emergencies cannot be avoided. Consequently, organizations should offer a reliable safety mitigation plan for occupants and the project itself ( Evacuation plans of subterranean spaces in most countries are not mandatory by laws. In Greece for example, the lack of legislation is partially substituted by the obligation to submit a study on passive fire protection based on Decree 71/1988 ( Orderly and complete evacuation of all occupants and visitors requires careful provision for exit routes and accounting for all individuals after the evacuation. With planning taking into account all factors, quick and orderly evacuations can be achieved with minimal problems ( Exit route means a continuous and unobstructed path of exit travel from any point within a workplace to a place of safety (including refuge areas). An exit route consists of three parts: the exit access, the exit and the exit discharge. Exit discharge (exit door) means the part of the exit route that leads directly outside or to a street, walkway, refuge area, public way or open space with access to the outside. An example of an exit discharge is a door at the bottom of a two-hour fire resistance-rated enclosed stairway that discharges to a place of safety outside the building ( Standards and regulations regarding evacuation plans and design, include restrictions and parameters that affect the exits location. These parameters concern, among others, the travel distance to exit door, the exit doors relative position and travel distance in dead end areas. Evacuation calculations have become a part of performance-based analyses to assess the level of life safety provided in buildings ( Moreover, evacuation simulation models have been used to study the effect of variety of parameters that may affect the evacuation procedures, such as the effect of uncertain parameters (concerns occupant behavior) on evacuation time in commercial buildings ( The paper describes the development of an algorithm combining all critical evacuation parameters, so as to provide the best exits location. It derives from a thorough analysis of the evacuation parameters. Moreover, the algorithm is able to determine all the combinations of the possible exits location and performs an evaluation of them. Also, the software offers a graphical visualization by mapping the designed space based on regulation’s compliance and evacuation effectiveness. Evacuation regulations were designed to optimize three key parameters related to safe evacuation and to minimize property damage: Hazard identification and evacuation decision immediacy. Evacuation completion pace. Risk minimization of the evacuation process such as minimization of disorientation, overcrowding and panic. Regulations which come under the safety standards and codes are affected directly by the exit routes. This includes the number, design, type of exits (exit doors) and location of exit doors which is of major importance. Although the first three ones depend on the type and amount of occupants in the workplace, the exits location is a more complicated issue due to its dependency on building design. Considering worldwide regulations or standards such as the National Fire Protection Association – NFPA ( More specifically: Each point in the workplace space should have a given maximum distance from the nearest exit discharge ( The travel distance into a dead end area must be under a maximum value ( The angle between any point in space and two exits must have a minimum value (in case of more exits in place, this regulation must be applied to at least two of them) ( Also, some regulations mention a restriction about the exits relative position, such as the minimum distance between them that depends on the building dimensions. For example, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code requires that at least two of the required exits shall be located at a distance from one another not less than one-half the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or area to be served, measured in a straight line between the nearest edge of the exits ( Maximum and minimum values vary, depending on the standard or regulation code used and are related to the type and size of occupancy and the degree of hazard present. Engineers with the currently available tools, are able to inspect the compliance to the corresponding regulations. However, it cannot be guaranteed that the selected choices are the best possible. For example, in a common space there are various values of travel distance to the closest exit door for each point in the area. By selecting different combination of exits location, the average travel distance for all points adopts a different value. The regulations intention is to minimize or maximize a given parameter. However, the ideal study would determine an optimal solution for a variety of parameters that govern evacuation procedures and not for each parameter separately. In that case, in which there are multiple objectives - parameters instead of a single one and some of them may be conflicting with each other, although they share the same goal (optimization of evacuation procedures), a balance is needed to provide a sufficient design. This optimization initially requires a regulations’ parameters evaluation. Each regulation parameter affects evacuation effectiveness differently. On the one hand, travel distance’s raison d’être is to minimize the evacuating time. Likewise, travel distance limitation in dead end aims at avoiding crowd being “trapped” in a small area by fire or other hazards. On the other hand, angle’s minimum value regulation purpose is to avoid overcrowding during evacuation procedure. Thus, travel distance and “dead end” regulation affect the evacuation time, while “angle regulation” affects the overcrowding effect (counting in time and spread). In order to perform a reliable evaluation, each parameter should be examined in the way it affects the evacuation effectiveness factor that it is serving. The evaluation is accomplished based on two parameters that affect the evacuation effectiveness: An initial approach is to determine the evacuation time variation, relative to occupants’ distance from the exit door and to occupants’ density. To accomplish this, the evacuation simulation model “Pathfinder” has been used, where a number of people (that change respectively to density As it is shown in By using the same methodology for distance parameter, the relation between dead end distance and evacuation time have been determined and it is also linear ( Performing this study by ignoring the density effect in occupants speed, the exported results showed that there are no essential changes in the evacuation time with respect to angle for different values of density. The limitation of the angle rule (45° in Greek Law) aims at avoiding evacuation overcrowding that also results in the evacuation time improvement. This particular feature (the occupants’ velocity variation in relation to their density) is included in the STEPS evacuation model. Moreover, attention was paid to monitor the time that the occupants “local” density recorded high values, while the simulation was implemented for three different values of exit door distance. The results for the distance of 30 As it is shown in Therefore, the results of a comprehensive study provided a mathematical function for each parameter on how it affects the evacuation effectiveness: The variables x Evacuation optimization purpose is to minimize the evacuation and overcrowding times. In mathematical term this may be stated as: These individual times are directly related to the values of evacuation parameters. Although the three functions of parameters produce time values, the time count is different and has a different effect on the evacuation effectiveness ( In order to optimize the results, a multi parameter function should be defined and optimized. The type of this function is: To provide the same relative weight to each variable must apply the following:  As maximum angle value was chosen that of 180° and for minimum that of 5°, since in one hand angle less than 5° actually leads to identification of the two escape routes and on the other, smaller value leads to unrealistic results (the function tends to infinity). As maximum distance is chosen that of the maximum provided by the regulations (120 Likewise, for the maximum travel distance in dead end, the value of 35 Therefore: K By using Eqs. A multi-objective optimization problem involves a number of objective functions which are to be either minimized or maximized. As in a single-objective optimization problem, the multi-objective optimization problem may contain a number of constraints which any feasible solution (including all optimal solutions) must satisfy ( Multi-objective optimization software contains a number of methods that are able to construct the so-called Pareto front of the multi-objective optimization problem, and a number of methods that will find one solution acceptable for all different objectives. Multi-objective methods support both continuous and discrete parameters ( In Moreover, the Pareto front can be created for more than two variables, although it cannot be displayed for more than three. It should be noted that the Pareto front does not identify the optimal solution (because there is not only one, in cases where variables are conflicting), but essentially isolates those who do not optimize the ultimate goal. In mathematical terms, a multi-objective optimization problem can be formulated as: In addition, the vector-valued objective function is often defined as: An   A solution The multi parameter function evaluates each Pareto optimal solution and provides the best one. In many workplaces or buildings there are some areas or spaces that are not of high importance due to their use (e.g. storage areas) and therefore have low probability of being occupied by personnel or visitors and the escape routes from these areas are not of high importance. Therefore, a specific evaluation of these areas is required, regarding the use or the occupation probability. To accomplish this, a new property named Therefore, the evaluation for each combination will arise from the Therefore, in one hand, in case of an assembly area where all points have the same probability to be occupied by a person, the mean value type will be used. On the other hand, in case of a workplace with complex use where office, classrooms and storage areas exists, those points that are part of storage areas or are occupied by equipment, have lower or none probability to be occupied by a person (low weight factor – hotness) and those that are part of classroom areas have higher probability to be occupied by a person (higher weigh factor – hotness). There are many evacuation models (applications) (i.e. STEPS, Pathfinder, buildingEXODUS), offering a variety of options to users. These models are based on people movement and, briefly, they have the ability to simulate and visualize the building evacuation, providing information for evacuation time, door and area usage, people speed and density etc. Those models do not provide such preferences relative to exit doors location choice, meaning that the existing evacuation models don’t evaluate all possible exit door combination, neither provide information about regulation parameters validation (areas that are not comply with a regulation and which one). Therefore, they cannot determine the best combination for exit doors location by using a mathematical function to evaluate each one based on regulation parameters. In order to determine the optimum solutions for exit doors location for every building, workplace or underground space, an application has been developed in which all the possible combinations of exits location are determined and evaluated based on a mathematical function (explained above). In addition, it provides at a glance, an overall perspective of invalid areas or areas that need specific attention. Also, by using Hotness option the user may orient the results to cover the most importance areas and isolate the trivial ones. The new software that was developed, in addition to workplace regulation compliance overview, aims to optimize the locations of exit doors by taking into account the parameters and limits of the regulations. To determine the best combination, all the possible ones should be evaluate, by calculating each combination Performance that is directly related to each square rating. Cell rating depends on the parameters values in this cell and evaluation function. This pattern is repeated for all combinations of exit door location. Finally, all the combinations of the studied workplace or structure are presented in value order (Performance), in order to obtain the optimal one. The above methodology is presented with a flowchart in The exit locator has been designed in a user-friendly way even for the inexperienced user. The main panel of interface ( The second panel ( In It should be noted that the application was developed so that the user can customize the type of function, in order to cover the special characteristics of a given underground workplace. Nevertheless, the application provides by default a certain function which derived from a thorough analysis of the parameters involved and experiments. As long as the calculation has been completed, the application provides a list of all exit doors combinations and two properties relative to them. The first property is the Moreover, the workplace area is gradiently colorized in order to provide a visual appearance of square performance, so that the user may notice the areas that are more or less effective in evacuation procedure or even the areas that are invalid to evacuation restrictions. Gradient colors appear from green to red, where green is the square color for highest performance (value 1) and red for lowest performance (value 0). Black color indicates an invalid area ( In order to validate the new methodology, at first the crucial property of Average Performance (AP) must be completed defined. AP values directly depend on regulation parameters value limits. In order to make more comprehensible the importance of Average Performance and the value variation regarding the area size, a study in a random room ( Minimum Angle: 45°. Maximum Distance: 60 Maximum dead-end travel distance: 20 Minimum distance between exit doors: one-half the length of the maximum overall diagonal. The maximum value of the AP curve shows a reduction as regards the room space increment that becomes linear after a certain point. This point coincides with the point at which the size of the surface area cannot give any valid combination so that the entire area complies with the selected values parameters. As the room size decreasing, more combinations can satisfy the parameter limitation, resulting in an increase of the corresponding values of AP ( Moreover, In addition, as a case study for the new methodology implementation, the Underground Hazardous Waste Repository (U.H.W.R.) in Lavrion Technological and Cultural Park, Greece, was selected. The (U.H.W.R.) space has been developed exclusively in order to store hazardous waste, derived from the metallurgical activities in Lavrion area. It is the first installation of this kind developed in Greece and one of a few worldwide. More often than not outdated underground mines are modified and transformed into underground repositories, geological conditions permitting. Due to its special characteristics there is a big number of visitors for educational or other purposes ( The space has been created using the room and pillar mining method. It occupies a total area of 2000 square meters of which approximately 700 Inspecting this simple space (i.e. in floor plan) for regulation compliance by using simple geometrical methods ( In addition, the Exit Locator provides information for the current combination performance and for the best alternative. The existing exits location is calculated as having Average Performance As more and more people are affected by the impact of emergencies across the globe, it is imperative that the relative organizations focus on preparedness for a wide range of situations. Evacuation is a significant element of this focus. Both building compliance with safety regulations and optimal location of exit doors are complicated issues. The The calculations and simulations are performed using a default mathematical multi-variable function. However, the application can adapt to the special characteristics of a workplace by entering customized function. Moreover, the use of the “hotness” property offers the user the ability to orient the exits location towards the most significant areas. The software has been developed in the Laboratory of Mining Engineering and Environmental Mining of the National and Technical University of Athens (NTUA), it has not been published yet and its use is limited for educational purposes. The authors would like to extend a special note of appreciation to Mott MacDonald group and Thunderhead Engineering group, for providing educational license to use and work on STEPS and Pathfinder platform respectively and for the excellent and direct cooperation of its members. They would also like to thank Mr. S. Papazoglou for providing much scientific information for Net software framework, which was used to develop the Exit Locator software.