The Jinshachang Pb–Zn deposit, an exceptionally radiogenic Pb-enriched sulfide deposit, hosted by dolostone of the Upper Sinian (Neoproterozoic) Dengying Formation and the Lower Cambrian Meishucun Formation, is located in the western Yangtze Block, about 300km northeast of Kunming city in southwest China. Ore bodies in this deposit are dominated by strata-bound type and steeply dipping vein type. Primary ores in these two types are composed of sphalerite, galena, fluorite, barite and quartz with massive, banded, veined and disseminated structures. Twenty-seven ore bodies in the Jinshachang deposit host 4.6milliontons of sulfide ores at average grades of 4.07wt.% Pb and 5.03wt.% Zn. Quartz separates from the sulfide ores have δDH2O values ranging from −137‰ to −86.2‰ with an average of −114‰ (n
                     =7), lower than those of magmatic, metamorphic and meteoric water, suggesting a contribution of organic water. δ34SCDT values of ninety-one sulfide separates range from +1.1‰ to +13.4‰ with an average of +5.7‰, lower than those of evaporites (δ34SCDT
                     =+15‰ to +35‰) in the Cambrian to Triassic sedimentary strata in NE Yunnan province. δ34SCDT values of eight barite separates range from +32‰ to +35‰ (average +34‰), within the range of evaporites. These data suggest that S2− in the hydrothermal fluids derived from evaporites by thermo-chemical sulfate reduction (TSR), whereas SO4
                     2− directly originated from the evaporites. Six sulfide separates have highly radiogenic 206Pb/204Pb ratios ranging from 20.74 to 21.18 (average 20.92), 207Pb/204Pb ratios ranging from 15.85 to 15.89 (average 15.87), and 208Pb/204Pb ratios ranging from 40.89 to 41.42 (average 41.16). The Pb isotopes of the sulfides plot above the upper crust Pb average evolution curve and overlap the Cambrian sedimentary rocks, but are different from the Sinian dolostone. This indicates a crustal source of Pb most likely derived from the Cambrian sedimentary rocks. The initial 87Sr/86Sr ratio of seven main stage sphalerite separates from the Jinshachang deposit is 0.713, which is higher than those of the Upper Sinian Dengying Formation dolostone (0.708–0.710), Lower Cambrian carbonates (0.708–0.710), Devonian to Lower Permian sedimentary rocks (0.707–0.711) and Middle Permian Emeishan flood basalts (0.704–0.708), and lower than those of the Proterozoic folded basement rocks (0.724–0.729), but similar to those of Lower Cambrian black shale (0.712–0.714). Therefore, the Sr isotope data of the sphalerite support the view that the Lower Cambrian sedimentary rocks, in particular the black shale, were important source of metals. The main stage sphalerite separates have an Rb–Sr isotopic age of 206.8±3.7Ma, reflecting the timing of Pb–Zn mineralization. This study suggests that the Jinshachang Pb–Zn deposit is an epigenetic, thrust fold-controlled and strata-bound deposit with fluids and metals derived from the Cambrian sedimentary strata.Carbonate-hosted Pb–Zn deposits, an important sub-type of sediment-hosted Pb–Zn deposits, are widely distributed around the world ( Isotopes are powerful for determining the origin of ore-forming fluids and metals. For example, H–O and S isotopes have been widely used to constrain the source of hydrothermal fluids (e.g., South China is made up of the Yangtze Block in the north and the Cathaysian Block in the south ( Many Pb–Zn deposits have been reported in the SYG province, which are characterized by irregular ore bodies with simple mineralogy, weak wall rock alteration, high grades of Pb In the southwestern SYG province, there are about 160 Pb–Zn deposits distributed along NS- and NE-trending faults ( Previous studies in the SYG province have reported hydrothermal calcite/fluorite Sm–Nd isochron ages of the Huize, Maozu and Jinshachang Pb–Zn deposits at 222 Ore bodies in the Jinshachang deposit are hosted in dolostone of the Upper Sinian Dengying Formation and phosphorous dolostone of the Lower Cambrian Meishucun Formation, and are structurally controlled by the NWW–SEE-trending Jinshachang anticline and the NW–SE-trending Jinshachang thrust fault ( Twenty-seven ore bodies are delineated in the upper part of the Dengying Formation ( Nos. I and IV ore bodies are strata-bound. No. I ore body occurs along the interlamination fracture zone of the Dengying Formation ( Ores in the Jinshachang deposit underwent hydrothermal and supergene oxidizing processes ( Based on crosscutting, overgrowth and replacement relationships, the hydrothermal period is divided into three stages ( Wall rock alterations are simple and include silicification, fluoritization, baratization and dolomitization ( Quartz separates from different stages were analyzed on a Finnegan MAT-253 mass spectrometer. δ Pb isotope analysis was carried out using a GV Isoprobe-T Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) at Beijing Institute of Uranium Geology. The analytical procedures involved dissolution of samples using HF and HClO Chemical separation of Rb and Sr from matrix elements and mass spectrometric measurements were accomplished at Chinese Academy of Sciences. Spec-Sr exchange resin was used for the separation and purification of Rb and Sr. The procedure blanks of Rb and Sr are about 6 and 5 H–O isotopic compositions of fluid inclusions in quartz are listed in Lead isotopic compositions of sulfide separates from the Jinshachang deposit and the country rocks are listed in The main stage sphalerite separates in the Jinshachang Pb–Zn deposit are analyzed for Rb–Sr isotopic compositions ( Previous studies demonstrated that Rb–Sr isotopic dating is feasible for certain sulfide minerals (e.g., The Rb–Sr isotopic age of 206.8 Previous studies of two quartz separates have shown the δD Sulfur isotope geochemistry was systemically studied by Because some Pb isotopes are radiogenic, the Pb isotope ratios need to be corrected to a consistent age in order to make comparisons between different phases (e.g., In order to use Sr isotopes to trace the origin of ore-forming metals, age corrections are also needed (e.g., Ore deposits in the SYG province may have been affected by multiple orogenic events that occurred in the western Yangtze Block (e.g.,  H–O–S–Pb–Sr isotopes suggest that the Cambrian sedimentary rocks, in particular the black shale, are the most important fluid and metal sources for the Jinshachang deposit. Sphalerite yields an Rb–Sr isotopic age of 206.8 The Jinshachang deposit belongs to an epigenetic, carbonate-hosted, strata-bound and thrust fold-controlled deposit that is different from typical MVT deposits. The research is jointly supported by the