Background
                  While hemiarthroplasty (HA) is considered the treatment of choice for displaced femoral neck (FN) fractures in elderly patients, HA has been partly performed as an alternative treatment option for unstable intertrochanteric (IT) fractures. However, there is a paucity of data regarding the risk and availability of HA for unstable IT fractures compared to HA for displaced FN fractures in elderly patients. Therefore, we performed this case-control study to determine whether HA for unstable IT fractures provides clinical results and survival comparable to HA for displaced FN fractures in elderly patients.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  HA for unstable IT fractures in elderly patients provides clinical results and 1-year survival comparable to HA for displaced FN fractures in the same aging group.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We identified 80 patients aged 75years or older, who underwent cementless bipolar HA for unstable IT fracture (AO/OTA type 31-A2.2/3 and A3.3). Their clinical results and 1-year survival were compared to the matched control group of 80 patients with displaced FN fractures (Garden type 3 and 4) treated with the same procedure. Perioperative results, postoperative complications, and 1-year survival were investigated between the two groups. Functional outcome was assessed by walking status and Harris hip score (HHS) 6months after surgery.
               
                  Results
                  Operating time was significantly longer in the IT group than the FN group (97.3min [50 to 255] vs. 79.3min [40 to 175], P
                     =0.016). However, the two groups did not significantly differ regarding perioperative results, such as total blood loss, transfusion, intraoperative fracture, length of hospital stay, and postoperative complication. No statistically significant differences in walking status and HHS were observed between the groups. No significant difference in cumulative survival was observed between the two groups (P
                     =0.836), with a 1-year survival rate of 80% (95% confidence interval [CI], 71.8 to 87.5) in the IT group and 82% (95% CI, 73.1 to 89.4) in the FN group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  HA for unstable IT fractures in elderly patients showed clinical results and 1-year survival comparable to HA as the treatment of choice for displaced FN fractures in the same aging group.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III, case-control study.The incidence of proximal femur fracture continues to increase with age as a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in elderly patients Owing to distinct benefits of HA over IM nailing in elderly patients with unstable IT fractures in terms of allowing early ambulation with immediate weight bearing and avoiding complications, such as lag screw cut-out and collapse, HA has been performed as an effective treatment in unstable IT fractures as well as displaced FN fractures in osteoporotic elderly patients A prospectively compiled database was used to identify retrospectively patients aged 75 years or older who underwent cementless bipolar HA for an unstable IT fracture (AO/OTA classification The patients’ demographic characteristics are presented in In all of the cases, a tapered wedge stem with a rectangular-shaped section, of which the surface is treated with an extensive grit blasting (Zweymüller stem; SL-Plus, Plus Orthopedics AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) or micro-arc oxidation (Coren stem; CORENTEC, Cheonan, South Korea) was used. In the study group, Zweymüller stem was used in 48 hips and Coren stem used in 32 hips. Similarly, in the control group, the former was used in 45 hips and the latter used in 35 hips ( All the operations were performed through the posterolateral approach by the senior author. The patients were given either general or regional anesthesia. The type of anesthesia was decided according to the patients’ medical condition and preference. Accordingly, two types of anesthesia were not equally performed in each group. However, there was no significant difference in the type of anesthesia performed in each group ( In 58 cases (73%) with unstable IT fracture, the greater trochanter was fractured off along with the medial calcar fragment. First, the medial calcar fragment was fixed with 2 to 3 cerclage wires to secure it to the shaft. Then, press-fit insertion of a stem in the meta-diaphyseal junction was performed with a firm impaction. In cases with the short neck due to IT fracture, prophylactic cerclage wiring was performed to prevent the intraoperative calcar fracture and delayed subsidence of the stem before the final insertion of stem. The firm initial stability was achieved in all of the patients with unstable IT fractures. Next, the fractured greater trochanter was fixed with 2 figure-of-eight wirings passing under the lesser trochanter or a trochanteric transfixing plate and cables according to the circumstances. All of the patients received standard medical care after the operation and were instructed to stand with assistance, with unrestricted weight-bearing and use of an assistive device, as tolerated, on the second postoperative day. All patients were encouraged to stand or ambulate with weight bearing to enhance functional recovery during the hospitalization period In the absence of contraindications, the patients were given low molecular heparin for 1 Follow-up evaluations were performed along with the assessment of walking ability and Harris hip score (HHS) Electronic records were retrospectively reviewed and analyzed for demographic data, perioperative results, such as operating time, total blood loss, amount of transfusion, intraoperative fracture, postoperative care at the intensive care unit (ICU), postoperative time of starting ambulation with supports, and hospitalization duration, and postoperative medical and orthopedic complications. Total blood loss up to day 2 after surgery was estimated using a formula proposed previously The statistical package SPSS version 17 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) was used for statistical analysis. The characteristics of the patient populations were analyzed by using the Chi Operating time was significantly longer in the IT group (97.3 With regard to the occurrence of postoperative complications, no significant differences in medical and surgical complications were observed between the two groups ( No significant difference in the postoperative time of starting ambulation with supports was observed between the two groups ( Based on the Kaplan–Meier survival analysis, no significant difference in cumulative survival was observed between the two groups ( HA has been performed as an effective alternative for unstable IT fractures in osteoporotic elderly patients in order to allow early mobilization without the risk of reoperation owing to collapse or cut-out of the lag screw The current study is limited by its retrospective nature despite prospectively collected data and a short-term follow-up. However, a long-term follow-up study is rarely possible and has little clinical relevance in elderly patients, who have a short life expectancy and whose functional recovery at maximum after hip fracture surgery occurs within 6 postoperative months. Meanwhile, this study is strengthened by being the first case-control study with matched patients treated by a single surgeon at a single institution during the same period. The other strength of this study is that we initially matched the statistically concordant distribution of the two groups with several demographic variables. Besides, we believe that the present study provides the valid evidence for HA being performed in unstable IT fractures, which is the treatment of choice for displaced FN fractures in elderly patients. In this study, only operating time among perioperative results showed a significant difference between the two groups, which was longer in IT group. For this reason, HA for unstable IT fractures is technically demanding, unlike that for displaced FN fractures, and additive procedures to fix the greater trochanteric or medial calcar fragments are needed in HA for unstable IT fractures Fichman et al. However, HA for unstable IT fractures is a technically demanding procedure that require more operating time and additional procedures to fix the greater trochanter or calcar fragments. Besides, in comparison to HA for displaced FN fractures, HA for unstable IT fractures contains the potential risk of poor fit and subsequent subsidence of the cementless stem in osteoporotic proximal femur with these fragments In fragile elderly patients with unstable IT fracture, internal fixation is accompanied by several problems, such as collapse, loss of fixation, and cutout. These complications need one more operation, which leads to an increased risk of functional impairment and mortality, along with socioeconomic burden Eventually, based on these reports and our study, we believe that HA for unstable IT fractures in elderly patients is a satisfactory treatment option in terms of avoiding fixation failures, obtaining better functional outcomes than in internal fixation and clinical results comparable to HA for displaced FN fractures if performed by experienced operators because HA in unstable IT fractures is technically demanding. HA for an unstable IT fracture in osteoporotic elderly patients showed clinical outcomes and 1-year survival comparable to HA as the treatment of choice for a displaced FN fracture in the same aging group. Perioperative complications and mortality rates were no higher than with HA for displaced FN fractures, despite longer operating time. This finding suggests that HA may be a viable treatment option for unstable IT fractures in fragile elderly patients. However, this would need to be confirmed by future prospective studies with large cohort. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.