In comminution, particle breakage starts with crack induction and propagation. The path of cracks defines the breakage mode, e.g. preferential in phase breakage or phase boundary breakage. For investigating crack formation behavior, the description by displacement fields can be applied. The displacement fields of the mineral phases can then be used to understand breakage mode and liberation. Ore texture and operational conditions such as loading mechanisms will affect the system. One of the ore texture aspects is the ore texture heterogeneity, which is a complex quantity comprising mineral heterogeneity, geometrical heterogeneity, weak grain boundaries, and micro-cracks. This study aims at investigating the effects of ore texture and loading displacement rate on minerals breakage mode. By knowing minerals breakage mode it is possible to identify the factors which affect minerals liberation and optimizing these factors in order to liberate minerals even in coarser size fractions. The approach is to describe the spatial displacement fields in different ore textures. In order to obtain these, in-situ compression loading tests with different displacement rates were conducted, followed by X-ray computed micro-tomography (XCT) and Digital Volume Correlation (DVC). In addition, the resulting cracks from ore breakage were analyzed and quantified in order to analyze the breakage mode. Moreover, XCT imaging was used for tracking the propagated cracks in the third dimension. For identifying mineral phases, automated scanning electron microscopy (SEM) complemented by energy dispersive spectroscopy was applied. The outcomes showed that both ore texture and loading mechanism should be considered for describing crack formation and consequently mineral liberation.The main purpose of comminution in ore processing is to liberate valuable minerals. In order to understand the contribution of particle breakage in comminution to mineral liberation, the breakage mode is defined. In general, the breakage mode is expressed as random and non-random breakage (e.g. Several studies have attempted to investigate the effect of operational parameters such as loading rate and ore texture on breakage mode and mineral liberation. In an investigation into the loading rate on mineral liberation, It is of interest to note that there is a contradiction in the investigations and it is still not clear if the liberation improvement is due to the operational parameters or ore texture. Moreover, the different results show that there is a lack of fundamental understanding of the microscopic spatial deformation of ore texture under loading rate and the cracks initiation and propagation. In order to tackle this problem, a systematic analysis of the crack formation and propagation with respect to phase boundary, preferential in phase, and random breakage will lead to better analyzing minerals breakage mode and liberation. Finding the effective parameters in minerals breakage mode will pave the way to optimize the comminution process in terms of mineral liberation. The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of ore texture and loading mechanism on minerals breakage mode. In order to achieve the objective, the ore texture heterogeneity and loading mechanism rate are utilized to study the spatial deformation and micro-crack propagation within an intact ore sample. Ore texture heterogeneity is an inherent component of geological material, which is at the nano-scale and micro-scale. Nano-scale heterogeneities are due to the lattice defects of single crystals/grains including (1) Interstitial impurity atom, (2) Edge dislocation, (3) Self interstitial atom vacancy, (4) Precipitate of impurity atoms, (5) Vacancy type dislocation loop (6) Interstitial type dislocation loop, and (7) Substitutional impurity atom. Micro-scale heterogeneity includes four types: (1) mineral heterogeneity due to different grain mineralogy, (2) geometrical heterogeneity associated with grain sizes, (3) heterogeneity associated with anisotropy and weak grain boundaries, and (4) heterogeneity due to existence of natural micro-cracks ( Particle breakage and consequently mineral liberation starts with crack initiations and propagations. Material failure is a consequence of sufficient applied stress and work that break the bonds that hold atoms together. The bond strength is due to the attractive forces between atoms. In addition, where the equilibrium spacing occurs the potential energy is minimum. A tensile force can increase the separation distance from the equilibrium value, which breaks the atomic bond. In order to sever the bond completely, the tensile force must exceed the cohesive force ( Cohesive stress (σ Rocks as geological materials mostly have brittle breakage behavior and commonly contain micro-cracks ( At constant c* (critical crack length; the crack would be unstable under the loading), when σ (induced stress) exceeds σ Cracks can be quantified in terms of density and their geometrical characteristic (microstructural features) ( Based on its size, a micro-crack can be visible or invisible due to the resolution limit of the measuring techniques (e.g. SEM used for image analysis). In the cases where micro-cracks are not visible, measuring the deformation around micro-cracks can be a way to investigate a material failure. The deformation of a plane can be studied by Digital Image Correlation (DIC) method ( In this equation, A detector then measures the attenuation of the X-ray signals. The attenuated signals are reconstructed in virtual slices with gray levels of brightness ( 3D measuring techniques can be used in order to measure the internal structural deformation of the material ( The measurements of 3D displacement and strain fields in DVC are based on the two steps of volume images of a test sample before and after loading ( Magnetite ore samples from Malmberget ore deposit located in Northern Sweden have been used for this study. The samples were collected from the conveyor belts feeding to the beneficiation plant. The collected samples were characterized at a macro- and micro-scale. At the final stage of characterization, two different textures were selected for XCT studies. The selection criteria were the mineral proportions and the grain size of the minerals. Samples contained both magnetite and gangue minerals with roughly equal proportions and scattered distribution of minerals. Moreover, since the ore type may have hematite ( Furthermore, a proper selection of the grain size had to be done. Too fine grain sizes can lead to two problems. First, grains may not be distinguished at the selected resolution and a misinterpretation of the grain characteristics occur due to the partial volume artifact ( The first step is to study the spatial deformation of ore textures along with in-situ loading of XCT images. The modified Brazilian test along with XCT can be used for studying the structural deformation (in combination with DVC measurements) of minerals within each texture. The Brazilian test setup was used for the following reasons: It is a method with indirect measurements of tensile strength and is widely utilized to study the fracture behavior of brittle materials ( Due to the small surface sharing of the particle and platen, the friction force will be less effective. Friction will cause the apparent compressive strength to vary inside the sample ( There will be less irregularity on the cylindrical specimen surface. In this case, the applied stress will not accumulate on a specific part ( Another advantage of the cylindrical shape samples is the full scan field for XCT studies of circular fields of view ( The selected ore textures i.e. (A) and (B), were prepared for a modified Brazilian test. To perform the Brazilian test, a cylindrically shaped sample was drilled out of the characterized samples. The sample size was selected due to 1) high attenuation of magnetite as a dense material, 2) the longer distance of the sample from the X-ray source and detector due to the in-situ chamber and therefore less X-ray penetration, 3) due to high attenuation level and less X-ray penetration, longer scanning time is required which causes the axial load relaxation ( For conducting the in-situ Brazilian test, an apparatus with a suitable sample holder was needed. A light density and low plastic behavior are two criteria for selecting the proper sample holder material. For preventing the plastic deformation inside the apparatus, it was recommended to use steel ( Another criterion for the apparatus design was its proper size setting. The apparatus was designed according to the procedure recommended in The 3D scanning was carried out using a Zeiss Xradia 510 Versa 3D microscope system. A CCD (charge-coupled-device) detector was used which included an image intensifier. To have comparable scan results, the scanning parameters were consistent at each scan. The scanning parameters are listed in The scanning time (4–4.5 h) was set to balance the duration of scan and desired quality based on the aforementioned scanning parameters. The field of view (i.e. the beam section size) was selected in a way to cover the specimen and the Brazilian apparatus with an objective of 4X. The XCT generates cross-sectional image slices through the object being placed on a rotational stage between an X-ray tube and a detector. The cross-sectional image was obtained from projections at many different angles in which these projections are reconstructed by a back-projection algorithm in the scanner's computer. For carrying out the DVC measurements, an in-situ loading device (CT5000, Deben Ltd, UK) was used along with the XCT and the Brazilian apparatus. The quasi-static compression loading mechanism was applied at two different displacement rates (0.1 and 1 mm/min) at room temperature. The temperature was controlled during the process to prevent a temperature effect on particle deformation. Three loading steps were used for all textural types and loading displacement rates, including normal loads of 30 N, 500 N and the load at the breakage point. In each step, the ore texture sample was loaded to the before-mentioned force and scanned while the force remained constant ( DVC measurements were performed on the obtained XCT datasets, using LaVision DVC software (Davis, 8.4, LaVision GmbH, Göttingen, Germany). The local correlation algorithm in LaVision is a Fast Fourier Transform cross-correlation, which correlates the sub-volumes independently as a discrete function of gray levels. The choice of DVC settings are detailed in Appendix A. From the displacements at the center of the sub-volumes, all the components of the Green–Lagrange strain tensor were calculated using a centered finite differences scheme ( The second step is to quantify the propagated cracks in 2D to investigate breakage mode in terms of being random or preferential breakage (in phase and in phase boundary). To assess this, an image processing code in MATLAB was used to quantify cracks in order to identify random or preferential breakage from SEM images. Additionally, XCT 3D imaging was used for tracking the propagated cracks in the third dimension. The high-resolution 2D SEM analysis was carried out in a Zeiss Sigma 300 VP with a field of view of about 7 × 7 mm and a resolution of 20 μm per pixel. A summary of the image preparation and analysis methodology in MATLAB is given below: Gray level SEM images were binarized for discriminating cracks. Morphological processing was applied to the crack binary images. Thinning processing was used in order to “skeletonize” the cracks and was iterated until there was no more modification. Topological properties (number of holes and connections) were conserved in this process ( By combination of the cracks’ binary image and SEM backscattered electron (BSE) image, the crack width and surrounding phases were calculated and recorded. This can be done by plotting a perpendicular line to the skeletonize crack and extend this line until reaching the mineral phases. An example for SEM image processing and the resulting network of cracks obtained by the steps described above is presented in For characterizing cracks in terms of mineralogy, some phases were not detectible from BSE images. Therefore, an EDS mapping was done with Bruker Instrument EDS detector combined with SEM. Moreover, magnetite grain boundary breakage and breakage mechanism were studied qualitatively based on reflected optical microscopy images in order to identify and characterize the propagated cracks. In this study, the maximum principal strain was used since rock is a brittle material and the maximum principal stress is an appropriate measure for assessing damage initiation ( In order to see the effect of mineralogy on the characteristic of cracks, SEM images and optical microscopy images were used. Cracks were characterized qualitatively and quantitatively. With the help of three-dimensional images and selected slices for two-dimensional images, the reported observations can be tracked in the whole specimen. In order to study cracks quantitatively, 2D images of SEM analysis were utilized. For investigating the magnetite breakage mode, optical microscopy images were used. The magnification and resolution in optical microscopy images were 20X and 0.5 µm respectively. However, due to the resolution restrictions of the utilized camera during imaging, the resolution was reduced to roughly 1 µm. For measuring the strains and deformations, the assumption is micro-cracks are equally distributed without any specific orientation. In order to compare the effect of loading displacement rate and textural type on strain type and its distribution, sections of the 3D images of the core were used ( While in the case of the texture (A), the loading rate has an effect on breakage mode, the texture (B) shows no significant difference in terms of deformation, which is high in both displacement rates ( From the SEM analysis of texture (A), it was observed that some quartz grains were covered by biotite ( More examples of the SEM and optical microscopy images of the failed texture (A) with 0.1 mm/min displacement rate are given in In terms of breakage mechanism and pattern of breakage, there are four main categories including shattering, cleavage, chipping, and abrasion. The shattering breakage mechanism observed when the applied energy is a multiple of that required for the breakage. Closer inspection of the texture (A)-0.1 mm/min case shows that crack formation patterns in magnetite lead to result of the shattering breakage mechanism ( The observation of magnetite failure in optical microscopy images ( In addition, similar results in terms of biotite covering quartz grains have been observed also in texture (A) ( According to the optical microscopy images of texture (B) in In total four minerals were selected according to the pixel value of the mineral including quartz, apatite, actinolite, and magnetite. The quantifications were done through 3 sections in textures A-0.1 (mm/min), A-1 (mm/min), B-1 (mm/min) and 2 sections in texture B-0.1 (mm/min). Quantification of mineral occurrence on both sides of the crack was done along the entire crack length with an average of the selected sections. The crack length inside each mineral and between two minerals was quantified and normalized by the total length of the cracks ( In overall, the cracks dominantly occurred in the magnetite phase. It seems that the inherent micro-cracks and the large abundance of magnetite are the main reasons for that. In terms of breakage mode, the slower loading rate gives higher preferential in phase breakage for magnetite while this is opposite for apatite. Phase boundary breakage between minerals e.g. apatite and magnetite or quartz and magnetite are not significantly different for the tested loading rates. Moreover, it is observed that the slower loading rate is more favorable for the liberation of magnetite. Ore texture type and loading displacement rate are the two parameters, which affect the ore crack formation and consequently breakage mode and mineral liberation. In this study, a new aspect of ore texture was introduced as ore texture heterogeneity, which is a complex property comprising mineral heterogeneity, geometrical heterogeneity, weak grain boundaries, and micro-cracks. The combined effect of ore texture heterogeneity and loading displacement rate was investigated through two methods including Digital Volume Correlation and crack quantification. Digital Volume Correlation illustrates the textural deformations and strains through in-situ loading of specimen along with X-ray computed micro-tomography scanning. Crack quantification was done through combination of the cracks’ binary image and scanning electron microscopy backscattered electron image. Moreover, a detailed characterization of cracks was done with optical and characteristic scanning electron microscopy images. The following conclusions can be drawn from this work: Digital Volume Correlation measurements showed that the deformations from invisible micro-cracks. It is possible to track the quantity of active micro-cracks by quantifying their deformations rate. By doing this, a prediction of the breakage mode in terms of being random or non-random within the ore texture can be done. The findings suggest that both ore texture and loading displacement rate may affect the breakage mode and liberation, although the current study is based on small size samples. The density of crack formation in a specific mineral indicates the natural micro-cracks within the mineral, which cause a preferential breakage mode. Geological heterogeneity deformations within an ore texture affect minerals’ natural micro-crack and alter breakage mechanism. Biotite weak planes and cleavages cause a phase boundary preferential breakage mode through its boundaries with minerals. Geological deformation e.g. metamorphism causes geometrical and micro-crack heterogeneity. Crack quantification gives a powerful tool for detecting the type of random and non-random breakage mode in terms of being phase boundary and preferential in phase breakage. The evaluation of the comminution process in terms of mineral’s breakage mode and consequently liberation should be based on the combinations of ore texture and process-related parameters. By measuring the deformations and cracking behavior of a small scale ore cores, a proper selection of the loading mechanism rate with respect to ore texture can be done. By adjusting the comminution related parameters to the dominant ore texture, it is possible to improve minerals liberation. Moreover, studying the ore texture deformations and crack quantification will lead to save the energy for the energy demanding comminution investigations.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial support of the Each dataset was correlated against the as-received condition (step number) with two different settings ( The reliability of the displacement measurements was assessed in terms of the quality of the cross-correlation coefficient. These settings were utilized for finding the desired resolution with the least decorrelation value. A normalized cross-correlation coefficient, r The variables in the equation have been explained in section 1.3 and VOI refers to the volume of interest. A correlation coefficient value r