The present work proposes the recovery of rhodium from rhodium-containing waste rinsing water through cementation with metallic zinc powder. The effects of zinc content, reaction temperature, reaction time and shaking on rhodium recovery are investigated in detail. In addition, the cementation kinetics of rhodium is studied, and its activation energy was found to be 30kJ/mol. After a detailed observation of the dissolution behavior of the zinc powder during the cementation process, it is demonstrated that most of the zinc is preferentially consumed by free acid, a finding corroborated by pH measurements. The proposed process is simple, straightforward and economically feasible.Rhodium belongs to the platinum-group metals (PGM) and has a special catalytic activity to reduce nitrogen oxides (NO Its high and relatively uniform reflectivity and the ease with which it produces hard, bright electrodeposits have led to the widespread use of rhodium in jewelry, searchlight reflectors and electrical contacts ( The cementation technique has been used in industry for a long time in both hydrometallurgy and in the purification of process streams and wastewaters. The advantages of the cementation process include its relative simplicity, ease of control and its ability to recover of valuable metals ( The standard reduction potentials of Rh and Zn are given as follows: The potential difference is calculated to be 1.52 The overall reaction is expressed in Eq. The objectives of this work were 1) to recover the rhodium incorporated in waste rinsing water via cementation with zinc powder and 2) to highlight the dissolution behavior of the sacrificing metal (zinc) and 3) to observe the pH variation during the cementation process. Used rinsing water that was procured from a rhodium-plating workshop (Hasar, S., Turkey) was employed in this work. All of the chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade. The optimal cementation parameters were established by examining the following factors: time, temperature, amount of zinc powder (< Solid/liquid separation was performed following each cementation experiment. For the analyses, the filtered solutions were introduced into the instrument at an appropriate dilution when necessary. The recovery (%) of this cementation process was calculated from the percentage of the cemented rhodium using the following equation: To investigate the cementation behavior of the rhodium from the waste rinsing water, a kinetic study was performed. After the cementation reaction, excess zinc was digested in 2.0 The process outlined in this paper could be used to recover almost all of the rhodium present in waste rinsing water. In the following section, the process parameters were examined in detail.  Approximately 2.75 As shown in  As shown in As shown in In order to observe the effect of time on rhodium recovery, experiments were carried out at various time intervals. These three figures similarly show that zinc preferentially reacts with free acid, resulting in the increment in solution pH. Moreover, 30  As shown in After the effect of shaking was observed, it was attempted to investigate the effect of temperature alone on rhodium recovery. Thus, experiments were conducted without shaking. Some authors have suggested that temperature is the most influential parameter on cementation ( As shown in  Following the production of metallic rhodium powder, the powder was washed with fresh 2.0 To determine the purity of the produced powder, the powder was dissolved in fused sodium bisulfate (NaHSO In the present work, it was attempted to recover rhodium from rhodium-containing waste rinsing water that is used to clean rhodium plated items following the plating process. It was demonstrated that more than 99% of the rhodium metal in waste rinsing water could be recovered using only high quantities of zinc powder. This is possible because most of the zinc powder was consumed by free acid in the medium and rhodium is in its complex form. Shaking and temperature were shown to be important parameters in the cementation reaction, which is in accordance with the scientific literature. The activation energy of rhodium cementation by metallic zinc powder was calculated to be 30 The author wishes to thank TUBITAK for the financial support. Special thanks are due to Güntaç Zorlu (MSc student) for his invaluable discussions and Mr. Tayfun Aktas for making possible the analysis conducted outside the university. Grateful acknowledgment is also due to Tony Goetz & Zonen, Antwerpen, Belgium for invaluable support.