It has been shown that the quality of reduction achieved with the surgical treatment of distal radius fractures is of significant importance in the clinical outcome achieved as well as in reducing the long term incidence of post traumatic arthrosis. Our study demonstrates that arthroscopic assisted fracture reduction of distal radius fractures is not only feasible, but allows for superior fracture reductions of distal radius fractures and also allows for a thorough assessment of concomitant ligamentous and soft tissue injuries in the wrist. This article discusses the indications, contraindications, and goes through a very detailed description of the surgical technique involved in the arthroscopic treatment of distal radius fractures.Since the advent of wrist arthroscopy; numerous authors have described its use in distal radius fracture reduction. The goal of operative fixation of intraarticular distal radius fractures should be anatomic restoration of the articular surfaces, both the radiocarpal and distal radial ulnar joints; as well as extra-articular alignment, ie, volar tilt, radial height, and radial inclination. The arthroscope is a tool that should be considered when its use in achieving articular reductions and dealing with concomitant soft tissue pathology justifies the additional cost of the use of arthroscopy. Particularly in intraarticular distal radius fracture reduction, it can provide superior visualization of the articular surface, improved diagnostic information, and allow for superior articular fracture reduction. Although we have no way of knowing the amount of damage sustained by the chondrocytes on a cellular level by the initial trauma, many authors have reported on the importance of reducing the articular incongruities that are seen in intraarticular fractures to as near as an anatomic level as possible to provide better functional and radiographic outcomes. It has been shown that intraoperative fluoroscopy and plain radiography cannot accurately determine the quality of the articular reduction, making anatomic reduction difficult and that there is considerable intraobserver and interobserver variability with these methods. It has been shown by multiple studies that an articular step-off of 1-2 mm is correlated with the development of degenerative arthritis. There have been many reports on the high incidence of associated chondral, intracarpal, and soft tissue injuries associated with both intraarticular and extraarticular distal radius fractures. Indirect diagnosis from intercarpal gaps or malalignment seen on plain radiography or clinical examination may only detect some of the most severe associated injuries, thereby missing the more subtle injuries. Despite the high incidence of associated injuries, we do not recommend routine arthroscopic evaluation of every distal radius fracture. An absolute contraindication for the use of arthroscopy would be in the setting of or suspicion of compartment syndrome of the forearm or hand and severe soft tissue injury or those with extensive contamination. Other relative contraindications would be in the setting of open fractures or infection. As for every treatment, whether operative or nonoperative, proper patient selection is critical and patient expectations, activity level, age, gender, and occupation are all extremely important parameters to consider. Arthroscopic reduction is best done 3-10 days after the injury, after the peak of swelling and before the maturation of early callus. The patient is prepared and draped in the usual fashion, with the patient in the supine position with the affected arm abducted on a hand table. A pneumatic tourniquet is applied to the arm and set at 250 mm Hg. There are many different fracture patterns and thus many different options for definitive fixation. Arthroscopy should be used to facilitate better fracture reduction and evaluation of chondral, intracarpal, and soft tissue injuries. It can be used in combination with percutaneous pin or screw fixation, external fixation, or open reduction and internal fixation, whether it is a volar or dorsal plating or fragment-specific fixation. If the fracture pattern can be internally fixed via volar plating we make a standard volar Henry approach retracting the flexor carpi radialis, the digital flexor tendons, and the median nerve ulnarly and the radial artery radially. Vigilant and careful gentle retraction of median nerve is necessary to help prevent postoperative neuropraxia. The pronator quadratus is incised with a scalpel on its radial insertion, leaving at least 2 mm of tissue to reattach during closure. We then provisionally reduce the radial metaphyseal wrist fragment to the diaphysis under direct and fluoroscopic guidance and a 0.62 in (1.6 mm) Kirshner wire is percutaneously inserted through the radial styloid into the proximal diaphysis for temporary fixation for all fractures with a radial styloid fragment. The accurate reduction with restoration of the volar tilt and radioulnar inclination is essential at this stage because the correct position of the radial styloid fragment provides an anatomic landmark to which the remaining intraarticular fragments will be reduced. A small skin incision should be made with a scalpel and blunt dissection down to the radial styloid before insertion of the K-wire to protect branches of the dorsal radial sensory nerve. The K-wire should be inserted using a soft tissue protector. Volar plating can be performed after provisional K-wire fixation of the articular fragments under fluoroscopic guidance as described by Slade et al Now that the wrist is provisionally reduced, the hand can be suspended from the wrist arthroscopy traction tower by sterile finger traps on the index and long fingers, with approximately 10 lbs. of traction. The topographic anatomy of the wrist is then drawn with a marking pen. Because the anatomy may be distorted secondary to fracture displacement and swelling, careful attention must be used in portal placement. The 3-4, 6R, radial and ulnar midcarpal portals are defined and marked. An 18-gauge needle on a 30 mL syringe full of normal saline is used to find the 3-4 portal and infiltrate the radiocarpal joint. A number 11 scalpel blade is used to make the skin incision and a mosquito snap is used for blunt dissection down to the capsule. The 2.7 mm/30° small-joint arthroscope blunt trochar is carefully inserted through the capsule. Using the scope's trochar as the instrument to penetrate the capsule, we will create a tight seal around the scope and allow less extravasation of fluid into the soft tissues. In addition, the scope is less likely to repeatedly fall out of the joint during arthroscopy. Ringer's lactate solution, which has an isotonic composition, is hung by gravity for irrigation, which will also decrease extravasation into the soft tissues. A pump can also be considered using low pressure if the fracture pattern is relatively simple and there is not too much soft tissue swelling preoperatively. However, if a pump is used, careful attention must be paid to soft tissue extravasation during the case to prevent the potential development of compartment syndrome. An 18-gauge needle is then inserted through the 6R portal under direct visualization. After a skin incision is made and blunt dissection has been completed, the trochar is used to perforate the capsule and a 2.0-3.0 mm full-radius motorized suction shaver is inserted to evacuate the hematoma and improve visualization. It is very important to adequately wash out the joint during this step or intraarticular visualization can be difficult. If a volar Henry approach has already been made, a volar portal can be made very safely under direct visualization between the radioscaphocapitate and the long radiolunate ligaments via a switching stick inserted through the 3-4 portal. It will exit safely volarly between the flexor carpi radialis and radial artery, which have already been dissected free and can be retracted. This portal allows visualization of the dorsal radius, the dorsal radiocarpal ligament, and superior visualization of the palmar scapho-lunate interosseous (SLIO) ligament. From the 3-4 portal the volar radial surface, the lunate fossa, the volar extrinsic ligaments, and the TFCC can be assessed. A calibrated probe inserted from the 6R portal can be used to assess any intraarticular step-offs or gaps, as well as to aid in assessment of intracarpal ligament tears as described by Geissler In this first example, this 25-year-old, right-handed dominant male sustained a fall from a bicycle and injured his right distal radius. His fracture was an intraarticular fracture of the distal radius, with a depressed radial styloid that led to a step off and gapping of the scaphoid facet ( Centrally, depressed or die-punch fragments are reduced by gently elevating them up from below, using a probe or freer elevator and held reduced by a subchondral K-wire. Great care should be taken if intraarticular fracture reduction is attempted by using the probe intraarticularly to pull up depressed fragments as it is very easy to fragment the articular edges of these depressed fragments. It is important to disimpact them from below and get them mobile before using probes or blunt trochars intraarticularly to fine tune the reduction. However, one must take great care not to mobilize these intraarticular fragments too aggressively or they can become intraarticular loose bodies, which then become very difficult to reduce. Other intraarticular fragments are reduced using a combination of tenaculum bone clamps and percutaneous K-wires used as joysticks, which can then be advanced for temporary or permanent fixation. Cannulated screws can also be inserted over these K-wires if desired. Traction may need to be slightly released to aid in fragment reduction. Although ligamentotaxis can help in fracture reduction, it can simultaneously create rotational deformities of the articular fragments. For example, a dorsal lunate facet fragment will tend to rotate volarly with axial traction. Intraarticular step offs and gaps are reduced as anatomically as possible. Cancellous allograft or autograft is used to provide support for significant metaphyseal bone loss. Alternatively, one may use a bone graft substitute if desired to provide subchondral support. In this second example, this 27-year-old, right-handed dominant male fell while snow boarding onto his right wrist. Initial radiographs reveal a depressed intraarticular fracture of the distal radius involving the lunate facet. Contralateral radiographs reveal the degree of displacement ( After reduction of the distal radius fracture has been completed, systematic evaluation of the radiocarpal and midcarpal joints is performed. Intracarpal ligaments, extrinsic ligaments, and TFCC injuries can now be addressed arthroscopically if indicated. We feel that it is important to address all of these concomitant injuries at the time of distal radius fracture fixation as that may lead to better outcomes and fewer morbidity by potentially avoiding further surgical procedures. Unless obvious intercarpal dissociation was seen on preoperative or intraoperative radiography, historically these injuries were not addressed at time of the initial fracture fixation, which may be a reason why there are extremely variable clinical results in patients treated with distal radius fractures. Our preferred method of treatment for acute scapholunate ligament injury is percutaneous pinning for Geissler grade 3 instability. In patients who have grade 4 instability or a complete tear of the interosseous ligament, we prefer to perform an open repair of the dorsal scapholunate ligament with suture anchors augmented by a Synthes (West Chester, PA) partially-threaded headed cannulated screw through the scaphoid to the lunate that is removed after 4-6 months. Treatment is similar for lunotriquetral ligmentous injuries depending on the grade of instability. For TFCC tears: Palmer Class 1A central flap tears are debrided to a stable rim, and Class 1B tears are arthroscopically repaired using a meniscal repair kit using an outside-in technique with number 2 polydioxanone sutures. Of note, we only treat soft tissue injuries that can clearly be interpreted as acutely traumatic. Post-operative rehabilitation is dependent on the method of fixation and the associated soft-tissue injuries that may prolong immobilization, ie, TFCC repair. Regardless of procedure, all our patients are immobilized in a splint for the first 10-14 days after surgery, with their fingers free and instructed on finger active range of motion. After their initial period of immobilization, all patients are referred to a certified hand therapist for formal therapy. There have been many complications reported on operative fixation of distal radius fractures Wrist arthroscopy is a feasible adjunct for distal radius fixation. It provides direct assessment of intraarticular fracture reduction and provides early assessment and potential treatment of associated injuries, which may potentially yield superior clinical results. It is important to realize that arthroscopy should not be used for every distal radius fracture, but rather that a careful analysis should be performed in each case to determine the additional benefit that can be gained from the use of arthroscopy. If it is felt that the quality of reduction would be significantly improved or if there is concomitant pathology that can be best addressed by arthroscopy, then arthroscopic assistance can be invaluable in achieving superior reductions and potentially superior clinical results.