Deep soil stores a large amount of organic carbon (C) and nitrogen (N). However, little is known regarding the interactions between soil C and net N mineralization in deep soil, which complicates the prediction of ecosystem C and N dynamics. In this study, a 150-day laboratory soil incubation experiment was performed under 20 °C and 25 °C to investigate the influence of soil depth and warming on C and net N mineralization and their relationship. Soils were collected from a Hapludalfs profile in a subtropical forest with three depth intervals: 0–10 (topsoil), 10–30 (midsoil), and 30–60 cm (subsoil). Soil microbial community-level physiological profiling (CLPP) was conducted to investigate the role of the microbial community in C and N mineralization. The results demonstrated that both C and net N mineralization rates in subsoil were significantly lower than in topsoil. Compared to topsoil, subsoil had lower temperature sensitivity of C mineralization and relatively higher temperature sensitivity of net N mineralization. Cumulative soil C and net N mineralized were positively correlated in topsoil with the mineralized N per mineralized C showed as 0.19 and 0.31 at 20 °C and 25 °C, respectively. However, there was no significant correlation between cumulative soil C and net N mineralized in subsoil due to the low amount of net N mineralization. The lack of labile C source and degradable organic N were believed to limit the net N mineralization in subsoil. The microbial community in topsoil used relatively more easily decomposable carbohydrates and carboxylic acids, which favored C mineralization. In contrast, the microbial community in subsoil had relatively high utilization of amino acids (N-containing substrates), which indicated there was N limitation. This distinguished substrate utilization patterns of microbial communities could explain the observed C and N mineralization rates among the soil depths, and suggests that the microbial community played an important role in soil C and N mineralization. The decoupled relationships between soil C and net N mineralization in deep soil and their differentiated responses to warmer temperatures among soil depths indicated that deep soil should be considered separately from topsoil for ecosystem C and N cycling, especially for ecosystem C dynamic models.Soil carbon (C) mineralization produces a major flux of CO C and N storage and mineralization processes have been well-described in surface soils (above 10 cm). Deeper soil (below 30 cm) stores significant amounts of organic C and N as well ( The relationship between C and net N mineralization is soil-specific and depends on the degree of microbial N limitation ( In addition to soil C/N ratio, the microbial community and composition of soil organic N also affect soil N mineralization. For example, net N mineralization in a vertisol below 1 m was limited by the associated microbial population ( Temperature is one of the most important environmental factors affecting soil C and N cycling ( The effects of warming on soil C and N cycling are usually accompanied by a shift in the microbial composition and activity ( In this study, we wanted to examine how soil net N mineralization rate and its relationship with C mineralization may differ among various soil depths and how they may respond to warming. We hypothesized that (1) as the C/N ratio increases with soil depth, the soil net N mineralization rate would increase from the topsoil to the subsoil, resulting in a greater ratio of mineralized N per unit of mineralized C; (2) warming would increase both the soil C and net N mineralization rates, and their temperature sensitivity would be different among soil depths. To test these hypotheses, soils from three layers in a subtropical forest were incubated at 20 °C and 25 °C to examine the dynamics of soil C mineralization and net N mineralization. The dynamics of soil dissolved fractions and soil microbial functional community were also detected to explore the factors regulating these processes. Soils were collected from the Badagongshan National Nature Reserve, Hunan Province (29°46.04′N, 110°5.24′E), in north of Wuling Mountain in the mid-subtropical zone of China. The climate is subtropical mountain humid monsoon with an average annual rainfall of 2100 mm. The topography is characterized by deep valleys, steep slopes, and flat tops. The natural vegetation is dominated by evergreen and deciduous broad-leaved mixed forests. The dominant tree species include We dug soil profiles at three locations with a similar landscape in a small watershed in May 2014. The soil profiles consisted of a dark brown mineral A horizon (10–15 cm thick), a transitional horizon between mineral A and B layer (8–15 cm thick), and a yellow brown mineral B horizon (Bts, about 60 cm thick). Soil samples were collected at fixed depth intervals from the three profiles. 0–10 cm soil was referred as topsoil (represented soil from A horizon), and 30–60 cm soil was referred as subsoil (represented soil from B horizon). 10–30 cm soil was also collected as midsoil (including soil from the transitional horizon and the bordering horizons). Soils from the same depth intervals at the three locations were considered as field replicates. All soil samples were immediately brought to the laboratory and passed through a 4 mm sieve. Roots and visible residues were removed manually. Soils were stored in a refrigerator (<4 °C) until further analysis and lab incubation. For each soil, approximately 50 g of fresh sample (equivalent to 30 g of dry weight) was weighed in twenty individual 250 mL triangular flasks. Before incubation, soil moisture was adjusted to 65% water-holding capacity (WHC) by adding deionized H The rate of soil C mineralization was measured daily during the first week, weekly during the following three weeks, and monthly in the remaining period of the experiment by quantifying released CO Soil microbial biomass was measured by substrate-induced respiration technique ( CLPP was assessed using the BIOLOG Eco-Plate TM system (Biolog, Hayward, CA, USA). Briefly, 5 g of fresh soil were suspended in 50 mL of 0.85% sterile NaCl solution and shaken for 30 min on a reciprocal shaker. Soil solutions (150 μL) were inoculated in each of the microplate wells, which were then incubated at 20 °C in the dark. The readings were taken at 590 nm and 750 nm after inoculation and at 12 h intervals for 204 h using a microplate reader (Multilabel Plate Readers, M200 PRO, Tecan, Austria). The average well color development (AWCD) on BIOLOG Eco-plates was calculated according to Soil samples were tested for the presence of carbonate, and no carbonate was found. SOC, total N, and their δ The cumulative amount of C mineralized was calculated by integrating the soil C mineralization rate with time in mg g AWCD on the BIOLOG Eco-plate reflects the overall utilization of each individual substrate, and was used to indicate soil microbial activity. Microbial diversity was evaluated by calculating the Shannon index based on BIOLOG Eco-plate individual well readings. The AWCD and diversity indices presented in this study were based on 120 h incubation readings since this incubation time had the highest rate of microbial growth. To obtain information about the carbon source utilization pattern, 31 substrates were assigned into six groups according to their chemical type, including amines, amino acids, carbohydrates, carboxylic acids, miscellaneous and polymers ( Data were checked for normal distribution and homoscedasticity of variances using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and the Levené test, and transformed where necessary. One-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) combined with Tukey's HSD SOC and total N decreased significantly ( The proportion of the total acid hydrolysable N in soil total N ranged from 54.4 to 62.0%, and increased significantly ( Cumulative C mineralized was significantly different according to soil depth ( At 20 °C, cumulative soil C and net N mineralized were positively correlated only in the topsoil ( The Q10 value of soil C mineralization in the subsoil was significantly lower compared to the topsoil and midsoil ( Soil depth and incubation temperature showed no significant effect on soil DOC content ( Soil microbial biomass, AWCD and Shannon index were significantly affected by soil depth ( PCA analysis revealed that the microbial functional community was affected by soil depth, temperature, and incubation time. At the beginning of the incubation, microbial community in the subsoil had a greater relative usage of amino acids and miscellaneous substrates, and microbial community in the topsoil used relatively more carbohydrates and polymers ( The soil C mineralization rate based on SOC content was significantly higher in the topsoil than in the subsoil, thereby suggesting that decomposability decreased with depth, which was consistent with the findings of other studies ( In the topsoil (at both 20 °C and 25 °C) and the midsoil (at 25 °C), positive correlations between the cumulative C and net N mineralization were observed. However, there was no such relationship in the subsoil at both 20 °C and 25 °C. These results contradicted our first hypothesis that a lower C/N ratio in the deeper soil would result in a greater ratio of net N mineralized per unit of C mineralized ( First, SOC in subsoil is more recalcitrant than topsoil ( Second, low supply of active soil organic N in subsoil likely hinders soil net N mineralization. The acid hydrolysis method helped us chemically isolate labile N fractions, among which hydrolysable ammonia-N and amino acid-N are believed to be useful indicators of the N supply potential ( Third, the dynamics of soil microbial biomass and activity probably affected the net N mineralization and the link between C and N mineralization. The significant decrease in soil microbial biomass carbon and activity throughout the incubation in the topsoil indicated that the N demand of microorganisms would decline accordingly, which then facilitated a higher allocation of N to mineralization than immobilization. In contrast, the constant soil microbial biomass carbon and activity in the subsoil during the incubation indicated the N demand of microorganisms didn't decline, which constrained the allocation of N to mineralization. In summary, the observed pattern of soil N mineralization and the decoupled relationship between C and net N mineralization in deep soil are likely caused by a combination of several factors, including the energy deficiency, a low supply of active N components, and steady microbial activity in the subsoil. It is notable that our laboratory experiment was very different from field conditions where root residues and exudates, and soil animals could provide a continuous source of labile C and N to deep soil ( The soil C mineralization rate increased significantly with warming for all soil depths. As the global temperature increases, accelerated C mineralization rates will result in greater quantities of CO Warming also increased the net N mineralization rate for all soil depths. The temperature effects on soil net N mineralization has been proposed to be associated with a proportionally larger increase in the gross N mineralization rate than the immobilization rate ( Soils from different depths not only had distinct microbial activities and diversities ( Soil microorganisms were vulnerable to warming ( Warming and incubation also caused succession of the soil microbial functional community ( Soil C and N cycling are closely related, and their interactions can regulate the C balance for terrestrial ecosystems. Our study observed a significant positive correlation between C and net N mineralization in surface soil, but this link was not present in deeper soil due to the low level of net N mineralization. We found that net N mineralization in subsoil from our subtropical forest was limited by low amounts of labile C source (which provides energy) and degradable organic N (which provides material). The low C mineralization rate for deep soil and its low temperature sensitivity suggested that C release from deep soil in our study area would be weaker than earlier prediction under future warming conditions, but the impact of subsoil N on C sequestration through plant growth would also be minimal due to the weak net N mineralization. The decoupled relationships between soil C and net N mineralization in deep soil and their differentiated responses to warming at different soil depths highlighted the need for soil C models to capture this effect. The authors declare no competing financial interests. This work was supported by the Supplementary Data: The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this chapter can be found at