For those who were unable to attend the event, the full set of published papers from the Montreal Pigment & Colour Science Forum & TiO In October 2014, for the very first time, Smithers Rapra effectively combined its two highly popular pigment conferences – the World TiO If you walk up any of the streets on the northwestern side of the university quarter of Montreal, you soon find yourself immersed in the 200 hectare Mount Royal Park, which spreads over a hill rising to a peak more than 230 metres above the River St Lawrence. From that peak, you can look down on the so-called skyscrapers of the city-centre, including the conference hotel, or you can look back to the trees on Mount Royal. As Mr Gary LeRoux (of the Canadian Paint & Coatings Association), the final conference speaker, pointed out to the audience, the dominant colours of Mount Royal are reds, golds and evergreens right now, but in a few weeks' time the dominant colour will be white thanks to the snowfalls that last throughout the winter. Maybe that was a factor behind the selection of Montreal as the first venue for co-locating the conferences on white and coloured pigments? Combining the two events was evidently judged a success and Smithers Rapra plans to do the same thing next year, inviting delegates to vote on their preferred venue: Amsterdam, Prague, Paris or Lyon. Opening the first dedicated TiO Reviewing these trends in TiO Sales of TiO By early 2012, it became obvious to most customers that they had overstocked on TiO DuPont has been the world's largest TiO Currently, DuPont's TiO Ms Kasia Patel (of ‘Industrial Minerals’ magazine) reviewed the TiO Rutile and calcined petroleum coke (CPC) are important raw materials for making TiCl Mr Derek Folmer (of Sierra Rutile) spoke about the position of natural rutile in the array of TiO Mr Reg Adams (of Artikol) presented a 22-page paper titled “Dawn of a New Era for TiO  Mr Robert Gibney (of Iluka) stated that his company's medium-term strategic plan is based on a forecast of trendline 4% per annum growth in TiO Mr Laurence Wang (of Tinox Consulting) described trends in China's TiO Domestic pigment demand growth has slowed down, so several major companies have been actively building up their export sales. For the time being, domestic TiO Mr Jean-François Turgeon (of Tronox) discussed various aspects related to his company's Fairbreeze mining project. Tronox is the most vertically integrated of all the TiO Mr Andrea DeMori (of Hatch) also addressed the issues involved in project development, this time from the standpoint of a full-service turnkey contractor with experience across the entire value-chain, including geological assessments, ore mining, mineral processing, tailings treatment, ilmenite smelting and acid leaching of the slag product to generate a very high-grade feedstock. Mr DeMori highlighted the importance of good project design to ensure that the various complex schedules can be dovetailed into a compact timetable. He also pointed out that as the portfolio of easy-access, high-grade orebodies become exhausted, the industry will have to deal with less conventional titaniferous resources, such as Norwegian and Italian hardrock rutile deposits in eclogite hosts, large high-slimes deposits in Paraguay and anatase ores in Brazil. Innovation and the need for dedicated investment in research and development was the chosen theme of Mr Gerry Colamarino (of TiPMC Solutions). He began by pointing out that although TiO Innovation is the The TiO Meanwhile, the Colour Science forum kicked-off on the Wednesday morning with an interesting presentation by Mr Paul Czornij (of BASF) on the aesthetic nature of colour and the significance of colour selection in product design and marketing. He referred to the five principles of observation in Gestalt theory – proximity, similarity, closure, continuity/order and the Prof Mas Subramanian described the molecular structures and electron movements (due to ligand field excitation, charge transfer excitation or jumping across valence/conduction band gaps), explaining why emerald is green, sapphire is blue and vermilion is red. He also presented an update on the paper he presented at last year's Rome conference concerning the trigonal bipyramidal structures of new blue and orange chromophores. The next speaker to come to the podium was Dr Andrew Smith (now with Shepherd Color), who was formerly a PhD student on Prof Subramanian's team. Dr Smith outlined some of the ways in which academic research, specifically on the chromophores in the Yin There were several excellent papers discussing various effect pigments in detail: Dr Angelo Yializis (of Sigma) on vacuum-metallised flake pigments; Dr Andrea Fetz (of Eckart) on glass-flake effect pigments; and Dr Frank Maile (of Schlenk) on high-reflective mirror-like finishes, also known as liquid metal effect pigments. Dr Kirsten Fritsche (of Merck) addressed the question of how the optical properties of individual effect pigments influence the visible texture of paints and coatings. In separate papers, Dr Linda Gerhardt (of General Motors) and Dr Chris Seubert (of Ford) highlighted the importance of colour specification, measurement, model-building and testing from the automotive paint customers' standpoint. The bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) is a 4-dimensional function that defines how light is reflected at an opaque surface. In her paper, Dr Kristin Dana (of Rutgers University) showed how materials can be recognised and characterised using BRDFs. Algorithms for pattern recognition and machine-learning can be developed for specifying materials using BRDFs. Dr Dana also showed how a Mr Charles Hoover (of Hoover Color Corp) opened the proceedings on Day Three of the conference with a description of his company's Dr Masayuki Osumi (of Office Color Science) discussed strategies for automated colour formulation, with particular regard to metallic coatings. As with several other speakers, he emphasised the need for methods of colour measurement to truly capture the human observer's perception. Even the best performing pigment is of little practical use unless it is thoroughly and evenly dispersed within the paint system. Dr Tom Annable (of Lubrizol) addressed the issues of dispersion, flocculation and colloid stabilisation, highlighting the advantages of polymeric comb dispersants over conventional linear dispersants. Prof Vinothan Manoharan (of Harvard University) spoke about structural colours, noting that in all the bird species with blue plumage, the colour is generated as an angle-independent structural colour, whereas all red feathers incorporate a red pigment. Angle-independent structural colours require a disordered nano-structure. As working examples of biomimetics, synthetic materials have been made with angle-independent structural colours, which can then be encapsulated in an easily dispersed form for making coloured inks. Prof Manoharan's group have recently demonstrated a method for extending the array of structural colours right across to the red end of the spectrum. The morning session concluded with a presentation by Mr Doug Thornley (of Impact Colors), featuring a synopsis of his company's ‘Color Trends 2015’, the sixth in a series of annual forecasts prepared in collaboration with Ms Antoinette Van Den Berg (of Future Touch Inc). The final session of the conference was a plenary session, featuring presentations on: aerospace paints, from Ms Karen Schultz (of Boeing); scientific evidence underlying restrictions on pigment use, from Dr Mark Vincent (of Dominion Colour) and Mr Leo Van Der Biessen (of Royal Haskoning); the global speciality chemicals sector, from Dr Mosongo Moukwa (of PolyOne); trends and innovations in the plastics sector, from Dr Bruce Petersen (of Mathelin Bay Associates); novel pigments offering improvements in the construction sector, by Mr Mark Ryan (of Shepherd Color); and the role of national paint industry associations, from Mr Gary LeRoux (of the Canadian Paint & Coatings Association). These will be reviewed in next month's issue of ‘Focus on Pigments’.