This paper reviews research of “natural zeolites engineering” in Cuba during the last 25 years. It is remarked that a good application derives from a deep knowledge of the natural zeolite from a particular deposit starting from the geological survey. The mining and beneficiation steps of the mineral processing are fundamental to obtain a zeolite raw material with homogeneous properties. The modification of the purified mineral must be designed to achieve the desired quality and performance of the new material. The stability of the final product must be evaluated since the laboratory up to the industry and final utilization. Application fields considered in this review are: ion-exchange and metal immobilization; catalysis; production of ceramics and glass; preparation of zeoponic substrates, active ingredient in drugs, and honeycomb monoliths.A set of new materials based on zeolitic tuffs have recently been developed in Cuba. The list ranges from zeoponic substrates for plant soilless culture to industrial facilities to medicine for humans. Two types of new materials can be designed: (1) based on the physical and chemical properties of the rock, without transformation of the zeolite, (2) based on transformation of the zeolite into a new zeolite or another material. The natural clinoptilolite from Tasajera deposit, Villa Clara province, Cuba, has been the main subject of our study. Two types of technological samples, each one about 100 tons, were obtained: (1) mineral extracted from a drill hole (CMT-C), (2) mineral from the horizon above the groundwater (RM). The chemical and mineral phase compositions of both samples are reported in  Studying homoionic forms of both samples enabled us to establish through X-ray diffraction the influence of the exchanged cation on the thermal stability and to detect the variation in the vibration modes of the crystalline structure by infrared spectrometry [ The development of a catalyst for the transformation of ethanol to ethylene with high yield and low content of byproducts was conducted using CMT-C as raw material [  The use of natural clinoptilolite as aluminum source, instead of the usual feldspar, for ceramics and glass production, with significant energy saving, needs a definite content of calcium and sodium, and a given composition of zeolite and non-zeolite mineral phases. The low thermal stability of the calcium clinoptilolite is important. The lower the thermal stability, the higher the capability of clinoptilolite structure to release aluminum. The viscosity parameters of a sodium-calcium zeolite-based glass are better than the ordinary feldspar-based glass ( RM sample with its high zeolite content and the consequently stable ion-exchange properties is ideal for the production of zeoponic substrates [ The strict control of the chemical and mineral phase compositions assures the pharmacological effect of NZ and its modified forms without toxicity or biological hazards for human beings [ Simon Zinc is a heavy metal with a microbicide effects. Zinc also plays important roles in growth and development, immune response, neurological function, and reproduction of human beings and animals. Many drugs based on zinc compounds for different therapeutic treatments are described in Pharmacopoeia, but their effectiveness depends on their capacity to release Zn Natural clinoptilolites have widely been used for metal removal from industrial wastewaters due to their chemical resistance and low cost, even if their exchange capacity for heavy metals is about 30% of the total capacity [ The stabilization process of the monoliths using a Na-silicate solution at boiling temperature causes the hydrothermal transformation of clinoptilolite into zeolite-P observed by X ray diffraction study and SEM. In The design of the new materials developed, which have unique and stable properties, followed the predetermination of the optimal characteristics required for their utilization. The adequate zeolite mineral was identified on the basis of the geology study of the targeted depot. The mineral was then subjected to a beneficiation process aimed at enriching clinoptinolite and thoroughly characterizing its physical and chemical properties. A strict quality control monitored the modification of the mineral under conditions that can be reproduced at an industrial scale. The stability of the new materials was evaluated keeping in mind their targeted use. This procedure is what we define as Natural Zeolites Engineering. The author is grateful to A. Iraizoz, M.A. Barrios, R. Simón, A. Fleitas, J. Jordán, C. Concepción, B. Cedré, P. Ávila, L.C. de Ménorval, L. Rivero and G. Cros and the colleagues from Lab. Ingeniería de Zeolitas for their contribution. I am also grateful to Universidad de La Habana, other Cuban scientific institutions like INACV, Inst. Finlay, IPK; and I.C.P. from Spain, and Pole Universitaire de Montpellier, France. I also acknowledge Mrs. J. Vera García has significantly improved the English of the draft.