We investigated the effect of plant residue decomposability and fungal biomass on the dynamics of macroaggregate (250–2000μm) formation in a three months' incubation experiment and determined the distribution of residue-derived C and N in the microbial biomass and in aggregate size fractions (250–2000μm, 53–250μm and <53μm) using 13C and 15N data. A silty loam soil (sieved <250μm) was incubated with and without addition of 15N labelled maize leaves (C/N=27.4) and roots (C/N=86.4). Each treatment was carried out with and without fungicide application. The addition of maize residues enhanced soil respiration and microbial biomass C and N and resulted in increased macroaggregate formation with a higher and more rapid maximum macroaggregation in the soil amended with maize leaves than in that with addition of roots. Fungicide application led to a significant decline of microbial biomass C and mineralization of the added residues compared to untreated soils, which demonstrates a successful suppression of part of the active microbial biomass by the fungicide. However, this was not confirmed by a generally lower ergosterol concentration. Consequently, ergosterol was no reliable fungal biomarker in periods of rapid decline of the fungal biomass. A single addition of fungicide was insufficient for continued inhibition of the fungal biomass. Yet, a significant delay (28–42 days) in macroaggregation in fungicide treated compared to untreated samples highlighted the importance of the fungal biomass in macroaggregate formation. Macroaggregates were enriched in maize-derived 13C and 15N compared to microaggregates or the fraction<53μm. They turned over rapidly with decreasing substrate availability, which entailed a transfer of maize-derived C and N stored within macroaggregates during the first weeks of incubation to microaggregates with proceeding incubation time. Our results indicate that this transfer happened within macroaggregates, because no considerable amount of free particulate organic matter (POM) was released upon macroaggregate breakdown. We conclude that substrate decomposability and fungal activity are key factors determining extent and dynamics of macroaggregation during decomposition processes. Macroaggregate formation implied rapid incorporation and thereby short-term protection of maize-derived C and N. Moreover, macroaggregates allowed a transfer of maize-derived organic matter into microaggregates within macroaggregates, which prevented the release of significant amounts of free POM upon macroaggregate breakdown. Consequently, macroaggregates constitute to the transfer of recently added C into more stable soil organic matter fractions.Soil aggregation mediates many of the soil's biological, chemical and physical properties (e.g. aeration or water infiltration); it contributes to soil fertility, and it reduces soil erosion, because water infiltration and the resistance to raindrop impact or wind action are supported ( Aggregate formation and stabilization are affected by several factors, e.g. the clay content, the mineralogy of the clay fraction and the type and amount of organic material ( For soils with SOM as the major binding agent, We conducted a soil incubation experiment with and without the addition of Soil from the Ap horizon (0–30 The following six treatments were applied with four replicates each: (1) “Control” (soil without incorporation of maize residues, without fungicide), (2) “Control For the treatments with incorporation of maize residues, 150 The added residues were derived from maize plants that were grown in pots with coarse sand during the vegetation period 2005. The maize plants were watered with a nutrient solution which contained 10% labelled ammonium nitrate ( The fungicide application for treatments 2, 4 and 6 was carried out as described by The incubation was run for 84 days at 15 The incubation pots were sealed with a lid that had an air inlet port and an air outlet port. The headspace of each incubation pot was continuously flushed with 10 The After eight weeks of incubation, the difference in CO Soil microbial properties of the bulk soil were determined at days 0, 14, 28, 56 and 84. Changes in the size of the microbial biomass pool were estimated using chloroform-fumigation–extraction (CFE) ( The The percentage of maize-derived C in the microbial biomass C ( The content of ergosterol (ergosta-5,7,22-trien-3β-ol), the predominant fungal sterol ( Fractionation of water-stable aggregates was carried out at days 0, 14, 28, 56 and 84. The fractionation scheme was modified from the method described by Since there is little or no binding of organic matter with sand particles, we determined the sand content in all aggregate size fractions >53 Maize residues that were swimming on the water surface during the wet sieving procedure and thus not protected within aggregates or in other association with the soil mineral matrix (i.e. free particulate organic matter (POM) with a density Bulk soil, isolated soil fractions and maize leaves and roots were finely ground for the determination of SOC and total N contents using an automated C and N analyser (Heraeus Vario EL). The isotopic composition of SOC ( The proportion of C derived from maize litter in a soil sample was calculated according to Significance of differences between treatments was tested by an ANOVA followed by the Student–Newman–Keuls test. The statistical significance was evaluated at the In the Soil A high percentage (up to 90%) of the evolved CO From day 28 onwards, we observed no marked changes in the CO Water-stable macroaggregates (250–2000 Macroaggregation was significantly increased by the addition of maize residues. The amount of water-stable macroaggregates remained higher in the residue-treated soils (7–71 Further, macroaggregate dynamics were significantly influenced by the decomposability of the added residue: in the Soil In the Captan treatments, the amount of water-stable macroaggregates remained significantly lower than in their untreated counterparts at the beginning of the incubation ( Microbial biomass C was greater in the residue-treated soils compared to the control and was the highest at the beginning of the experiment ( The microbial biomass N pool was higher in the residue-treated soils (15–22 The amount of ergosterol, an indicator for the fungal biomass, was also increased by the addition of maize residues and remained higher in the Soil Water-stable macroaggregates contained 28–56 However, due to the low amount of macroaggregates (less than 10% of the soil mass, The N concentration in macroaggregates was also higher than in microaggregates or the fraction The formation of water-stable macroaggregates was accompanied by extensive incorporation of maize-derived C. Up to 61% of the SOC in macroaggregates originated from maize litter. A much lower proportion of maize-derived C was detected in microaggregates (8–13%) and in the fraction The proportion of maize-derived C in water-stable macroaggregates decreased in the order: Soil The amount of maize-derived C in the light, free POM, i.e. not associated with minerals or occluded in aggregates, was influenced by litter quality and fungicide addition. In the Soil The quantities of residual maize-derived C and N associated with each aggregate size fraction can be expressed as percentage of the total maize-derived C and N present in aggregates (C in macroaggregates Macroaggregates of the other treatments with litter addition (with the maximum macroaggregation at a later stage of the experiment) contained a considerably lower proportion of the residual aggregate-associated maize-derived C at day 14 (12–36%) compared to the Soil The macroaggregate fraction contained a smaller proportion of maize-derived N than C in all treatments and at all sampling dates except for days 56 and 84 in the Soil The significantly enhanced soil respiration after the addition of maize residues reflected the high bioavailability of these residues, which was confirmed by the high contribution of maize-derived C to the evolved CO The results indicate that litter composition does not affect the dynamics of litter mineralization on a longer perspective. In field experiments, lower mineralization rates and higher rates of C stabilization were observed for maize roots than for aboveground biomass of maize ( The significant decrease in soil respiration and in the mineralization of the added residues in the fungicide-treated soils confirmed that the fungicide successfully suppressed part of the active microbial biomass. This was corroborated by a lower size of the microbial biomass C pool throughout incubation, but not by a generally lower ergosterol concentration. Captan was used previously in incubation studies and was found to reduce the fungal biomass significantly for up to 44 days when analysed after staining under the microscope or substrate induced respiration ( There was a clear effect of the decomposability of plant residues on the dynamics of macroaggregation. The amount of water-stable macroaggregates remained lower and maximum macroaggregation was observed later in the Soil The overall low amount of macroaggregates isolated from the soil at all four sampling days (<10% of the soil mass compared to 42–55% determined for this soil under field conditions ( Attention has to be paid to the fact that the results of studies on soil aggregation depended strongly on the employed procedure of aggregate size fractionation. Wet sieving of air-dried soil generally results in lower yields of water-stable macroaggregates than wet sieving of slowly rewetted or field-moist soil ( Dynamics in the size of the microbial biomass pool were not directly related to the amount of water-stable macroaggregates: the microbial biomass pool was the largest during the first two weeks of incubation in all treatments – despite considerable differences in macroaggregate dynamics between treatments. Aggregate formation probably relies more on microbial activity than on the number of living fungi and bacteria, since their activity influences the production of exudates and hyphae, which in turn act as binding materials ( The single addition of Captan was insufficient for a complete and continued inhibition of the fungal biomass, which was evident from visible fungal mycelia in the fungicide-treated soils after >50 days of incubation. Our finding agrees with observations from Our results demonstrate that macroaggregate formation during decomposition of plant litter is a rapid process: The maximum macroaggregation in our experiment was reached within two weeks after the start of incubation in the soil amended with maize leaves, and it occurred after 2–4 weeks in the treatment with maize roots. This is in accordance with findings of The observed high organic matter concentrations in the macroaggregate fraction support the concept of aggregate hierarchy, which postulates that macroaggregates consist of microaggregates plus additional organic binding agents ( The results of our study showed that easily decomposable residues and an intact fungal community (Soil However, the results of our study indicate that there is no long-term protection of fresh SOM in macroaggregates because these disintegrated after less than two months of incubation. The results of the The short lifetime of macroaggregates and the high yield of microaggregates in the soil (up to 70% of the soil was found to be microaggregates) made the latter the most important fraction for the storage of maize-derived C and N during the investigated period – despite a lower concentration of maize-derived C in microaggregates than macroaggregates. Similarly, Overall, the dynamics of maize-derived N showed trends comparable to those of the maize-derived C. However, macroaggregates contained greater proportions of maize-derived C than N, while the fraction Our findings suggest that macroaggregates are important for preventing a rapid loss of recently incorporated C and N as they rapidly incorporate fresh organic matter and thereby protect it from degradation. The transfer of maize-derived organic matter into microaggregates within macroaggregates prevents the release of significant amounts of free POM upon macroaggregate breakdown and thus it constitutes to the transfer of recently added carbon into more stable soil organic matter fractions. The decomposability of the added maize residues significantly influenced the size of the microbial biomass pool, its activity and the extent and dynamics of macroaggregation and thereby the partitioning of maize-derived C and N among aggregate size fractions and the microbial biomass. A single addition of Captan was not sufficient for complete and continued inhibition of the fungal biomass. However, macroaggregation was significantly delayed (28–42 days) in the fungicide-treated soils compared to their untreated counterparts, which highlights the importance of the fungal biomass in macroaggregate formation. Ergosterol was inappropriate as a fungal biomarker in periods of rapid decline of the fungal biomass. The formation of macroaggregates was associated with the preferential accumulation of maize-derived C which appears to be the main driver of macroaggregation. Macroaggregates turned over rapidly with decreasing substrate availability. This was accompanied by a transfer of maize-derived organic matter into smaller aggregate size fractions, especially the microaggregate fraction. No considerable release of free POM was observed upon macroaggregate breakdown, suggesting that the transfer of maize-derived C and N into microaggregates and the mineral phase took part within macroaggregates. Consequently, due to their fast turnover, macroaggregates did not directly contribute to long-term stabilization of SOM. Instead, macroaggregates provided instant protection of recently added organic matter and allowed a transfer of maize-derived C and N into microaggregates, where the new C and N may become stabilized after macroaggregate breakdown. This study was supported by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft in the priority program 1090. The authors are grateful to the staff of the “Höhere Landbauschule” Rotthalmünster for providing soil from their study site as well as to Dr. Norman Loftfield for his help with the incubation system.