Phonon spectral energy density (SED) is widely used in phonon mode analysis, from which the phonon dispersion curve and phonon lifetime of each vibration mode can be obtained. In practice, SED can be calculated through time–space 2D Fourier transforms of the velocity fields of atoms from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (Maruyama, 2003) [1]. However, the resolution of phonon SED is not satisfactory for limited-size systems. Although previous works have highlighted this problem, a quantitative relationship is still lacking for how the resolution of phonon SED changes with the size of the simulation domain. In this work, we analytically derived the relationship using the convolution theorem in Fourier transforms. Moreover, molecular dynamics simulations were performed in a 1D atom chain to prove our derivation. Then, we drew a conclusion to guide the simulation settings in the MD simulations to achieve a reasonable resolution at the end of this article.Phonon behavior is of fundamental importance in studies of material properties because of its coupling with other quasi-particles. To analyze the behavior of phonons, the phonon spectrum plays an important role. It provides us with the energy of different phonon modes in momentum space. Several different methods have been proposed to calculate the phonon spectrum. For example, a force constants matrix can be successfully obtained using density functional perturbation theory However, most of the aforementioned methods are static, zero-temperature methods, and the anharmonicity is not completely included. In order to obtain the phonon property at different temperatures, the first-order perturbation theory Therefore, in our work, we analytically established the relationship between the size of the simulation domain and the resolution of the SED. This derivation was performed with the help of convolution theory. Moreover, molecular dynamics studies of series of single atom chains with different lengths were conducted, and the following SEDs were obtained from the velocity fields of such atoms. In this simple case, the corresponding broadening of the spectrum was extracted, and they fit quite well with our analytical formula. Finally, we attempted to provide the expression for the ‘sufficient size’ criterion. In the calculation of the phonon SED function In To calculate the velocity field from an infinite sample, the simulation domain should be infinitely long in principle. This is impossible in real calculations, and it can be avoided by introducing periodic boundary conditions (PBCs). With the help of PBCs, the information of an infinite sample can be obtained from a limited-size sample. At the same time, the information that we obtained from the simulation domain, the velocity field for example, can be understood as the information from the original infinite sample times a rectangular function with the same length as the simulation domain, shown in The rectangular window function can be expressed as follows: The value of To acquire the phonon SED, the multiplication of the velocity field and the rectangular function in real space is the convolution of the phonon real space SED and the Fourier transformation of the rectangular window function, according to the convolution theorem, as shown in In the following part, we conducted MD simulations of infinite 1D atom chains with different simulation cells of 500 Similar to the Rayleigh criterion, two phonon normal modes are regarded as just resolved when their distance in reciprocal space is half of the broadening width We also investigated the effect of anharmonicity on the phonon SED resolution in momentum space by mimicking what we did for 1D atom chains with simulation cell of 500 In our simulations, Notice that when the anharmonicity is strong, the broadening of phonon SED in frequency space is large as shown in In summary, in this letter, we conducted an analytical investigation of the relationship between the size of the simulation domain and the resolution of the corresponding SED. With the help of the convolution theorem, we found that the broadening width of the SED is inversely proportional to the size of the sample that we simulated. Further MD simulations confirmed this relationship. Based on these results, we finally provided an analytical expression for the ‘sufficient size’ for a reasonable resolution while evaluating phonon SED. We also investigate the effect of anharmonicity on the phonon SED resolution. The result shows that anharmonicity affect on the resolution in momentum space by broadening the phonon SED in frequency space. The width of main lobe is still controlled by the size of system. We would like to acknowledge the financial support for this work provided by the Here, we will show why the multiplication of the real space velocity field and the rectangular function is the convolution of phonon SED in real space and the Fourier transformation of rectangular window function according to the convolution theorem. The symbol According to the definition of the Fourier transform, The convolution theorem states that According to Eq. This is exactly what we want to derive. To prove Eq. Moreover, the convolution theorem can be derived by performing a Fourier transform on both sides of Eq.