Thermodynamic and kinetic dissolution experiments were performed at different temperatures and different oxalic and sulfuric acid ratios by using synthetic magnetite powder. The Kabai model was the most appropriate one for describing the dissolution kinetics of magnetite in mixtures of sulfuric and oxalic acid. The reaction rate constant, k, at 35°C was found to vary between 4.1·10−5 and 5.6·10−4
                     s−1 for the different acid ratios. The solid specific constant of the Kabai model, a, was also found to vary in the different acid systems, suggesting that changes in the solid take place during dissolution in different media. Increasing the oxalic acid content in the solution phase yielded higher solubilities, as well as accelerated kinetics. Whereas kinetics was significantly improved when increasing the oxalic acid fraction from 50 to 70, solubility no longer increased markedly.The dissolution of iron oxides has been studied extensively for several decades. Despite the numerous papers published on the topic, certain aspects of the dissolution of hematite and magnetite are still under discussion. The mechanisms of acidic dissolution are not fully agreed on. Furthermore, whereas studies of individual acids to explain the mechanisms are common, papers on mixtures of several acids are few. The dissolution of iron oxides by oxalic acid has attracted a lot of attention in the course of years (  The objective of this work is to study the dissolution of magnetite in mixtures of oxalic and sulfuric acid to determine whether the mixing of these two acids would change the thermodynamic equilibrium, and whether it would affect the reaction kinetics significantly. Analytical grade oxalic acid dihydrate from Merck (99%, Darmstadt, Germany) and sulfuric acid from Merck (96–98%, Darmstadt, Germany) were used to prepare the leaching solutions. The concentrations of the oxalic and sulfuric acid in this study were 0.33 and 0.26 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern and the particle size distribution of the magnetite powder are presented in The experiments were carried out in thermostated glass reactors, with a reaction volume of 1 The oxalic and sulfuric acid solutions were first thermostated to the desired temperature, after which the solids were added and mixing was commenced. The mass of the solids for each thermodynamic experiment was 40 Samples of the liquid phase were drawn at regular intervals by using a syringe equipped with a syringe filter. The reaction was allowed to proceed to an equilibrium state and terminated after that. The samples were diluted 10 times with 14 As the leaching solutions were mixtures of two acids, the volumetric ratio between the oxalic and sulfuric acids was varied. The studied ratios (Ox:H The experiments were performed in randomized order. The experimental error in this case was approximately 2% and was quantified by repeating data point 7 three times. Solid samples were drawn from the reactor to study their composition using XRD and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and to image them using a Zeiss scanning electron microscope (SEM). In this study 12 models, summarized by The physical background of the equations for dissolution, of which a summary is included here, has been extensively reviewed by Eq. The Kabai equation has been partially derived from the Nernst equation, which in its original form describes the saturation difference between the bulk phase and the boundary layer as the driving force for apparent dissolution. However, the Nernst equation in its original form does not apply in all cases, due to an underlying assumption on the reaction order. To overcome this limitation, The effect of the acid ratio was investigated in thermodynamic and kinetic experiments. The effect of temperature was only investigated in thermodynamic experiments. The data for the thermodynamic experiments is presented in A steady increase in the pH, which seemed to follow the course of the reaction, was observed in all the experiments. The increase in the pH could indicate a consumption of hydrogen ions, which would be in line with reactions presented by other authors for the dissolution of iron oxides through protonation and complex formation. However, this observation was different to previous studies of hematite dissolution in oxalic acid, where an initial decrease followed by steady increase was observed ( The data for the kinetic experiments is presented in A steady increase of the pH was also observed during the kinetic experiments. The kinetic modeling yielded similar results for all the kinetic experiments: the Kabai model was the most applicable in this case to describe the dissolution ( The Kabai equation was the only one yielding satisfactory coefficients of determination: 0.99 for 0:100, 0.92 for 30:70, 0.94 for 50:50, 0.98 for 70:30 and 0.98 for 100:0. The fit was slightly poor only for 30:70, as can be seen in As expected, a decreased rate of reaction was observed when the quantity of sulfuric acid was increased. The coefficients of determination and obtained reaction rate constants, With pure oxalic acid, the kinetics of dissolution was significantly increased in comparison to different acid mixtures, and especially pure sulfuric acid. In addition to slower overall kinetics, using pure sulfuric acid as the dissolvent resulted in a very slow induction period. For individual cases, some models performed quite well. For example, for the system where only oxalic acid was used, the Avrami–Erofe'ev models gave good coefficients of determination (0.99 and 0.98 for Eqs. According to the approach of Although the Kabai model was fairly good in describing the full extent of the dissolution, systematic changes in the slope were observed in the data. The first data points together exhibited higher slopes than the overall data set, whereas the last data points exhibited lower slopes than the overall data set. It is difficult to identify where the exact point of change in the solids would be. With plotting, just the first three data points of each experiment with pure sulfuric acid and the mixtures, the slopes were 0.79, 0.85, 0.47 and 0.65 in decreasing order of sulfuric acid fraction. Although a significant difference still remained between the systems of the lowest and highest sulfuric acid fractions, now the constant The interpretation of the rate-limiting step and the reaction mechanism in the Kabai model is based on the constant The change of the solid phase during dissolution could explain the observed differences in  The Fe(III) oxalate complex is then dissolved during the induction period. After a sufficient amount of soluble Fe(II) is formed and the ratio between the Fe(III) and Fe(II) complexes is stabilized, the dissolution is followed by fast reductive dissolution. The reductive dissolution can proceed according to the electron-transfer reaction Eqs. Both these steps can be rate-determining. If Fe(II) is added into the solution, the dissolution follows Eq. It is worth noting that the speciation of oxalic acid is dependent on the pH. Although progressing through different chemical reactions, the dissolution of iron oxides with both oxalic and sulfuric acid exhibited the initial release of Fe(III) and could thus be regarded as having the same initial mechanism in that perspective. No obvious reason as to why the mechanism was different for the acid mixtures can be given. The interpretation of the implications of The original investigations of The dissolution of magnetite in solutions of oxalic and sulfuric acid was investigated in this paper. Twelve kinetic models were tested to explain the dissolution profiles, and one, the Kabai model, was chosen as the most appropriate in describing the dissolution in all the studied conditions. It is worth noting that the treatment of Kabai means that the order of reaction cannot be identified through the kinetic equation. However, it is important to acknowledge that the other studied models here were not suitable for describing the full extent of the dissolution nor the dissolution in varying conditions. The dissolution mechanisms when using a semi-empirical correlation, as that of Kabai's, is a different matter altogether. The Kabai model contains a solid-specific constant The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of SIB Labs at the University of Eastern Finland for providing the SEM images.