The relationship between tensile properties and microstructural parameters are discussed. Grain size, degree of recrystallization, size and distribution of precipitates were varied by thermomechanical processing. Tensile tests were performed and the microstructures were characterized using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Quantitative analysis was carried out to explain the yield strength in connection with the change in the microstructural parameters. The primary strengthening precipitates of the under aged alloy were δ′ (Al3Li) and S′ (Al2CuMg). The greater the warm rolling reduction ratio and the lower warm rolling temperature give a higher strength. Closely distributed fine S′ precipitates were effective in improving the yield strength. The increment in yield strength by S′ precipitation can be explained quantitatively by the Orowan’s mechanism.Much attention has been paid to develop aluminum–lithium alloys that have the combination of lower density with increased stiffness and strength. The reduction in density and increase in stiffness are attributed to the lithium addition to aluminum which is a desirable property for aircraft structural applications. Consequently, numerous studies have been carried out on various mechanical and microstructural characteristics of these alloys A thermomechanical processing (TMP) Depending on the variables in TMP, the degree of recrystallization as well as grain size can be controlled; microstructures of completely recrystallized, partially recrystallized or completely unrecrystallized grains with different grain sizes can be obtained by the proper selection of temperature and deformation mode in TMP. The deficiencies in the Al–Li alloys can thus be improved through the use of microstructural control using TMP techniques. The mechanical properties of Al–Li alloys vary with the degree of recrystallization. According to the papers by Starke et al. The objective of this study is to analyze the effect of microstructural features on the strength of 2091 Al–Li alloy. A quantitative study was carried out, especially focusing on explaining the change in yield strength due to δ′ (Al The material used in this study is 2091 Al–Li alloy, whose chemical composition in wt.% is 2.15Li, 2.10Cu, 1.49Mg, 0.12Zr and balance of Al. The iron, silicon and sodium are 0.06 wt.%, 0.03 wt.% and 3 ppm, respectively. The original ingots (1300×350×40 mm) of alloy were homogenized, then 5 mm planed off from both surfaces, processed with different TMPs and rolled to a final thickness of 6 mm plates. The alloy was processed with various TMPs as shown in Detailed processes of the TMP are as follows. The warm rolling reduction ratio was varied at 30, 45, 60 and 75% for a constant warm rolling temperature of 623 K. The warm rolling temperature was varied to 573, 623 and 723 K for a constant warm rolling reduction ratio of 45%. The cold rolling reduction ratio prior to solution treatment was varied at 0, 20 and 30%, after warm rolling at the condition of 623 K, 45%. Cold rolling reduction ratio was varied at 0, 20 and 40%, after a constant 45% warm rolling condition at 623 K and annealing treatments, 673 K, 2 h. The maximum reduction ratio of cold rolling was 30% in case (c), compared with 40% in case of (d). This was due to the occurrence of edge cracking when an annealing step was not used before cold rolling. The TMP processes were designed to control the microstructural parameter of the precipitates, grain size, subgrain size and degree of recrystallization. Also 3% cold rolling just before artificial aging was conducted to promote an even distribution of the fine S′ precipitates within all of the specimens. The under-aging treatment, in which toughness of the alloy is increased by lesser precipitation at the grain boundaries Tensile specimens were machined to plate type with the dimension of 2 mm thickness, 4 mm gage width and 20 mm gage length, with the axis parallel to the rolling direction of the plates. Tensile tests were performed at room temperature at a crosshead speed of 8.3×10 Microstructures of the alloys were characterized using an optical microscopy and transmission electron microscopy, TEM. Polished samples for optical microscope observation were etched by immersion in Keller’s reagent. Thin foil for TEM were prepared with a twin-jet Tenupol apparatus using a 20% methyl acetate solution at 253 K and a potential difference of 20 V. Thickness of the TEM thin foils was measured according to the contamination spot method  The grains became more fine as the warm rolling temperature decreased. But elongated grains were observed at higher temperatures. The grains were slightly coarser when the cold rolling reduction ratio was 20% in comparison with the 30% ratio. Owing to the effect of severe cold rolling (30%), some grains were recrystallized at the grain boundaries after successive processing. When annealing was carried out before cold rolling, some precipitates formed at the grain boundaries. Change in grain size was appreciable with cold rolling and no annealing. The grains were more refined in the 20% ratio sample than in the case of 40%, as compared to those with cold rolling without annealing. Some recrystallized grains also nucleated at the grain boundaries when the ratio was 40%. δ′ (Al  The microstructural parameters measured on TEM micrographs for each condition are listed in Microstructural parameters for warm rolling temperature of 573, 623 and 723 K are shown in   The effect of cold rolling ratio before solution heat treatment on tensile properties is shown in Microstructural parameters for annealing and different cold rolling reduction ratios are shown in  The strengthening mechanism in the present alloy will be theoretically discussed in the following sections. The resolved shear yield stress, In the following discussion, the contribution of each strengthening mechanism to the 0.2% yield strength of the present alloy is determined based on theoretical analysis or equations. Finally, each constituent strength is added up to compare with the experimental overall yield strength of the 2091 alloy. Yield strength of the alloy related to grain size can be described by the following Hall–Petch equation  The slope, i.e. the increment of yield strength associated with grain refinement is 21 MPa μm The degree of solid solution strengthening for precipitation hardening aluminum alloys is, generally, evaluated when an alloy is in the as-quenched condition. The degree of solid solution strengthening was, therefore, modified by assuming that it decreased logarithmically with aging time as schematically shown in The degree of solid solution strengthening for as-solutionized alloy was calculated by subtracting The main precipitates in the present alloy were found to be δ′ and S′ from TEM observation. Strengthening mechanisms of Al–Li binary alloys by δ′ has been well defined, and good agreement between experimental and calculated values of strength has been reported The contributions of δ′ and S′ to Dislocations move by shearing δ′, because δ′ is coherent with the matrix. Noble et al. (a) Strengthening due to the creation of antiphase boundary by dislocation pairs; (b) Strengthening due to the difference in shear modulus between the matrix and δ′; (c) Strengthening due to misfit strain between matrix and δ′; (d) Strengthening due to shearing of δ′ by dislocations; The equation of The calculated values of the increment in tensile stress, according to the above-mentioned four strengthening mechanisms, are shown in The increment in strength due to the creation of antiphase boundaries by dislocation pairs is greatest, approaching 75–107 MPa while those due to the misfit strain between δ′ precipitates and matrix, and shearing of δ′ precipitates by dislocations are very small. The strengthening mechanism of commercial Al–Li alloys by S′ precipitates has remained as unclear. The chemical strengthening due to the shearing of S′ precipitates by dislocations and the strengthening due to the dislocation movement according to the Orowan’s by-pass mechanism were applied for explaining the strengthening of the present alloy by S′ precipitates. The increments in resolved shear stress caused by weak and strong precipitates, Δ For weak precipitate, For strong precipitate, The value of According to the report by Miura et al. The values of 1.41 times of the measured width and distance of S′ precipitates were substituted for Z and The measured increment in strength caused by S′ precipitates can be given by subtracting the theoretically calculated strength increments caused by grain refinement, solid solution and δ′ precipitates from measured The calculated strength increment by S′ precipitates which is based on the chemical strengthening mechanism of weak and strong precipitates and the measured one are compared. The calculated values are much smaller than the measured ones. The strength increment by S′ precipitates, therefore, can not be explained by the chemical strengthening mechanism. The calculated strength increments by S′ precipitates according to the Orowan’s mechanism are compared with measured ones. The calculated strength increment with linear correction of solid solution strengthening and measured one are shown in Therefore, the increment in strength caused by S′ precipitation can be explained by Orowan’s mechanism based on the above theoretical analysis. The increment of yield strength associated with S′ precipitation by Orowan’s mechanism is assumed to be from 100–200 MPa. Grain refinement, solid solution and precipitation strengthening mechanisms were reviewed as the contributing factors to the 0.2% yield strength of the present alloy. In the above discussion, analysis was done to show the contribution of each strengthening mechanism on the yield strength: Increment of yield strength associated with grain refinement was evaluated as 21 MPa μm Some good correlations are observed between the shape parameters on S′ precipitates and precipitation strengthening as shown in As shown in  The measured strength and calculated one will be in better agreement if more accurate increments in strength by solid solution strengthening and Effects of thermomechanical processing, TMP, on the strengthening of the 2091 Al–Li alloy were investigated. The following results were obtained. The greater warm rolling reduction ratio and lower warm rolling temperature give a better tensile properties. All the tensile properties except elastic modulus increase as the cold rolling reduction ratio increases. When the cold rolling reduction ratio increases, trends of 0.2% yield strength, tensile strength and failure strain in the successive processing of annealing and cold rolling are the same as those of the cold rolling without annealing treatment. The annealing treatment before cold rolling lowers the value of tensile properties. Precipitation of δ′ and S′ precipitates is found to be the main contribution to the strengthening of this Al–Li alloy: The creation of antiphase of δ′ precipitate by dislocation pairs and closely distributed fine S′ precipitates are effective in improving the yield strength. The increment in strength by S′ precipitation can be explained quantitatively by the Orowan’s mechanism. The authors would like to thank Alithium Co., Ltd. for supplying the testing materials and financial support.