Microwave heating inside a cavity is not uniform and depends on various factors such as: cavity geometry, properties of treated material and frequency. In most applications of microwave (MW) heating there is only a small variation in the nature of the feed. However, this is not the case for the MW/Infra-Red (IR) ore sorting. As microwaves are electromagnetic waves, the microwave field around a given ore particle is influenced by its dielectric and magnetic properties and the modified field should also influence the heating of neighbouring particles. While influence is reciprocal it is clear that particles with high dielectric properties will dominate field effects. Understanding of this process is important in the particle-by-particle ore sorting process where the accept/reject decision is based on the temperature of the ore particle.
                  A series of experiments were conducted at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre to investigate the impact of particle size and its (highly) electromagnetic properties upon the heating of other nearby particles. The results suggest that magnetic and/or MW responsive particles that are prone to heat strongly during MW heating will have an impact on the heating of neighbouring particles of intermediate responsiveness. The heating of particles which is influenced by other highly responsive particles is very likely to lead to misclassification during the sorting process.The idea of using microwave to selectively heat particles that contain valuable mineral and sort particles based on their surface temperature is well documented in the literature ( Ore particles are accepted or rejected in a sorting process in four ways, as shown in Ideally, the number of misclassified particles should be zero. However, this ideal case is difficult to achieve due to non-uniform MW heating inside the MW applicator ( The microwave field distribution inside a microwave (MW) cavity/applicator depends, not only on the cavity design, but also on the dielectric properties, the volume and the shape of the material being heated inside the cavity ( The objective of the experimental work reported in this paper is to demonstrate the impact of different particle properties (i.e. particle size, magnetic properties, thermal response to MW heating) upon the heating of adjacent ore particles. Microwave experiments were undertaken on a skarn monzonite ore (Ore sample A) which was characterised to consist mainly of gangue (quartz, andradite, feldspar) and copper and iron bearing minerals. Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA) was undertaken on a population of Ore sample A and the average modal mineralogy is presented in The table shows a number of iron oxides and iron sulphide minerals which will determine the magnetic properties of the ore which could affect MW heating. The Magnetic Permeability of a material determines how an electromagnetic field such as those from microwaves interact with the material. Although the magnetic permeability of the ores were not measured directly in this study, it is known that the most common geologic magnetic mineral is magnetite, and in most cases the magnetic permeability of an ore is determined by its magnetite content ( The ore sample was screened into three size fractions (−45 + 37 mm, −37 + 31 mm and −31 + 26 mm) and each size was then representatively sampled to obtain 96 ore particles. These particles were then randomly divided into eight subsets of similar mass, each containing 12 particles. The particles were labelled and the mass and magnetic susceptibility ( Each subset of ore particles was heated for 12 s in a 2.45 GHz multimode MW oven with an applied power of 1.2 kW. The heating time was the time required for a turntable inside the MW oven to complete one full revolution. The temperature of each particle was measured before and after MW exposure using an infrared camera (Model Silver, CEDIP Infrared Systems acquired by FLIR Systems). To simulate a bed of particles and to keep the orientation and position of each particle constant during repeated microwave exposure testing, silicone muffin trays were used. The silicone exhibited negligible heating response to MW exposure. Based on the temperature and magnetic susceptibility measurements, four particles were chosen from each size fraction with the following properties: Magnetic/Hot- particles with high magnetic susceptibility and high temperature after MW heating Magnetic/Cold- particles with high magnetic susceptibility and low temperature after MW heating Non-magnetic/Hot- particles with low magnetic susceptibility and high temperature after MW heating Non-magnetic/Cold- particles with low magnetic susceptibility and low temperature after MW heating The properties of all the chosen particles are summarised in The influence of these particles ( Tray 1 contained a large particle (45x37mm) from Tray 2 contained a particle from Tray 3 contained a small particle (31x26mm) from In total, 33 particles in the −37 + 31 mm size range were used in the testing. Positions four and six ( To estimate the reproducibility of the experiments, each test was repeated three times keeping particle movement to a minimum. Between each repeats, trays were left for at least 5 h at room temperature to cool down. As previously explained, the surface temperatures of −37 + 31 mm ore particles were observed when a particle from The results are analysed and presented in a way that the influence of particle position and its magnetic/thermal properties on the heating of adjacent particles is demonstrated.  This experiment was repeated three times and the increase in surface temperature and standard deviation for each particle are presented in A two-tailed Similar tests were repeated with three other large particles selected from Based on It can also be concluded that in this case ( The next set of experiments used the −37 + 31 mm particles from A significance test (a two-tailed And lastly, experiments with the smallest particles from Based on the results in It should also be noted, that particles in all of these experiments were separated at least 10 mm which would not be the case during an actual sorting process. In an industrial MW-IRT sorter, the particles are presented as a packed mono-layer during MW heating. Although the belt speed could be manipulated to change the distances between particles so they are far enough from each other to minimise the interaction effects, this would also affect the sorter throughput. It is therefore typical that particles are quite close to each other to maximise throughput and increase the efficiency of MW heating. Based on the inverse square behaviour of electromagnetic fields, the MW field distortion caused by an adjacent particle will be stronger closer to the particle; this leads to conclusion that the impact of magnetic/hot particle on the heating of other particles and misclassification would be stronger in an actual sorting process. Furthermore, if two highly MW responsive particles were in electrical or magnetic contact, they would become much more effective at absorbing energy than either particle on its own and cause even larger distortions in the applied MW field. The proportion of misclassified ore particles due to these effects would be ore and grade dependant. As an example, temperature profiles after MW heating for two ore samples is presented in About 90% of particles from Ore sample B are considered to be non-magnetic, cold particles and will not have any impact upon the heating of neighbouring particles. Therefore, it could be expected that the effect of neighbouring particles will be negligible for Ore sample B. Ore sample A contains about 40% of responsive particles; therefore, it is expected that many more particles will have their temperature affected by neighbouring particles. This will likely increase the proportion of misclassified particles. The work presented in this paper demonstrates that a magnetic and/or MW responsive particles that are prone to heat strongly during MW heating will have an impact on the heating of neighbouring particles of intermediate responsiveness. This effect is more apparent when the magnetic/hot particle is larger than other particles. Heating of particles which is influenced by other highly responsive particles is highly likely to lead to misclassifications during the sorting process. Therefore, it is suggested that magnetic particles should be removed prior to MW/IR sorting and particles of a narrow size fraction should be MW treated where sorting based on dielectric properties is the objective. This work was part of a research project that was completed 7 years ago and authors would like to express their gratitude to Rio Tinto which gave permission for results to be published. Authors would also like to thank Dr. Vladimir Rizmanoski for his contribution.