Fracture arrest in layered rock sequences is important in many geodynamic processes, such as dyke-fed volcanic eruptions, earthquake ruptures, landslides, and the evolution of plate boundaries. Yet it remains poorly understood. For example, we do not fully understand the conditions for dyke arrest (preventing potential eruptions) or hydraulic-fracture arrest in gas shales (preventing potential aquifer pollution). Here we present new numerical results on the conditions for arrest of fluid-driven (mode-I) vertical fractures in layered rock sequences when the tips of the fractures approach the interface between two layers of contrasting mechanical properties. In particular, we explore the stress-field effects of variations in layer stiffness, proximity of fracture tip to layer interface, and layer thickness. When the layer hosting the fracture tip is stiffer, fracture arrest normally occurs at the interface with the more compliant layer. By contrast, when the layer above the interface is stiffer, fracture arrest may occur within the host layer well below the interface. These conclusions are supported by field observations of arrested fluid-driven joints and dykes and, therefore, provide a better understanding of the mechanical conditions for dyke-fed eruptions.Understanding and forecasting the conditions leading to propagation or arrest of fractures in crustal segments composed of contrasting layers is a fundamental unsolved problem in Earth Sciences. The solution of this problem is of great importance because fractures largely control key processes in fields such as volcanology, seismology, engineering geology, hydrogeology, and petroleum geology. Most rock fracture propagation models assume that the crustal segment hosting the fracture is either isotropic and homogeneous (i.e. non-layered), or, at most, composed of only a few layers or units ( Fluid-driven fractures (which include dykes and hydraulic fractures) are predominately extension fractures and hence modelled as mode-I fractures ( Whilst there have been many studies on fluid-driven fracture propagation in geological sequences ( The studies that do consider the influence of crustal heterogeneity include data taken from field observations, laboratory experiments, and analytical and numerical models ( However, there have been numerous field observations which indicate that mode-I fractures can also become arrested before reaching the interface or contact between different layers ( The example illustrated in The fractures illustrated in The effect of layering on tensile stress distributions at the fracture tip prior to meeting an interface between layers has received comparatively little attention. To address these problems we present a systematic study of the effects of mechanical layering on the distribution and amount of tensile stress at the tip of a fluid-driven fracture, using the Finite Element Method (FEM). We present a purely static model that considers the conditions for fracture arrest but specifically precludes consideration of the mechanics of propagation. In our models, we consider three variables, namely: (1) Young's modulus contrast (elastic mismatch) across the interface between two layers; that is, the difference in Young's modulus between the layer hosting the fracture tip and the layer ahead of the fracture tip (above the interface); (2) the normalised distance from the fracture tip to the interface (tip proximity to the interface); and (3) the normalised thickness of the layer ahead of the interface. For the latter two parameters, the distance and thickness are normalised to the length of the fracture in the numerical models. One fracture length is 10 m in the models presented. The values are normalised so that the analysis can be applied to fractures of different sizes. We show that all these parameters affect the local tensile stress at the fracture tip, and hence the probability of fracture arrest. Here, the modelling is confined to extension fractures (mode-I fractures). The results therefore have wide implications for the arrest of fluid-driven extension fractures and fracture-related processes such as dyke-fed volcanic eruptions and hydraulic fracturing. The tensile stress at the tip of the fracture depends on the three variables considered here but also on the dimensions of the fracture. In nature, many mode-I fluid-driven fractures have a length to aperture (thickness) aspect ratio of approximately 1000: 1 ( We used the finite element method software COMSOL Multiphysics to investigate how layering affects the potential arrest of fluid-driven fractures such as dykes and hydraulic fractures. The initial model set up is shown in The model fracture is fully confined to what we refer to as the ‘host layer’, which has the following properties: Young's modulus of 10 GPa, Poisson's ratio of 0.25 and density of 2600 kg m Unless stated otherwise, the layer ahead is 10 m thick, and the distance between the fracture tip and the interface with the layer ahead is also 10 m. As the fracture length is 10 m, both this distance and the thickness of the layer ahead are equal to 1 fracture length. We consider that the results from this study are likely scale dependant. For this reason, we also quote thicknesses and distances in terms of fracture length. The results can then more easily be applied to hydraulic fractures over a wide range of sizes. When modelling how the thickness of the layer ahead may affect the tensile stress at the fracture tip we considered a range of thicknesses for that layer, i.e. between 1 m and 80 m, as this adequately covers the range of unit thicknesses found in many sedimentary and volcanic sequences. This also represents a range of 0.1–8 fracture lengths. In terms of hydraulic fractures associated with oil and gas reservoirs, this scale is likely to be a good representation. However, for dyke/sheet intrusions, which can be orders of magnitude larger, a smaller lower bound limit may be more representative to simulate, for example, fine ash layers. Due to computational constraints, we were unable to model thinner layers as they require substantially smaller mesh element sizes. A range of 0.125–64 m from the fracture tip to the layer ahead was used when considering how a change in proximity to the interface ahead may affect the tensile stress at the fracture tip. This represents a range of 0.0125–6.4 fracture lengths. Again, this constitutes a realistic range for hydraulic fractures propagating in both oil and gas reservoirs and volcanic systems. But for dyke emplacement, a range including a lower limit might be more representative since these are typically much larger. For reasons already discussed, it was not possible to model the fracture tip at such close proximities to the layer ahead due to the same computational constraints. In the case where the Young's modulus ratio is 1 (i.e. the Young's modulus of the host layer and the layer ahead are the same), the model can be considered homogeneous, and as such any change in the layer ahead (position or thickness) should not affect the tensile stress at the fracture tip. However, we found that when modelling the effect of changing all three parameters simultaneously, there were small differences (mean of < 0.1% difference across all model runs) in the tensile stress in this homogeneous case. These small differences are caused by an automatic fining of the mesh when the fracture tip is closer to the layer ahead, and as the thickness of the layer ahead is reduced. We therefore normalised the results so that, for the homogeneous case, the tensile stress was always the same. This allowed for direct comparisons between model runs. The absolute values in this study are only valid for an example which matches the model parameters. For this reason, we compare the results using a scale related to the length of the fracture, but also report percentage changes in the tensile stress at the fracture tip. Here we present results from 529 model runs where we investigated the three variables, namely Young's modulus contrast, layer thickness, and distance from fracture tip to interface. We analyse the variables first individually and then combined. We modelled how the tensile stress at the tip of a fluid-driven fracture was affected by a succeeding layer (referred to as the layer ahead) with a Young's modulus that was different from or contrasting to the layer hosting the fracture (referred to as the host layer). The properties of the host layer remained constant throughout the analysis, namely a Young's modulus of 10 GPa, a Poisson's ratio of 0.25, and a density of 2600 kg m  The variation of tensile stress at the fracture tip with respect to the variation in Young's modulus ratio follows or fits a power-law function ( The results suggest that, for any given value of host-rock tensile strength, a larger fluid overpressure would be required to propagate a fracture when the layer ahead is stiffer than the host layer. This is in excellent agreement with analytical studies which indicate that many extension fractures become arrested at interfaces where the layer ahead of the interface is stiffer than the layer below the interface that hosts the propagating fracture ( To extend our analysis, we now consider how changes in both the Young's modulus ratio and the thickness of the layer ahead affect tensile stress at the fracture tip. We do this by running two sets of models: (1) models with a Young's modulus ratio of 0.5 where we vary the thickness of the layer ahead from 2 m to 80 m, and (2) models with a Young's modulus ratio of 2 where we also vary the thickness of the layer ahead from 2 m to 80 m. With both these modulus ratios, the layer ahead has a Young's modulus contrast of 2. As in the previous model runs, the distance between the fracture tip and the interface remains at 10 m (equal to 1 fracture length). When the Young's modulus of the layer ahead is lower than that of the host layer, the concentration of tensile stress at the fracture tip is higher than that of the homogeneous case. This effect is greater when the more compliant layer ahead is thicker. Thus, the maximum tensile stress at the fracture tip increases as a (positive) power-law function of the increase in thickness of the layer ahead ( When the Young's modulus of the layer ahead is higher than that of the host layer, the concentration of tensile stress at the fracture tip is lower than that of the homogeneous case. This is because much the stress becomes concentrated in the stiffer layer ahead. Consequently, the tensile stress at the fracture tip is lower when the comparatively stiff layer ahead is thicker. The maximum tensile stress at the fracture tip decreases as a (negative) power-law function of the increase in thickness of the layer ahead ( In both implementations of the model (ratios of 0.5 and 2) the tensile stress at the fracture tip approaches the homogeneous value of 3.84 MPa as the thickness of the layer ahead approaches zero ( Here we consider how changes in the distance from the fracture tip to the interface affect the tensile stress concentration at the fracture tip for modulus ratios of 0.5 and 2. In these model runs, the thickness of the layer ahead is kept constant at one fracture length (10 m). Here the tensile stress at the fracture tip is significantly higher than for the homogeneous case when the fracture tip is close to the interface with the more compliant layer ahead (solid symbols in Under these conditions, the tensile stress at the fracture tip is significantly lower than for the homogeneous case when the fracture tip is close to the interface with the stiffer layer ahead (open symbols in For both conditions, the model demonstrates that the tensile stress at the fracture tip is highly dependant on the proximity of the fracture to the layer ahead. However, this dependence decreases significantly as the distance between the fracture tip and the layer ahead is increased. For both conditions, our data are reasonably well fit by a power law up to the distance where the tensile stress at the fracture tip is the same value as the homogeneous case. At greater distances, it is a poor fit as our values for both ratios are the same as the homogeneous case. The results show that there is essentially no effect on fracture-tip tensile stress in the far-field, where the distance to the interface exceeds approximately 30 m, or 3 fracture lengths Furthermore, the magnitude of change in fracture-tip stress depends on the modulus contrast. For a fracture close (0.125 m) to an interface with a more compliant layer, where the modulus ratio is 0.5, the fracture-tip tensile stress is 37% higher than in the far-field. By contrast, for a fracture approaching close to an interface with a stiffer layer, with a modulus ratio of 2, the fracture-tip tensile stress is 26% lower than in the far-field. In a geological context, these results suggest that, for any given loading condition, when the tip of a fluid driven fracture approaches a layer interface, the tensile stress at the fracture tip gradually increases if the layer being approached is more compliant than the host layer, but gradually decreases if the layer being approached is stiffer than the host layer. Hence, such fractures (for example, dykes) propagating through a comparatively compliant layer but approaching the interface with a comparatively stiff layer may become arrested well before they reach the interface - a phenomenon commonly observed in the field ( Similar observations have been reported from uniaxial compression tests on samples with multiple layers of granite, sandstone and siltstone ( Of the three parameters discussed here that influence the fracture-tip tensile stress, the proximity to the interface between mechanically dissimilar layers appears to have the largest effect, while the thickness of the layer being approached appears to have the least effect. Nevertheless, it is important to understand how the tensile stress may vary with combined changes in all three parameters In order to combine changes in all three parameters simultaneously, we ran a series of multi-parametric model runs with (1) Young's modulus ratios between 0.0125 and 8, (2) fracture tip to interface proximities between 0.125 m and 40 m (0.0125 to 4 fracture lengths), and (3) layer thicknesses of 1 m and 80 m (0.1 and 8 fracture lengths). The outputs from all model runs are provided in the Supplementary Information. A representative selection of the outputs is displayed in When combining the variations in all three parameters, we find that the tensile stress at the fracture tip can range from a minimum of 1.81 MPa to a maximum of 11.67 MPa; or approximately 0.5 to 3 times that for the homogeneous case ( The highest and lowest tensile stresses occur at the model parameter extremes, and while the lower values of Young's moduli used in this study are common in terms of up-scaled rock masses, some of the higher values (i.e. > 20 GPa) may be uncommon, or even unrealistic, for up-scaled fractured rock masses. A comprehensive study by For model iterations with less severe variations in Young's modulus ratio, layer thickness and interfacial proximity, the variations in tensile stress at the fracture tip are smaller but remain significant. For example, when the thickness of the layer ahead is only 1 m, and the fracture tip is 0.125 m from the interface, we still observe maximum and minimum tensile stresses that are 66% higher (6.36 MPa) and 41% lower (2.28 MPa) than the homogeneous value, and thus still significant. For example, in the Vaca Muerta formation of Argentina (a layered unconventional hydrocarbon reservoir, where layers of organic-rich shale are interbedded with other units such as limestone, ash beds and sills), individual layer thicknesses vary from a few centimetres to a few metres ( The same is true for crustal segments hosting volcanoes where individual (commonly compliant) pyroclastic layers can range in thickness from a few tens of centimetres to tens or even hundreds of metres ( The results of this study demonstrate the importance of correctly identifying layering within geological sequences in order to understand the likelihood of fracture arrest. Specifically, it is important to ascertain individual layer thicknesses, the Young's moduli of the individual layers and the proximity of propagating fractures to the layers ahead (i.e. the interfacial distance). In reality it can be difficult to determine these parameters. However, using a combination of field and laboratory methods it is possible to determine these parameters to at least a first order approximation. For example, the Young's modulus of the individual layers (and therefore the modulus contrast between layers) can be determined using standard laboratory experiments on samples gathered from core or outcrop material ( This study presents outputs from a series of numerical models which highlight how crustal layering affects fracture propagation. Our models simulate fluid-pressure driven mode-I fractures which are analogous to volcanic intrusions such as dykes and man-made hydraulic fractures which are often generated to stimulate oil and gas reservoirs. The results, however, may be applicable to other modes of fracture propagation, with some modifications. In our models, we altered the thickness of the layer ahead of a propagating fracture, the proximity of the fracture tip to the interface with the layer ahead, and the Young's modulus contrast between the layer hosting the fracture and the layer ahead. The results show that all three parameters affect the tensile stress concentration at the fracture tip, and therefore also influence the potential for fracture propagation or, alternatively, arrest. Overall, the model results show that: Tensile stress at the fracture tip increases as the tip approaches an interface if the layer ahead (above the interface) is more compliant than the layer hosting the fracture tip, but decreases when the layer ahead is stiffer than the hosting layer. The contrast in Young's modulus between the layers (elastic mismatch) has a larger effect on the fracture-tip tensile stress as the layer ahead of the propagating fracture increases in thickness and as the proximity of the fracture tip to the interface decreases. Fracture arrest is most likely to occur exactly at the interface when the layer ahead is more compliant than the host layer. By contrast, when the layer ahead is stiffer than the host layer fracture arrest can occur either at the interface, or at some distance within the host layer before the interface is reached. These results are in agreement with field observations of arrested extension fractures. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank the editor Ozgen Karacen, Mike Heap and an anonymous reviewer for comments that helped improve the manuscript. NFI acknowledges financial support from the NERC CDT in Oil and Gas (Grant NE/M00578X/1) throughout his Ph.D. at Royal Holloway, University of London. Without this support this work would not be possible. NFI would also like to thank Rhys Davies for helpful discussions related to the empirical fitting of data. JB also acknowledges support from Fondecyt award 11190143 and Fondap-Conicyt 15090013. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 