The industrial demand for lithium especially in a battery is expected to be high in near future. The use of lithium selective adsorbents, such as spinel-type lithium manganese oxides (LMOs) show the potential candidates for recovery of lithium from seawater. Here we report the approach for recovery of lithium from seawater using a new composite composed of LMO and epoxy-silica hybrid binder (HB) prepared by sol-gel method. The LMO and HB composites were coated on polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plate and its adsorption efficiency was studied in terms of binder contents and thickness. The composite showed excellent physicochemical and mechanical durability in seawater. The adsorption capacity of 6.5 mg/g (67% in comparison to that by powder LMO) was obtained in natural seawater when the composition of HB/LMO was 30/70 (in dry wt%) at a thickness of 300 μm. The kinetic study showed that the lithium adsorption on composite obtained using 30 mg/L Li spiked seawater was found to be matched to pseudo-second order model as the coating thickness was <230 μm, and turned to follow intra particle model over 230 μm due to diffusion limit of lithium ion into the inside of coated adsorbent. The results displayed good reproducibility over 5 consecutive adsorption/desorption cycles without significant efficiency drop. The results suggest that the composite tested in this study has good feasibility in practical application to seawater on large scale.With increasing on the demand of lithium in the Li-battery industry, the recovery of lithium dissolved in seawater has attracted considerable attention since it reserves huge amounts (2.5 × 10 In recent years, adsorption using highly lithium selective adsorbents is recognized as a promising method in practical use ( In this study, we suggest the new approach by which LMO adsorbent is practically applicable to seawater. We fabricated LMO adsorbent coated on PVC plate using epoxy-silica hybrid binder prepared by the modified sol-gel process. Epoxy-silica hybrid binder has a good adhesive property with plastic substrate ( As the lithium selective adsorbent, the LMO powder (Li The epoxy-silica hybrid binder (referred to HB) was prepared by modified sol-gel process. 101.5 g of bisphenol-A type epoxy resin with the epoxide equivalent weight of 195–215 g/eq. (YD-115CA, Kuk-do chemical) and 70 g of γ-Glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (98%, Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in 64.9 g of 2-Methoxyethanol (99%. Samchun pure chemical). 1.26 g of distilled water and 0.32 g of HNO Epoxy-silica hybrid binder and LMO composite (referred to HBL composite) coated on PVC plate was prepared as follows. HB solution was prepared by mixing the Mixture 3 and Mixture 4 and then certain amount of LMO powder was added into the binder solution with various HB/LMO weight ratio and mixed for 1 h to prepare HB/LMO slurry. Then, the resulting slurry was coated on one side of PVC plate (5 cm × 5 cm, a thickness of 0.2 cm) by the doctor blade method. The HBL composite coated PVC plate was dried at room temperature under vacuum for 24 h. Then, the dried HBL composite coated on PVC plate was immersed and stirred in a 0.3 mol/L HCl solution (each sample/2 L HCl sol.) at 25 °C for 5 days to fully extract the lithium ions by ion exchange reaction, which yielded the lithium-selective adsorbent (referred to the adsorbent plate). Finally, the adsorbent plate was washed with deionized water to rinse away the remaining HCl solution. The prepared samples were denoted as x_HBL, where x refers to the coating thickness of HBL composite in μm (50–500). Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) measurement was carried out on VERTEX 80/80v (Bruker) in order to characterize the structure of HB and HBL composite. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using a simultaneous DTA-TG apparatus (DTG-60H, Shimadzu), and X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD, RIGAKU, DMAX-2500) was obtained using Cu-Kα radiation. The surface morphology was examined using a S-4800 (Hitachi) scanning electron microscope (SEM). The concentrations of lithium ion including other cations in the sampled solution were analyzed with an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, optima 7300 DV, Perkin Elmer). The Li After each adsorption experiment, the adsorbent plate was washed using distilled water to remove the ions, which was not adsorbed onto adsorbent prior to desorption step. Then immersed and stirred in a 0.3 mol/L HCl solution (HBL composite/2 L HCl sol.) for 24 h in order to examine the desorbed Li   The thermogravimetric curves for LMO powder in Various LMO/HB ratios of HBL composite were tested to examine the mechanical stability of HBL composite on PVC plate, in which LMO and HB mixtures were coated on the PVC plate with a coating thickness of 300 μm. Crack and breakages were found with the LMO/HB ratio <7/3. With consideration of Li In order to confirm the surface morphologies of HBL composite on PVC plate, SEM images were taken from series of samples. As shown in Once HBL composite is exposed to an acidic solution, the ion exchange between H The kinetic study in lithium uptake using delithiated HBL composite was conducted. The widely used pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models were applied to determine the rate of Li    We report the new approach by which powder LMO adsorbent can be practically applicable to seawater by forming composite simply coated on PVC plate using epoxy-silica hybrid binder prepared by the sol-gel process. The adsorption experiments were conducted for 30 mg/L Li-spiked seawater and natural seawater, and the effect of the hybrid binder content and coating thickness on lithium adsorption performance were discussed. The composite showed good physicochemical stability, which is suitable for the use in seawater. The lithium uptake per unit sheet obtained with 30 mg/L Li-spiked seawater increased with the coating thickness up to 230 μm, and showed no significant increase of lithium uptake values above 230 μm of thickness due to the diffusion limit of lithium ion onto coating layer. From the natural seawater test, the maximum value of lithium uptake was observed at 6.5 mg/g which is corresponds to about 67% of that by LMO powder. The results were reproducible over 5 consecutive adsorption/desorption tests. Therefore, we believe that the suggested approach can be a potential candidate for practical application of LMO adsorbent in the recovery process of lithium from seawater. This research was supported by the national research project titled “The Development of Technology for Extraction of Resources Dissolved in Seawater” of the