In this study, separator rejects of a closed circuit cement tube milling were dry ground in a 10-l pilot scale vertical stirred mill. Tests were done as open and closed circuit. The results were evaluated by size distributions, Blaine surface area of the products and the specific energy consumed during the tests. Mill capacity and the stirring speeds were the investigated parameters for the open circuit tests, whereas closed circuit tests were carried out at a constant stirring speed but variable discharge rate. Five speed levels used in the open circuit grinding tests are 200, 400, 600, 800 and 1000 rpm. The capacities were determined to obtain product Blaine surface areas in the limits between 2000 and 5000 cm2/g. Closed circuit tests have resulted in 87%, 182% and 452% circulating loads.The increase of the world's population day by day and the development of the human relations in many aspects following the globalisation of the earth has led to the increase in motion which in turn has expanded the world's energy consumption. This increase in energy consumption of the consumed energy has caused the investigation of new energy sources and the invention of novel less power-consuming technologies. The building sector is an indicator of the civilisation level. This also shows the importance of cement to the civilisation progress. Growing population and development both increase the need for cement production. Half of the energy used in cement production is consumed in clinker grinding. Thus new technologies and researchers tend to focus on this huge energy necessity to diminish it. Stirred milling is becoming popular in fine and super fine grinding. Today, many industries including ceramics, mineral, coal, metallurgy, electronics, chemical, food, agriculture, medicine, photography, energy, etc., extensively uses stirred milling technology in their production The main reason for using stirred mills is their energetic efficiency in the production of submicron particles compared to other conventional grinding systems such as ball milling. So nowadays regrinding circuits tend to shift to the stirred milling system. The coarse size of the clinker is a disadvantage to stirred mills since their applicability is valid for a maximum feed size of a couple of millimetres. However, stirred mills can be applied to cement grinding if the feed size is made suitable. For example, instead of regrinding the separator reject in the tube mill, it can be directed to a stirred mill. Thus a possible energy saving can be obtained compared to ball mill grinding. Because, stirred mills are reported to supply energy savings below 100 μm product sizes  The application sizes of stirred mills range from a few millimetres down to 1 μm. The product size is in the sub micrometer range. Stirred mills are very effective in the production of micronised material due to their easy processing, simple construction, high size reduction ratio, low energy consumption and less wear contamination. Therefore it has been started extensively to be used in the recent decade in many industries especially such as mineral, coal, ceramic, metallurgy, electronics, paint, chemical, food, animal nourishment, biotechnology, rubber, agriculture, medicine, photography and energy The forces utilised in stirred mills are different from the rod and ball mills. Stirred mills utilise mostly abrasive and shear forces, whereas tumbling mills predominantly comminute by impact and compression Industrial applications of the stirred mills were recorded up to 20 t/h capacity with 6 μm median product size with 60% less energy consumption The separator reject sample from a nearby cement factory (Oyak Bolu Cement Industry) was collected for the experimental part of this study. The sampling point for the clinker grinding circuit was depicted in The size analysis results were carried out with a Malvern Mastersizer-S Laser Analyser. The size distribution of the feed material is given in The separator reject sample was brought to the “Yakup KESKİN” Mineral Processing Laboratories of the ZEDEM Industrial Support Centre of the Mining Engineering Department of the Zonguldak Karaelmas University. Then the milling studies were carried out with a pilot scale stirred mill. The grinding tests were carried out both as open and closed circuit basis. The study was financed by the University Research Fund and the experimental set was designed and prepared at local sites. The product fineness was assessed by Blaine surface area manometer. The description of the method for surface area measurement with a Blaine manometer is detailed in Turkish Standards No. 24 The experimental setup is constituted by a magnetic resonance feeder, a stirred mill, a helical transporter, a mechanical classifier, a vacuum fan, a dust collecting filtering mechanism and the necessary drivers for adjusting the revolutions of the motors attached to the system units. The magnetic feeder was produced by Eriez Magnetics and has an hopper with a 100 kg of separator reject capacity. The hopper has a magnetically vibrating chute. The hopper discharge can be adjusted by a sliding door; thus, a maximum capacity can be arranged in the desired way. The magnetic displacement intensity knob controls the capacity from zero to the maximum setting. The vibrating chute feeds the separator reject directly to the mill inlet hopper. The stirred mill is directly activated by a 7.5-kW motor. The mill motor is attached to a frequency inverter (Siemens MD1500) and controlled via a PC over a RS 232–485 converter. The PC-motor combination enables the control of the rotor's revolution infinitely up to 1500 rpm and helps the currency and torque data to be gathered continuously during the experiment. Low carbon content steel beads were used for grinding purposes. The media has a 2.5 mm diameter and 7 g/cm The mill body is enclosed inside a secondary chamber and cooling water goes through the zone in between. The heat radiated out of the main mill body is driven off by this water thus preventing excess heat, damaging the system and the material inside the mill. The mill used has 10 l net volume and eight cylindrical pins for mixing purposes. The pins are 20 and 170 mm in diameter and length, respectively. The pins were coupled on a vertically rotating rotor simultaneously at right angles. The mill rotor is open at the bottom end where on which an attached raising plate continuously stirs the media over a screen plate. Screen plate covers the bottom end of the mill and holds the weight of the mill charge. The material fed moves downward by gravity and stirring action. The residence time is controlled by the transporting velocity of the helical transporter mounted beneath the mill bottom. Speed of the transportation was controlled by a Telemechanic brand inverter. The transported mill discharge through the helical carrier can either be directed to the cyclone classifier or directly taken as an open circuit product. Cyclone classifier operates under vacuum conditions. Suction is maintained by means of a fan with 1800 m Open circuit experiments were carried out at different flowrates. As mentioned above, the flowrate is adjusted by the revolution change of the helical carrier via a frequency inverter. The flowrates were determined and selected to let the Blaine surface area measurements of the products lie within 2500–5000 cm As can be deduced from the reasoning, the Blaine surface area increases following a reduction in the flowrate or, in other words, an increase in the residence time of the separator reject in the mill. The relationship follows a linear pattern with reverse proportionality. As the stirring speed increases, the slope of the relationship decreases, showing a less dependence on the effect of the flowrate change compared to the slower speeds. For example, the reduction required to obtain the same amount of surface area increment, let us say from 3000 up to 4000 cm The incremental change of the flowrates for different speeds at each 1000 unit Blaine change was depicted in The linear relationship parameters were drawn from the linear least squares approximation over the flowrate vs. Blaine surface area values. The best fitting parameters found are listed in If the change of slopes of the linear fitting equations by stirring speed is examined, The meaning of the linear trend between the speed vs. slope relationship for the speed range 400–800 rpm is that the Blaine fineness change with capacity is directly proportional to the change in stirring speed. The increase of speed proportionally reflects itself to the rate of change of Blaine with capacity. However, deflection from this linearity occurs at 200 and 1000 rpm. The deflection at 200 rpm shows an increase in capacity since a less steep flowrate vs. Blaine line was achieved, which means that required Blaine fineness is obtained at a higher flowrate than the expected. However, the condition is reversed at 1000 rpm leading to a decrease in slope increase rate. This may happen due to ineffective mixing conditions caused by fluidised beads to fly around the empty places of the upper portion of the mill body. This condition was also proved by eye inspection through an opening on the top of the mill. Thus the bead-material impacts cannot reach the correct number due to loosened matrix, which in turn led to an increase in the residence time or decrease in capacity than expected. In the cement industry, the product is almost at certain Blaine surface area levels such as 3000, 3500 or 4000 cm The open circuit experiments were energetically assessed by the electricity input divided by the tonnage for 1 h. The electricity consumption was measured via a kW h-meter. Different speeds gave different power input; so, the capacity-specific energy relationship plotted on a log–log axis has separate lines for each speed shifting along the capacity ( In order to obtain certain Blaine values, the required specific energy values are given in Closed circuit experiments were carried out at a constant mill stirring speed of 600 rpm. The product from the mill was conveyed to an air separator via a spiral conveyor. As an adjustable parameter the spiral's conveying capacity was used at three levels, namely 800, 1700 and 2800 g/min. The oversize from the separator was carried back to the stirred mill, whereas the undersize was collected in a dust box as an end product or finish cement. The classifier products were determined by direct weighing at 2-min intervals. Since the oversize is to be returned to the mill's feeding chute, only the accumulated amount of product for half a minute at the beginning of each 2-min intervals was used to calculate the coarse product's capacity. In order to balance the ingoing and outgoing streams of the stirred mill, the flowrate of the closed circuit's fresh feed was equalised to the finish product discharge and continuously controlled during the experiments. The duration of the experiments were held constant at 20 min. The analyses of the samples were carried out by the laser sizer and surface area by the Blaine manometer. The average values of the flowrates around the separator and the circulating load ratios were given in The Blaine surface areas of the fine products (finish cement) were measured at the end of 20th minute for the closed circuit experiments. These results were tabulated in We can conclude that the Blaine will range in a couple of hundreds vicinity of 4500 cm Specific energy consumptions were calculated based on the finish cement discharge rate. Their values are given in Open and closed circuit experiments have resulted in different specific energy consumption figures. If open and closed circuit experiments are compared in terms of specific energies of the products of equivalent Blaine surface area, closed circuit experiments uses more energy than the open ones. Closed circuit experiments resulted in a Blaine area of 4000 cm In order to utilise the stirred milling in the cement grinding technology, these mills should produce similar product fineness in a cheaper way. This can be expected since literature dedicates 50% energy saving compared to that of tube milling. This will lead to an estimation of a possible consumption of 15 kW h/t. But, pilot scale tests of stirred milling of separator rejects in this paper have resulted in a minimum specific energy consumption of 38 kW h/t at a Blaine surface area of 3500 cm Besides, the effect of rerouting the separator rejects to the stirred milling over the tube mill performance should be evaluated, too. Because, separator rejects is quite a fine material as a mill feed compared to fresh clinker, which has to travel a long size reduction progress until the fine sized product is obtained. During the evaluation of the results  In order to see the difference of the stirred and ball mill products from the real cement's size frequency, The minus signs show that mill products are in larger amount than the cement, whereas the plus sign shows that the mill products are deficient in amount compared to the cement. Cement and stirred milling products mostly differ at 0.25–6.1, 6.1–21 and 38–879 μm size ranges. 0.25–6.1 μm size range has 7.5% excess for the cement, i.e. the stirred mill weighs less at this range. However, at 6.1–21 and 38–879 μm ranges stirred mill product has 2.7% and 5.6% extra mass, respectively. If ball mill product is compared to the cement, the main difference occurs at 0.25–38 and 38–879 μm size ranges. The former is the amount for a ball mill product to reach the cement's fineness. In other words, 30% of the 38–879 μm size range of the ball mill product has to be comminuted down to 38 μm size range to obtain a cement's size distribution. The positive and negative only summation of the amounts are equal and was given at the bottom row of the table and expresses the total difference at all sizes between the cement and the mill products. The difference of the stirred mill and ball mills are 8.4% and 30.6%, respectively. This figure outlines that stirred mill produces a product with more fines than that of a ball mill product has. This would mean value if they also had the same specific energies. But, laboratory ball mill (20 cm in diameter) consumes 20 kW h/t, whereas stirred mill expenses 40 kW h/t. Their difference in energy consumption seems to offset the gain obtained from the fine size range improvement by stirred milling. It is worth mentioning here another experimental result obtained by Bond's mill and batch stirred mill (1.75 l) that they gave 28 kW h/t and 60 kW h/t specific energy consumption at the same Blaine fineness, respectively. This shows that their motor rating and capacity has an important effect on power draw. Further experiments are necessary to clarify the economy of stirred milling over ball milling. Strength measurements should support the results and form basis on evaluation. Pilot scale open and closed circuit stirred milling tests led to further conclusions on the grinding of separator rejects from a cement tube mill. The maximum fineness attainable by open circuit stirred mill tests is 6200 cm During the open circuit tests, specific energies excessively increases beyond Blaine values of 4500 cm Closed circuit tests carried out at the same separator setting but different circulating ratios led to a constant product discharge rate, but different Blaine surface areas above 4000 cm Closed circuit experiments doubled the specific energy consumption. However, this is expected to be caused by separator settings. Besides, the strength comparison of the concretes prepared from the cement products is to be evaluated in addition to their Blaine surface areas and specific energies. Comparison of size distribution of products form a laboratory ball mill, open circuit pilot scale stirred mill and the finish cement marketed at the same Blaine surface areas showed that stirred mill product have a pronounced similarity to the finish cement. Stirred mills have doubled the production of fines at the sizes suitable for finish cement compared to ball milling. However, the stirred mill consumed twice the specific energy that the ball mill uses. This is expected to happen because of motor power ratings and too low capacities compared to commercial mills. Usage of additives may enhance the grinding process, thereby reducing the specific energy consumption. Authors would like to appreciate very much the contributions made by the following authorities during this research: Zonguldak Karaelmas University's Research Fund (Project No. 97-115-001-07) and Mining Engineering Department (Turkey), A.J. Lynch (Australia), Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (Australia), Universiti Sains Malaysia School of Materials and Mineral Resources Engineering (Malaysia), Mining Engineering Department of Hacettepe University (Turkey), Oyak Bolu Cement Industry (Turkey).