The adsorption performance of activated carbon largely depends on its physical and chemical properties. Carbon formed into nanofiber mats/membranes has the potential to improve the performance of traditional activated carbon. For this study, electrospun carbon nanofiber membranes were prepared from lignin or polyacrylonitrile (PAN). These carbon nanofibers, along with PAN microfibers (MF), and a commercial granulated activated carbon (GAC), were evaluated by determining methylene blue adsorption capacity, iodine number, kinetics of adsorption, efficacy in removing organic acids from a contaminated water and flow permeability. Results suggest that the electrospun lignin nanofiber membranes offer approximately 10-times higher adsorption capacity, provide two-times faster adsorption kinetics, and six-times higher permeability than traditional activated carbon sources. A high specific surface area (583m2/g), larger average pore diameter (3.5nm), and high pore volume (0.29cm3/g) for the lignin nanofibers relative to other carbon adsorbents provided the opportunity to capture more contaminants in shorter residence times, making them highly efficient for adsorptive water treatments. A preliminary energy and economic evaluation for implementation of the lignin carbon nanofiber membranes into a water treatment process showed that lignin nanofibers could reduce energy consumption by 87%.Activated carbons have many potential applications, including for drinking and wastewater treatment, environmental remediation, air purification, food processing, medicinal uses, recovery of metals in hydrometallurgy and as chemical reaction catalyst. As a modern water treatment technology, activated carbon is typically used for removing relatively low-concentration pollutants from drinking water. Nitrogenous compounds, sulphides, heavy metals, aromatic solvents, chlorinated compounds, pesticides and gasoline may all be removed via granular activated carbon adsorption Activated carbon has a well-developed porous structure that is formed during the activation process. The pore size distribution and structure is dependent on the raw material used and the method of activation. In turn, the rate limiting step in adsorption kinetics is often the diffusion of the sorbate from the surface of the sorbent into the pores of the sorbent Traditionally, the activated carbon material is packed into relatively thick beds with depths from 20 Nanofiber membranes produced by electrospinning have attracted growing interests for biological and chemical separations. Electrospinning is a processing technique in which an electrically charged jet of polymer solution is captured on a grounded collector plate. The electrical charge of the polymer solution allows the polymer to form uniform and very thin fibres, commonly known as electrospun nanofibers. The electrospinning process results in a product with a high surface area-to-volume ratio, which makes it ideal for many applications Other researchers have evaluated the use of relatively common carbon-based nanofibers, especially those derived from polyacrylonitrile (PAN), for various separation applications. For instance, PAN-based carbon nanofibers have been evaluated for removal of harmful chemicals from water sources, such as formaldehyde This research focuses on the preparation, characterization, and performance evaluation of electrospun carbon nanofiber membranes for water treatment applications, but does so from a more fundamental perspective to shed light on the important properties that help control separation performance of carbon nanofiber media. More specifically, two types of electrospun carbon nanofiber membranes were first prepared from their respective precursors of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and lignin via thermal treatments of stabilization and carbonization. Subsequently, the carbon nanofiber membranes were characterized and their performance in water treatment applications were evaluated; for comparison, PAN microfiber mats, as well as a commercially available granulated activated carbon, were also studied. Due to the intrinsically large specific surface area of the produced carbon nanofiber membranes, no expensive or complicated activation methods were used to treat these materials prior to evaluation. The performance characteristics for each of the carbon materials as adsorbents for water purification applications were determined in several ways. Studies were completed to elucidate both fundamental evaluations (to understand the importance of physical/chemical properties of the various carbon adsorbents, such as pore size, pore volume and surface area), as well as practical applications and process/economic/environmental considerations. Polyacrylonitrile (PAN, Mw Electrospun carbon nanofiber membranes were prepared by electrospinning of precursor nanofiber membranes followed by thermal treatments of stabilization in air and then carbonization in argon. Prior to electrospinning, two spinning solutions including (1) 10 To convert PAN and lignin/PVA precursor nanofiber membranes into carbon nanofiber membranes, the thermal treatments of stabilization in air and then carbonization in argon were carried out in a Lindberg 54453 heavy duty tube furnace purchased from the TPS Co. (Watertown, WI). The following was the heating procedure for stabilization of lignin/PVA nanofiber membranes: (1) increasing the temperature from ∼25 to 100 For adsorption performance, methylene blue acted as a relatively large molecule with a molecular mass of 320 A standard curve for methylene blue was prepared by measuring the absorption of known concentrations of the Kodak P573 methylene blue dye by spectrometry. A stock solution with a concentration of 1200 The methylene blue batch adsorption tests were performed by agitating small samples of carbon with known masses between 3 and 10 The bottles were placed on their sides to allow for better mixing and secured to a shaker. The samples were then agitated at approximately 58 The batch kinetic tests were performed by submerging and agitating the carbon samples in a known concentration of methylene blue dye. The absorbance of the dye was measured at regular intervals, first every hour, and then every two hours when the change in absorption became smaller, for the first twelve hours, with the sampled dye being returned to the bottle, then left on the shaker for another twelve hours (24 The Iodine number test acted as a relatively small molecule with a molecular mass of 127 Permeability tests were performed with an Amersham Biosciences AKTA purifier. Three-quarter inch rounds were cut from the sample material and inserted into the test chamber. The sample rounds were tested both as a single layer and as a stack of three layers. A Danco Company 13/16 To determine the ability of the carbon materials to adsorb organic acids, a solution containing a source of tannic acid was prepared. Tannic acid has a much higher molecular weight (1700 Morphological structures of the electrospun carbon nanofiber membranes were examined by a Zeiss Supra 40VP field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a JEOL JEM2100 transmission electron microscope (TEM). Since the carbon nanofibers were conductive, no pre-treatment ( The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface area, total pore volume, average pore size, and pore size distribution of lignin and PAN electrospun carbon nanofiber membranes were determined by N As shown in Due to lack of chain structures and/or molecular entanglements, a solution containing lignin alone could not be electrospun into nanofibers at any lignin concentration. In contrast, uniform PVA nanofibers with diameters of ∼300  As shown in Static adsorption tests were completed to determine the adsorption capacity of each carbon material using a relatively large standard molecule (methylene blue), a relatively small standard molecule (iodine) and a very large water impurity (tannic acid). These results provided evidence for total equilibrium saturation capacity for different types of water impurities and allowed for an estimation of the total amounts of a contaminant that could be adsorbed by the materials during water treatment applications. The results of the methylene blue equilibrium adsorption test modeled the capacity of the material for adsorption of a relatively larger contaminant molecule in the mesopores of the material. Mesopores are pores with a diameter in the range of ∼2–50 More quantitatively, Langmuir adsorption isotherms were fitted to the methylene blue adsorption data using the least squares method and solving for the saturated equilibrium adsorption (q-max) and the Langmuir disassociation equilibrium constant (Kd), as shown in Eq. These results indicated that the lignin-based carbon nanofibers had the ability to remove much greater quantities of contaminant per mass of carbon than the commercial granular activated carbon, as well as PAN nanofibers and PAN microfibers. Comparing the lignin nanofibers and PAN nanofibers, this was expected due to the extremely high surface area-to-volume ratio of the lignin-based carbon nanofibers. However, compared to the GAC, the PAN nanofibers also had approximately 10 times higher adsorption capacity, even though the specific surface area for the GAC was 65% higher and pore volume was 59% greater. This seemingly contradictory result can be explained by considering the average pore size of the two materials, along with the estimated hydrodynamic radius of the methylene blue. Methylene blue has a reported hydronamic radius of approximately 0.5 The uptake of methylene blue by the lignin-based carbon nanofibers also showed a statistically similar equilibrium disassociation constant compared to that of the commercial granular activated carbon, indicating a similar “affinity” for the methylene blue. Activating the carbon nanofibers may further increase the Langmuir q-max constant of the samples allowing for higher saturation capacity and simultaneously may provide stronger adsorption (lower Kd) allowing for better removal at very low concentrations of contaminants. Importantly, it can also be seen that the intrinsic chemistry of the PAN fibers (both nano and micro) have relatively low binding affinity for the methylene blue, as indicated by the highest Kd values. The adsorption data for the nanofiber materials shows more scatter than the microfibers and GAC due to the random nature of the electrospun material. When using relatively small pieces of nanofiber material needed for these evaluations, there was a higher probability of using a spatially inconsistent piece, along with a relatively high relative uncertainty associated with the calculation of the ‘q’ value in Eq. The results of the iodine number were used to estimate the presence of micropores in the different carbon materials As shown in The kinetic tests were designed to test how quickly the carbon samples were able to reach adsorption equilibrium with the methylene blue dye. A comparison of the kinetic adsorption of methylene blue by the carbon materials is shown in The results show that all three fibrous materials are able to adsorb more dye, more quickly than the granular activated carbon. The carbon nanofiber membranes and microfiber membrane remove the dye at a quicker rate in part because the diffusion is primarily externally-driven, as opposed to granular activated carbon, where the diffusion is both internally and externally driven. Thus, the methylene blue has more immediately available active sites for adsorption on the fibrous materials and does not require extensive contact time to more efficiently utilize their capacity. Similarly, as discussed above, the large pore diameters for the two nanofiber materials provide more rapid internal transport, allowing sites to be accessed more efficiently for a given residence time within a potential flow through, dynamic system. This is an especially attractive characteristic given the relatively high total capacity available for the nanofiber materials.  Permeability is an important metric for the performance of activated carbon materials. In a water treatment system, high permeability of the adsorption material allows for a system with lower pressure drop and therefore lower energy costs. The permeability data from the carbon samples shows that the nanofiber materials exhibit a comparatively higher permeability than the granular activated carbon. The permeability values of the various carbon materials are shown in When the overall adsorption process efficiencies of the materials are compared, the nanofiber materials exhibit significantly more promising values. The higher permeability coupled with the higher adsorption capacity, and faster adsorption kinetics, means that less carbon material would be required for a particular purification, and could be completed faster with lower pumping costs. A carbon adsorption process with nanofiberous materials, especially lignin-based carbon nanofibers, would require significantly less carbon and therefore a smaller adsorption column. The smaller column would also translate to lower capital costs and lower operating costs over the entire process which would translate into significant energy savings. Two specific economic factors were evaluated below to provide quantitative measures on the potential costs savings of using nanofiber-based carbon adsorbents in place of traditional granulated activated carbon: electrical operating costs and thermal regeneration costs. For the hypothetical lignin nanofiber adsorption system, a shorter column required due to improved adsorption capacity and higher permeability would translate to a much lower pressure drop over for fluid being pumped through the adsorption media, which leads to significant energy savings. In order to examine these factors quantitatively, an economic comparison of the carbon materials was conducted using the performance characteristics of the various materials. The economic comparison was based on a case study done at the Niagara Falls Wastewater Treatment Plant Based on the economic comparison, both PAN- and lignin-based carbon nanofibers are superior adsorbents to traditional activated carbon for minimizing the pumping costs for operation. These materials are able to maintain a much lower pressure drop, saving energy in the system. The energy savings of the nanofiber and microfiber materials were calculated using a yearly operating time of 8400 The carbon regeneration costs for the Niagara Falls case study were also estimated as part of the economic analysis. Bradshaw, Van Wyk, and Swardt The regeneration economic analysis demonstrates that the lignin-based carbon nanofibers, in addition to having a higher permeability, require less frequent regeneration than other materials, saving almost $39,000 in regeneration costs each year, due to the much higher adsorption capacity. In practice, rather than using a large bed of lignin nanofibers with over 10,000 Carbonaceous adsorption materials with different physical and chemical properties were compared to fundamentally investigate the performance effects of morphology (fiber versus granular), pore size, specific pore volume, and specific surface area on the ability to adsorb different families of water impurities. It was found that lignin-based nanofibers, with relatively high specific surface area (nearly 600 The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the