In this study, Cu3(1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate) (Cu-BTC) metal-organic frameworks decorated with Fe3O4 nanoparticles were synthesized via the hydrothermal process. Subsequently, the obtained Fe3O4/Cu-BTC was coated by poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) via in situ chemical polymerization methods. The chemical, structural, and magnetic hysteresis analysis of particles were carried oud via scanning electron microscope (SEM), X-ray diffractometer (XRD), vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM), and fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) machines. The characteristic peaks of C/F and P@C/F were obtained without any other impurities and extra peaks. The Fe3O4 decorated Cu-BTC displayed octahedral morphology with average particle size of 150–170 nm. As an electromagnetic wave absorber, the obtained Fe3O4 decorated Cu-BTC was mixed with 45% by weight of paraffin. For comparative studies, the PEDOT coated Fe3O4/Cu-BTC was also filled to the paraffin matrix. The higher real and imaginary part of permittivity values were obtained with introduction of conductive PEDOT shell. The electromagnetic wave absorption performance of composites was determined with permeability and permittivity values. The result exhibited that the strongest reflection loss was −18.3 dB at 17.5 GHz frequency with a thickness of 5 mm for PEDOT coated Fe3O4/Cu-BTC composite. It was proved that the conductive PEDOT coating on Fe3O4/Cu-BTC enhanced electromagnetic wave absorption capability of composite and the PEDOT coated Fe3O4/Cu-BTC can be considered as a good candidate for electromagnetic wave absorption applications.Recently the magnetic materials have been used in a wide range of applications such as antimicrobial, magnetic shields, catalysis, microwave application [ One of the most studied MOFs is Cu Today, magnetic oxide production has received much attention due to the unique combinations of spin, charge and orbital orders. Among the magnetic oxides, many studies have focused on perovskite-like oxides and Fe based oxides. Magnetite (Fe Recently, many metal-organic frameworks materials have been studied as EM wave absorbers due to their high surface areas and porous structure. In addition, novel structural designs were performed to enhanced EM wave absorption performance of metal-organic frameworks. However, Cu-BTC MOFs have not been studied for EM wave absorption applications yet. In this study, poly(3,4 ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) coated Cu-BTC metal-organic frameworks decorated with Fe All chemicals and materials were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. In a typical synthesis, copper (II) nitrate trihydrate (Cu(NO Cu-BTC MOF particles were dispersed in distilled water and then FeCl Firstly, 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) monomer was dissolved in pre-cooled C/F water-based suspension and sonicated for 1 h (weight ratio of monomer:powder is kept to 1:1). The H In order to evaluate the electromagnetic wave absorption properties in Ku-band, 45 wt% of the prepared coated sample was uniformly dispersed in molten paraffin matrix. EM wave absorber sample was molded in the dimension of Ku band (15.77 × 7.89 × 3 mm). The crystal structure of obtained particles was determined by using powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, XMD 300, Cu-K The XRD patterns of C/F and P@C/F were observed in The FTIR spectrums of C/F and P@C/F were given in The structural characteristic of C/F and P@C/F particles were observed by SEM images ( The field dependence of hysteresis loops of C/F and P@C/F were investigated with VSM at room temperature and given in The complex permittivity ( The The dielectric ( The matching thicknesses ( The relative input impedances The other important parameters are eddy current loss (C The P@C/F showed the highest attenuation constant (α) values that provide the higher EM wave absorption ability in the frequency range of Ku-band. Compared with α of C/F, it can be said that the magnetic and dielectric loss factors of P@C/F are more responsible for the attenuation constant. To evaluate EM wave absorption ability of C/F and P@C/F, the reflection loss (R In this study, PEDOT coated C/F metal-organic frameworks decorated with Fe  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at