In this work, the zinc plant copper cake (CINKUR Co., Turkey) was leached with hydrochloric acid and main acidic leach solution containing Zn(II), Fe(II), Pb(II), Al(III), Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) ions was obtained. Except for cadmium, cobalt and nickel, the other metals were precipitated by adding various reagents and adjusting the pH of the solution. Then, cadmium was separated by solvent extraction process. After these separation processes, ammonium thiocyanate and water were added to remaining leach solution. Thus, acidic thiocyanate leach solutions used in ELM process were obtained. ELM consists of kerosene as diluent, tributyl phosphate as extractant, sorbitan monooleate (SPAN 80) as surfactant, and 6M ammonia solution as the stripping solution. Separation and concentration of cobalt by ELM from acidic thiocyanate leach solution containing cobalt and nickel was performed. The important parameters governing the extraction behavior of cobalt have been investigated. These parameters were mixing speed, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration, phase ratio, treatment ratio, stripping solution base concentration, initial cobalt concentration in feed solution, thiocyanate concentration in the feed solution, and the feed solution pH. The results obtained showed that by appropriate selection of the extraction and stability conditions, nearly all of the cobalt ions present in the feed solution were extracted within 10min. The separation factors of cobalt with respect to nickel, based on initial feed concentration, have experimentally found to be of as high as 310 for non-equimolar Co–Ni feed solutions.Cobalt and nickel are among the most important nonferrous metals. Certain raw materials such as laterite ores are the main sources for their production. Hydrometallurgical methods of leaching applying sulphate, chloride–sulphate, and chloride systems result in leach liquors containing mainly nickel and cobalt in company of some impurities, such as copper, iron, and aluminium. Usually, the majority of these impurities are removed by precipitation with lime, while the copper is cemented out with cobalt powder and recovered by filtration. The obtained purified leach liquors contain both Co(II) and Ni(II) ions. It is very difficult to obtain pure cobalt and nickel compounds from such solutions because of the similar physico-chemical properties of these metals The separation of cobalt from nickel in aqueous solution above mentioned has always been a problem in hydrometallurgy. Their adjacent positions in the transition metal series in the periodic table result in aqueous somewhat similar chemical behavior but differences do exist. For example, although both cobalt and nickel preferentially exist as divalent hexahydrated ions in dilute aqueous solution, the rate of water exchange on the cobalt ion is very much higher than for nickel. Thus complex ion formation often proceeds much more readily with divalent cobalt than with nickel. On the other hand, the trivalent cobalt ion is much less labile and forms in preference to nickel even though the redox potentials for the Co Using classical methods, such as precipitation, oxidation, and crystallization, it is impossible to separate the nickel–cobalt pair in a simple and economical way. Solvent extraction seems to be the most efficient method for separation of Co(II) and Ni(II) ions from solutions, including leach liquors The use of emulsion liquid membranes containing specific metal ion carriers offers an alternative method to the solvent extraction processes for selective separation and concentration of the metal ions from aqueous dilute solutions Liquid membranes are not only an important technique for concentration, separation and recovery, but also of fundamental importance from an environmental engineering point of view in understanding the mechanisms of ion transport. The transport of metal ions from wastewater solutions by liquid membranes has been the subject of many studies over recent years. Hundreds of cation separation systems have been published in the literature, but only a few examples are known for the separation of anions which concentrated on anion separation. The removal of toxic elements such as thiocyanate anions by liquid membranes has been of great interest in recent years In this study, separation and concentration of cobalt from acidic thiocyanate leach solutions containing cobalt–nickel by emulsion liquid membranes using tributyl phosphate (TBP) as extractant was presented. In order to have a better understanding of the dynamics of ELM process, the major parameters influencing the extraction extent of cobalt were experimentally studied and the optimum conditions were determined. The liquid membrane phase is composed of a surfactant, an extractant and a diluent. The surfactant is sorbitan monooleate which is a product of Fluka and commercially known as SPAN 80. The mobile carrier is tributyl phosphate which is purchased from Merck, Germany. A commercial kerosene (density 830 The zinc plant copper cake (CINKUR Co., Turkey) consists an average of 15% Zn, 10% Cu, 8% Fe, 2.5% Cd, 0.2% Co, and 0.6% Ni on mass basis was leached with a 2 After precipitation process, adjusting the pH of leach solution, cadmium was separated by solvent extraction. Final leach solution contained about 525 In 250 In 600 The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis. Determinations of metals (Co and Ni) was made by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-6701F model, Tokyo, Japan) at autosampler operating mode. All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at the ambient temperature of 20 Tributyl phosphate is a neutral extractant. It is completely miscible with many organic solvents, but has a low solubility in water, 1.5 When TBP [(C diffusion of cobalt (II) thiocyanate and H complex formation between metal ions and the extractant by an interfacial reaction at the external interface; diffusion of the cobalt (II) thiocyanate–extractant complex into the liquid membrane; the stripping reaction of the cobalt (II) thiocyanate–extractant complex by OH The extraction reaction in the feed solution plays an important role in the extraction of metal ion from the feed phase to the stripping phase. Therefore, the effect of pH in the feed solution on extraction percentage of cobalt was studied in the pH range of 4.5–3.5. The pH of the feed solution was adjusted using acetic acid/sodium acetate buffer. The results obtained were shown in Since cobalt is extracted through the membrane in the form of complex with thiocyanate, Co(SCN) The stripping reaction in the stripping solution plays a vital role in the extraction of metal ion from the feed solution to the stripping solution. Hence, the effect of the concentration of ammonia solution in the stripping solution on extraction percentage of cobalt was studied. The results obtained were shown in Surfactant concentration is an important factor as it directly affects the stability of ELM. Concentration of TBP in the membrane solution also plays a significant role in extraction of cobalt. Effect of concentration of TBP on extraction percentage of cobalt was studied in the TBP concentration range from 2.0% to 7.5%. The results were shown in The effect of mixing speed (375–450 The effect of volume ratio of stripping solution ( The effect of the volume ratio of emulsion ( The effect of cobalt concentration in the feed solution was investigated at three feed concentration. The effect of initial cobalt concentration in the feed solution on the extent of extraction was shown in The optimum conditions were experimentally determined and were shown in The selectivity of an ELM system is a parameter that allows for the evaluation of the degree of purification of a species with respect to others. In order to study the selectivity of the membrane system under the optimum conditions, the percentage extractant of Co An emulsion liquid membrane process using tributyl phosphate to separate and concentrate cobalt from acidic thiocyanate leach solution has been investigated. From this study the following conclusions can be drawn: The optimum conditions have been determined experimentally as stated above ( The separation and concentration of cobalt from acidic thiocyanate leach solution containing cobalt and nickel has been performed by ELM process using TBP as extractant. The highest extraction efficiency was obtained when pH and thiocyanate concentration of the acidic thiocyanate leach solution were 3.75 and 0.75–1.0 Extraction efficiency increased by decreasing of surfactant concentration up to fifth minute, and then decreased due to deterioration of emulsion stability in emulsions formed with surfactant concentrations of 3% and 4% Extraction efficiency increased by increasing of extractant up to a certain concentration of extractant within 5 Although the higher concentration of NH Increasing of mixing speed from 400 to 450 At the optimum conditions, the extraction of cobalt has been achieved with an efficiency of 99% from non-equimolar cobalt–nickel mixtures containing 100 The obtained extraction percentages and separation factors were satisfactory. For non-equimolar cobalt–nickel mixtures, at the beginning of extraction process and when the cobalt concentration in the feed solution increased, the separation factor of cobalt also increased. Separation factors as high as 310 for cobalt have been achieved. The results obtained, it was confirmed that extraction of cobalt can be carried out with TBP. The author wish to express his sincere gratitude to the State Planning Organization of Turkiye (DPT), that supported this work, and Mehmet Yilmaz, coordinator of BAPK in Sakarya University.