Bagasse particle is used in energy generation, and the usual method for determining their size distribution is sieving. Traditional methods for measuring the bagasse particle size distribution, such as sieving, do not evaluate the effect of the irregular particle shape, producing results that are not always applicable to the prediction of fluid dynamic behavior. This work determined size distribution of bagasse particles considering their aerodynamic behavior. Physical-chemical characterization was performed in different particle sizes of the bagasse. A particulate elutriation and settling system was developed to determine the terminal velocity distribution of particles. Drag coefficients and terminal velocities measured were compared with literature correlations. Almost all the correlations analyzed showed significant deviations from the values obtained experimentally. Haider and Levenspiel’s correlation showed the smallest average deviation. Two types of particles were observed in bagasse: fibers and spongy pith. The apparent density of the particles depends on the particle size, and the ash concentration in smaller fractions is 3 times larger than the average. The method of aerodynamic separation for the characterization of bagasse particle allowed to obtain information that cannot be found by the traditional method of separation by sieving.The products from sugarcane, ethanol and bagasse, accounted for 16.5% of primary energy production in Brazil in 2017. Sugarcane mills use bagasse as fuel in boilers for cogeneration of steam and electricity, producing 6.7% of all the electricity consumed in the country [ Most sugarcane mills use milling systems for raw juice extraction, and a few use diffusion systems [ The usual way of granulometric characterization of bagasse is the separation of the particles through sieving. This mechanical method is the most widely used for separation of particles with a large dispersion of size and is suitable for particles of shapes where the width, length, and height are close, similar to a cube or a sphere. However, for particles with length much larger than height and width, such as long cylinders, sieving can cause distortions in its classification, as with bagasse, which is composed of a mixture of particles of different shapes and sizes [ Other methods have been used, such as image analysis [ The elutriation of particles is a well-known phenomenon in fluidized beds [ Srinivasan et al. [ Terminal velocity and drag coefficient are parameters that allow and facilitate fluid dynamic calculations and models of particles immersed in fluids. Pioneering studies on this topic were carried out by ancient authors, as Wadell [ The following aspects give the motivation for this work: sugarcane bagasse is an important energy source, for thermal and electricity generation; the particles that make up the bagasse have an irregular size and shape distribution; the known correlations regarding the drag coefficient and terminal velocity of particles may not be entirely applicable to such particles; drag coefficient and terminal velocity are essential parameters for dimensioning and modeling of thermal processes involving biomass particles; the physicochemical characteristics of sugarcane bagasse may not be homogeneous and may depend on its shape and particle size. This work aimed the physicochemical characterization, as solid fuel, of sugarcane bagasse particle separated by elutriation in vertical air flow and as a function of the separation velocity. The characterization includes chemical analysis, size distribution, and shape of the particles. Also, terminal velocity and drag coefficient obtained in this work were compared with classic correlations in the literature. The data obtained in this work can be used to improve transport, drying, handling, and combustion systems of sugarcane bagasse. A review of the terminal velocity and drag coefficient is done in section The terminal velocity and the drag coefficient, Considering a particle immersed in an upward flow, with relative velocity Several theoretical analyzes and empirical studies, or a combination of both, have been proposed to determine the terminal velocity of particles. The equations for non-spherical particles use shape correlations, e.g., the sphericity factor, φ, which according to Wadell [ Pettyjhon and Christiansen [ Some researchers have conducted studies to determine the terminal velocity exclusively of sugarcane bagasse. According to Anderson [ Sugarcane bagasse collection was carried out in a sugarcane plant located in São Paulo state. A bagasse sample was randomly withdrawn from the bagasse conveyor at the outlet of the mills. After the collection of the bagasse, two samples were separated by the quartering technique, as ISO 14780 standard. The drying of the sample was done at a temperature of 70 The determination of the dimensions of the separated particles was done by image scanning for the particles separated by elutriation. Particle groups were placed carefully on a scanner screen in such a way that they were not superimposed. The images of the scanned particles obtained for use in the UTHSCSA Image Tool (IT) were 300 dpi (dots per inch). The lowest resolution was 85 μm (1 pixel). After obtaining the image in the digital format, it was converted into a negative image and was treated with Corel Photo Paint X4 for the improvement of its edges, shades, and tones. The UTHSCSA Image Tool (IT) software was used to determine the largest and smallest lengths perpendicular to each other. The largest of these is called the major length, and the other is the minor length, as shown in After a preliminary analysis, we found that most of the particles resembled fibers, as it will be described in more detail in section In Equation A sample of the bagasse was separated by sieving, and another was separated by elutriation-sedimentation. Six mesh sizes were used in the sieving. The separation results obtained by sieving were used to estimate the elutriation velocities and drag coefficients, In the separation by elutriation-sedimentation, an experimental workbench was used, After the ES, a sedimentation chamber with a filter retained the particles that are elutriated into the vertical tube. The suction of the air kept air flow in the tube through an exhaust fan. Air enters the system at pressure and temperature ambient at different velocities. The feeding of the bagasse particle to be separated was done in small amounts carefully, preventing a large amount of being fed simultaneously in the ES tube, in order to minimize the agglomeration effect. The velocities chosen for the separation (0.5, 0.7, 1.1, 1.6, 1.9, 2.3 and 5.0 m s The determination of the apparent particle density was done using a pycnometer, for the particles separated by elutriation. The apparent density of the particles was obtained by picnometry, which is based on determining the volume of liquid displaced by the addition of a known mass of solid particles in a vessel filled with liquid. The volume of liquid displaced by the solid represents the volume of the added particles. The method of pycnometry applied to porous particles, such as biomasses, may present uncertainties due to the possibility of the liquid being absorbed by the particle, despite the short analysis time (maximum 5 min). In order to reduce these uncertainties produced by the absorption of water, we used n-heptane. Elemental analysis of the bagasse was done in PerkinElmer model 2400CHN, using samples of 1 mg, three repetitions per sample. Ashing was done according to ASTM    The comparison between the measured separation velocities and the estimated velocities through the correlations of Grobart’s correlation underestimates all separation velocity values. The correlation of Haider and Levenspiel [  The drag coefficient calculated from the experimental data follows the same trend of the correlations except for the Clift and Gauvin [ To better understand the variability of dimensions and the different shapes, the morphology of the particles separated in the ES was analyzed by Scanning Electron Microscopy and Microanalysis (SEM). In We can see the presence of the two forms of sugarcane bagasse: spongy pith and fiber, as described by Nebra and Macedo [ The average of three measurements of the ash content and oxides determination is given in  Oxygen was calculated by difference. A slight increase in sulfur and nitrogen contents is observed as the particle size decreases (lower separation velocity). This may indicate that the higher concentration of minerals in the fine particles may not be exclusively due to the soil drag by the sugar cane handling. The elutriation and sedimentation technique was used to characterize aerodynamically sugarcane bagasse particle. The results obtained for the terminal velocity, and for the drag coefficient of the particles differ significantly from the values obtained by the approaches proposed in the literature. The large variability in the size and shape of bagasse particle explains these results. In general, the velocities obtained from the correlation of Haider and Levenspiel [ The detailed analysis of each bagasse fraction obtained by elutriation showed little variability in the elemental analysis of ash-free biomass. On the other hand, the apparent density of the bagasse particle presented significant variation as a function of the separation velocity. The apparent particle density was around 420 kg m The ash content of the bagasse is higher in the fine particles. About 61% of the bagasse ash is contained in the particles with an elutriation velocity less than 0.7 m s Detailed data of bagasse characterization can be used for the design of thermal systems and equipments that process bagasse, such as dryers, pneumatic conveyors, and combustors. Data of the terminal velocity, size, and shape distribution (major length and minor length) allow greater accuracy in the results obtained through design and simulation models because it uses values measured experimentally. Paulo César Lenço: investigation, formal analysis, methodology, writing. Deyber Alexander Ramirez-Quintero: writing, review, visualization, formal analysis. Waldir A. Bizzo: conceptualization, methodology, writing, review The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financed in part by the  dynamic viscosity effective viscosity of non-Newtonian fluids sphericity fluid density particle density projected Area drag coefficient diameter of tube particle diameter particle representative diameter (mm), in equation from Sosa-Arnao and Nebra [ nominal or equivalent particle diameter mean volumetric diameter of the particle diameter of the sphere with equivalent projected area of the particle equivalent particle spherical diameter diameter of the sphere with equivalent volume surface area of the particle surface area of a sphere of the same particle volume dimensionless particle diameter drag force gravitational acceleration Stokes form factor Newton form factor ratio of the settling velocity of the volume-equivalent sphere to the settling velocity of the particle according Pettyjhon and Christiansen [ maximum sieve opening (mm), Anderson’s equation [ particle Reynolds number according Chien [ Reynolds number drag velocity terminal velocity of non-spherical particles terminal velocity of spherical particles particle terminal velocity dimensionless particle diameter particle volume particle velocity moisture content All units are in the SI, except when indicated otherwise.