This retrospective radiographic study sought to evaluate how primary fracture line location relates to the pattern and severity of intraarticular calcaneal fractures. Preoperative lateral radiographs and semicoronal computed tomography scans of 100 displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures (89 patients) were evaluated for Bohler’s angle, Sanders classification, and calcaneocuboid, anterior, or middle subtalar articular involvement. Primary fracture line location was measured on semicoronal computed tomography views as a ratio of the width of the posterior facet. There were 60 Sanders type II (29 IIA, 29 IIB, 2 IIC), 35 type III (10 IIIAB, 9 IIIAC, 16 IIIBC) and 5 type IV fractures. The mean Bohler’s angle was 10.1 ± 15.6°. The mean primary fracture line location was calculated to be found at 45.7 ± 18.2% of the width of the posterior facet, as measured from lateral to medial. Statistical analysis found a significant association between primary fracture line location and Sanders class (r = .636; P < .001) and Bohler’s angle (r = –.287; P = .005); as the fracture line moved medially, comminution increased and Bohler’s angle decreased. Forty-eight percent of the fractures involved the calcaneocuboid joint; 39% involved the anterior (n = 28) or middle (n = 11) subtalar facets, or both. A medial primary fracture line correlated to greater involvement of the calcaneocuboid joint (r = .247; P = .015) and the anterior (r = .241; P < .001) and middle (r = .344; P = .003) facets. These results suggest that intraarticular calcaneal fractures exhibiting a medial primary fracture line are associated with a more severe fracture pattern and an increased incidence of anterior articular extension.The calcaneus is the most frequently fractured tarsal bone, accounting for 60% of all tarsal injuries, and 75% of calcaneal fractures are intraarticular ( A primary fracture line is common to most intraarticular calcaneal fractures. The line begins in the sinus tarsi and propagates obliquely across the posterior facet to the medial wall ( Although most authors generalize the location of the primary fracture line as coursing through the posterior facet, its actual position may vary depending on the position of the foot at the time of impact ( If the position of the foot at the time of impact theoretically affects the portion of the posterior facet cleaved by the primary fracture line, this may then affect the final configuration of the fracture and its severity. If the foot is supinated, the majority of the articular surface of the posterior facet remains intact ( This was a retrospective radiographic study of patients who sustained an intraarticular calcaneal fracture between 1996 and 2005. Records of patients presenting with a calcaneal fracture diagnosis code were obtained from two sources: the private practice of the senior author (C. M. L.) and the medical records database of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center of Queens. Of these records, only those patients with displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures who had both preoperative radiographs and semicoronal CT scans were included in this study. Exclusion criteria were as follows: extraarticular fractures, nondisplaced fractures, and patients younger than 18 years of age. Full institutional review board approval was obtained before commencement of the study. Preoperative plain radiographs were then reviewed for the presence of CCJ involvement and a determination as to whether the fracture was joint depression– or tongue-type. Bohler’s angle was measured on the lateral view and defined as the complement to the angle formed by 2 lines: 1) a line drawn between the highest part of the anterior process and the highest part of the posterior articular surface, and 2) a line drawn between the same point on the posterior articular surface and the most superior point of the tuberosity ( Preoperative CT scans were evaluated for evidence of CCJ or anterior or middle subtalar facet involvement. The fracture was then classified according to the Sanders classification system using standard guidelines ( After classification, the location of the primary fracture line was determined on the same CT image. In the presence of more than one fracture line, the line that demonstrated the least amount of comminution, coursed longitudinally through the posterior facet, and extended along the sagittal plane of the calcaneus was deemed the primary fracture line. The relative lack of comminution associated with this fracture line was taken to suggest the shearing nature of the initial injury versus the additional compressive forces that lead to secondary fracture lines ( Descriptive statistics were performed to determine mean values of the following parameters: age, Bohler’s angle, and primary fracture line location ratio. Scatterplots and analyses of variance were obtained to aid in evaluating the linear versus curvilinear relationships in the data. Pearson correlation coefficients ( Of the 163 patients whose records indicated a presenting diagnosis of calcaneal fracture, complete preoperative plain radiographs and CT studies were available for 95 patients (107 fractures). Of these, 7 fractures were found to be extra-articular and were excluded. Therefore, there were 89 patients (100 fractures) included in this study. The mean patient age was 45.6 ± 16.6 years. A breakdown of the number of patients according to their Sanders classification is found in A histogram demonstrating the distribution of primary fracture line location in terms of posterior facet involvement can be seen in When the posterior facet was divided into lateral and medial halves, 88.1% of type II fractures had a primary fracture line in the lateral half of the facet, with 11.9% in the medial half ( There was also found to be a significant negative correlation between primary fracture line location and Bohler’s angle ( A categorization of the fractures with respect to anterior extension can be found in Twenty-eight fractures showed involvement of the anterior subtalar facet. Of these, only 8 involved this facet alone. Eleven fractures demonstrated involvement of the middle subtalar facet. None of these occurred in isolation: either the anterior facet (AF), CCJ, or both were also involved. Both AF and middle facet (MF) involvement demonstrated significant positive correlations to Sanders class (AF: Fifteen fractures demonstrated involvement of two anterior articular surfaces. Six fractures demonstrated involvement of all 3 anterior articular surfaces. There was a significant correlation found between involvement of the AF and involvement of the MF ( There were 26 tongue-type fractures and 74 joint depression fractures. No significant correlation was found between fracture type and any of the other variables. Also, no significant correlation was found between patient age and the remaining variables. Letournel ( Although many factors may affect the final outcome of calcaneal fractures, the two criteria that previously have been reported to have the most significant clinical impact are the degree of comminution ( Similarly, the degree of comminution has been shown to correlate to postoperative outcome ( Although previous studies did not examine the effect of primary fracture line location on the severity of the fracture pattern, a few authors did subdivide the Sanders classification with respect to A, B, or C fracture lines ( We propose that a medial fracture line invites greater comminution, which accounts for the smaller number of 2-part fractures with this primary fracture line location. Although there were only 2 type IIC fractures among our patients, 19 of 42 (45%) type III or IV fractures had a “C” primary fracture line ( These findings are supported by a recent study by deSouza and Rutledge ( Although the current study only included fractures whose primary fracture line was located within the boundaries of the posterior facet, the same connotations apply; as the primary fracture line moves medially, more comminution and joint displacement can be expected. While only 11.9% of type II fractures had a primary fracture line in the medial half of the posterior facet, 75.7% of type III and 100% of type IV fracture lines were located medially ( Likewise, the negative correlation between primary fracture line location and Bohler’s angle indicates that a medial fracture line is associated with greater depression of the posterior facet. If the primary fracture line shears the calcaneus at a medial position along the posterior facet, this leaves a greater portion of the facet open to comminution with additional force of the injury. In turn, the force of injury also depresses those comminuted pieces into the body of the calcaneus, reducing Bohler’s angle. Our finding of a significant correlation between Bohler’s angle and Sanders class lends further support to this theory. On the other hand, no correlation was found between the classification of the fracture as a joint depression– or tongue-type and any of the remaining variables. Although several authors have noted tongue-type fractures to be associated with less comminution, no such difference was found in the current study ( With respect to anterior extension of the fracture, previous studies have reported involvement of the CCJ to range from 38% to 68% ( Thirty-nine percent of our patients demonstrated involvement of either the anterior or middle subtalar facets or both. Moreover, the current study found a significant correlation between involvement of the AF or MF and the location of the primary fracture line. Miric and Patterson ( The increased involvement of the anterior and middle subtalar facets with a more medial fracture line has several clinical implications. First, if 39% of intraarticular fractures violate these joint surfaces, then the foot and ankle surgeon should maintain a high index of suspicion for their involvement, especially in the presence of a medial primary fracture line. Most clinicians have focused only on the importance of restoring the posterior facet. However, the subtalar joint is a complex articulation consisting of a functional interdependence of all three facets. In addition, Wagner et al ( Although Sanders et al ( Basing our evaluation on retrospective analysis of radiographs and CT scans imposes several limitations on our findings. The imaging studies were performed at more than one institution over a period of 10 years, and it cannot be assumed that they were performed in a standardized fashion. In addition, it is often difficult to assess involvement of the anterior and middle subtalar facets on these CT views. It is possible that there were additional cases where these facets were involved but not appreciated on the CT scan. However, the incidences of AF and MF involvement found in this study are similar to those previously reported ( Based on the work of Thoren ( Finally, even though increased comminution and decreased Bohler’s angles have been found to be associated with poorer clinical results, it is beyond the scope of this study to conclude that a more medial primary fracture line also correlates to unfavorable outcomes. Clinical follow-up studies are required before any definitive conclusions can be drawn and are a basis for further research. One interesting but unexplored consideration is the effect of foot type on the clinical outcome of these fractures, not only with respect to its effect on primary fracture line location but also on the ability of the foot to tolerate the clinical consequences of this fracture. A more medial primary fracture line was found to exhibit a significant correlation to increased Sanders class, decreased Bohler’s angle, and involvement of the CCJ and anterior and middle subtalar facets. Overall, this translates to a more severe fracture pattern, with greater comminution, joint depression, and greater involvement of surrounding joint surfaces as the primary fracture line moved medially. These findings should prompt the foot and ankle surgeon to approach intraarticular calcaneal fractures demonstrating a more medial primary fracture line with a greater appreciation for their severity. In particular, clinicians should have a higher index of suspicion for anterior articular involvement with more medial primary fracture lines. Although these results suggest that a supinated foot position at the time of injury creates a more severe fracture pattern in intraarticular calcaneal fractures, clinical follow-up studies are required to relate these radiographic results to clinical outcome. The authors wish to thank Kaaren Hoffman, PhD, for her assistance with statistical analysis and Michael Connolly for his illustrations.