The application of Bacillus subtilis as a flocculant for fine coal has been reported here. Zeta-potential measurements showed that both the coal and bacteria had similar surface charge as a function of pH. Surface free energy calculations showed that the coal was hydrophobic while the bacterium was hydrophilic. The adhesion of the bacteria to coal and subsequent settling was studied in detail. Adhesion of bacteria to coal surface and subsequent settling of coal was found to be quick. Both adhesion and settling were found to be independent of pH, which makes the process very attractive for field applications. The presence of an electrolyte along with the bacterium was found to not only enhance adhesion of bacteria, but also produce a clear supernatant. Further, the settled fraction was more compact than with bacteria alone. Interaction energy calculations using the extended DLVO theory showed that the electrical forces along with the acid–base interaction energy play a dominant role in the lower pH range. Above pH 7, the acid–base interaction energy is the predominant attractive force and is sufficient enough to overcome the repulsive forces due to electrical charges to bring about adhesion and thus settling of fine coal. With increase in electrolyte concentration, the change in total interaction energy with pH is minimal which probably leads to better adhesion and hence settling.Processing and handling of mineral fines is a major problem encountered in the mineral and mining industry. Fines are produced during various unit operations and during the transport of minerals from the mine to the plant. The ultrafine particles (<5 μm) create problems in processes like screening, flotation, dewatering and in the tailings pond. If the particles have a low density such as coal, then the problems exist even up to sizes of 25–30 μm. Coal refuse ponds and phosphate tailings ponds are a major problem worldwide. These tailing ponds not only occupy large areas, but also hold up lot of valuable water that can be reused if the particles are separated or settled effectively. Increasing the particle size by coagulation or flocculation can enhance settling rates. Coagulation is achieved by using salts such as alum and ferric sulfate while flocculation is possible with polymeric flocculants or polyelectrolytes One method that has shown promise is the use of microorganisms for flocculation of fine particles. The application of microorganisms in mineral processing has been reviewed comprehensively by Smith and Misra In the present study, A pure culture of Cell number was determined by microscopic counting with Petroff–Hauser counter using a Leitz phase contrast microscope (Laborlux K Wild MPS12). The cells were then harvested by centrifugation at 10 000 rpm in a refrigerated centrifuge. The pellet was washed several times before being suspended in distilled water to be used for further experiments. All glassware and growth media were sterilized before use. The coal sample was from the Jamadoba mine in Bihar, India and was supplied by Regional Research Laboratory, Bhopal. The as-received sample was crushed to finer size ( The surface charge as a function of pH of the bacterium and coal were determined using a Malvern–Zetasizer (Malvern Instruments, UK). A dilute suspension of coal of required ionic strength was prepared and pH was adjusted using KOH or HNO Contact angles on surfaces are a measure of the hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity of the sample. The contact angles were measured by the sessile drop method using model A-100 Ramè–Hart contact angle goniometer. Block samples of coal of about 1×1×0.5 cm size were selected and mounted on a holder using epoxy resin. Polishing was done using sand paper of various grid sizes from 120 to 600. Final polishing was done on a polishing wheel with 10 μm alumina. The sample was then washed thoroughly with distilled water to remove any adhering alumina and used for measurement of contact angle. Each reported value is an average of at least five readings at various spots on the surface. Three different liquids, two polar and one non polar were used for the measurements. The size of the drop used was 2 μl. The contact angle data so obtained was utilized in calculating the surface energy components of the coal and bacteria. The bacterial sample was centrifuged, washed twice in distilled water and filtered through a 0.45 μm cellulose triacetate filter paper to obtain a homogeneous bacterial lawn Adhesion studies were done by mixing equal amounts of coal and bacterial suspensions (3% pulp density coal suspension and bacterial suspension of predetermined cell count) in either distilled water or electrolyte solution. The change in cell number in the suspension was measured by microscopic counting using a Petroff–Hausser counter. The difference in the cell count was taken as the number of cells adhering to the coal surface. The data could be reproduced within an error of less than 5%. The effect of time, pH and ionic strength on adhesion was studied. Settling tests were done in 100 ml graduated glass cylinder by mixing equal amount of coal and bacterial suspensions and conditioning for 5 min. The conditioned samples were transferred to the cylinder and after a predetermined time, the top 85 ml of suspension was removed. Whatever coal remained in the lower 15 ml was considered as flocculated and settled. This coal was filtered, dried and weighed. Each data point could be reproduced with an error of less than 2%. The growth characteristics of The surface charge of the organism was determined as a function of pH at different concentrations of KNO The zeta-potential of the coal sample as also determined ( The contact angles of water, formamide and diiodomethane on the bacteria and the coal sample were measured by sessile drop technique and are given in The kinetics of adhesion of The effect of pH on adhesion in the absence and presence of electrolyte was also investigated and the results are plotted in The effect of time and pH on settling efficiency of coal was investigated. The settling kinetics (shown in  Several approaches are available for understanding the bacterial interactions with solid surfaces The total free energy of the interacting surfaces can be written as follows: The Lifshitz–van der Waals interaction comprises of the dispersion as well as the induction and orientation contributions and is not affected by the ionic strength of the medium. For a sphere–plate model the Lifshitz–van der Waals interaction energy is given by The electrostatic interaction decays with increasing ionic strength due to shielding of surface charges and at high ionic strength the electrostatic forces lose their influence. The contribution of electrostatic forces is given by The acid–base interactions are based on the electron-donating and electron-accepting interactions between the polar moieties in aqueous solutions and are essentially unsymmetrical, i.e. the electron-donating and electron-accepting parameters are not equal. The influence of acid–base interactions is enormous compared with electrostatic and Lifshitz–van der Waals interaction. It is given by The total free energy of interaction between J-coal and The total free energy change as a function of separation distance was also calculated at different pH values for 1×10 The following conclusions may be drawn from this study: The zeta-potential of Surface free energy calculations showed that coal is hydrophobic while the bacterium was hydrophilic. The surface of the bacteria was found to be highly electron-donating in nature. The presence of an electrolyte was found to affect both the time required for adhesion and the quantity of Settling tests showed that Settling in the absence of any reagent was dependent on pH. But with bacteria and electrolyte, settling was independent of pH. More importantly, the addition of an electrolyte along with the bacterium produced a very clear supernatant. This makes the process very attractive for field study. Interaction energy calculations using the extended DLVO theory corroborated well with the experimental results. Even though the contributions from Interaction energy calculations at different ionic strengths showed that The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support provided by Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and Department of Science and Technology, Government of India for this work.