Soldering and abrasive wear of die-casting tools are some of the biggest problems facing the aluminium die-casting industry. The understanding of the tribological behaviour is crucial to design new tool steels and tool steel-coating systems. The present study aims at investigating aluminium adhesion of aluminium/tool steel pair, performing sliding tests at high temperature with ball-on-disc configuration to reproduce solid/solid interaction. Different test conditions have been conducted in order to select the optimal test parameters to obtain aluminium adhesion on disc surface. Once the lab test has been designed, the high temperature tribological performance of different hot work tool steels (uncoated and coated by PVD) sliding against aluminium has been studied to allow proper die material design and selection.High-quality aluminium castings for automotive parts such as engine blocks, carburettor bodies, transmission cases and valve bodies are usually produced by high pressure die-casting (HPDC). HPDC is a single step process in which molten metal is injected into water or oil cooled metallic mould or die under high velocity and high pressure, allowing high volume production of uniform castings. When solidification is completed and die casting has cooled sufficiently, the die is opened and the part is ejected mechanically by activated pins. Dies have a high economic cost (often above $100,000) and a high incidence on the produced piece cost (about 20% in aluminium die casting), thus their longevity is of extreme importance. The harsh conditions during the casting operation (high temperatures, chemical attack by molten alloys, and high stresses) may cause premature damage in dies and markedly decrease the process efficiency In the present work solid/solid interaction is studied in order to reproduce aluminium adhesion phenomena on tool steel. The understanding of the tribological behaviour is crucial to develop new tool steel and tool steel-coating systems. The tribo-physico-chemical mechanisms during die/casting interaction at high temperature are very complex and could involve friction, wear, material transfer, oxidation and deformation simultaneously. Direct examination of industrial tools may provide information about the acting damaging mechanisms but this is tedious, time consuming and may be not feasible in some industrial applications (mainly due to the size of tools and their high cost that do not permit the use of destructive analyzing techniques). Thus, a lab scale test that reproduces the tribological behaviour of tools during HPDC will help to evaluate the applicability of different tool steels or hard coatings. To our knowledge, very limited tribological investigations have been conducted for aluminium/steel pair and even less at high temperature, aimed at reproducing the tribological conditions acting in HPDC. Menezes et al. In the current study, a lab scale test is designed to perform wear test at high temperature aimed at reproducing as close as possible the aluminium adhesion on tools during HPDC. A ball-on-disc test configuration where aluminium balls are used as a counterpart for sliding on hot work tool steel discs is chosen. With this test configuration it is expected to reproduce aluminium adhesion on HPDC tools, which is one of the main tool damaging mechanisms. Different test conditions are examined in order to select the optimal test parameters to obtain aluminium adhesion on disc surface. With the selected test parameters the tribological behaviour of different coated and uncoated tool steels grades is investigated in order to rank their applicability in HPDC dies. Two commercial hot work tool steels with hardness levels usually applied in hot forming tools, DIN 1.2344 (41 and 52 HRC), and HTCS-150 (52 HRC) and HTCS-170 (52 HRC) were used to prepare discs samples of 40 High temperature sliding tests were carried out in a CETR UMT-2 tribometer with ball-on-disc configuration. An aluminium ball (diameter 9.5 Wear scars on disc surfaces were examined by means of optical confocal microscopy (Sensofar Plμ 2300), scanning electron microscope (SEM, ZEISS ULTRAplus) and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). The wear loss and stuck material volumes were calculated from the cross sectional area of the wear track obtained in 8 zones by optical confocal microscopy (200X) of the scar. By means of an image analysis software (SensoMap) an average profile of each image was used to calculate the negative and positive volumes. The normalized wear rate ( In order to study the test parameters influence on the tribological behaviour of the aluminium/tool steel pair, several tribological tests were performed varying these parameters as indicated in   The influence of disc material hardness is pronounced, as can be seen in tests A, C and B, D, which were performed at the same test conditions on 41 and 52 HRC discs. The aluminium sticking trend is higher at higher hardness. Also the sliding speed has a strong influence in the adhesion wear mechanism as can be observed in C, D, E and F tests. Aluminium adhesion is higher at slow sliding speed. Load has more effect at slow sliding speed, making the predominant wear mechanism stronger at higher loads, B has higher abrasive wear than A, and D higher Al weight % than C (see An example of the friction behaviour is shown in The SEM images of the worn surfaces of the tool steel discs corresponding to tests B and C are given in From results obtained from A–G tests it can be summarized that, in order to study the adhesion of aluminium on HPDC dies the test parameters that reproduce this situation are those used in tests C and D. The high width of the disc wear track generated in test D difficult the wear measurement and for this reason parameters from test C were selected as those that better represent adhesive wear behaviour.  Coefficient of friction of uncoated HTCS-150 and CrN coated samples is shown in The worn surfaces from the tests performed on HTCS discs were analysed by SEM and the corresponding micrographs are shown in In this work a test methodology was designed to reproduce at the lab scale the adhesion of aluminium to a tool steel. A ball-on-disc configuration, with an aluminium ball as sliding counterpart and the tool steel as a disc, was chosen. The test conditions, such as load, sliding speed and temperature were set up to adhere aluminium to the disc surface, similarly to the mechanical soldering phenomena found in HPDC dies. Results show that, as a first approximation, the test can be used to evaluate the tool performance against aluminium soldering in HPDC. The test was applied to discern the aluminium adhesion trend of different tool steel grades and surface conditions. The best tribological behaviour in front of aluminium soldering, in term of less stuck material, is found in HTCS steel samples (uncoated and CrN coated) compared to DIN 1.2344. This work is financially supported by