The shallow buried composite lining is frequently used in underground engineering. A model for predicting dynamic response of composite lining in saturated poroelastic medium under incident P wave is proposed based on nonlocal-Biot theory. The analytical solution is obtained using wave function expansion method. The size effect, which is described by the nonlocal parameter, on dynamic stress concentrate of composite lining is studied in detail. Subsequently, the influences of input frequency, incident angle, thickness of composite lining, stiffness of composite lining and the buried depth of the lining on dynamic stress concentrate are elaborated. The distribution pattern of dynamic stress concentrate factor obtained in this work may provide a beneficial guideline for safety design in tunnel engineering.In the past decades, the underground infrastructures have been dramatically increased in many fields (e.g., mining engineering, hydroelectric project, and underground engineering et al.). It is believed that the anti-seismic performance of underground structures is prior to that of the ground structures Many studies have been implemented on dynamic response of cylindrical lining. For the first time, Pao et al. To address the above issues, a series of poroelastic model Previous investigations on dynamic response problem of lining in saturated soil are based on classical Biot theory, which is proposed based on the assumption that the pore size in saturated soil is much less than the wave length. Nevertheless, it has been demonstrated that the pore size has significant effect on dynamic response in saturated medium both experimentally In this work, the analytical solution for dynamic response of shallow buried composite lining in saturated soil under incident P wave are derived using the wave function expansion method, based on nonlocal Biot theory. The model in present work is verified by comparing with published numerical results. Subsequently, the influence of nonlocal parameter on DSCF of composite lining are discussed. In addition, the effects of input frequency, incident angle, thickness of composite lining, stiffness of composite lining and the buried depth of composite lining on DSCF also have been investigated. As illustrated in According to the work of Tong et al. Then the governing equation can be obtained as For harmonic wave, the time dependent term can be expressed as To solve Eq. Substitution of Eq. Eliminate  where Obviously, Eq. In this work, we mainly focus on the influence of P wave on stress distribution of shallow buried composite circular lining in saturated soil. Therefore, we assume that a plane P wave is applied on composite lining with incident angle Wave function expansions on Eqs. When the incident wave propagates into the outer lining through the saturated soil, the scattering wave is generated by the lining. Obviously, the scattering wave also satisfies Eq. Similarly, the scattering waves of P The total wave field in saturated soil is composed of the incident wave, reflected wave from the ground surface, scattering wave from the lining surface and the scattering wave from the ground surface, which can be written as By solving Eqs. In Eqs. The composite lining includes the initial lining and secondary lining, which are viewed as single-phase homogenous solid medium for the sake of convenience. Thus, the classical motion equation and constitutive relation can be respectively written as Assuming that the saturated soil medium and the composite lining medium are completely continuous and impervious at the interface, the zero stress at inner boundary and the half ground surface and completely continuous at the interface of linings. Thus, the boundary conditions can be shown as According to Eq. Combine Eqs. Similarly, the displacement and stress in the composite lining also can be expressed by the displacement potential function as As the boundary conditions are expressed in two sets of coordinate systems Eq. Eq. Substitute Eqs. Substitute Eq. Similarly, substitute Eqs. Finally, substitute Eqs. All undermined coefficients can be solved by combining Eqs. Dynamical stress concentration always caused by geometric discontinuity in medium, such as cavity, section break and obstacle and so on. The DSCF is frequently used to describe the dynamical stress state, which are defined as the ratio of circumferential stress of composite lining to the stress in saturated soil caused by the incident wave written as To illustrate the rationality and convergence of the model proposed in this work, the model is degraded by taking the nonlocal parameter To investigate the influence of pore-size effect and pore-dynamic effect on DSCF, another set of parameters of saturated soil are selected as shown in To further investigate the influence of input frequency on DSCF of composite lining sufficiently, the DSCF obtained at both incident angle 0° and 30° is shown in The variation of DSCF of the composite lining at both points A and B (inset of To comprehensively demonstrate the DSCF distributed along with the circumferential direction of the composite lining, the DSCFs on outer and inner surfaces under different incident angles and nonlocal parameters are shown in The variations of DSCF at point A and B (shown in the inset of To study the influence of lining modulus on DSCF, the DSCF at points A and B (shown in the inset of The influence of buried depth on DSCF is shown in Using wave function expansion method, a model, based on nonlocal Biot theory, for predicting dynamical response of a shallow buried composite tunnel embedded in saturated soil medium under incident plane P wave is proposed. The influence of nonlocal parameter on the dynamic stress concentrate factor is investigated in detail as well as the input frequency, incident angle, thickness of composite lining, stiffness of composite lining and the buried depth of lining. The results show that the increasing nonlocal parameter decreases the dynamic stress concentrate factor of the composite lining in saturated soil at a certain incident angle and frequency, that is, the classical Biot theory over-estimates the dynamic stress concentrate factor, which may cause over-invest on tunnel project. Within low frequency range, the nonlocal parameter has insignificant influence on the dynamic response while cannot be neglected within high frequency range. For 0° wave incident angle, the DSCF smoothly varies with the variation of nonlocal parameter, while fluctuates with increasing incident angle due to the wave interference. Within low input frequency range, the DSCF can be effectively reduced by increasing the lining thickness and stiffness, while the reducing effect is weakened with response frequency increasing. Analysis of influence of buried depth of composite lining shows that the buried depth mainly affects the phase of the reflected wave, causing a different wave interference effect, hence a different DSCF distribution patterns. In general, the DSCF distribution patterns obtains from the proposed model in this work can doubtlessly provide a visible guideline for safety design of the tunnels. The authors are grateful for funding from the          