Abstract
                  Calcination is the last process step of the sulphate method for production of titanium dioxide. The chemical reactions that occur during calcination are analysed by means of simultaneous DTA-TG-MS-measurements in order to provide a 5-step reaction schematic. The corresponding enthalpies of reaction are determined calorimetrically by means of the reversed drop method. The developed schematic is suitable for process modelling purposes.In the sulphate method for production of titanium dioxide white pigment, the raw materials ilmenite (FeTiO Due to incomplete desulphurisation, about 5–10 The energy required to carry out the strongly endothermal calcination reactions is provided by combustion of natural gas. In order to identify operational strategies allowing for reduced fuel consumption, simulation studies are to be carried out by means of a mathematical process model. For that purpose a method is required to easily calculate the energy demand for calcining filter cake of a given composition. However, accurate values for enthalpies of reaction are only available for moisture evaporation and rutilisation (   Enthalpies of reaction for dehydration and desulphurisation of TiOSO Since the accuracy of the mentioned values is insufficient for process modelling purposes, experimental investigations are carried out to thermochemically characterise the calcination of titanium dioxide. Samples from an industrial calcination kiln are taken and calcined under laboratory conditions. The occurring chemical reactions are monitored by means of simultaneous DTA- (differential thermal analysis), TG- (thermogravimetry), and MS- (mass spectrometry) measurements. From the measurement results a simplified system of chemical reactions is derived. The corresponding enthalpies of reaction are determined by means of a drop calorimeter. The samples were provided by TRONOX Pigments GmbH, Krefeld-Uerdingen, Germany. Two samples A and B of about 1 Calcination of sample A was observed by simultaneous DTA-TG-MS-measurements The gaseous calcination products were analysed qualitatively by means of MS during the entire heating procedure including preheating and holding at 40 Enthalpies of reaction were measured in a drop-calorimeter A straw was used to cut out samples of about 10  The TG-curve shows massive weight loss already during the isothermal hold-time at 40 Further weight loss occurs above 650 The exothermal effect which is observed between 800 and 1150 The calcination reactions can thus be described by the reaction schematic shown in DTA-measurements similar to the ones described here are carried out by Assuming the filter cake to consist only of TiO(OH)  From the results of the DTA-TG-MS-measurements it can be seen that dehydration and desulphurisation occur in two different temperature ranges that are marked gray in The enthalpy of dehydration is determined for sample A at a calorimeter temperature The measured enthalpy change Δ  The enthalpy required for pure desorption of water from TiO(OH) The enthalpy required for desulphurisation of TiOSO  The value for the enthalpy of reaction for desulphurisation (Reaction (4)) is calculated from Δ Calculation of Δ The total enthalpy Δ  It is notable that the uncertainty of Δ In order to determine the “real” water content of filter cake B and to avoid premature evaporation, large samples of about 40–50 For process modelling, the “true” water content of the filter cake is therefore determined on larger samples to equal 49.3 By means of the proposed schematic of chemical reactions and the corresponding enthalpies of reaction the energy demand for calcination of titanium dioxide can be calculated from the composition of the reactant filter cake. The enthalpies of reaction determined here are in good agreement with literature values. The filter cake composition can be calculated without analytic effort simply from the weight losses during annealing at 500 The authors would like to acknowledge TRONOX Pigments GmbH for kindly providing the filter cake samples. The Aachen Institute for Computational Engineering Science (AICES) is acknowledged for providing financial support. The uncertainty of Δ