Objectives
                  Non-invasive interactive neurostimulation (InterX®) delivers high amplitude electrical pulsed currents at points of low impedance on the skin. This study compared the hypoalgesic effect of non-invasive interactive neurostimulation with transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  A repeated measures parallel group study on healthy human volunteers randomized to receive strong non-painful TENS or non-invasive interactive neurostimulation for 21 min on the forearm (N = 10/group). Pressure algometry was used to determine blunt pressure pain threshold at baseline, 10, and 20 min during stimulation, and 5 min post stimulation.
               
                  Results
                  Low impedance sites were found in half of the participants receiving non-invasive interactive neurostimulation. ANOVA found no effects for intervention (p = 0.923), time × intervention interaction (p = 0.21), or time (p = 0.094).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Given the limited power of this study, we show that there were no significant differences in hypoalgesia between non-invasive interactive neurostimulation and TENS. Unlike our previous studies we also failed to detect a change pain threshold during TENS. Nevertheless, our findings can be used to inform the design of an appropriately powered study on pain patients.Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is a non-invasive technique that is used throughout the world to manage painful conditions, although there continues to be uncertainty about efficacy and effectiveness ( Non-invasive interactive neurostimulation is a relatively new TENS-like device and is sold under the trade name InterX®. Manufacturers claim that non-invasive interactive neurostimulation relieves pain and promotes healing of various injuries ( Manufacturers claim that the waveform used in non-invasive interactive neurostimulation devices is impedance sensitive and can detect changes in the electrical properties of tissue that alter in response to injury and trauma ( Pre-clinical testing of new treatments in healthy volunteers is critical to ensure safety, efficacy, and optimal dose and technique ( A repeated measures parallel group study was designed to measure experimentally induced blunt pressure pain thresholds during TENS and non-invasive interactive neurostimulation in pain-free healthy human volunteers. Informed consent was obtained from all participants and the study was approved by the Research Ethics Sub-Committee of Leeds Metropolitan University. Twenty unpaid healthy human volunteers were recruited by announcements throughout the University. Interested individuals were verbally briefed about the nature of the study and provided with a participant information sheet. Volunteers were given 48 hours before being formally invited to take part in the study. Each participant took part in one experiment. Before the start of the experiment they were screened for study eligibility (18 years or older with no previous use of TENS or TENS-like devices) and contraindications to TENS in line with current professional standards ( Each experiment was conducted in a physiology laboratory and facilitated by the principal investigator (NB). Participants were seated throughout the experiment with their non-dominant forearm resting on a side table and instructions delivered verbally, using a series of cue cards. Participants received either strong non-painful TENS or strong non-painful non-invasive interactive neurostimulation. Block randomization was used to ensure equal numbers of participants in each group ( Mechanical pain thresholds to blunt pressure stimuli were measured using a Somedic Type II pressure algometer with a flat circular probe (1 cm Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation and non-invasive interactive neurostimulation were administered for a total of 21 min. Participants were told in pre-study information that there were different types of TENS devices and that some produced a sensation and others did not. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation was administered so that stimulation covered the median nerve and the flexor carpi radialis muscle using a ProTENS (Nidd Valley) and two square self-adhering electrodes (each 5 × 5 cm, Acupad Multistick TENS Electrodes, Nidd Valley Medical, Knaresborough, UK) using a continuous pulse pattern, a pulse frequency of 150 pulses per second, and a pulse width (duration) of 220 µsec. The proximal electrode was applied to the lateral epicondyle of the elbow, and the leading edge of the distal electrode placed 3 cm below the proximal electrode along an imaginary line between the lateral epicondyle and the midpoint of the wrist creases (see Non-invasive interactive neurostimulation was administered using an InterX 5002 device (InterX, Neuro Resource Group, Plano, TX, USA, The current amplitude to achieve a strong non-painful sensation for TENS and non-invasive interactive neurostimulation was recorded after the device was switched on, immediately after measurement of the pre-intervention pain thresholds and again at 6, 12, and 18 min. Current amplitude was taken from the screen display of the non-invasive interactive neurostimulation device and using a Type 4000 Frye Analyser (RDG Medical Ltd, Croydon, UK) during TENS. An unpaired Twenty healthy volunteers expressed interest in the study and all started and completed the experimental session (14 female, mean [SD] age = 20.7 [0.80] years). Pre-intervention pressure pain thresholds were of a similar magnitude to those reported in previous studies ( There was no difference between interventions at 20 min of stimulation (mean [SD] difference = 21.0 [16.4] KPa, An area of low impedance was found while scanning with the non-invasive interactive neurostimulation device in five of the ten participants. The mean current amplitude to achieve a strong non-painful sensation over the 21-min intervention was lower for TENS (mean [SD]= 14.05 [7.09] mA) compared with non-invasive interactive neurostimulation (mean [SD]= 23.25 [7.70] mA, mean difference =−9.2 [95% CI =−16.19, −2.21 mA], This study failed to detect any significant differences between non-invasive interactive neurostimulation and TENS on pressure pain threshold at the flexor carpi radialis muscle in 20 healthy human participants. A higher current amplitude was necessary to achieve a strong non-painful sensation for non-invasive interactive neurostimulation than TENS. Areas of low impedance could only be found in half of the participants receiving non-invasive interactive neurostimulation. Our study was designed to evaluate the relative efficacy of TENS with non-invasive interactive neurostimulation, so we did not include a placebo control group. Placebo controlled studies have consistently shown that TENS elevates pain pressure pain threshold when administered at a strong non-painful intensity at the site of pain following a similar time course as observed in the present study ( We found no difference in pain threshold between non-invasive interactive neurostimulation and TENS. One reason may be that the mechanism of action of TENS and non-invasive interactive neurostimulation are similar. Both modalities generate a strong non-painful sensation indicative of low threshold afferent activity and this has been shown to inhibit ongoing transmission of nociceptive input within the spinal cord ( We found that higher current amplitude was necessary to achieve a strong non-painful sensation for non-invasive interactive neurostimulation compared with TENS. However, current amplitudes to achieve a strong non-painful TENS sensation were lower than previous studies by ourselves ( Higher current amplitudes for non-invasive interactive neurostimulation may be due to a lack of a conductive medium used at the electrode–skin interface. Non-invasive interactive neurostimulation delivers current using a single electrode head that is made of concentric stainless steel outer and inner electrodes. These stainless steel electrodes make direct contact with the skin without the use of electrode gels. If the impedance at the interface between electrode and skin remains high, it will hinder the passage of electrical currents across the electrode–skin interface. This may generate areas of high current density (termed hot spots) resulting in skin irritation ( The non-invasive interactive neurostimulation device only identified areas of low impedance in five of the ten participants. It is claimed that peripheral nerve stimulation techniques should be administered over skin with low impedance ( All three randomized controlled clinical trials conducted on the pain relieving effects of non-invasive interactive neurostimulation have been positive. Selfe et al. ( The possibility of a type 2 error cannot be discounted in this study. We were interested in interaction effects although these can be associated with low power. The observed power for interaction effects in our study was only 0.354, despite using sample sizes similar to analyses to detect differences between TENS and placebo in previous studies. It is possible that a smaller magnitude of difference, and a larger sample size, is needed to determine relative efficacy of two active interventions. Nevertheless, the observed power of the The generalizability of our results may be limited. Our recruitment strategy focused on university students and staff rather than a general population-based sample. We used a single sensory modality testing procedure (i.e., blunt pressure pain) and did not assess other modalities of nociception (i.e., thermal and electrical) that can be captured using a multimodal testing procedure in order to characterize the complexity of pain experience ( In conclusion, we detected no significant differences in the hypoalgesic effects between non-invasive interactive neurostimulation and TENS on pressure pain thresholds in healthy volunteers, although the possibility of a type 2 error cannot be discounted. Despite the positive outcome of clinical trials, our findings raise uncertainty about the process of monitoring and subsequently stimulating areas of low skin impedance. Our study findings should act as a catalyst for further research from basic and clinical sciences.  The authors would like to thank Dr. Osama Tashani for technical assistance during this study and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive advice. The non-invasive interactive neurostimulation (InterX) device and accessories were borrowed from Neuro Resource Group, Inc., Plano, Texas. All authors contributed to the design, data analysis, and preparation of the manuscript including intellectual input at all stages. Ms. Biggs and Professor Johnson conducted participant recruitment and data collection. All authors approved the final manuscript. The Faculty of Health and Social Sciences at Leeds Metropolitan University provided funding for the study. All authors had complete access to the study data. Biggs N., Walsh D.M., Johnson M.I. 2011. A Comparison of the Hypoalgesic Effects of Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS) and Non-invasive Interactive Neurostimulation (InterX®) on Experimentally Induced Blunt Pressure Pain Using Healthy Human Volunteers. Neuromodulation 2012; 15: 93–99 This is an important comparative study that evaluates effects of the non-invasive neurostimulation approaches. The authors discovered that traditional transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) and “noninvasive interactive neurostimulation” are very similar in terms of producing hypoalgesia. The study is simple but well documented. However, the findings in healthy volunteers may not be completely transferable to pain patients and therefore I would encourage the authors to perform similar comparisons in symptomatic patients as the results may be either concordant with those in healthy controls—or completely surprising in terms of discovered difference between two modalities. Konstantin Slavin, MD  *** In this study, this group of investigators compared the effects of two techniques of peripheral electrical stimulation (neurostimulation (Inter®X) vs. transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)) on pain threshold. Though ANOVA showed no significant effects for intervention, time and time x intervention interaction, this study was powered only to detect large differences between groups (effect sizes larger than 1) and in addition it is important to note that this study found no significant effect also for TENS. Thus reader should be aware of these issues when analyzing results from this study. Fellipe Fregni, MD, PhD  *** Every day we read advertisements about new medical devices. A majority of them are promising non-invasive and effective cure of illnesses, or at least faster and better relief of suffering. Not surprisingly, new devices are usually more expensive and have more attractive design. However, the latest is not necessarily the greatest. This study failed to show superiority of a new brand-name device versus our old friend TENS. The study was conducted in a clean unbiased experimental setting. However, pressure-induced pain in healthy volunteers and its alleviation by TENS or other devices may not represent pathological conditions with altered pain perception, modulation and transmission. Clinical comparative studies should be conducted to support or dismiss advantages of new methods. Michael Gofeld, MD  Comments not included in the Early View version of this paper.