Purpose
                  Clinical and in vitro studies suggest that subchondral bone sclerosis due to abnormal osteoblasts is involved in the progression of osteoarthritis (OA). Human osteoblasts isolated from sclerotic subchondral OA bone tissue show an altered phenotype, a decreased canonical Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, and a reduced mineralization in vitro as well as in vivo. These alterations were linked with an abnormal response to BMP-2. OA osteoblasts release factors such as the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) that contribute to cartilage loss whereas chondrocytes do not express HGF. HGF can stimulate BMP-2 expression in human osteoblasts, however, the role of HGF and its effect in OA osteoblasts remains unknown. Here we investigated whether elevated endogenous HGF levels in OA osteoblasts are responsible for their altered response to BMP-2.
               
                  Methods
                  We prepared primary human subchondral osteoblasts using the sclerotic medial portion of the tibial plateaus of OA patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty, or from tibial plateaus of normal individuals obtained at autopsy. The expression of HGF was evaluated by qRT-PCR and the protein production by western blot analysis. HGF expression was reduced with siRNA technique whereas its activity was inhibited using the selective inhibitor PHA665752. Alkaline phosphatase activity (ALPase) and osteocalcin release were measured by substrate hydrolysis and EIA respectively. Canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling (cWnt) was evaluated both by target gene expression using the TOPflash TCF/lef luciferase reporter assay and western blot analysis of β-catenin levels in response to Wnt3a stimulation. Mineralization in response to BMP-2 was evaluated by alizarin red staining.
               
                  Results
                  The expression of HGF was increased in OA osteoblasts compared to normal osteoblasts and was maintained during their in vitro differentiation. OA osteoblasts released more HGF than normal osteoblasts as assessed by western blot analysis. HGF stimulated the expression of TGF-β1. BMP-2 dose-dependently (1 to 100ng/ml) stimulated both ALPase and osteocalcin in normal osteoblasts whereas, it inhibited them in OA osteoblasts. HGF–siRNA treatments reversed this response in OA osteoblasts and restored the BMP-2 response. cWnt is reduced in OA osteoblasts compared to normal, and HGF–siRNA treatments increased cWnt in OA osteoblasts almost to normal. Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation in response to BMP-2, which is reduced in OA osteoblasts, was corrected when these cells were treated with PHA665752. The BMP-2-dependent mineralization of OA osteoblasts, which is also reduced compared to normal, was only partially restored by PHA665752 treatment whereas 28days treatment with HGF reduced the mineralization of normal osteoblasts.
               
                  Conclusion
                  OA osteoblasts expressed more HGF than normal osteoblasts. Increased endogenous HGF production in OA osteoblasts stimulated the expression of TGF-β1 and reduced their response to BMP-2. Inhibiting HGF expression or HGF signaling restored the response to BMP-2 and Smad1/5/8 signaling. In addition, decreased HGF signaling partly corrects the abnormal mineralization of OA osteoblasts while increased HGF prevents the normal mineralization of normal osteoblasts. In summary, we hypothesize that sustained elevated HGF levels in OA osteoblasts drive their abnormal phenotype and is implicated in OA pathophysiology.Osteoblasts from human osteoarthritis (OA) patients express an altered phenotype in bone tissue Abnormal production of growth factors has been described in OA osteoblasts, such as for the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) Interactions between HGF, TGF-β1 and BMP-2 have been observed in different cell systems. Indeed, TGF-β1 can stimulate HGF production in some cell types whereas the reverse has also been reported, suggesting that the interaction between TGF-β1 and HGF could be cell-specific In general, TGF-β1 activates the ALK5/Smad2/3 pathway TGF-β1 and HGF also play important immunoregulatory role on OA mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) Hence, the present study was performed to unravel the potential role of HGF to alter the phenotype of OA osteoblasts, Tibial plateaus were obtained from OA patients undergoing knee replacement surgery and prepared as previously described Isolation of subchondral bone plate and the cell cultures was prepared as previously described ALPase activity was determined by substrate hydrolysis using p-nitrophenylphosphate of whole cell lysates whereas, osteocalcin release in cell supernatants was evaluated using an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) as previously described Conditioned media (CM) were prepared from Murine L cell lines transfected with either an empty vector (Parental) or with Wnt3a (Wnt3a) obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Cedarlane Laboratories, Ontario) as described Confluent cells were incubated in BGJb media containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 50 HGF expression was inhibited in OA osteoblasts by specific siRNA using previously described methods In some experiments, HGF signaling was blunted using a selective HGF receptor blocker, PHA665752. In brief, OA osteoblasts were grown to confluence under normal culture conditions as described above, and PHA665752 was added at a final concentration of 0.5 Cell extracts were prepared for western blotting as previously described RT reactions were primed with random hexamers with 1 OA osteoblasts were plated in 24-well plates at a density of 1.5 Quantitative data are expressed as mean Previous reports have shown that the phenotype of OA osteoblasts is altered compared to normal Ob As we previously reported that OA osteoblasts produced more HGF than normal osteoblasts and since sustained elevated levels of HGF have been shown to alter osteoblast markers in osteoblast-like cell lines HGF and TGF-β1 can both regulate osteoblast cell markers and cell proliferation As we observed that the response to BMP-2 was altered for ALPase activity and osteocalcin secretion, but could be corrected by inhibiting HGF expression, we next evaluated if: i) HGF could curb the mineralization of normal osteoblasts and, ii) if inhibiting HGF expression and/or inhibiting HGF signaling in OA osteoblasts could correct the poor mineralization observed in these cells Since high endogenous HGF expression and production in OA osteoblasts altered their capacity to respond to BMP-2, we next evaluated whether this could be supported by an alteration of the BMP-2 and cWnt signaling pathways, both involved in the regulation of osteoblasts phenotype markers and mineralization. First, as shown in The exact cause of OA remains elusive. However, key observations have led to the idea that abnormal tissue remodeling and disruption of tissue homeostasis are involved in structural alterations observed in all tissues of the OA joint. Inasmuch as reports have shown abnormal bone and cartilage tissue remodeling takes place in joints of OA patients and that this is linked with abnormal osteoblasts cell behavior, this raises the hypothesis that OA is a metabolic disease in which systemic and/or local factors are involved Likely candidates that could alter tissue remodeling and serve as autocrine/paracrine messengers are growth factors and adipokines which are released in abundance by osteoblasts. Indeed, IGFs, TGF-β1, HGF and leptin could all be likely contributors to the altered local cell metabolism and tissue remodeling observed in OA. We previously demonstrated the key roles played by IGF-1, TGF-β1 and leptin in OA osteoblasts Here, we demonstrate that HGF is expressed and released by OA osteoblasts more than by normal Ob, that this capacity is maintained during cell differentiation in culture, and that the release of HGF drives the expression of TGF-β1 which is also elevated in OA osteoblasts Chronic elevated HGF levels acted upon different signaling pathways to convey its inhibitory action of osteoblasts markers and mineralization. The BMP-2 signaling pathway is reduced in OA osteoblasts as a consequence of their elevated endogenous HGF levels, as reflected by the correction of Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation in response to the inhibition of HGF signaling. Indeed, an antagonist of HGF receptors prompted an increase of about 50% in Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation in OA osteoblasts. A similar alteration of Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation in response to BMP-6 has been observed in hepatocytes In conclusion, we demonstrated that endogenous elevated HGF production in OA osteoblasts is responsible, in part, for their altered response to BMP-2 stimulation, leading to alterations of ALPase activity, osteocalcin secretion, and mineralization. This is linked with an inhibition of the phosphorylation of the ALK1/Smad1/5/8 pathway in response to BMP-2 and of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway in response to Wnt3a. EA, BB and XM contributed to This work was supported by grant  The authors declare that they have no competing interests.