An alternative procedure for the processing of monazite mineral concentrate has been suggested. This procedure is based on a prior separation of the REEs and Th oxalates from the sulfate liquor of the hydrous oxide cake obtained after alkali breakdown of monazite concentrate.
                  From the mixed oxalate precipitate, it was possible to optimize the selective alkali dissolution of Th using a mixed Na2CO3/NaHCO3 solution. Highly pure oxide products of the three interesting metal values; viz REEs, Th and U have properly been prepared.Monazite together with xenotime and bastnesite represents the three major mineral resources of rare earth elements which represent about 95% of their occurrence in nature. Chemically, the first two minerals are phosphate of rare earths and thorium besides a relatively small uranium content, however, monazite is particularly rich in the light REEs (Ce sub-group involving La–Eu) while xenotime is particularly rich in the heavy REEs (Y sub-group involving Gd–Lu). Bastnesite, a flurocarbonate, is another source of the light REEs, however, it contains less heavy REEs than monazite. The recovery of the REEs and the associated thorium and uranium values from monazite concentrate is actually accomplished by a variety of methods after its breakdown with either sulfuric acid or sodium hydroxide. The former acid breakdown procedure has been used most extensively in the United State of America, while the latter has mostly been used in India and Brazil. The different recovery methods have actually been developed by several authors including The studied recovery methods from the sulfuric acid liquor involve the double sulfate precipitation after the stepwise neutralization, the selective precipitation of the REEs and thorium oxalates besides possible application of solvent extraction. From the caustic soda treatment of monazite which allows recovery of the phosphate content, the mixed REEs–Th–U metal values would be left in the form of an insoluble hydrous oxide cake. The latter can be then dissolved in a mineral acid and properly treated for the separate recovery of the three metal values through the proper techniques. It is interesting in this regard to mention that the direct sulfuric acid breakdown process does not yield pure products and is no longer in commercial use. In the light of the above mentioned works, the present work has been so formulated to apply the alkali breakdown of Rosetta monazite concentrate followed by sulfuric acid dissolution of the obtained hydrous oxide cake. The purpose was to avoid the direct breakdown of the concentrate with sulfuric acid which results in impure products on one hand and to recover the tri-sodium phosphate which is used in the phosphate fertilizer industry on the other hand. Also, from the obtained sulfate liquor of the hydrous oxide cake, the REEs and thorium were first precipitated as their insoluble oxalates leaving uranium in solution. However, instead of applying solvent extraction using tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) to extract Th and Ce (IV) after caustification/calcination followed by dissolving in nitric acid and oxalate precipitation, while the other REEs are kept in the raffinate, it was found more convenient to directly apply selective carbonate separation of thorium from the combined oxalates precipitate. In this regard, it is interesting to refer to the previous works of However, it was indicated by Whereas 90% of the uranium was found in the carbonate filtrate, 99% of Th was precipitated with the REEs due to their exceedingly large quantity. On the contrary, both thorium and uranium can be co-precipitated by H Recently, In the present work, as mentioned above separation of the REEs, Th and U from Rosetta monazite concentrate has been studied via another alternative of the classically applied routes. Thus, after alkali breakdown, the hydrous oxide cake was dissolved in sulfuric acid followed by oxalate precipitation of the REEs and Th while U – left in solution – was recovered by proper neutralization. Separation of Th from the combined oxalate precipitate was then studied in detail through its selective carbonate dissolution. The insoluble RE-oxalates were then calcined to obtain the RE oxides. The starting material for the present work is the hydrous oxide cake of Rosetta monazite mineral concentrate (90% purity).Therefore, a 500 The dried precipitate of the REEs and Th oxalates was subjected to several selective alkali dissolution experiments for Th using a mixed solution of sodium carbonate and bicarbonate in a manner to optimize the relevant dissolution factors. These factors involved the Na The digestion procedure of The major oxides in the obtained sulfuric acid solution of Rosetta monazite concentrate sample have been determined using the conventional wet chemical technique of In order to determine the efficiency of the applied precipitation or dissolution experiments of the three working metal values, their analysis in the different working stream solutions was all the time performed. For this purpose, the same procedures mentioned above for their analysis in the original sample have been adopted. As previously mentioned, the working Rosetta monazite concentrate sample of about 90% purity was subjected to proper analysis. Results of the complete chemical analysis of the working sample are shown in Chemical analysis of the prepared 10 liter sulfate liquor of the hydrous oxide cake prepared by alkaline breakdown of 500 The first step in the processing of the obtained sulfate solution containing the three interesting metal values was the direct precipitation of both the REEs and Th as their oxalates, while keeping U in the solution, by using 30% oxalic acid at 60 It is important to mention that, both the REEs and Th were precipitated with efficiencies of up to 99 and 98%, respectively. The obtained REEs–Th oxalate cake after filtration, washing and drying was subjected to ESEM-EDEX qualitative analysis. The latter, ( From the prepared REEs–Th combined oxalate cake, Th was selectively dissolved using a mixed carbonate/bicarbonate solution. In this treatment, Th would dissolve as its penta carbonate complex which could be represented by Eq. The different relevant or effective Th selective dissolution factors with the mixed solution of Na To study this factor upon selective Th dissolution from its combined oxalate precipitate with the REEs, four dissolution experiments at room temperature using fixed total concentration of both reagents at 100 From the obtained results shown in Fixing the above mentioned optimum value of the Na The effect of the solid/liquid ratio upon the selective leaching efficiency of Th dissolution from its combined precipitate was studied between 1/2 and 1/7. In these experiments, the optimum dissolution conditions previously determined involving 3:1 of Na In trial to investigate the possibility of decreasing the leaching time upon Th leaching efficiency from the working Th–REEs oxalate cake, the latter was studied in the range from 30 to 120 Four selective leaching experiments have been performed to investigate the effect of leaching temperature upon thorium selective leaching efficiency – from its combined oxalate cake with REEs – in the range from room temperature (about 25 From the above studied selective Th leaching factors, it can be concluded that the optimum leaching conditions for dissolving 99.5% of the Th content from their combined Th–REEs oxalate cake would be summarized as following: Na Na Leaching time: 2 Leaching temperature: 75 Solid/liquid ratio: 1/6. To study the potentiality of Th recovery from the alkaline solution obtained from its combined oxalate cake with the REEs, a proper solution of thorium was prepared by the alkali treatment of the working oxalate precipitate using the above mentioned optimum dissolution conditions. Analysis of this solution was found to be free from any REEs while its Th content assayed 2.5 The REEs precipitate left behind as their oxalates after the alkaline dissolution of Th was carefully washed with distilled water, properly dried before its calcination followed by its qualitative ESEM-EDX determination of its composition. From the results shown in The uranium value that has been left behind in the sulfate liquor after separation of the REEs and Th oxalates was then treated for its recovery. For this purpose, the volume of the working solution was reduced by evaporation to increase its U concentration and also ensure it oxidation to the hexavalent state. After that, the pH of the solution was then increased by NH A suggested procedure for the treatment of the monazite mineral concentrate has successfully been applied upon a sulfate liquor of the monazite hydrous oxide cake. This procedure involved a selective precipitation of combined REEs–Th oxalates leaving the uranium content in the liquor. The relevant factors of alkali selective Th dissolution have been found to involve a mixed weight of 3/1 Na