The current slenderness limits in international design codes are often based on certain rotation capacities obtained from plastic bending tests of Concrete Filled Tubes (CFT). In the past, a plastic slenderness limit of λs=188 was obtained by the first author based on a fracture rotation limit of the steel tube. However, such limit may be questionable being brittle and insufficient for plastic design of CFT members, sub-assemblies and frames where adequate strain/deformation ductility is required. The main aims of this paper are to present (i) a new method to determine new ductile slenderness limits suitable for plastic design of structures based on the measured strains in plastic bending tests on CFT; (ii) a closed-form solution for the elastic and inelastic buckling strains of CFT under pure bending using a new simplified energy approach employing the well-known Ritz method. The critical strains obtained from such analysis were used to derive new slenderness limits for CFT; and (iii) finite element modelling of CFT and compare the experimental and numerical moment-rotation responses. The effect of concrete filling on the post-buckling strength of restrained tubes is quantified. The current design rules for unrestrained Circular Hollow Sections (CHS) in steel specifications are also compared with the restrained strength obtained from the tests. Two new compact and yield slenderness limits were derived based on the strength corresponds to the appearance of the plastic ripples during the test. The experimentally obtained and the theoretically derived slenderness limits are compared against the available limits in the design codes and standards. The newly derived compact limit of λp=79 was found in a good agreement with λp=72 specified for CFT in the ANSI/AISC 360-10 specification. However, the new yield limit of λy=150 was found considerably lower than λy=254 for CFT specified in the ANSI/AISC 360-10.Amplitude of plastic ripples Circular hollow sections Outside diameter of CHS Inside diameter of the tube Modulus of elasticity of CFT section Measured initial Young's modulus of steel tube Modulus of steel tube in the longitudinal direction Modulus of steel tube in the hoop direction Hardening modulus of steel tube in the longitudinal direction Predicted elastic modulus of the concrete Unconfined strength of concrete Confined strength of concrete Measured yield stress Stress at Proportional limit Measured ultimate tensile strength Measured ultimate tensile strength Beam length under constant moment Applied moment Ultimate moment Plastic moment Plastic moment of the composite section Plastic moment of the hollow tubes Predicted concrete contribution Parameter used in Eq. Mean radius of the tube Shear span Plastic section modulus for hollow tubes Elastic section modulus for hollow tubes Thickness of CHS Ultimate strain at fracture Strain at proportional limit Section slenderness defined in AS4100 Yield slenderness limit for compression Yield slenderness limit for bending Plastic slenderness limit for bending Slenderness limit for CFT Slenderness limit for CHS Angular location of the plastic neutral axis Critical buckling stress for CHS Critical buckling stress for CFT Relative angle of rotation Rotation corresponding to M Rotation corresponding to yield of the steel tube In general, composite members consisting of circular steel tubes filled with concrete are extensively used in structures involving large rotations, particularly in zones of high seismicity. Composite circular concrete filled tubes (CFT) have been used increasingly as columns and beam-columns in braced and unbraced frame structures CFT structural members have a number of distinctive advantages over conventional steel reinforced concrete members. CFT members provide excellent seismic resistance in two orthogonal directions as well as good damping characteristics. These members also have excellent hysteresis behaviour under cyclic loading, compared with hollow tubes In spite of the bulk literature written over the last five decades on the techniques of concrete filling of circular steel tubes, little was devoted, specially theoretical studies, to the large deformation flexural behaviour of these members as noted by The plastic slenderness limits are widely used in current design rules to classify the cross sectional behaviour subjected to pure bending. Three types of sections are commonly used in this classification, namely, compact, non-compact and slender. The plastic D/t-limits are used to identify a compact and a non-compact sections suitable for plastic design of frames.  The ultimate bending moment capacity of CFT is commonly predicted by available standards and codes such as: the Japanese standards AIJ In a related paper, a plastic slenderness limit of λ In a related paper, Elchalakani et al. The behaviour of CFT beams constructed from non-compact (79<λ  The filled sections had better performances compared to their unfilled counterparts, especially for tubes with large D/t ratios. The improvement in the void-filled tube behaviour appears to be related to the delay or total prevention of local buckling caused by the restraining action provided by the infill concrete. In the case of concrete-filled tube, the ultimate bending strength can be predicted The concrete contribution was derived in  It should be noted that a number of CFT specimens with λ Based on the test data presented in In the past, Bradford et al. Elchalakani The current AISC Specification defines the plastic and yield slenderness limits for circular hollow section (CHS) subjected to flexure as (D/t) Solving for the steel yield strain and setting this strain to the local buckling strain at the occurrence of plastic ripples (ε Similarly for the yield slenderness limit, the local buckling strain ε  It is seen in Lai and Varma The change in strain energy due to elastic foundation Equating the work done given in Eq. The second term can be ignored for a rigid filler To determine the inelastic buckling stress for CFT the term Setting the elastic buckling strain ε The critical buckling stress given in Eq.  The response of CFT under pure bending loads is examined numerically by using the load-displacement nonlinear analysis, from which the ultimate loads, failure modes and other outputs are determined The steel specimens were cold-formed circular hallow sections of grade C350, which were manufactured by Palmer Tube Mills according to the Australian standard AS 1163 The concrete used for testing has an average compressive cylinder strength at 28 days of The three-dimension finite element model is shown in A Multi-Point Constraint (MPC) of type “Beam” is used in the global system of coordinates to couple the kinematics of the free end of the CFT structure in the plane z=L and apply a bending moment. MPC Beam defines a rigid beam connection to constrain the displacement and rotation of the slave nodes (the nodes of the deformable concrete and steel structures located at z=L) to the control point (a reference point located at x=y=0, z=L). This condition ensures that the free end remains planar and restricts buckling from taking place at the free end of the structure. The reference point is constrained in the global y direction subjected to a constant angular velocity in the x direction. These boundary conditions allow the structure to bend in the x-z, the reference point to move along the z axis and the mid-plane z=0 to move along the global y axis. A Multi-Point Constraint (MPC) of type “Beam” is used in the global system of coordinates to couple the kinematics of the free end of the CFT structure in the plane z=L and apply a bending moment. MPC Beam defines a rigid beam connection to constrain the displacement and rotation of the slave nodes (the nodes of the deformable concrete and steel structures located at z=L) to the control point (a reference point located at x=y=0, z=L). This condition ensures that the free end remains planar and restricts buckling from taking place at the free end of the structure. The reference point is constrained in the global y direction subjected to a constant angular velocity in the x direction. These boundary conditions allow the structure to bend in the x-z, the reference point to move along the z axis and the mid-plane z=0 to move along the global y axis. A quasi-static analysis is conducted to simulate the 12 specimens tested and presented in As shown in As shown by Elchalakani et al.  The plastic slenderness limit of λ Two new compact and yield slenderness limits were derived based on the strength and strain corresponds to the appearance of the plastic ripples during the test. The newly derived compact limit of λ Eq. A non-linear finite element model was constructed to analyse the behaviour of cylindrical CFT subjected to pure bending. The proposed model uses damaged plasticity along with compression hardening and tension stiffening effects to describe the behaviour of concrete. It also uses Von-Mises elasto-plasticity with hardening to describe the behaviour of steel. A good agreement was found between the measured and the predicted moment-rotation curves using Abaqus. The model reproduced the plastic ripples that were observed experimentally. In addition, it predicts the development of fractures that are associated with the plastic ripples. The finite element mode revealed that the plastic ripples are obtained within 88.3<D/t<109.9 (124<λ The authors would like to thank Prof L.H. Han and Prof Wu Xu of Tsinghua University in China, Prof Hanbin Ge of Meijo University and Prof H. Kitoh of Osaka-City University in Japan for providing valuable information on slenderness limits. The first author sincerely acknowledge the financial assistance of the