The projection based multivariate data methods of principal component regression (PCR) and partial least squares regression (PLSR) are well established in the field of process monitoring. Use of score and loading plots for visualization is, however, complicated when many components are required for good predictions, and the information is therefore often compressed into less informative T
                     2 and contribution plots. The score information may, however, be further compressed by projection onto subspaces spanned by the vectors of prediction coefficients for the response variables. This is especially attractive in the case of two response variables, i.e. when the model reduction results in a single score-loading biplot. Contribution vectors for the process variables, as well as a confidence ellipse, may also be included in such a plot. As illustrated in an industrial data example, such a score-loading-contribution plot provides means of both failure detection and fault diagnosis.The projection based multivariate data methods of principal component regression (PCR) and partial least squares regression (PLSR) are well established in the field of process monitoring The strength of PCR and PLSR as compared with other regression methods, is the visualization possibilities given by use of score and loading plots, often combined in score-loading biplots with corresponding score and loading directions The basic insight utilized in the present paper is that the number of components for prediction and visualization need not be the same. The reduction of number of components is the major result of the often rather cumbersome orthogonal signal correction (OSC) methods, e.g. the OPLS algorithm In the present paper I will first recapitulate how any number of PCR or PLSR components can be reduced to the number of responses, without loss of prediction capability. Specifically will two responses require two final components only, and thus one final score plot and one final loading plot only. Using correspondence properties In summary the proposed monitoring method for industrial processes with two response variables involves projections in two steps: Projection of objects (rows) in the Further projections of the PCR or PLSR scores onto plane defined by The theoretical development is finally illustrated by use of industrial data from a mineral processing plant. With several responses Alternatively one may use a non-orthogonalized PLSR model with different matrices From Eqs. We shall now focus on the specific case with two response variables, and thus two coefficient vectors, and use the plane spanned by Projection of the original scores onto the plane spanned by It is, however, straightforward to show that   From the definition of Note that although the theorem is valid also for PLS2 models, it is not valid for a set of PLS1 models for the different responses. The reason for this is that the coefficient vectors then are located in different subspaces. For the same reason the theorem is not valid for a set of individual PCR models with different numbers of components. For a more thorough discussion and a more general theorem, see Ref. Since From this follows that the size of the deviation is determined by the value of Δ A comparison of a new sample with the calibration data set can be done by use of the Hotelling's With centered data the With two components only, the upper control limit can be shown as a confidence ellipse in the score-loading-contribution plot, as illustrated in the industrial data example in The following example uses multivariate regression data from a mineral processing plant Before proceeding with the example it is appropriate with a note on abnormal samples. When an ordinary PCR or PLSR model is used in a process monitoring application, there is a need to check that new objects are not too far away from the projection subspace, as compared with the modeling samples. This is often done by use of a squared projection error (SPE) plot A score-loading-contribution plot as described in The plot two samples later is shown in Finally note that the plots in For the case with two response variables, score projections onto a plane spanned by the two PCR coefficient vectors and use of two orthogonal loading vectors in that plane, result in a reduced model with two components and single score and loading plots with exact correspondence. In the score-loading biplot the position of the score will thus be exactly determined by contribution vectors for the regressor variables. For the general case with With two response variables, a confidence ellipse for failure detection may be added to the score-loading-contribution plot. When a failure is detected, the contribution vectors provide fault diagnosis. The theory is valid also for non-orthogonalized PLS2 models, while use of separate non-orthogonalized PLS1 models gives only approximate results. The reason for this is that the two coefficient vectors then will be located in different subspaces. This is the case also for a set of individual PCR models using different numbers of components.