We report the intercalation of dexamethasone sodium phosphate drug in Mg/Al layered double hydroxides (LDHs) through co-precipitation technique. The as-synthesized nanohybrid was characterized by XRD, FTIR and thermal analysis techniques, which reveal that the dexamethasone phosphate anions are accommodated within the brucite layers. The shifting in the stretching frequency of phosphate anion of the drug provides strong evidence that the drugs are bonded to LDHs through electrostatic force. The surface charge analysis suggested the possibility of charge manipulation in LDHs system by varying intercalated anions. In-vitro release study of as-synthesized nanohybrid particles suggests a significant reduction in release rate of dexamethasone phosphate anions from Mg/Al–Dexa LDHs and is due to confinement of drugs in the interlayer. The mechanism of drugs diffusion in nanohybrid is studied by using dissolution–diffusion kinetic model, which reveals that it is probably due to dissolution and intra-particle diffusion of anions in the physiological medium.Insertion of organic anions onto layered double hydroxides (LDHs) offers an attractive route to develop hybrid materials which have incredible practical importance in pharmaceuticals Dexamethasone sodium phosphate is a synthetic member of the glucocorticoid, which acts as an anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant on smooth muscle cell proliferation. It is known to play a key role in controlling the regulation of genes and cellular processes essential for cellular growth and division However, dexamethasone sodium phosphate is not compatible with various drugs such as daunorubicin HCl, doxorubicin HCl, metaraminol bitartrate, and vancomycin during storage and administration. Again intra-arterial administration of dexamethasone sodium phosphate has been demonstrated as effective for reducing restenosis in a rat model In this article, we report the synthesis and characterization of novel dexamethasone phosphate-LDHs (Mg/Al–Dexa) nanohybrid materials for sustained delivery. The hybrid particles thus obtained from dexamethasone sodium phosphate shows hydrophilic behaviour in physiological medium and we discuss the details of its effectiveness to drug loading and release kinetics. It exhibits hydrophilic behaviour in buffer (pH 7.4) and the kinetics of drug release involves the dissolution and intra-particle diffusion process. In addition, hybridization of dexamethasone phosphate with LDHs suggests the presence of single polymorphic form of drugs. We further extend this study to make dexamethasone phosphate chemically stable in the physiological conditions. The skeletal representation of new nanohybrid particles is shown in Co-precipitation method was used for preparing carbonate intercalated Mg/Al layered double hydroxide Novel dexamethasone phosphate intercalated Mg/Al layered double hydroxide nanohybrid material has been developed by using co-precipitation method and by controlling the synthesis condition. Dexamethasone sodium phosphate (98%) was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. In a typical experiment, 1 mmol dexamethasone sodium phosphate and 60 ml M.Q. water were kept in five necked flat bottom flask by passing nitrogen gas for 15 min. Salt solution of magnesium nitrate hexahydrate (2.2 mmol 569 mg) and aluminium nitrate nonahydrate (1.1 mmol, 418 mg) in 18 ml M.Q. water was prepared and after complete dissolution, it was added drop wise to the above solution under stirring. Solution pH was adjusted to 8.5 by simultaneous drop by drop addition of freshly prepared NaOH solution (0.5 M). The whole solution was aged at 65 °C for 24 h under inert atmosphere. Following this, the precipitates were separated using centrifugation/filtration and were washed four times to remove un-reacted drugs and impurities. The separated solid particles were dried in vacuum at room temperature and kept in refrigerator for further characterization. For comparison, physical mixture of dexamethasone sodium phosphate and Mg/Al–CO Structural information on prepared samples was obtained by Powder X-ray Diffraction (PXRD) pattern using a Philips PW 3040/60 diffractometer. The measurement was performed by using 40 kV, 30 mA with Cu-Kα radiation ( The ability of dexamethasone phosphate-LDHs to act an effective sustained release vehicle for drug delivery was investigated in a series of The XRD patterns of pristine CO FTIR spectra of LDHs, physical mixture, pure drug and Mg/Al–Dexa are compared in the range 400–3500 cm The thermal analysis of all samples is investigated by using TGA and their derivative plots are shown in The atomic weight percent obtained from elemental analysis is given in The particle size and surface morphology of the hybrid hydroxides observed by SEM and TEM are shown in The stability of nanoparticles in aqueous medium was characterized by particle size analyzer. The stable homogeneous Mg/Al–CO Several studies have demonstrated that ‘molecular mobility’ is the most important factor, which affects the physical and chemical stability of pharmaceutical compounds during storage Preliminary To understand the drug release mechanism from Mg/Al–Dexa LDHs nanohybrid systems, two types of dissolution–diffusion kinetic models First-order model demonstrates the release system where dissolution rate depends on the amount of drug present in the nanohybrids and can be expressed as Parabolic diffusion model express the diffusion-controlled phenomena of drug from clay nanohybrids and mathematically written as New nano structured hybrid materials were developed by intercalating anti-inflammatory drug in layered double hydroxide by using co-precipitation method. XRD patterns suggested the expansion of interlayer spacing from 7.6 Å for Mg/Al–CO We gratefully acknowledge The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at