Recently, various types of porous surfaces have been demonstrated for lubricant (e.g., oil) impregnated omniphobic surfaces. However, the retention of the lubricating liquid within the porous layer and the omniphobic durability still remain challenges. Here, the omniphobic durability of the oil-impregnated surfaces of various types of anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) nanostructures is investigated. The oil impregnation into nanoporous AAO with high porosity enhances droplet mobility by eliminating the pinning site of a contact line on the solid surface, whereas that with low porosity allows the pinning site to result in less mobility. In the cases of nanopillared AAO layers, although the oil-impregnation enhances the repellency to liquids, oil is prone to be depleted by external force such as fluid flow due to the nature of the interconnected oil through the passages between pillars, which limits the omniphobic durability. Among the various types of nanostructured AAO surfaces, the AAO with isolated pore geometry with high porosity exhibits the most durable omniphobicity for a wide range of liquids including organic liquids with low surface tensions. Moreover, the nanoporous AAO surface shows great anti-bacterial adhesion property, reducing the adhesion of bacteria (Escherichia coli K-12) up to 99.2% compared to a bare aluminum surface.Sustainable functional surfaces with self-cleaning capability have aroused significant attention in a wide range of applications, including biomedical equipment, solar cell, marine vessels, food container, anti-icing, hydrodynamic drag reduction, and water distillation Despite the several advantages of the oil-impregnation-based omniphobicity over the superhydrophobicity-based omniphobicity, the degradation and failure of the omniphobicity by depletion of the oil in the porous structures have also been reported More specifically, in this work, we examine two-dimensional nanoporous as well as three-dimensional nanopillared surfaces of anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) with regulated porosities and morphologies for the study of omniphobic durability. For two-dimensional nanoporous surfaces, conventional cylindrical nanoporous AAOs with two different (i.e., small and large) porosities are tested. For three-dimensional nanopillared surfaces, pillar-on-pore hybrid AAOs Aluminum foil (99.99%, thickness: 0.2 mm, Alfa Aesar) was used as a substrate for the fabrication of AAO nanostructures. The substrate was degreased in acetone with ultrasonication for 5 min followed by electropolishing in perchloric acid and ethanol mixture (1:4 in volumetric ratio) under constant voltage of 20 V for 8 min at 15 °C. Uniform and well-ordered pre-patterns on the aluminum substrate were first fabricated by anodizing in 0.3 M oxalic acid at 40 V at 0 °C for 12 h followed by the removal of the sacrificial oxide layer in the mixture of 1.8 wt% CrO To improve the affinity between the AAO nanostructures and the perfluorinated oil (Krytox GPL 100, DuPont) to be impregnated, a thin layer of Teflon (∼2 nm) was spin-coated on the AAO surfaces To fully fill the hydrophobized AAO layers with perfluorinated oil (Krytox GPL 100, DuPont), a solvent exchange method was employed, whose details have recently been reported elsewhere The wetting properties of the AAO surfaces were characterized by measuring apparent contact angles, contact angle hysteresis, and roll-off angle of a sessile droplet (∼5 μl) using a goniometer (Model 500, Rame-hart). Three liquids (deionized water, ethylene glycol, and hexadecane) with different surface tensions (72, 47, and 28 mN/m, respectively, at room temperature) were tested for the measurement. The contact angle hysteresis was measured from a contact line movement induced by increasing (advancing contact angle) and decreasing (receding contact angle) the volume of a droplet. The roll-off angle was measured when a droplet showed the evident movement over the substrate fully (at both uphill and downhill sides) without any pinning. All measurements were averaged over at ten different locations on each specimen. The wetting property (i.e., droplet mobility) of organic complex liquids, including ketchup (Heinz Tomato Ketchup, H.J. Heinz Company) and olive oil (Extra Virgin Olive Oil, California Olive Ranch) was also examined on the surfaces pre-inclined at 10°. To investigate the durability of the oil retention and immobilization on the nanostructured AAO surfaces, water droplets (∼5 μl) were continuously dropped on the surfaces which were pre-inclined at 5° by using a syringe at a distance of 8 mm. The flow rate from the syringe was regulated by a controller to dispense a droplet at around every 5 s. Droplet movements on the pre-inclined surfaces were recorded using a digital camcorder integrated with the goniometer (Model 500, Rame-hart). The number of droplets rolling off along the surfaces was counted until the droplet began to be pinned on the surfaces. A continuous jet flow was also applied to investigate the omniphobic durability, where a jet flow of water (1 l/min) was applied onto the surfaces pre-inclined at ∼5°, using a tube with 6 mm in diameter. Wetting and slipperiness of a water droplet on the surfaces were checked after applying the jet flow of water for 10 min. Frozen stock culture of   Without oil-impregnation, the static contact angle mostly increased with the increase in the porosity or air fraction of the nanostructured AAO surfaces, regardless of the surface tensions of the different liquids tested ( Without oil-impregnation, the advancing contact angle generally follows the same trend with the apparent contact angle of an as-deposited droplet, as shown in With oil-impregnation, such pinning is significantly reduced so that the droplet shows the high mobility (i.e., low contact angle hysteresis and roll-off angle) The durable omniphobicity (i.e., the stability of oil retained on the nanostructured surfaces) was further examined by continuously dripping water droplets (∼5 μl) on the same location of the oil-impregnated surfaces inclined at 5°. A liquid droplet moving on oil-impregnated surfaces also induces complex force interactions causing the wetting ridge and capillary suction so that the movement accompanies the dynamics and redistribution of oil along the droplet boundary In the cases of oil-impregnated surfaces ( The durability was also examined under the continuous jet flow of water applied on the surfaces at the inclination of ∼5°, as shown in The omniphobicity of the L-Po surface that shows the superior durability has further been examined for complex fluids such as ketchup and olive oil. As for the anti-stickiness and contamination resistance of the omniphobic surface of the oil-impregnated L-Po AAO surface, we have also examined the anti-bacterial adhesion property of the L-Po surface. As shown in Although a thin layer of Teflon-coating on nanostructured AAO enhances the chemical affinity of the perfluorinated oil for the impregnation to the nanostructures, the oil-impregnation into the less porous AAO (i.e., as-anodized AAO without pore widening) failed to completely eliminate the pinning sites of a solid surface to a liquid droplet, especially for the liquid with high surface tension. When the oil layer on the top surface is further sheared off by the dynamic motion of a droplet or continuous jet flow, the oil layer is more prone to be depleted away to lose the initial omniphobicity. In contrast, the more porous AAO surface (e.g., made with a pore-widening process) provides the stable retention of the lubricant oil on the surface even against such dynamic effects so that the durable omniphobicity is attained regardless of the surface tension of the applied liquids. Although the nanopillared AAO surfaces (made with a more elongated pore-widening process) also initially exhibit omniphobicity with the oil-impregnation, the pillared surface morphology is not effective to stably retain the lubricant oil on the surface under the dynamics effects and to show the durable omniphobicity, regardless of their dimensions, due to the open and interconnected nature of the surface morphology for the relatively easy redistribution of the oil. Previously, various techniques have been reported to realize oil-impregnated omniphobic surfaces on commercial materials This work was mainly supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:            