Two types of gold ores were subjected to iodide/iodine leaching at room temperature. The effects of three factors, including ore type (a carbonaceous and an oxide gold ores), iodide/iodine concentration, and the presence of oxygen in solution on gold leaching performance were investigated. The carbonaceous ore showed only 20% gold extraction, since gold–iodide complexes readily adsorb on organic matter. In contrast, gold extraction from the oxide ore in a solution containing 20g/L iodide and 4g/L iodine reached 77% in 6h and 89% in 24h. With iodate as the oxidant, no gold could be leached in 48h. When the iodate was partially converted to iodine by adding HCl to the solution, gold leaching was then started. Iodine reactions with the sulfide and ferrous minerals of the oxide ore slowly consumed iodine within 48h. Based on the obtained experimental data, a power law rate equation was applied to model the gold extraction kinetics in iodide/iodine solutions. The reaction was found to be first order with respect to tri-iodide concentration.Chlorine has been used to dissolve gold from ores and concentrates during the second half of the 19th century. This process was later replaced by the more economical alkaline cyanide leaching ( The rate of dissolution of gold by chlorine is much faster than that by cyanide ( Leaching of gold from an oxide gold ore in chloride/hypochlorite solutions was performed to study the effects of operating conditions on the leaching performance and gold complexes stability ( For gold–halide species in solution, the standard redox potentials of Au/Au Iodide/iodine solution has also been suggested for extraction of other precious metals such as platinum ( The fundamental aspects of gold leaching in iodide/iodine solutions have been thoroughly discussed in the literature. However, detailed information on the application of iodide/iodine system for extraction of gold from ores is scarce in literature. It was the objective of the present work to examine the technical feasibility of using iodide/iodine lixiviant system to leach gold from an oxide gold ore and a carbonaceous gold ore. The effects of iodide/iodine concentration and the presence of oxygen in solution on gold leaching performance were also investigated. Furthermore, the kinetics of gold extraction from the oxide ore was modeled. A 4″ core from an oxide gold deposit was crushed and ground to an average size of 150 Leaching experiments were performed in a custom-made 10 Before starting the experiments, pH, ORP, and DO probes were calibrated. 6.0 The experiments were run for up to 5 The total concentration of aqueous iodine species (IO The error in measurements of gold, iodine, and iodide concentrations as determined by measuring known samples was less than 3%. The reproducibility of gold leaching experiments was within 5%. Due to the coarse nature of gold in the ground ore (the Knelson tailing), gold head assay for each leaching experiment was calculated by adding the gold remained in solid residue after each leaching experiment and the gold leached. The calculated gold content for the oxide ore was in the range of 1–2 Seven gold leaching experiments were performed for up to 5 In As shown in At the constant initial iodine concentration of 4 The effect of presence of air on the performance of gold leaching was examined in experiment #6. The results from this experiment were then compared with those of experiment #1, as shown in The effect of iodate addition, instead of iodine, was investigated in experiment #7. With a starting solution of 20 The gold–iodide complexes are stable in solution and their adsorption on mineral surfaces can be ignored. As a result, the gold extraction data from the oxide ore in the present study does not involve gold re-precipitation or gold–iodide adsorption on the mineral surfaces. In the following parts, the chemistry of the system is first discussed. Then, the equilibrium relation between iodine species is elaborated. Finally, the power-law kinetic model is applied to the obtained experimental data. The Eh–pH diagrams of iodine and gold species at 25 The solubility of solid iodine in pure water at 25 However, as Reaction The equilibrium constant of Reaction Eq. The pH values in the current work were less than 9. Under this condition, the oxidation and reduction reactions in the gold–iodide–iodine system are presented by Reactions As a result, the overall reaction is: Under high concentrations of The value of the solubility product of Reaction The stoichiometric amount of iodine needed for Au extraction is very low. The high rate of decrease of the iodine concentration during the Au extraction experiments is mainly due to its consumption through Reaction The solubility of iodine in the form of tri-iodide depends on the concentration of iodide in solution, as understood in the equilibrium Reaction The equilibrium constant of Reaction If the total measured concentration of iodide for a given solution sample is [ The total measured concentration of active iodine in solution is the sum of aqueous iodine and tri-iodide (under neutral and acidic conditions). Hence, the equilibrium concentration of tri-iodide is According to Eq. In heterogeneous solid–fluid reactions, at least, the following three sequential steps occur: (a) diffusion of reactants through the fluid film surrounding the solid, (b) diffusion of reactants through the solid matrix, and (c) chemical reaction on the internal areas of the solid. The level of slurry agitation and the solid particle sizes were selected in such a way that diffusions of reactants in the fluid film and inside the particles were not the limiting steps (as confirmed by preliminary leaching experiments). Hence, the observed gold extraction kinetics is governed by the surface chemical reactions. Two classical fluid–solid reaction models, namely, homogeneous diffusion model (HDM) and shrinking core model (SCM) ( The empirical power-law rate equation ( Where − For non ideal systems, such as concentrated electrolyte solutions, rate equations should be expressed in terms of activities rather than concentrations ( For a batch operation, the mass balance for gold is, W Eq. The measured concentrations of dissolved iodine (with the same molarity as I For each leaching experiment from the time of 0.25 To obtain the optimum value for As Eq. To verify the kinetic modeling work, Eqs. At 1.0 The carbonaceous ore with 1.6