Using the polyoxometallate anions (POM) PW12O40
                     3−, SiW12O40
                     4−, H2W12O40
                     6− or P2Mo18O62
                     6− as photocatalysts and propan-2-ol as sacrificial electron donor, Pd2+ can be reduced and recovered in metallic form. The method leads to very low final palladium concentrations (<0.2ppm) while the soluble POM catalyst is self-separated from the pure precipitated metal that is obtained, retaining its catalytic function.
                  The process is efficient in both one-pot and two-pot system. However, reduced tungstates of the formula XW12O40
                     
                        n−, X = P, Si or H2 that react rapidly with oxygen are preferably photochemically produced in situ in a one pot system, where propan-2-ol/POM/Pd2+ species co-exist. On the other hand, the 2-equivalent reduced P2Mo18O62
                     6− is preferably used in a two-pot system, pre-formed upon photolysis of a propan-2-ol/POM system and in turn serves as an easily kept electron storage (since it is inert against reoxidation by oxygen) amenable to reduce Pd2+ ions at will.
                  Some novel results are marked concerning the environmental photocatalysis with POM: i) Upon photolysis of a one-pot system where propan-2-ol/POM/Pd2+ species co-exist and under the same conditions, the rate of photocatalytic reduction of palladium follows the photoxidizing ability of POM (PW12O40
                     3−>SiW12O40
                     4−>H2W12O40
                     6−). That is, POM catalysts that are more efficient in photo-oxidative degradation of organic compounds are also more effective in reductive recovery of palladium. ii) Selectivity in recovery of palladium among mixture of non-noble metal ions (Cu2+ and Ni2+), can be achieved even when they are in more than 10-fold excess.Palladium is a highly toxic metal, able to inactivate in PdCl Many of the conventional methods implemented to recover metals, such as hydrometallurgy, are inhibited by the presence of organic compounds and a pretreatment step to remove or destroy organics is generally required. In this context, the establishment of methods that could treat systems contaminated, both with organic and metal compounds, would be of strategic importance. Pyrometallurgy is a well-known process which is able to decontaminate systems from organic pollutants and simultaneously recover metals in an uncontrolled mode that demands extremely high temperatures (beyond 2000 Polyoxometallate anions (POM) are molecular metal oxides, relatively non-toxic and cheap, well-known for their diverse photocatalytic functions in several redox processes In the process, impinging light Thus the photoexcited catalysts can cause oxidative degradation of a plethora of organic compounds and organic pollutants. For POM, mineralization of organic pollutants takes place, generally, via reaction (2) The reduced POM can, in turn, transfer their excess electrons to metal ions, causing reduction–precipitation to zero metallic state Reaction (2) is a non-selective reaction due to the highly strong oxidants it involves, that is, (a) the excited states POM (h On the contrary, reaction (3) is a mild thermal process that could be easily controlled by selecting POM of appropriate redox properties. As these two reactions are separated in time and act independently, even when they take place in the same pot Of high practical importance is also to find catalysts that would be efficient both in the degradation of organic pollutants and simultaneous recovery of metals. Thus, a stronger reducing catalyst is expected to be more efficient in the recovery of metals, while a stronger photo-oxidant POM will be more efficient in the degradation of the organic pollutants. The experimental results reported in this paper, however, show that in the series of POM with Keggin structure studied, the stronger photo-oxidant (i.e. the 12-tungstophosphate) is more efficient in reducing and precipitating palladium ions, due to kinetic rather than thermodynamic factors. As will be shown, POM photocatalysts are effective in recovery of palladium both i) in a one-pot system upon photolysis of deaerated POM/organic substrate/Pd In order to investigate the thermal electron transfer efficiency between reduced POM and metal ions, different POM of variable reduction potentials are used. These POM are tungstates with the Keggin structure, of which the ground state redox potential vary with the central atom K PdCl Photolysis was performed with an Oriel 1000 A typical experiment was as follows: 4 For the direct study of reoxidation of the reduced phosphomolybdate a certain amount of P The photolytic process was followed by analysis of metal ions left in solution after filtration through 0.45 The degree of reduction of POM in photolyzed deaerated solutions was calculated from the known extinction coefficients of the one-equivalent reduced 12-tungstophosphate, PW The catalyst (SiW In a series of experiments, deaerated XW Illumination of a deaerated solution containing propan-2-ol/POM/Pd The most efficient photocatalysts in recovery of palladium are PW Illumination ( In a similar experiment with the photochemically formed 2-equivalent reduced phosphomolybdate P Two-equivalent reduced molybdate (P We denote here that POM anions serve as electron relays in the irreversible electron transfer from propan-2-ol to Pd In the absence of palladium ions solely reaction (2) takes place, responsible for the production of reduced POM and the blue coloration of the photolyzed solution. The rate for the formation of the blue colored POM (e In the presence of Pd Dioxygen reoxidises fast the reduced POM Keggin tunstates Prolonged irradiation leads to complete decontamination from Pd POM can serve as excellent probes for redox reactions as their reduction–reoxidation does not involve break or formation of chemical bonds and pure electron transfer takes place. Since the redox properties of POM can be widely and precisely varied, depending on the nature of polyanions, manipulation of the efficiency of the process can be achieved by selecting POM of appropriate redox potentials. Probing reaction (3) separately, the photochemically produced 1-electron reduced tungstates were rapidly reoxidized when mixed with Pd This is also the case for the reduction of other metal ions, such as Cu A similar trend was also observed during reaction of reduced POM with another oxidizing reagent O The order of increasing photosensitivity for 12-tungstates [reaction (2)] is PW However, in one-pot system where both reactions take place, the efficiency of the photocatalytic recovery of palladium follows the order PW An attractable issue in POM photocatalysis is the potentiality of combining a photochemical [reaction (2)] with a thermal process [reaction (3)] in a way that they can act either in one-pot or separately. In the latter case, where reduced POM is firstly produced and then metal ions are added to reoxidise the reduced catalyst, POM can act as stoichiometric reagents. One attractive candidate for this purpose, from a practical point of view, is the 2-electron-reduced P On the other hand, PW Elemental palladium is effectively recovered from an illuminated deaerated solution of propan-2-ol/SiW On the other hand, the photochemically or otherwise produced 2-electron-reduced P We thank the Ministry of Development, General Secretariat of Research and Technology of Greece for supporting part of this work. A.T. is grateful to NCSR Demokritos, Institute of Physical Chemistry, for a Post-Doctoral fellowship.