There is great interest in metallic multilayer thin films with the layer thickness on the order of nanometers due to their high hardness and strength. The yield strength deviates from Hall–Petch and Orowan predictions with layer thickness as the controlling factor, and other factors are in need to explain this phenomenon. In this work, the effect of dislocation source length on yield strength of multilayer system in the nanoscale regime is investigated using a three dimensional cellular automaton dislocation model. Different initial dislocation source lengths are assumed in the model for the metallic multilayer thin films with different layer thicknesses. The multilayer system studied here is composed of alternating A and B components with FCC structure, cube-on-cube orientation relationship, and the same layer thickness. The results show that the initial dislocation source length can provide an explanation for the above deviations.Different features can be the controlling factor in Hall–Petch relation for multilayer systems. If the layers are polycrystalline, the smaller feature of layer thickness and grain size is generally the controlling factor of yield strength. Similarly, twin spacing is the determining feature in Cu foils studied by Zhang et al. Section This section sketches the general features of material system studied here. Yield strength of the multilayer system can be predicted analytically with detailed derivations in Ref. The 3D cellular automaton dislocation dynamic model A detailed study is performed on investigating the effect of dislocation source length on the yield strength of multilayer system with nanometer scale layer thickness. In the modeling, the ratio between For each layer thickness investigated, the yield strength first decreases with the increase of dislocation source length, and then reaches a constant limit value. This is due to the fact that there are two parts contributing to the yield strength. The first part is based on dislocation source length, and the second part is based on the lattice parameter mismatch as indicated in Eq.  For a multilayer system, the yield strength versus layer thickness relation has different trend for different system when layer thickness is several nanometers. One mechanism is that dislocation source length plays a controlling role, which is indicated through the simulation results for two layer thicknesses of a multilayer system. Both analytic and modeling predictions indicate that dislocation source length influences the yield strength of multilayer systems. For a multilayer system with a specific layer thickness, yield strength first decreases with the increase of dislocation source length, and then reaches some constant value. When layer thickness decreases in a multilayer system in the modeling, for example from 50 The author is gratitude for the opportunity to presenting this research in Structural Materials Division Symposium: Mechanical Behavior of Nanostructured Materials, in Honor of Carl Koch: Plasticity and Deformation Mechanisms at Small Length Scale, during TMS 2007 Spring Meeting.