When dry illite is wetted, its layer structure contracts along the c-axis by up to 0.2Å. This behavior contrasts with that of smectite which shows interlayer swelling on wetting. Layer contraction has also been found to occur in glauconite and celadonite that are structurally more disordered than illite, as well as with phengite and artificially degraded hydromuscovite. In contrast, muscovite proper does not show contraction. The contraction is ascribed to the deprotonation of hydronium ions (H3O+
                     →H2O+H+) occupying interlayer K+ positions. The hydronium ion is approximately 5% larger than the neutral water molecule. This difference in size is proportional to the magnitude of contraction. The change in molecular volume and interlayer separation of illite particles may explain the anomalous decrease in density after dehydration under pressure. This paper reports on wetting-induced contraction in illite and related layer silicates, using humidity-controlled X-ray diffraction.Illite is a common constituent of the clay fraction of soils and sediments, and has been the subject of many investigations ( The term ‘illite’ was originally proposed by The crystal structure of the true mica mineral illite can be described as a stack of tetrahedral-octahedral-tetrahedral (TOT) composite layers, held together by a range of possible interlayer species compensating the net negative charge of the TOT composites. Chemical bonding within the TOT-composite layer is predominantly covalent, lending rigidity against mechanical comminution and abrasion, as well as chemical stability against alteration. The composite layer consists of two tetrahedral layers with a single octahedral layer, hence micas are commonly referred to as ‘2:1 layer minerals’. Different stacking orders of the TOT composite layer gives rise to polytypism. Details on crystalline structure and chemistry of micas are elaborated in Hydromuscovite has been referred to as ‘hydrous mica’ since the 4th International Congress of Soil Science in Amsterdam/NL in 1950 (see e.g. In contrast, chlorite is not a mica but defines its own hydrous-phyllosilicate group (e.g. In commenting on some discrepancies in As the name suggests, humidity controlled X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis allows the specimen to be examined in an atmosphere at a strictly controlled relative humidity (RH). Using this technique, From the more than one hundred pure illites and smectite-bearing illites in the authors' clay samples collections, many show interlayer contraction on wetting, yet do not appear to contain any expansible smectite layers. For the present investigation, ten different pure illite samples (including celadonite and glauconite) were selected, together with one sample of muscovite and phengite. A sample of sericitic hydromuscovite separated from white phyllite collected at Jutulhogget along county road Rv3 through Rendalen, central Norway was also examined, in order to verify whether the applied sample preparation protocol would attribute chemical and structural degradation, leading to analytical artifacts. Sample numbers, main constituent mineral, location, origin, impurity minerals, and the Munsell color codes of the selected samples are tabulated in The clay fraction, comprising particles < Oriented specimens for humidity controlled XRD analysis were mounted by placing an aqueous dispersion containing ~ The thus prepared specimen was then firmly affixed in a closed specimen chamber. Relative humidity of the chamber atmosphere was precisely controlled by flushing with a mixture of dry and wet N Mounted specimens were measured on a custom-built θ-θ goniometer, consisting of two one-circle Huber 420 goniometers with 200 The goniometer was equipped with a long-fine focus X-ray tube (non-monochromated, Ni-filtered CuKα, operated at 40 After acquisition, diffractograms were corrected for Lorentz polarization ( A collection of ten polypropylene vials containing bulk powders from seven of the samples investigated here (in addition to three others not reported here) was submitted to the NGU laboratory for bulk whole-rock chemical analysis (after sudden decease of lead author RAK). Macroscopic color of all sample powders was assessed using the Glass tablets were analyzed in a PANalytical Axios Minerals XRF instrument with a Rh-tube operated at 50 Oxide weight percentages cannot be recalculated reliably into atoms per formula unit (apfu) to represent mineral composition formulae, as the identity and respective modal contents of all mineral impurities present in the bulk sample powders are not currently known. Data from X ray diffraction analysis are presented in The illite of BB-1 from Silver Hill in Montana, USA has been analyzed by many authors (e.g., The graph in The graph in   The basal reflection of the muscovite remains unchanged at the three RH investigated, whereas that of the phengite reveals a distinct contraction of 0.024  Subsequently, a portion of the BB-3 sample material was ground in an agate mill under distilled water for 10 The black shale illite from Spain (BB-2, not shown graphically) behaves similarly to the hydromuscovite in In contrast, the diffractograms of a poorly crystalline illite from Argentina (BB-4) in  The inset in Diffractograms for synthetic NH The two mineral phases behave very differently upon wetting. The illite/smectite mixed-layer component expands by 0.734  Results from bulk ‘whole-rock’ chemical analysis of selected sample materials by XRF In general, Na content is near LLD in all samples, except BB-9. In contrast, K content is in the same range for most samples, but nearly double the amount in samples BB-5 (phengite) and BB-10 (celadonite). This may be attributable to the presence of K-feldspar or muscovite (maximum theoretical K Samples BB-4, BB-5, BB-9, BB-10, and BB-11 are all colored various shades of yellowish to greenish (cf. Oxide concentrations of typical green chromophoric species like Ni (e.g. pimelite), Cr (e.g. fuchsite) are always below their respective limits of detection (LLD) and therefore omitted from Only the concentrations of Ba and Zr oxides are above their respective LLD, suggesting presence of traces of baryte BaSO Illite is a fine-grained, non-expanding, dioctahedral (2:1) interlayer-deficient mica (cf.  Apart from diminishing particle size, wet grinding of micaceous minerals also comprises an enrichment in interlayer hydronium (H Following Structural modeling studies as referred to in the introduction ( For the identification of illite/smectite mixed-layer minerals, sample materials are glycolated following a standardized procedure (eg. Furthermore, Kühnel and Van der Gaast have shown in earlier work (1993, also see: 1996, 2001, 2005) for humidity-controlled X-ray diffraction on illite at 100–0–100% RH (i.e., wet-to-dry-to-wet over an extended series of intermediate RH values, notably: 100–90–100–80–90–65–80–50–65–35–50–20–35–10–20–0–20–10–35–20–50–35–65–50–80–65–90–80–100–100–100% RH) at otherwise ambient conditions, is reproducible and the expansion/contraction reversible, as opposed to some other minerals (e.g., ettringite, where exsiccation leads to irreversible crystal-structural damage that is not restored upon wetting). Given existing time-constraints on the use of XRD instrumentation, as well as for reason of analytical practicality, only the drying sequence 100–50–0% RH has been analyzed. However, based on the above, there is no indication that wetting 0–50–100% RH would give different results for the materials investigated here. The largest contraction in basal spacing measured in this study is 0.204 Furthermore, Based on the newly acquired data and above discussion, interlayer contraction of illite on wetting is interpreted as being related to the ‘double role’ of protons as suggested by In summary, humidity-controlled X-ray diffraction is able to distinguish coexisting expanding and contracting clay mineral constituents in a single specimen. This technique is also capable of distinguishing coexisting illites of different origin (e.g., detrital, authigenic, or neoformed). Overall, there is a contraction along the c-axis upon wetting from 0–100% RH, and a re-expansion on drying. Both the contraction and expansion are reversible and reproducible. The minerals here investigated here can be ordered by increasing amount of wetting contraction as: In addition, the extent of contraction/expansion varies for different types of illite. For instance, authigenic illites with d(001) spacing of > Humidity-controlled X-ray diffraction clearly indicates that the layered structure of illites and related dioctahedral interlayer-deficient micas contracts along the c-axis on wetting, and expands again on drying. These observations may be ascribed to the reversible deprotonation-protonation of interlayer water occupying potassium-deficient sites in these minerals. The wetting-induced contraction of illite and related dioctahedral interlayer-deficient micas is a new phenomenon, whose implications merit further investigation. The authors gratefully acknowledge