Stable dispersed slurries were prepared from a mixture of commercial Al2O3 and Y2O3 powders by the ball milling process. Ammonium poly meta acrylate (Dolapix CE64) as the dispersant and different amounts of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS)+0.1 wt% MgO as the sintering aids were added to the slurries. The effects of TEOS and MgO addition on the fabrication of transparent polycrystalline YAG ceramics were investigated by slip casting and vacuum sintering. The results showed that almost all slurries containing TEOS and TEOS + MgO had a near-Newtonian behavior, but the slurry containing only MgO had shear thickening with a thixotropic behavior. Also, by increasing the amounts of TEOS, due to the creation of steric repulsion, the viscosity was decreased. In comparison, TEOS + MgO slurries had lower viscosity than the TEOS ones. This was due to both the release of more ethanol and MgO action as a dispersant agent among the particles of yttria and alumina. All samples were pure YAG phase. The maximum transmittance at 1064 nm (≈83%) was obtained for the sample of 0.5 wt% TEOS+0.1 wt% MgO. A nearly pore-free microstructure with high relative final density (99.99%), a narrow grain size distribution (2.5–7.5 μm), with the average grain size of 4.5 μm, was achieved in this sample.In the pseudo-binary system, the most stable compound is yttrium aluminum garnet (Y Polycrystalline YAG ceramic, in comparison to the single crystal, has been evaluated as a multi-functional material because it can be manufactured by a low-cost method involving a single or composite phase with a large size product, and it has the maximum ions doping concentration too [ The development of the recent technologies has made it possible to get YAG ceramics of the desired quality complex shape and large size in manufacturing [ The most reported papers on YAG forming are have been focused on dry pressing. It means that dry pressing is probably the most common method used for ceramic consolidation [ Moreover, to obtain high density and transparent YAG ceramics, it is necessary to use different sintering aids such as CaO [ However, the effects of TEOS and MgO addition on the slurry rheological behavior and the properties of the slip casted green and sintered bodies have not been evaluated yet for the transparent YAG ceramics. Therefore, in the present study, the effects of TEOS and MgO as the compound sintering aids on the properties of the slurry and green casted body, phase transformation, densification, transmittance, microstructure evolution, and the grain size distribution of the YAG ceramics were examined. High-purity α-Al The pH values of the slurries were measured using a digital pH meter (PHS-3E, Precise scientific instrument Corp, Shanghai). The viscosities of the slurries with different additives were measured by using a rotary viscometer (DVIIT, Brookfield, USA). Rheological properties of the slurries were determined by a rotational stress-controlled rheometer with a shear rate of 264 s  The viscosities of the slurries with 60 wt% mixture of yttria, alumina, and different amounts of Dolapix were measured. To describe the influence of the additives on the slurry, the rheological measurements were performed. By placing yttria and alumina in an aqueous medium, hydrolysis occurred according to the reactions (1) and (2). Regarding reactions (3) and (4), the yttrium and aluminum hydroxide groups caused the partial negative charge on the surface of the particles by the adsorption of OH By adding TEOS (Si(OC In the sample T0M, similar to reactions (1) and (2), MgO was hydrolyzed according to the reaction (7) by absorbing the H However, it seemed that by the addition of MgO to the sample containing different amounts of TEOS, another mechanism was involved. As mentioned before, MgO is more hydrated than Al Since the radius of the Mg(OH) This leads to the higher probability of attacking TEOS by magnesium hydroxide with a negative surface charge and therefore, more ethanol could be released (reaction 9). In fact, as more ethanol is released, less solid loading is used, even by one percent, this causes the reduction of viscosity. Also, according to the reaction (9), since the hydration of MgO is more [ In fact, by the simultaneous use of TEOS and MgO as the additives, more ethanol was released. Not only was the steric repulsion among the aluminum and yttrium hydroxide with the negative charge created, but also MgO acted as a dispersant agent among the particles of yttria and alumina, causing to more steric repulsion between them. Therefore, the viscosity was decreased more.   For the solid-state reaction synthesis of YAG powders, it would need a temperature higher than 1600 °C. It seems that three successive transformations under sintering could be happen as follows [ At temperatures higher than 1250 °C, to form a YAG phase, the remaining Al    According to the Lambert–Beer equation and Mie theory, the amount of transition is inversely related to the fraction of porosity, the second phases, and grain boundaries [ In the present study, as no secondary phases such as YAM or YAP were detected and the impurity phases were very low and negligible, so we assumed that the γ Also, According to the literature [ According to Equation   The optimum content of MgO plays a key role in the sintering of transparent YAG ceramics. The lower amount of MgO is not able to form enough liquid phases and cannot enwrap and delay the grain boundary movement. This causes the remaining pores at grain boundaries at the final stage of sintering. On the other hand, if the MgO percentage is more than the usual amount, there will be a reaction between MgO and Al Transparent polycrystalline YAG ceramics containing different amounts of TEOS and TEOS+0.1 wt% MgO as the sintering aids were prepared by the slip casting method and consequently vacuum sintered at 1715 °C for 10 h. The measurement of the suspension viscosity as a function of the dispersant concentration indicated that, in order to get the minimum apparent viscosity, the optimum dispersant content should range from 1.5 wt % to 1.7 wt% at the pH range of 9–10. The effects of different amounts of TEOS and TEOS+0.1 wt% MgO on the viscosity of the suspensions prepared with the 1.5 wt% dispersant at the pH of 10 were investigated. An almost near-Newtonian behavior was demonstrated for all slurries containing TEOS and TEOS + MgO, whereas shear thickening with a thixotropic behavior was observed for the slurry containing only MgO. Also, it was shown that by increasing the amounts of TEOS, the viscosity was decreased due to the creation of the steric repulsion. Furthermore, it was observed that in comparison, TEOS+ 0.1 wt% MgO slurries had a lower viscosity than TEOS slurries. There were two major reason: (i) more ethanol was released, and (ii) MgO acted as a dispersant agent among the particles of yttria, causing the steric repulsion. The sample T7M (0.7 wt% TEOS+0.1 wt% MgO) had the least viscosity and the highest green relative density. For all samples, the almost pure YAG phase was obtained by sintering under the vacuum atmosphere at 1715 °C for 10 h and no intermediate phases such as YAM and YAP were observed. SEM micrograph also showed that the sample T5M (0.5 wt% TEOS+0.1 wt% MgO) had a dense, homogenized, and pore-free microstructure, as well as the narrowest grain size distribution (2.5–7.5 μm) with the average grain size of 4.5 μm. It had the highest in-line transmittance, which was approximately 83.48% at 1064 nm.