In this paper, the authors undertake a critical review of the Starkey test and the publicly available information related to the test equipment, procedures, and scale-up methodology. The following recommendations are proposed to improve the test method:
                  
                     
                        
                           1.
                           The test should be conducted for a fixed grinding time of 120min, regardless of the time required to reach 80% passing Tyler #10 mesh.
                        
                        
                           2.
                           The test should be conducted with constant time intervals of 15, 30, 60, and 120min (cumulative) in order to facilitate the application of geostatistics to the resulting index values. This would also allow for multiple tests to be conducted in parallel (through the use of multiple mill rollers).
                        
                        
                           3.
                           The feed size should be prepared using a more rigorous procedure to ensure constant mass in each of the course screen fractions.
                        
                        
                           4.
                           The curve of finished product versus time should be modeled and the resulting index calculated from the model for a standard feed size distribution, so that errors attributable to the sample preparation step are minimized.
                        
                     
                  
                  The improved feed preparation steps and the use of constant grinding intervals enables the development of a faster alternative to the standard test that is more cost effective for high volume geometallurgical programs.
                  In addition to the updated procedures, a new calibration equation is proposed, with calibration factors for pebble crushing, fine feed and autogenous grinding, based on information in the public literature. Detailed descriptions of the test equipment, procedures, and calibration are provided, and it is proposed that this become an open standard procedure for SAG mill hardness testing, particularly for soft to medium-hard ores, over which range the test is most effective.The test should be conducted for a fixed grinding time of 120 The test should be conducted with constant time intervals of 15, 30, 60, and 120 The feed size should be prepared using a more rigorous procedure to ensure constant mass in each of the course screen fractions. The curve of finished product versus time should be modeled and the resulting index calculated from the model for a standard feed size distribution, so that errors attributable to the sample preparation step are minimized. Since the Starkey mill was introduced more than 15 A second objective of this research program is to provide a critical review of the test method, equipment specifications, data interpretation, and calibration equation, insofar as permitted by the information available in the public domain. The Starkey laboratory mill has been used since 1994 to predict the autogenous mill specific energy ( The test should not be confused with the SAGDesign test developed by Starkey & Associates, which is of similar genesis but employs a different analytical approach ( The Starkey laboratory mill dimensions and operating conditions are described in great detail in the references listed at the end of this paper. The important characteristics are described below, and scaled drawings are included in The mill has a 304.8 The mill reportedly rotates at 70% of critical velocity ( For large mills the ball diameter is negligible relative to the mill diameter, and the equation is often simplified to ( This equation yields the published mill rotational speed of 54 To investigate the impact energy imparted to the ore particles as a function of the mill rotational speed, the mill was outfitted with a transparent acrylic lid and rotated with a ball charge at various fractions of critical speed (no ore charge was used to avoid visibility loss because of dust). High definition video was used to measure the release angle ( The impact energy ( Knowing the impact energy per collision, the energy per unit time (  The original procedures for the test consist of stage crushing the sample to two control points—100% minus ¾ The above procedures were reviewed in a previous publication by one of the authors ( The curve of mass retained on Tyler #10 mesh (1.7 The practice of performing several iterations near the end of the test (the three points above 120 The test should be conducted for constant grinding time intervals, as this facilitates the mathematical or geostatistical handling of the data (it generates additive parameters, rather than a non-additive index values). These recommendations have been adopted in the present work. The times selected for the fixed grinding periods are 15, 30, 60 and 120 This problem has been mitigated, in part, by introducing a small change to the feed preparation procedures. The new procedures require the feed to be prepared to a controlled size distribution. The new size distribution was selected to reflect the average size distribution from the authors’ database of SGI tests conducted for commercial projects before the new procedures were implemented. It is shown in The proposed standard test procedures are appended. Several equation forms were investigated for modeling the SGI test, including those described previously by Analysis of a data set of approximately 150 tests conducted using the SGI mill indicate that it is possible to produce a lower cost, lower precision version of the SGI test by performing a single grinding iteration with the standard feed charge for a constant time interval of 60 By adopting the short test procedures, only minor loss of fidelity is incurred, as the empirical correlation shows a coefficient of determination of almost 0.98 ( Notwithstanding the marginally lower precision, the modified test procedures have a superior value proposition. For example (see The original calibration equation was developed during the mid-1990s under sponsorship by the Mining Industry Technology Council of Canada (MITEC) and the results were published in the proceedings of the SAG ‘96 conference held in Vancouver, Canada. The relevant equation expressed the mill power draw per unit throughput as a function of the SPI™ and The equation, shown in the form given by The calibration equation shown above is the primary calibration equation and is only valid for the reference circuit consisting of a SAG mill operating in closed circuit without pebble crushing and with nominal 6  With fine feed, With pebble crushing, Presumably, More recently, data from Los Bronces’ SAG mill circuit has become available ( The mill “efficiency” (if Counterintuitively, the mill efficiency was higher (lower As expected, the apparent transfer size of the SABC-AB configuration was finer than that of the SABC-B configuration, reflecting the reduced flow of coarse pebble crusher product to the ball mills. This observation may partly explain the lower The Bagdad mill consists of five autogenous grinding lines followed by ball milling. Using the available SPI and plant survey data ( While the relationship between predicted and actual specific energy is weaker with the Bagdad data (this is likely a result of differences in pebble crusher loads), the average At this point, it should be noted that there is some scatter in Note that when modeling for design purposes, one must also consider the error inherent in the estimated mill power draws; For a complete analysis and discussion of the error, including the error as it relates to the forecasting time period, refer to One of the limitations of the scale-up methodology described above is that the transfer size must be known in order to estimate the specific energy required for a given SAG mill circuit. One can either select a transfer size, and then determine the mill power required to achieve it (given a throughput target), or one can select the installed power and tonnage and then use the resulting transfer size to size the ball mills (presumably on the basis that the mill operators would then select the grates, pebble ports, crushing configuration, and classifier opening such that the calculated transfer size can actually be achieved in practice). The transfer size conundrum results from fact that in practice the transfer size is not exogenous—it is itself a function of the mill throughput and ore hardness (for a fixed system). Over long time periods it may be reasonable to assume that the grates, pebble ports, and other system parameters will be optimized to achieve the desired mean transfer size, but for simulations targeting specific process configurations or shorter timeframes (such as those performed on point samples representing ore reserve blocks or “snapshot” process audits), the energy based scale-up methodology described above should be used in conjunction with either phenomenological or semi-empirical models that incorporate breakage and selection functions in some form or another. For this purpose the authors favor an energy-based phenomenological breakage model that will be presented as part of a future publication. This paper has provided a comprehensive review of the publicly available information related to the Starkey test and calibration methodology. It has also provided an analysis of test data generated using the SGI test mill constructed by the authors as shown in the appended schematics. A case has been made for making the following changes to the terminology, procedures, and scale-up methods of the test: The terms “Starkey mill,” “Starkey test,” and “Starkey index” are obsolete, confusing, and should be dropped from the lexicon. The authors have proposed the terms “SAG grindability index” or “SGI” mill and test. To reduce error, the feed size distribution for the test should be fixed for the coarse fractions above the Tyler #10 mesh screen. The test should be conducted for fixed grinding time intervals of 15, 30, 60, and 120 The grinding curve should be modeled using a variant of the Swebrec™ equation and the SGI extrapolated or interpolated from the fitted equation. A shorter, lower cost/lower precision version of the test has been recommended for large geometallurgical projects that require very large datasets and can tolerate relatively minor reductions in test fidelity. An updated calibration equation has been provided, together with calibration factors for finer feed, pebble crushing, and fully autogenous milling. The appendices contain detailed drawings of the laboratory mill, a summary of published calibration data, and the test procedures for the standard and short versions of the SGI test. The authors suggest that these should constitute a freely available, open standard SGI test. See The following construction drawings depict the SAG grindability test mill constructed to perform the research described in this paper. The drawings were reconstructed from the publicly available sources as described in the body of this manuscript. Standard SGI test procedures: Using a laboratory jaw crusher, stage crush the sample to approximately 100% minus ¾ Screen the material on the following screens, and create a controlled SGI feed size distribution using standard laboratory splitting equipment and procedures: Place the 5 Using least squares methods, fit Eqs.  