A cloud point extraction procedure was presented for the preconcentration of copper, nickel and cobalt ions in various samples. After complexation with methyl-2-pyridylketone oxime (MPKO) in basic medium, analyte ions are quantitatively extracted to the phase rich in Triton X-114 following centrifugation. 1.0molL−1 HNO3 nitric acid in methanol was added to the surfactant-rich phase prior to its analysis by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS). The adopted concentrations for MPKO, Triton X-114 and HNO3, bath temperature, centrifuge rate and time were optimized. Detection limits (3SDb/m) of 1.6, 2.1 and 1.9ngmL−1 for Cu2+, Co2+ and Ni2+ along with preconcentration factors of 30 and for these ions and enrichment factor of 65, 58 and 67 for Cu2+, Ni2+ and Co2+, respectively. The high efficiency of cloud point extraction to carry out the determination of analytes in complex matrices was demonstrated. The proposed procedure was applied to the analysis of biological, natural and wastewater, soil and blood samples.The importance of the determination of trace metal concentration in natural water samples is increasing in contamination monitoring studies. The determination of trace of these ions in biological samples is particularly difficult because of the complex matrix and the usually low concentration of these elements in such samples, which requires sensitive instrumental techniques and frequently a preconcentration step Solvent extraction is widely used in hydrometallurgy The solubility of non-ionic surfactants in aqueous solution is depressed above a well-defined temperature known as cloud point temperature (CPT). By setting the solution at a temperature above CPT, the solution separates into a concentrated phase containing most of the surfactant, the coacervate phase and a dilute aqueous phase. Cloud point extraction (CPE) arises from the partitioning of a solute between the two water-based phases depending on its affinity to the surfactant. Such an extraction offers a convenient alternative to more conventional extraction systems. Aqueous solutions of non-ionic and zwitterionic surfactants possess the ability to decrease their solubility quickly and become turbid when heated above a temperature referred to as the cloud-point For higher temperatures, two distinct phases are formed, one consisting almost totally of the surfactant and the other containing a small portion equal to the critical micellar concentration (CMC) In the present work a simple, selective and sensitive CPE method for preconcentration and determination of copper, nickel and cobalt ions in various real samples using methyl-2-pyridylketone oxime (MPKO) as selective and sensitized complexing agent in basic media was established. All solutions were prepared with deionized water. Except if otherwise stated, analytical-grade acetone, acids and other chemicals used in this study were obtained from Merck, Darmstadt, Germany. The calibration curve was established using standard solutions prepared in 1 A Shimadzu AA-670 atomic absorption spectrometer equipped with deuterium background correction and copper, cobalt and nickel hollow-cathode lamps as the radiation source were used for absorbance measurements at wavelength of 324.8, 240.7 and 232.0 A Metrohm 692 pH meter furnished with a combined glass-saturated calomel electrode was used for pH measurements. The conditions for flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) determination of these ions are presented in The pH measurement method for speciation of different forms of complexes between copper, nickel and cobalt ions and MPKO were carried out according to our previous publication A typical cloud point experiment required the following steps: an aliquot of 15 Analysis of water sample for determination of analyte contents was performed as following: 400 Twenty grams of homogenized soil sample or 20 Spinach sample was purchased from Gachsaran, Iran. Afterwards, they were taken in small mesh. A 40 A 20 A 50 In order to show that complexation between ions, the metal complexation with ligand, as model has been investigated. Since these mentioned ions have similar properties, similar results for them can be achieved. The possible complexation form and their stability between analyte ions and MPKO have been investigated using potentiometry. Results of Due to the existence of a donating nitrogen atom as well as phenyl group and C These results show that it could form a fairly stable and selective complex with copper, nickel and cobalt ions in alkaline pH. Thus, we decided to examine its capability as a suitable reagent for sensitive and extractive CPE of copper, nickel and cobalt ions. Cloud point extraction yield depends on the pH at which complex formation occurs. pH plays a unique role on metal-chelate formation and subsequent extraction. CPE of copper, nickel and cobalt ions was performed in solutions of pH ranging from 3 to 11. The MPKO was employed as a complexing agent for copper, nickel and cobalt ions CPE. The concentration of MPKO was evaluated over the range 0.3–9.0 The non-ionic surfactant Triton X-114 was chosen because of its commercial availability in a high purified homogeneous form, low toxicological properties and cost. Also, the high density of the surfactant-rich phase, facilitates phase separation by centrifugation. Additionally, the cloud point (23–26 The influence of NaCl as electrolyte was investigated in the concentration range of 0.5–5% (w/v). Quantitative recoveries of copper, nickel and cobalt ions were obtained at 1.5% (w/v) NaCl concentration. The signal decreased considerably for increasing NaCl concentrations (2–5%, w/v). This effect might be explained by the additional surface charge when the NaCl concentration is very high, thus changing the molecular architecture of the surfactant and consequently the micelle formation process. It is necessary to emphasize that different blank solutions were also evaluated and no significant signal was obtained. In this way, 1.5% (w/v) NaCl concentration was used in all further experiments. Since the surfactant-rich phase obtained after the cloud point preconcentration contains a high concentration of Triton X-114 and, at the same time, the volume obtained is rather small, 1.0 The cloud point temperature of Triton X-114 is 67.3 It is required to preconcentrate trace amount of copper, nickel and cobalt ions with high efficiency in short time. Therefore, CPE on a set of experiments of 15 In view of the high selectivity provided by flame atomic absorption spectrometry, the only interference may be attributed to the preconcentration step, in which the cations may react with MPKO which may lead to decrease in extraction efficiency. There is some report which indicates that high selectivity for these ions complexation with oximes in high alkaline pH could be achieved CPE procedures for copper, nickel and cobalt ions determination in the high salt content samples can be strongly affected by the matrix constituents of the sample. Interferences studied were those related to the preconcentration step, cations that may react with MPKO or species that may react with analytes and decrease the extraction efficiency. To perform this study, 15 Calibration graphs were obtained by preconcentrating 15 The preconcentration factor for all ions calculated by dividing the aqueous phase volume to the final volume of preconcentrated phase is 30, while the enhancement factor as the ratio of slope of calibration curve of the analytes after preconcentration to that prior preconcentration is and enhancement factor are 65, 58 and 67 for Cu We have explored the feasibility of the methodology using preconcentration with MPKO in surfactant media for the determination of copper, nickel and cobalt ions in different matrices treated according to Section The micellar extraction of copper, nickel and cobalt ions with MPKO into the phase of non-ionic surfactant Triton X-114 has been investigated. Complete metals extraction was shown to be achieved with MPKO due to the hydrophobic complex compound formation. The molar ratio of the extracted complex has been determined. The sensitivity, metrological characteristics, ecological safety, simplicity, and convenience of the suggested procedure are competitive with respect to the methods based on the extraction with organic solvents. The results presented have confirmed its applicability to the separation and preconcentration of copper, nickel and cobalt ions, which due to its high stability constant and high pH dependency with high selectivity loading and elution has been carried out. In a view glance to the results presented in