Hyperforin is a major metabolite of the medicinal plant Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s Wort) and has recently been found in hormone induced root cultures. The objective of this study is to identify a downstream process for the production of a hyperforin-rich extract with maximum extraction efficiency and minimal decomposition. The maximum extraction time was found to be 60min. The comparison of two equipment concepts for the extraction and solvent evaporation was performed employing two different solvents. While the rotary mixer showed better results for the extraction efficiency than a stirred vessel, the latter set-up was able to handle larger volumes but did not meet all process requirements. For the evaporation the prompt evaporation of the extraction agent using nitrogen stripping led to minor decomposition. In a 5L stirred vessel, the highest specific extraction of hyperforin was 4.3mg hyperforin/g dry weight bio material. Parameters for the equipment design for extraction and solvent evaporation were determined based on the experimental data.Extracts from The solvents (HPLC or analytical grade) used for the experiments were hexane, petroleum ether (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany), acetonitrile and methanol (HPLC Grade, VWR Chemicals, Darmstadt, Germany). For the extraction in the 5  The production method and hormonal-based cultivation of the root material is described in For the extraction experiments the root material was transferred into a nitrogen flushed box to avoid decomposition of hyperforin. The roots were ground manually in a mortar with a pestle in liquid nitrogen until a fine powder was produced. The extraction was performed in a rotary mixer and in a beaker extractor. The rotary mixer consisted of a vertical, circular plate with attachments for the vials at a radial position of 0.26 The extraction of hyperforins was also performed in a 5 The analysis was carried out using an Agilent 1260 Infinity Quaternary LC System (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) with a DAD-detector (G4212 The extraction efficiency was quantified by the purity of the extract and the extraction yield (Y The specifically extracted hyperforin is the amount of hyperforin in the extract related to the used mass of dried root material: This allows to compare different extraction agents at a constant solvent to root material ratio. For one experiment one batch of root culture was used to grant comparability.  In the development of the downstream processing the transfer to scalable processes is always a challenging task. In the present study the lack of temperature control and scalability of the rotary mixer limited the use of the rotary mixer. Furthermore the processing with the rotary mixer included a wide range of manual handling e.g. the filling of the powder and solvent and also the phase separation afterwards. The beaker glass extraction was similar to a stirred vessel extraction. Nitrogen stripping and rotary evaporation were compared with respect to the most efficient way of evaporation with minimum decomposition.  The results for the same equipment but with petroleum ether as solvent are displayed in For evaporation immediate stripping of the solvent with nitrogen has maintained a higher hyperforin content and purity of the extracts. While the nitrogen stripping was performed between 23–28 This section is dedicated to the scale-up of the extraction equipment from a 250 For the processing of The processing of This work was supported by grants from the joint project SynFoBiA of the Center of Pharmaceutical Engineering (PVZ) of the Technische Universität Braunschweig. We also thank Ines Rahaus for her skillful technical assistance as well as Matthias Niggemann for his contribution to the extraction experiments.