The main objective of this study is to understand rock breakage behaviours which may provide a means to improve fragmentation efficiency. In this study, numerical modelling technology and image analysis are used to investigate the behaviour of actual rocks in the breakage process. A texture-based finite element method (FEM) modelling technique has been developed to present a realistic modelling method for characterizing heterogeneous rock breakage behaviour according to its actual microstructure using integrated microscopic observation, image analysis and numerical modelling.
                  Understanding the role of texture and crack propagation can provide fundamental knowledge for predicting and improving energy-efficiency of comminution. A number of samples were analysed with the aim of providing key information on mineralogical and textural controls which primarily influence preferential liberation.
                  The results in this study demonstrated that mineral distributions and minerals with lower tensile strength play a very important role in the breakage process.It is essential to understand how fractures initiate and propagate under the different distributions of minerals in rock in order to provide a better understanding of the rock fracture processes occurring in various mining and mineral processing operations ( With the development of high performance computers and the technology of image processing, image segmentation has been widely applied in mining and metallurgy. Lepisto ( Once classified mineral maps have been generated finite element meshes can be constructed, physical properties for specific mineral phases can be input, and complex, interactive stress displacement models can be run, facilitated by advances in computing power. Current applications of FEM modelling are based on the use of two-dimensional input images derived from core imaging, optical and SEM-based microscopy. Yue and other scholars have published work ( This study uses an edge detection method of image processing to establish the microstructures of inhomogeneous rock based on a texture image and then the material inhomogeneity is introduced into mechanical modelling. In order to improve fragmentation efficiency in mineral processing an understanding of the effects of mineralogy, mechanical properties and ore textures in the breakage process is very important. Texture-based finite element method (FEM) modelling is a sophisticated tool for simulating stress and failure under loading in complex, heterogeneous solid state systems, typical of mineralized ores and rocks. Applications of texture-based FEM modelling SimRock have been developed within the AMIRA P843 GeM project ( The major difference between the software SimRock and other approaches is that this model is built from a digital image, i.e. the distributions of mineral can be decided from the classified mineral map. Also SimRock can differentiate many different minerals in one sample, which cannot be achieved with other software. The potential to simulate rock interactions and to gain a fundamental insight into the texture-based controls on failure was recognised by GeM sponsors as providing an important new tool for understanding and predicting controls on comminution and liberation. This study was undertaken to investigate the energies required for several different aspects of rock breakage, and to obtain statistical data to identify patterns that can be used to further develop the breakage process.  One of the most important factors affecting breakage behaviour during the failure process is the initiation and propagation of cracks. Generally, for heterogeneous rocks, higher order functions is used to simulate this process in FEM. In the image process, the goal is to create a mesh of triangular elements each of which covers a homogeneous mineral property. In the current study, the Monte Carlo method was employed in the mineral segmentation process. Monte Carlo methods have become popular for obtaining solutions to global optimization problems. The optimization technique is simulated to detect the edge of different minerals. In the current version of In linear elasticity, the relation between stress and strain depends on the type of material under consideration. This relation is known as Hooke’s law. For anisotropic materials Hooke’s law can be written as Eq. The total strain component is expressed as: The stress can be derived from Eq. Due to the phenomena of anisotropy and discontinue (existing micro-cracks, pore topology) in rocks, many structures undergo very large deformations in normal or damaged conditions and geometric nonlinearity is inherent in these type of elements. On this approach, the load is subdivided into a series of load increments. The load increments can be applied over several load steps. Before each solution, the Newton–Raphson method evaluates the out-of-balance load vector – this is the difference between the restoring forces (the loads corresponding to the element stresses) and the applied loads. The program then performs a linear solution, using the out-of-balance loads, and checks for convergence. If convergence criteria are not satisfied, the out-of-balance load vector is re-evaluated, the stiffness matrix is updated, and a new solution is obtained. This iterative procedure continues until the problem converges. Currently, the failure process is treated in two ways: Maximum Principal Stress Criterion and Griffith Criterion. In the new version of SimRock, Tresca and Mohr Coulomb criterions will be added. Maximum Principal Stress Criterion: when the maximum principal stress exceeds the strength condition the element can undergo “failure”. The effect of failure is that all components of the stiffness matrix are multiplied by a user defined scaling value in the direction of maximum tension. This criterion is more suitable for the failure process analysis of a continuum material. The process of failure is the following: The maximum principal stress is calculated and compared to the specified strength. If the maximum specified strength is exceeded, the direction of the principal stress axis is determined. (This direction may be out of the plane.) The stiffness matrix is rotated into a new coordinate system in which the principal stress lies along the In the rotated coordinate system, the component of stiffness in The stiffness matrix is rotated back into its original orientation. Griffith Criterion: these elements are designed to fail under the Griffith criterion expressed by Eq. The process of failure is the following: The energy balance for cracking is computed. If the energy balance is favourable for cracking, the direction of the maximum principle stress is found. The stiffness matrix is rotated into a new coordinate system in which the principal stress lies along the In the rotated coordinate system, the component of stiffness in The stiffness matrix is rotated back into its original orientation. The Monte Carlo optimization technique ( The Monte Carlo method is used to move the nodes towards the mineral boundaries. A parameter mesh energy Nodes are moved in random directions by a specified amount and the moves are accepted or rejected depending on a Boltzmann factor. Optimized moves are accepted with minimized mesh energy, i.e. the nodes move in the direction that minimizes On each iteration of the procedure, the program attempts to move each node exactly once, although the attempts are made in a random order. The size of the move is chosen at random from a Gaussian distribution with a specified half-width. The direction of the move is completely random, except that nodes on the edges of the image are constrained to stay on the edges, and corner nodes cannot move at all. Nodes will never move to the interior of another triangle, nor will they ever move outside the boundaries of the image. In this section, examples are given to simulate the failure pattern of rock under a series of load steps. The samples are fixed on the bottom boundary and the top boundary is also fixed after an external initial displacement is applied on it as a step strain in the It is well known that for rock materials, the tensile strength of this material is a function of its Young’s modulus or its hardness and the strength can be estimated from many methods ( In mining industry, experience values are widely used. Typically, for example, tensile strength of rock materials is about 1/10 to 1/8 of the compressive strength. In this study, the tensile strength was taken to be 1/10 of the compressive strength and the user defined scaling value of stiffness multiplier after failure is 0.5. Firstly, two examples are used to demonstrate the numerical modelling process of a rock breakage analysis using SimRock software ( The mechanical properties of minerals for this sample are listed in  In this sample, step strain applied on the top is 0.01% in  In the following examples, the effect of the mineral distribution was investigated. The purpose of this study is to find the dominant factors affecting the breakage pattern in a multiphase mineral rock.  Some areas of Enstatite or Cholorite were changed to Pyrrhotite which has the middle value of tensile strength. Areas were swept between minerals of Enstatite and Chlorite. In order to investigate the effect of mineral proportions in the rock breakage process, the area of hardest mineral Enstatite was reduced by 3% or the softest mineral of Chlorite was reduced by 1% respectively. The results are listed in The results in It is well known that a hard mineral (with a higher tensile strength) more easily absorbs energy to form elastic deformation, whereas for a soft mineral (with a lower tensile strength) it is easier to absorb the energy to produce cracks. In the circled areas of Unlike previous discussions of this sample, the following modelling has been done with the mineral changes only happening between the mineral areas of Enstatite and Cholorite. First some areas of Chlorite changed to Enstatite (circled areas in  The input texture maps and their mineral properties are listed in Generally speaking, increasing the area of soft mineral will induce more cracks in the sample (shown in In this example, the mineral of host rock is Feldspar with a lower tensile strength of 21.9 The areas of Chlorite and Feldspar did not change when Muscovite and Actinolite increased or decreased, however, their failure percentages were changed. The failure rate of Chlorite even increased 6% or 12% as the area of Muscovite dropped 2.6% or raised 2.5% individually. Whereas with the same change of Muscovite, the failure rate of Diopside did not change at all. This result further demonstrated that the softest minerals do play a very important role in the rock breakage process and they have priority to absorb energy.  The mechanical properties of Sample B3 are listed in The results in This again indicates that by reducing the proportion of hardest mineral more cracks in the sample will be produced. Results in The mineral properties of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio are obtained from an indentation test. The samples from different deposits have significantly different Young’s modulus, so the effect of the tensile strength is impacted. In this sample, the mechanical properties are listed in Firstly, the tensile strength value of Chlorite was changed from the original value of 14.3 Then the tensile strength of Grossular was changed in the same way: 30.15 In The offset phenomenon is obvious in From Numerical simulation has become one of the most powerful tools for incorporating heterogeneities and for offering greater insight into rock breakage behaviour. In this study an approach has been developed using the finite element method with a novel digital image processing system, which together provide an accurate means of modelling the actual rock structure. The most significant achievement from this study is in providing a powerful, conventional and economical tool to investigate the breakage behaviours of complex heterogeneous rocks, including their arbitrary mineral distribution patterns, shapes and sizes. This study is different from other numerical models in which statistical methods are used to characterize the local inhomogeneous rock. Current simulation models are based on the mineral map, so the heterogeneity of rock is derived from mineral properties distributed on the map. The numerical results presented in this paper have demonstrated that the inhomogeneous characteristics have a considerable effect on the breakage results. The failure pattern is totally dependent on the mineral distribution inside the rock, and the difference in the mineral properties between adjacent minerals plays a very important role in the breakage process. Furthermore, the mineral with the lowest tensile strength plays a critical role in the failure rate and damage pattern. Consequently, the classification map should be taken very seriously for the minerals with the lowest and the highest values of tensile strength. The proportion of softer minerals in the sample also controls the distribution of energy consumption in the sample, and then the weight of the softer minerals in the sample will be an important effect in rock breakage processes. The present research was carried out with the financial support of Anglo Platinum and Rio Tinto in the AMIRA P843 GeM project. Also many thanks to Karen Holtham, who gave the author a lot help with the grammar check.