To substitute bearing steel mill balls used in magnetic material powder production, a novel mini-sized high Cr mill balls with sizes in the range Ø 6.35–7.14mm were developed. The structure, abrasion resistant properties and application performance of the balls were investigated in the present study. It was shown that both higher hardness (HRC 65–67) and longer impact fatigue life could be achieved through suitable composition design and heat treatment. The service life of the novel balls in the stirring ball mills was at least four times that of bearing balls.Mill ball is one of the most commonly used grinding media in a variety of ball mills. In some situation such as ultrafine powder production in permanent ferrite magnetic materials, building materials, food, medicine, and chemical engineering, etc., highly efficient stirring ball mills are widely utilized High chromium (HCr) white cast iron is a well-known high abrasion resistant material that is considered as the first candidate for a number of components widely used in abrasion-related situations, including mill balls in heavy mills in mineral processing, cement production and thermal power plant An investment casting technology was adopted because it allows a precise dimension and a high surface finish. All the raw materials were commercially available. The alloy was melted at 1550±10 Laboratory wear test was carried out in a SQ-220 ball mill. The mill has two drums each with a diameter of 220 Dry wear: silica sand (SiO Wet wear: silica sand (same as in dry wear) and water (pH 7.0, 300 To enhance the wear strength, 20 white cast iron balls with a size of Ø 40 Impact experiment was performed in a free-drop hammer apparatus as schematically shown in As shown in To get optimal microstructure and hardness, the heat treatment regime was systematically studied. It was found that heating to 960 The HCr balls exhibited a certain work hardening effect, for example, the micro-hardness values on the surface roughly increased Hv 50 for both as-cast and as-quenched HCr balls ( It is proposed from above results that the two types of balls may have comparable abrasion resistance at the beginning of service, because they have almost the same surface hardness. However, bearing balls would be inferior to HCr balls once their surface layer is removed by wear. The proceeding wear test results will confirm this inference. The results of laboratory wear test are shown in The impact tests were conducted with varied combination of impact pair of balls: bearing–bearing, bearing–HCr and HCr–HCr. The results are shown in To further verify the performance of HCr balls, they were sent to two magnetic materials plants, where real service performance was evaluated and compared with bearing balls under the completely same conditions. One of the two experiments is shown in In total 5 months use of HCr balls, accumulative 400 In total 5 months use of bearing balls, accumulative 1140 The above results prove that the HCr balls do have significant advantages over bearing balls. The abrasion resistance of the HCr balls is at least four times that of bearing balls. If the discarded balls (smaller than Ø 5 From the grinding fundamentals of stirring mill, the motion of the balls within it can be irregularly revolving and colliding under the action of stirring bars, as-sketched in From On the surface of bearing balls there exist many large pits that have different sizes but are of similar shape, as shown in It is well-known that the high abrasion resistance of HCr alloys originates from the combination of very hard (Cr,Fe) To further identify the wear mechanisms of the balls, their surface outlines were measured with Talysurf-6 Surface Morphology Apparatus. The results are shown in Let In the practical production condition, some water is usually added into the stirring mill, forming thick slurry with powders. The viscous slurry covers the ball surface due to the wetting of water and thus weakens the impact to a certain degree. However, this layer of slurry makes the friction resistance to particle sliding increase. As the balls roll or slide over each other, the resultant shear stress and normal pressure on the ball surface rises, giving rise to a rather strong cutting and ploughing effect. Moreover, the water in the slurry can promote the near-surface fatigue crack propagation and enhance the abrasive cutting due to stress etching and cooling effect on the abrasives. The material losses in wet wear condition are therefore higher than those in dry wear. In order to examine the effect of corrosive resistance on the wet wear resistance of the balls, soaking corrosive experiment was carried out, in which neutral water was used as the corrosive medium. The experimental results, together with wear test results, are presented in The high corrosive resistance of HCr balls is believed to arise from the high Cr content in the matrix. Since the dimension of the balls is so small that they solidify at a very high cooling rate, substantial Cr atoms will remain in the matrix, leading to a supersaturated solid solution and providing the matrix with a high electrode potential and therefore with a high corrosive resistance. During the heat treatment, supersaturated Cr atoms tend to precipitate from the solution, making the Cr content in the matrix decrease. The amount of carbides and the hardness increases, but the corrosive resistance decreases, resulting in relatively low wet wear resistance. The novel mini-sized mill balls made of high Cr white cast iron exhibit outstanding abrasion resistance compared to formerly used bearing balls in both dry and wet wear as well as field conditions. The HCr balls have quite high overall hardness and uniform hardness distribution across the section. The mean hardness of the balls is as high as HRC 65–67, and the maximum hardness difference across the section is less than HRC 0.5. Bearing balls have high surface hardness (HRC 63), but relatively low center hardness (HRC 56). This hardness distribution can be one of the main reasons causing poor abrasion resistance because once the high hardness surface layer is worn out the abrasion resistance will rapidly decay. On the other hand, the matrix of HCr balls has higher Cr content, thus has higher corrosive resistance than bearing balls, particularly the as-cast ones. Therefore the HCr balls present better performance over bearing balls in wet wear situation as well, which is the commonest application condition in magnetic materials production or other powder producing processes. Moreover, the HCr balls display outstanding impact resistance, at least 10 times as high as that of bearing balls. Field use demonstrates that the service life of the HCr balls is at least four times that of bearing balls. In stirring ball mill, the most likely wear mechanisms are fatigue spalling, cutting and ploughing. The former is predominant for HCr balls and the latter are responsible for bearing balls. The addition of water can intensify the near-surface fatigue crack propagation and abrasive cutting in addition to the corrosive effect and thus increase material removal. It is proposed that the balls should have higher resistance to abrasive intrusion and a better corrosive resistance. The HCr alloys would be one of the most appropriate materials for the grinding media in this condition that combine high hardness and strong impact resistance with better corrosive resistance.