Cereal grains are essential to our dietary needs, as well as for animal feeding and for industrial processing. The cereal species of agricultural significance are wheat, triticale, rye, barley, oats, maize, rice, sorghum and the millets, all members of the grass family. The grain industry can only meet consumer needs by managing grain quality at all stages of the grain chain, from breeding to production, harvesting, storage and finally processing into foods and animal feed. Assessment of grain quality is needed at all stages for effective management. The many analytical methods available need to be adapted to the specific needs at each stage of the value-addition chain.The cereal grains are a major source of our dietary energy and protein requirements. They are also needed for animal feeding and industrial processing. The three major cereal species (wheat, maize and rice, The term ‘quality’ has different significance, depending on the stage being considered along the ‘grain chain’ – the continuum from breeding, through growing and management of the crop, to harvesting, segregation, storage and transport, to processing and final consumption. The assessment of grain quality is essential to effective management of grain production and processing. Analysis of grain quality provides critical knowledge about the defects and advantages of the grain involved, thereby assisting those concerned along the value-addition chain on how best to manage processing for the financial benefit of the specific stage of the overall process ( Effective management of grain quality relies on analytical information along the consumption chain, providing a sound basis for assuring customer satisfaction. The ‘customer’ at any stage may be the next step along the grain chain, but the ultimate customer is the consumer. The degree of satisfaction is obviously related very closely to the price that will be paid at each stage of the value-added chain. The cereal grains are produced by plants of the grass family (Poaceae or Gramineae). The species of agricultural significance are wheat, triticale, The cereal group of plants has been very successful in contributing to mankind’s food needs. The success is indicated by the cultivation of many trillions of cereal plants worldwide (probably over 10 This level of production equates approximately to one kilogram of grain per person per day for the world’s population. However, world hunger does not reflect this statistic, because of the vast distances between the major production regions and the areas of human need, and because of the considerable amounts of grain used for industrial processing and animal feeding. An assortment of cereal grains is illustrated in  The ability of seed-bearing plants to preserve these stores of nutrients for long periods was the major reason for our ancient ancestors’ interest in the cereals as a food source. The harvested grain could be stored ready for the metaphorical ‘rainy day’, such as winter time, when other food sources were not available. In the same way, the storability of grains makes them an essential food source for us today. Because the storability of grains helped ancient man to survive the ‘rainy day’ periods of his existence, the cereal grains were a major catalyst in transforming Grains have been recognised as an important food source since pre-history. The ongoing propagation and improvement of seed-bearing plants were important phases in the development of mankind. The selection of plant species that best suited our food needs commenced from those times. These activities continued on to the selection of genotypes with superior attributes, such as improved grain size, disease resistance and processing quality. Our intimate and long-lasting relationships with the cereal grains, with wheat especially and with grain-based foods, are indicated by the many ways in which they enter in our culture and vocabulary, becoming symbols of social interaction. As examples, ‘Give us this day our daily bread’, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone’, and ‘Cast thy bread upon the waters’ are everyday expressions in English derived from the Bible. There are equivalent Centuries ago, celebration of the grain harvest in Western Europe was justification for celebration and thanksgiving by farmers and villagers. This tradition was carried by the settlers in North America, leading to the traditional Thanksgiving Day celebrations of the USA and Canada. In Eastern Europe, the completion of the grain harvest is a great occasion for celebration, known as ‘dozynki’ in Poland. Traditionally, villagers donned colourful folk costumes, sang and played instruments for the lord and lady of the manor, presenting wreaths made of corn, wheat stalks and flowers, together with bread baked from the freshly harvested wheat. Likewise, in the Middle East, bread (Persian ‘nan’) may be taken as a gift when visiting friends. This special gift bread is commonly a sweet bread, covered with frosting. Unleavened bread is central to the Jewish Passover celebration, acting as a reminder of the Israelites’ hurried departure from slavery in Egypt, when there was no time to leave the bread to rise overnight. In an Iranian wedding ceremony, bread often assumes a symbolic place on the table in front of the married couple. We use the word ‘cereal’ colloquially to describe ready-to-eat breakfast foods, such as corn flakes. This use is not incorrect, because breakfast cereals Despite the diversity of the grass family, only a relatively few species are used on a large scale for our food needs and for animal feed. The most common species are listed in The statistics in The various cereal species are listed in The entry in Total cereal-grain production totals over 2.2 billion tonnes per year.  The processing of cereal grains into their compositional fractions constitutes an important group of industries. For example, starch and protein fractions are separated for wheat and corn in vast quantities. Furthermore, annual production of maize oil worldwide exceeds two million tonnes. Thus the grains may be used for food directly, or after a significant extent of preprocessing. For example, cereal starch is a major source of glucose and fructose for use as sweetening agents in foods and drinks. The grains also contribute to many non-food uses, such as fuel alcohol for motor vehicles, adhesives, paper production, and agents for mineral processing. World production of the non-cereal grains ( Production of grains from dicot plants ( The range of commercially grown dicot grain species extends beyond those listed in What is meant by ‘grain quality’? Just as ‘Beauty is in the eye of the beholder’, as the old saying goes, so also the assessment of grain quality depends on the needs of the grain user. Those needs are likely to involve different combinations of attributes depending on the purpose for which the grain is being bought and used. Accordingly, the price that will be paid is determined by the quality – the suitability of the grain for the customer’s purposes. In addition, the term ‘quality’ has different significance, depending on the stage being considered along the ‘grain chain’ – the continuum ( Effective management of grain quality along the consumption chain is thus essential to customer satisfaction – the ‘customer’ being the next step along the grain chain, the ultimate customer being the retail consumer. The degree of satisfaction is obviously related very closely to the price that will be paid at each stage of the value-added chain. Effective assessment of grain quality provides critical knowledge about the defects and advantages of the The value-addition chain for grain has been dubbed ‘field to fork’ ( Despite the term ‘chain’, the sequence ( Beyond the breeder are the seed producers and grain growers. Initial assessment for them is the assurance that the seed being traded and sown is the correct variety. On-farm management of grain quality for the grower is interactive with grain yield, because of the need to maximise financial returns, represented by the combination of grain volume and market value. Beyond the farm gate is the critical stage of assessing the many aspects of grain quality that will determine the price to be paid to the grower. This assessment of quality also determines the manner of segregation of the grain delivery, thereby ensuring that it is combined with grain of similar quality type. Beyond this stage, there is the need to preserve the value of the aggregated grain that has been assessed to be of a specific quality, by storing and transporting it with its quality type preserved. Suitability for processing is a basic factor determining quality-based segregation. Therefore, quality assessment will again be a priority when the grain arrives at the flour mill, malt house, feed mill or other form of processing factory. The knowledge thus obtained will determine how a specific grain shipment will be stored, utilised and managed in the sequence of events leading to the product that is offered for final sale to the consumer. This sequence may be as short as the milling and boiling of rice grown by a subsistence farmer, with his family commenting on the eating quality. It may involve the stages of flour milling and bread or cake baking for sale in a hot-bread shop. Alternatively, there may be the much longer route of animal feeding to produce meat, milk, cheese or eggs. The ultimate arbiter of quality is the consumer, who provides an assessment of quality by voting with his or her buying power. Preference for the bread or cakes in Mr Jones’ shop means that the vote for quality may go to Mr Jones instead of to the supermarket on some occasions, or possibly the reverse on other occasions. For the subsistence rice farmer, his family is the ‘customer’, assessing quality according to their individual preferences for cooked rice.  Nevertheless, consumer preferences may stray from this central message to diverse concepts of nutritional quality involving the presence or lack of specifc grain types or of additives. Gluten-free is one of these concepts that is fully justified for individuals with specific dietary restrictions, such as coeliac disease, but that may be less justified in other cases. The feedback loop from the consumer to others up the chain may be short or long. It may be as short as reactions within the family or village in a subsistence farming community. At the other extreme, feedback may involve great distances and long time periods, taking into account the extent of the world grain trade and the many years involved in bringing a new grain variety from an initial cross to the selection of an elite line ready for commercial sowing. Another lag factor is the many months or even years that grain may be in storage and transport before it is processed. In addition, feedback may involve long distances, such as a flour miller in the Middle East or a legume trader in India reporting grain defects to grain traders or breeders in grain-producing countries such as the Americas, Australia or Europe. Such feedback obviously relies on effective and reproducible assessment of quality factors ( Bakers may complain that the quality of the flour provided by the flour mill varies in its dough-handling properties, and thus in its overall baking quality. ‘No nasty surprises’ is a generalisation that processors often quote to indicate their approach to quality assessment. Such a ‘nasty surprise’ may be a metal object hidden in the grain that would cause significant damage to processing equipment if undetected and removed. Extensive contamination with a noxious agent such as ergot is another example, which in this case could cause illness in consuming humans or animals. Unacceptable contamination may involve a small amount of weed seeds that produce scent, thereby giving an off-flavour to the whole consignment. ‘No nasty surprises’ can overall be construed as the provision of a consistent and continuous supply of grain with uniform quality. Another form of ‘nasty surprise’ for a large consignment of grain may be lack of homogeneity – wide variations in quality throughout the load. This problem accentuates the initial need (before even performing any quality assessment) of establishing adequate sampling procedures, so that quality is assessed on sub-samples that are representative of the whole consignment of grain ( Although general considerations of grain quality may be similar at all stages of the grain-supply chain ( Rapid methods are needed to check grain quality when the rush of the grain harvest may decree that a truck-load must not be left waiting for more than a few minutes before quality-grade has been finalised to indicate where the load should be tipped ( Methods of analysis described in this book reflect the range of quality attributes that need to be assessed at the various stages of grain production and processing, together with the diversity of restrictions due to practical factors such as speed, labour requirement and accuracy. The contrasts in such criteria are illustrated in Most analyses involve more conventional methodologies that require laboratory equipment and significant levels of expertise on the part of the operator. Conventional testing procedures have been developed and standardised to determine many of the grain-quality attributes required along the grain chain. The development of these standard methods is a laborious process, involving collaboration between various combinations of scientists from a range of laboratories involved in the type of analyses being evaluated ( Although rapid analysis is especially needed at certain stages of the grain chain, swift provision of results is welcome at any stage. The best promise of rapid analysis is provided by near infrared spectroscopy (NIR). Over recent decades, NIR methods have become widely adopted at mill or elevator receival for the determination of moisture and protein content in cereal grains generally, both for analysing single samples and for continuous monitoring on-line ( Originally this technology was applied to milled grain, but more recent advances have brought the great advantage that this technology can be applied to whole grain. The consequence is that no sample preparation is required – a grain sample can be simply tipped into the top of the NIR machine and results are generated automatically. NIR works in a similar manner to any other spectroscopic technique; different chemical groups in the sample absorb radiation at characteristic wavelengths and the extent of absorption depends on the concentration of the analyte. However, NIR has been most effective for determining major grain components such as moisture, protein and oil contents; the analysis of minor components by NIR may not be so simple.  Throughout the grain chain, efficiencies in management towards specified aims only become achievable if adequate analysis of quality trends is provided. The genetic improvement of grain genotypes has traditionally involved three major aims, namely: increasing grain yield, overcoming the impediments of biotic and abiotic stresses, and improving the processing and end-use quality of the grain. The breeder’s management approaches towards the last of these three aims (grain quality) are different in the early stages of the breeding process, compared to the final phase. Initially, when there are large numbers of lines to be screened, a management aim is to identify and exclude lines that are unlikely to meet quality targets. Their deletion at an early stage means that they will not be propagated unnecessarily, thus conserving resources. At this stage, tests that identify selected protein and DNA markers are especially effective, as they target aspects of genotype directly. Later in the breeding process, there are fewer individual lines and more grain sample is available for each line, permitting more extensive testing, such as the use of small-scale simulation of grain processing, namely, malting (for barley), actual milling and baking (for wheat) and cooking/tasting tests (for rice). Results from these forms of quality assessment will be critical at the stage when specific lines are finally approved for release. At that stage, the management of registration will probably also involve ‘DUS’ testing, namely, assessing that the potential new variety is distinct, uniform and stable, thus meeting the guidelines of the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) ( The pure-seed supplier has a critical management responsibility to provide seed of the correct variety, free from contaminating seeds and free from seed-borne diseases. Detailed assessments should be provided to the farmer as assurance of the aspects of quality at the time of sowing, when management responsibility transfers to the farmer. Grain quality in the harvested grain will depend on farm management and climatic factors, as well as on the quality of the seed. Many computer-based systems are now available to facilitate on-farm management towards specific quality goals, but none of these strategies can completely overcome the uncertainties of climatic factors. Nevertheless, Harvest time presents a major opportunity to manage grain quality, provided adequate analytical information is available promptly. As harvest time is busy for all concerned, the priority is more often to ‘get the grain off’ and into storage before wet weather threatens to damage quality, rather than to spend precious time checking that grain quality is adequately assessed to permit the separate binning of grain of different quality type. Despite the time constraints of checking grain quality before deliveries are combined in the same storage cell, there it the possibility of retaining small samples of all the deliveries that contribute to each storage cell, so that this ‘running sample’ can later be analysed in detail, thereby providing information about the overall quality of the grain in each storage cell. This information, if available, is valuable in marketing the grain, thus to satisfy the processing specifications of the food or feed manufacturer in the next step of the grain chain. Whatever type of grain processing is involved, assessment of its quality is integral to efficient processing. Blending of grain streams from different storages or deliveries is the first avenue of management available to the processor. In the milling of wheat to white flour, it is estimated that about 75% of flour quality is determined by the quality of the incoming wheat; i.e., management factors (mill adjustment and environmental conditions) contribute only 25% ( The milling of wheat flour requires the miller to achieve tight specifications that are set by the flour customer. The blending of flour streams is an important management tool in meeting these specifications, but this approach is totally dependent on effective assessment of quality prior to and during milling. Barley for malting is another grain for which detailed information about grain quality is critical to achieve effective management in processing. In this case, the maltster must have uniformity of grain size, of variety and of germination rate, thus to achieve uniform germination and maximise the extraction of soluble sugars for malting. For feed mill operation, a primary concern is for the absence of disease or contaminants that may cause injury to stock. As a result, analyses for mycotoxins and contaminating grains are conducted on incoming grain. A logical extension of the assessment-management philosophy described above is the integration of analytical and management tools to provide ‘expert systems’ that can be used to assist in the overall process. Currently, decisions within the management function are largely taken by practised operators, acting upon analytical information, but also drawing upon the intangible characteristic that is summarised by the words ‘experience’ and ‘wisdom’. Technological advances have been made in various management systems via the development of computer-based ‘expert systems’ that ‘learn’ to make decisions, or at least recommendations, based on previous experience. Maybe such approaches to grain utilisation will in the future serve to complement the accumulated experience of professional managers. The future will certainly bring us novel and improved analytical methods to provide more detailed and accurate information about grains in shorter time, probably permitting the move out of the laboratory literally into the ‘field’, thereby providing real-time analysis. These developments are likely to transform where, when and how many management decisions are made about grain processing. Although the consumer has been slow to accept genetically modified grains in many countries, this resistance will progressively dissipate in coming years, when the advantages to production, processing and nutrition become more evident, together with a fuller realisation of food safety. Gene technology has the potential to transform breeding for specific quality traits and also to simplify the task of identifying specific aspects of processing quality at harvest. These changes will in turn facilitate segregation and identity preservation of grain according to quality type. Future years will also see the fruition of current predictions about global warming and climate change. A significant aspect of these changes may be lower protein content for grain, due to increasing starch synthesis under the influence of the ‘carbon-fertilising’ effect of higher levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Other likely effects relate to altered rainfall and more frequent heat-stress episodes during grain filling. The latter are already known to alter grain quality in wheat by reducing dough strength and thus damaging baking quality. However, the expectation of less frequent frost episodes is expected to permit earlier sowing times, so that heat-stress episodes may be avoided. Useful web sites: