The evolution of recrystallization texture in the intermetallic compound Ni76Al24(B) has been investigated using the conventional pole figure as well as orientation distribution function (ODF) methods. The initial L12 structure which transforms to DO22 on cold rolling reverts back to the L12 during annealing. The annealing process can be divided into three stages: recovery, reordering and recrystallization. The moderately strong deformation texture resulting from cold rolling becomes very weak during the recovery and reordering processes by an ‘in-situ’ orientation change due to reordering that precedes recrystallization. The texture remains weak throughout recrystallization and grain growth stages. TEM investigations show evidence of twin like features during the reverse DO22→L12 transformation. This is expected to lead to fragmentation of the matrix grains resulting in a weak texture. The prominent recrystallization texture components are {025}<100> and {011}<100>, of which the latter component survives best with continued annealing.In recent years, boron-doped polycrystalline Ni Previous work suggests Gottstein et al. The present work was undertaken with a view to filling in the gaps in the existing literature on the recrystallization behaviour of B-doped polycrystalline Ni The material used was the intermetallic alloy Ni Isochronal annealing of the cold rolled material was carried out from 100 to 1000°C at intervals of 100°C. The holding time was 1 h in each case. A few samples were also isothermally annealed at four different temperatures, namely 750, 800, 850 and 900°C for various lengths of time. Thin foils were prepared from the materials at different stages of annealing by mechanical polishing, followed by electropolishing in a jet electropolisher using a solution of 10% H The variation, during annealing, of order parameter ( where, For texture measurement, samples of 14×24 mm  The variations in the order parameter values during the course of 1-h isochronal annealing of the 85% reduced material are depicted in The cold rolled (85%) microstructure of this alloy was characterized by a high density of shear bands as clearly shown in typical optical micrographs ( Annealing at 500°C shows at many places groups of parallel stripes running nearly perpendicular to original grain boundaries ( Twin like features are also sometimes observed in regions which have recovered sufficiently. This is shown typically in Annealing at 700°C leads to copious nucleation of large number of fine grains ( Texture measurements were undertaken on the partly and fully recrystallized samples which were initially cold rolled by 85%. As reported earlier The variation of volume fraction recrystallized with time at various annealing temperatures is shown in In order to understand the effects of the structural change and the change in order during annealing on texture, measurements were made on samples isothermally annealed at 850°C for 1, 5, 11 and 24 h. The The development of recrystallization texture in boron-doped Ni On the basis of what has been stated above, the annealing process in this alloy appears to involve a combination of three different phenomena: recovery, reordering and recrystallization. Several aspects need to be considered in explaining the results of the recrystallization texture measurements. The first pertains to the fact that a very weak texture is produced from the sharp cold rolling texture during the ‘recovery’ stage, which does not involve any reorientation of grains as a whole, but during which substantial atomic shuffling takes place producing the parent L1 It may also be recalled that annealing has been found to be associated with the appearance of a large density of twin like features. Tanner and Ashby The weak texture obtained after annealing for 1 h at 850°C continues as it is during progressive annealing up to 5, 11, 17 and 24 h, i.e. during the stages of partial recrystallization to full recrystallization, continuing even up to the grain growth stage. Very weak recrystallization texture in Ni Of all the orientations observed in the ODFs of the alloy during partly or fully recrystallized conditions, the Goss component {011}<100> appears to be the most prominent. It is known that this component usually originates in deformation/shear bands. In the present alloy, formation of shear bands started from 65% cold rolling onwards and the density of such bands increased significantly after 85% cold work The DO The reordering process is accompanied by the formation of twins which might accommodate the transformation strain. During annealing the texture changes drastically even before the onset of recrystallization and becomes very weak, almost random. This can be correlated with the DO During recrystallization a weak recrystallization texture is produced from the already recovered and reordered material which itself has a weak texture. The prominent recrystallization texture components are {025}<100> and {011}<100>. The Goss component becomes prominent in the post-recrystallization stage. The authors are indebted to Professor G. Gottstein, Director, Institute für Metallkunde und Metallphysik, RWTH Aachen, Germany for the provision of laboratory facilities for conducting the texture work. Acknowledgements are also due to V. Kumar and Mr. Umashankar for their help during the experimental work.