Flame treatment can be used to modify the surface of plastics to allow water-based coatings to be attached. The effect of the treatment is to produce hydrophilic species on the surface of the plastic. The process is therefore potentially useful for the separation of plastics by froth flotation, provided that the production of the hydrophilic surface can be achieved selectively. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) were selected for investigation as they are found as a co-mingled product from the recovery of beverage containers.
                  In this paper we report on the development of a simple, but effective, flame treatment method for flaked plastics. The treatment involves the use of an acceleration chute that delivers the flakes through the flame of an angled burner. In experiments with virgin plastics the PVC was found to be less susceptible to surface modification than PET, as indicated by contact angle measurement. Separation of the treated virgin plastic by froth flotation was found to be possible, using careful control of frother addition.
                  The technique was then considered for the treatment of post-consumer plastic bottles. It was demonstrated that flame treatment was effective in rendering the surface of both plastics hydrophilic, although the process alone was not sufficiently selective. Hydrophobic recovery of the PVC, but not the PET, was achieved by raising the temperature of the material to 140 °C for a period of 10 min. A two-stage flotation process was tested for the separation of the plastics. In the first stage the PET was floated away from the PVC utilising differences in particle thickness and surface contamination. The float product was then subjected to flame treatment and hydrophobic recovery prior to the second stage of flotation. In this stage the PVC reported to the float product leaving a PET-rich sinks fraction.Continuing growth in the use of plastics has led to increasing quantities ending up in “waste” products. According to the Association of Plastics Manufacturers in Western Europe ( Mechanical recycling involves separating the plastic into individual polymers, with high purity products often demanded by the reprocessor. In order to obtain the desired purity, at a reasonable throughput, automated sorters have been developed. These typically involve presenting single particles to a polymer identification system based on infrared or X-ray spectroscopy ( The use of froth flotation for plastic separation is particularly challenging because of all plastics have naturally hydrophobic surfaces and will readily float with the aid of air bubbles. The selected treatment method must make the surface of at least one plastic hydrophilic, resulting in no air attachment. This can be achieved by the addition of a reagent that reacts with the surface layer of the plastic. Examples of reagents that have been shown to be effective for PVC/PET separation include NaOH ( One way to make the surface of a plastic more reactive is to bombard it with high-energy species such as radicals, ions and molecules in excited electronic states ( The effect of these physical treatment methods may be partially reversible with the plastic surface becoming more hydrophobic with time (hydrophobic recovery). The changes are believed to result from reorganisation of the molecules within the surface layer. Recovery rates are reported to vary depending on the polymer type and treatment method. Shen et al. (2001) showed that the flotation response of plastics relates to both hydrophobicity and to gravitational factors relating to the mass of the particle. Their results show that flotation response decreases rapidly with increases in particle size. It was suggested that separation efficiency is greatly improved when the plastics to be separated have different size distributions (ideally narrow size ranges which do not overlap each other). Virgin PET (semi-crystalline) and PVC (amorphous) were obtained from Goodfellows Ltd. as 0.5 mm sheets. These plastics were selected because the materials had similar surface properties to those used in common beverage bottles. X-ray diffraction studies by the authors and Post-consumer PVC and PET bottles were collected from a municipal recycling facility. The bottles were shredded using a Blackfriars granulator fitted with a 7 mm screen, the product of which was fed to a dust extraction unit where the majority of the paper labels was removed. A representative proportion of the plastic was then sieved to give a size fraction of −7 The equipment used for measurement of contact angle using the sessile drop technique was manufactured at the Camborne School of Mines. A motorised syringe was used to deliver a 1.2 A number of tests were performed to determine the affect of flame treatment on the virgin plastic samples. The zeta potential of plastic samples was determined using the streaming potential method with an Electro Kinetic Analyser. Measurements were made in a 1 Flotation experiments were conducted in a glass cell, 21 cm high and 9 cm in diameter giving a volumetric capacity of 1.2 dm The flame treatment equipment used in previous experiments ( To test the effectiveness of the treatment, contact angle measurements were made on both sides of the plastic flake. When using a vertical burner only the side facing the flame was significantly affected by the treatment. Alternative burner configurations were therefore considered. An effective configuration was found by angling the burner (15° relative to vertical) onto the plastic flakes as they left the chute. With this configuration both sides of the plastic flake were treated. The success of this configuration can be attributed to the profile of the flame, as shown in The contact angle of PVC and PET flakes was measured for treatment times of 0.027–0.135 s (1–5 passes). The results obtained for both sides of the plastic flakes are shown in The comparison shows an increased oxygen content of the surface and an approximate reduction of 1 pH unit of the p.z.c. after flame treatment. Contact angle measurements indicated the possibility of separating virgin PET and PVC using froth flotation. The effectiveness of the flotation tests was determined by calculation of the separation efficiency, which combines the recovery and grade results into a single value ( The effect of residence time in the flame (0.05, 0.08 and 0.11 s) was then considered at a fixed pH of pH 5.8. This pH was chosen because reasonable separation efficiencies were obtained with low additions of frother. The results of these tests are shown in Following the encouraging results achieved with virgin plastics the emphasis was switched to the samples of post-consumer PVC and PET. In order to ascertain the effect of flame treatment the contact angle of the “as received” plastics had to be determined. Measured contact angles were generally lower than the virgin samples with significant variations between the inner (in contact with liquid) and the outer surface (in contact with air) of the material. Despite these findings samples of both plastics were flame treated for varying residence times and the effect of the treatment monitored using contact angle measurement. To ascertain the effect of surface cleaning with a surfactant prior to flame treatment the process was repeated using samples that had been scrubbed with a 1.25% solution of an anionic surfactant (Brite). The results (see Flame treatment was shown to reduce the contact angle of both plastics. The post-consumer PVC was more affected than the virgin material, with the reverse being the case for the PET. Flotation tests were conducted on individual samples of untreated PET and PVC samples without the use of frother at pH 5.8. The thickness of the plastic pieces was measured in both the float and sink products. This allowed the effect of particle thickness on flotation response to be evaluated. Due to the similar response of post-consumer PET and PVC to flame treatment it was decided to look at hydrophobic recovery as a possible means of producing a significant difference between the contact angles of the two plastics. In this investigation both PET and PVC samples were first rendered hydrophilic using of flame treatment (0.08 s). Following treatment the samples were placed in an oven at set temperatures for 10 min. After oven treatment the contact angles of the plastics were measured (see Flotation tests were conducted on washed PET and PVC samples, following flame treatment (residence time 0.135 s). The results ( A two-stage flotation test (see In the first stage of flotation the majority of the PVC was removed as a sinks product along with some of the coarser PET particles. In the second flotation stage the majority of the majority of the PVC was removed as a float product. The distortion of the PET particles into cylindrical shapes following the heat treatment step resulted in some recovery of this material to the float product.  Using an angled flame it is possible to render both sides of a plastic flake hydrophilic. The contact angle reduction increases with an increased residence time within the flame. Flame treatment produces an increased oxygen content of the surface layer.  The surface of the virgin PET was more easily modified than the PVC, resulting in a difference in contact angle of 30° after a 0.135 s treatment. Selective separation of flame treated virgin PET and PVC was found to be possible. Separation efficiencies of greater than 90% were produced using a controlled addition of frother.  The as-received contact angle of post-consumer PVC, and to a lesser extent PET, was much lower than for the virgin material, with the lowest values found on the inner wall of the container. Cleaning of the plastic with an anionic surfactant restored the contact angle to near virgin levels. The effect of the variation in residence time within the flame on the contact angle of both plastics was similar. Flotation response of PVC and PET was affected by flake thickness. Poor recoveries were achieved for material greater than 1mm in thickness, derived from the neck and base of the bottles. After a non-selective flame treatment it was found that by heating the material to 140 °C a difference in contact angle could be generated. This temperature exceeds the softening point of PVC allowing hydrophobic recovery. A combination of a two stage flotation process and flame treatment/hydrophobic recovery produced a reasonable PET purity but at a modest recovery. The efficiency of the process needs to be improved before being of commercial interest. The financial support of County Environmental Trust is acknowledged. Materials and services were kindly supplied by the Cornwall Paper Company and South West Waste Management.