This chapter focuses on the typical stages of biomass supply chains that occur between the point of harvesting and final consumption. Firstly, the harvesting methods depend on the feedstock; in many supply chains, there are options to harvest in whole or chipped form, with there being trade-offs further down the supply chain in regard to how they are stored, processed, and finally transported. This chapter also provides some typical fuel consumption figures for harvesting, processing, and storing biomass. Finally, the GHG emissions of road, rail, and marine transport of transporting different biomass types are compared.Biomass supply chains involving forestry or perennial crops consist of cultivation, harvesting, processing, storage, and transportation. This chapter focuses on stages of the supply chain that occur from the point at which the crop is ready to harvest. Some main biomass systems are used to illustrate typical processes and fuel requirements for harvesting, though in some cases this may be influenced by the biomass yield per hectare. These are usually variable costs/requirements, whereas site establishment and termination can be seen as a ‘fixed’ parameter in life cycle assessments (LCAs). Some biomass types, like wastes, do not have such a phase attributed to them, rather their ‘production’ system begins at processing. Once harvested, or collected, there are various options for processing biomass into a form that is more suitable for transportation, storage, and final use. The key of processing is to produce a more homogenous material that offers end users a fuel whose behaviour and quality are easy to predict, monitor, and feed into combustion systems in a reliable manner. Finally, transport is an unavoidable component of biomass supply chains, which must also be included in LCA studies. Willow can be harvested as chips, billets, and rods, each requiring a specialist machine. A forage harvester is typically used to harvest as chip, for which farmers are recommended to budget £30/h for fuel requirements alone. This equates to approximately 45 For harvesting Miscanthus, a mower conditioner [ Biomass supply chains in the forestry sector will handle a number of forms of material, including whole tree thinnings, roundwood, and brash bales. Whole trees are typically the first two thinnings in a stand, after which the stems are large enough (< Once harvested, there are various options for processing biomass into a form that is more suitable for transportation, storage, and final use. Two somewhat opposed processes are detailed here: comminution and densification: other more advanced processing options are covered in other chapters of this book. Nearly all biomass types will need to be comminuted to increase drying efficiencies or further processing. In woody biomass supply chains, such processing is usually carried out by a wood chipper or less commonly by a tubgrinder [ Tubgrinders, or shredders, are semimobile units used for processing particularly larger items of biomass at a high rate (up to 100 Imported wood pellets are currently the dominant biomass resource utilised in the United Kingdom. They are made from finely powdered and dried untreated biomass that is passed through a pellet dye at high temperature and pressure. The act of compression and the high temperature causes the lignin within the biomass to melt, glueing the particles together to then re-solidify as a pellet after cooling. The result is a high-value and high-density pellet that is consistently shaped and thus more efficiently transported compared to wood chips or straw bales [ The process of pelleting requires a significant amount of energy: a moisture content of 8%–12% is required to produce adequately durable pellets [ Densified biomass also includes lower density biomass types, such as bales, though this form presents a more viable option to transport such dry feedstocks. Producing bales is estimated to require 3.5 Storage is an unavoidable stage of any supply chain. With biomass, there is a need to provide a buffer between the supply of fuel and its demand. This is particularly an issue in heat supply chains, where the demand will mainly occur during the winter [ Though the GHG emissions associated with handling and storing biomass are small [ DM losses of storing fresh wood in this form will depend on a number of factors, including the form and moisture content of the material, ambient temperatures, rainfall, ground conditions, exposure, and how densely the material is packed. In general, comparing the results from storage studies is difficult because they are often performed under different conditions, with different species and for differing periods of times. The following subsections focus on storage options for woody biomass, baled biomass, and higher value densified biomass. As mentioned previously, seasoning wood is necessary where drier feedstocks are required. This involves leaving wood in piles outside or under covered storage where it can dry in ambient conditions rather than through more expensive active drying processes. The DM losses of storage of whole logs are believed to be small, or around 2% after a year [ It is common practice to store wood chips outside in piles, aiming to redistribute moisture away from the chips to the edge of the heap where it can evaporate [ It is typical for the temperature to rise very rapidly after heap establishment; indicating microbial decomposition [ It is suggested that the decay process can lead to the release of methane [ Baled biomass typically includes agricultural residues and energy grasses, though willow can also be baled. As this technique usually involves drier feedstocks, issues of self-heating and degradation are not as large of a concern, though there is evidence that patches of moisture can support microbial growth and lead to losses [ A substantial amount of processing is required to produce densified pellets. As a result, losses during storage would have a higher impact on the net GHG balance of the system compared to upstream losses. Pellets rapidly disintegrate in humid conditions [ There are reports of self-heating in pellet stores, though here it is due to chemical oxidation of the biomass, or from physical forces of condensation and adsorption [ Due to its dispersed nature and low energy density, biomass must be collected from a wide area. The most cost-effective method of land-based transportation is via rail; however, many biomass resources are not located close to rail hubs, and loading between trucks and rail will increase costs. Therefore, many supply chains will rely on transportation via roads. Exceptions for this are where imports are received at ports, which have supporting rail infrastructures. There are many sources of GHG emissions from road transport in literature; however, the data is usually provided as consolidated numbers that are based on many assumptions [ Estimating the volume of train cargo is difficult as trains are flexible with the mass of cargo carried and the number of train hoppers used to contain the load. The emission factors shown in Wood pellets are favoured in large-scale biomass supply chains as the densified nature of the feedstock reduces costs throughout the supply chain in regard to handling, storage, and transport. The trade in wood chips is predominantly limited between European countries, although there are some instances where longer transoceanic supply chains exist [ There are limited ways to calculate costs of a hypothetical transport operation, without getting a quote direct from a haulage company for a specific delivery. Many freight operations will have agreed contracts to deliver goods at a given time [ There are a number of options available to bioenergy growers, producers, collectors, and processors. Most automated screw-fed combustion systems require that the biomass is supplied in chip or pellet form to ensure a consistent and reliable fuel feed. Producing pellets may require extra investment in capital costs, as well as a greater input of primary energy and result in higher GHG emissions; however, they can still provide GHG savings compared to fossil fuels. Also, further down the supply chain, GHG emissions from transport and storage losses can be reduced by having a denser fuel compared to chips or bales. Harvesting wood as chip may be far cheaper, but unless the supply chain is equipped to dry the chip, it will be subject to losses due to decay in storage. Harvesting as logs or coppice stems may require rarer specialist machinery, but can reduce dry matter losses during storage, though incurring additional costs from handling and then from chipping or pelleting. Therefore, the selections of how biomass is harvested and processed will depend on the supply chain structure, machine availability, and the final end use demand.