Very fine-grained materials can be found in many process lines. The choice of the actual processing technique is affected by the particle size. There are several techniques to find the grain size distributions, including the sedimentation analysis. The paper reviews the methods of mathematical interpretation of particle size measurements, processing of measurement data and of the final results. Methods based on sedimentation processes play a major role in measurements of fine grain size distributions in suspensions.Fine-grained materials, either dried or hydrated, are often found in mining, minerals processing, metallurgy and in municipal facilities. In many cases the mined material has to be first crushed for the purpose of classification and refining, to form the concentrates. Fine-grained materials in the metallurgical sector originate in the process of dust removal from the flue gas as well as in processing of the feed materials and in the course of metallurgical processes. Nearly one half of the technologies employed in all these branches utilise fine-grained, mostly hydrated, materials. Particle size in fine-grained materials is less than 100 In most processes the dispersed phase has to be separated from the dispersing agent. In other words, the chief aim is to recover the dry material. Numerous sedimentation tanks are used for that purpose. Gravitational sedimentation tanks are in widespread use thanks to their low power demands ( Major factors that affect the efficiency of sedimentation in these facilities include: density of the solid and liquid phase; viscosity of the suspension; distribution of solid particles size. The density of the solid and liquid phase is found using well-known methods and viscosity of a suspension is easy to determine. Obtaining the distribution of the soil particles size might present some difficulties. Available methods can be categorised in two groups, depending on the form of the tested sample: dried samples; wet/hydrated samples. In the latter case (i.e. wet samples) specialised methods are required to eliminate the grain size changes that might occur in the course of measurements (when grains might get crushed in an air stream). Sedimentation in liquids appears to be the most representative method. The method uses a device known as a sedimentation balance and the measured quantity is the mass of particles settling on a scale pan within a specified period of time. A general view of a Mettler–Toledo sedimentation balance is shown in The balance has two main assemblies: a most precise analytical balance (0.1 The mass of particles, mapped on the The equation of the curve representing the measurement results is written as: The graph in Grain size measurement data are further utilised in the analyses of sedimentation efficiency. Accordingly, the set of points A major advantage of the log-normal distribution is that it can be linearised. Following the inversion by sides, we get: In the linearised system, we obtain the equation of a straight line: Another widely used approximation follows the generalised gamma distribution (Stacy's distribution). It is a tri-parametric distribution function related to the scale factor The function However, the grain size composition curve has to be approximated using the nonlinear regression. That is why one of the variations, i.e. the Rosin–Rammler–Bennett function, is often applied. It has two parameters Finding double logarithms, the function is linearised accordingly: No matter which distribution function is applied, the sedimentation efficiency In the case of the log-normal distribution, the integrals Finally, we get: In the case of the generalised gamma distribution: We get the final result: Selected examples are provided in Application of grain size measurement data to the analysis of sedimentation of polydispersive suspensions requires that the method employed should closely imitate the real industrial processes. A sedimentation balance proves to be an excellent choice for that purpose. Interpretation of measurement data might take into account several types of statistical grain size distributions, including the log-normal distribution, the gamma distribution or one of its variations: the Rosin–Rammler–Bennett distribution (