A mechanistic model has been developed to describe the equilibrium adsorption of copper cyanide species onto activated carbon. This model was based on the calculation of equilibrium between the various copper cyanide complexes in both the aqueous and carbon phases. Solution non-ideality was also incorporated, as changes in ionic strength have a significant effect on the copper cyanide speciation. The use of a theoretical equilibrium constant (i.e. a linear isotherm) was found to poorly describe the adsorption of Cu(CN)2
                     − and Cu(CN)3
                     2−, but better results were obtained by using a Freundlich isotherm for both species. Despite this, there were significant deviations under conditions of higher free cyanide, and hence the model was updated to include a desorption reaction, which is a function of the free cyanide concentration, to account for the irreversibility. This new model was found to predict the copper loading over a wide range of copper and cyanide concentrations.A significant quantity of gold processed in 21th century will be recovered from copper containing gold ores. When using cyanidation to process such ores, the copper can also leach into the cyanide solution, with the extent of dissolution depending on the mineralogy. The majority of copper minerals including chalcocite, covellite, native copper and the copper oxides/carbonates dissolve readily in cyanide solutions; whilst chalcopyrite dissolves very slowly ( The economics of cyanide destruction may be prohibitive where there is high soluble copper. Therefore, various processes have been developed or investigated to economically treat copper-containing gold ores by either reducing the cyanide consumption (e.g. Sceresini process, copper/ammonia/cyanide process, K-process) or recovering and recycling the copper/cyanide, e.g. AVR (acidification–volatilisation–reneutralisation), SART (sulfidisation–acidification–recycle-thickening), the CuTech process, and activated carbon/ion-exchange resin based processes. These processes have been reviewed elsewhere ( Previous researchers have presented the measurement and calculation of the copper cyanide speciation for solutions of varying salinity ( All experiments were carried out using solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and deionised water. Unless stated otherwise, experiments were conducted at 1 Equilibrium measurements were made using 200 The equilibrium loading of copper cyanide onto activated carbon has previously been studied by the authors and the results showed that the copper loading increases significantly with increasing ionic strength due to the presence of cations, and particularly for Ca At CN:Cu ratios above 3 for the conditions of Other potential mechanisms for the adsorption of copper are the precipitation of CuCN on carbon or the oxidation of adsorbed copper cyanides to malachite (Cu(OH) In the copper cyanide aqueous system, there exist various copper and cyanide species whose equilibrium can be described by the following reactions ( However, these equilibriums are influenced by the ionic strength (non-ideality) of the solution ( In the presence of activated carbon, the copper cyanide speciation in solution changes due to the adsorption of copper cyanide species onto carbon. The speciation calculation should thus involve not only the aqueous phase but also the carbon phase. The equilibrium between aqueous phase and carbon phase can be simply expressed as: The first function investigated to describe the equilibrium relationship between copper cyanide species in solution and adsorbed on carbon was an equilibrium constant (linear isotherm): Using the modelling concept described in It has been demonstrated that the adsorption of copper and other metal cyanides on to activated carbon can be better described by a Freundlich isotherm ( If however, the Freundlich isotherm is only applied to the Cu(CN) The Freundlich isotherm model incorporating both the di- and tri- cyanide complexes of copper was also applied to the data at cyanide to copper ratios above 3. As can be seen from One assumption made in the model described above is that the carbon adsorption process is reversible (i.e. the process reaches an equilibrium). To investigate the reversibility of copper cyanide adsorption onto carbon, carbon was firstly loaded from copper cyanide solutions and then the loaded carbon was placed in the same volume of deionised water containing various concentrations of free cyanide. If the copper adsorption is a truly reversible process, one would expect data from each stage to lie on the same equilibrium line (i.e. have the same Freundlich isotherm). Therefore, a model based on adsorption and desorption occurring via different pathways is proposed, and shown in There are two key limitations to this model: 1) an expression is required for [Cu]  In an attempt to improve the model for the adsorption of copper onto carbon, the effect of changing the value of the solution equilibrium constant for Cu(CN) The equilibrium loading of copper cyanide onto activated carbon was found to follow a Freundlich isotherm for the low cyanide-to-copper ratios (2 to 3) but deviates from it for the high cyanide-to-copper ratios (> The use of theoretical equilibrium constants (i.e. a linear isotherm) to describe the adsorption of Cu(CN) In applying this model to a gold plant, the following needs to also be considered: a) a correction to this model if the carbon activity is lower than for new carbon, b) changes in cyanide concentration as a result of cyanide oxidation or consumption from other gangue components. The support of the 