Abstract
                  Multiple myeloma (MM) develops devastating bone destruction with enhanced bone resorption and suppressed bone formation. In contrast to enhanced osteoclastogenesis, little is known about the mechanism of impaired bone formation in MM. Because a canonical Wingless-type (Wnt) signaling pathway has recently been shown to play an important role in osteoblast differentiation, we examined whether MM cells affect a canonical Wnt pathway to suppress bone formation. Conditioned media from RPMI8226 and U266 MM cell lines and primary MM cells suppressed in vitro mineralization as well as alkaline phosphatase activity in osteoblasts induced by bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2). These cell lines constitutively produced a soluble Wnt inhibitor, secreted Frizzled-related protein 2 (sFRP-2), but not other Wnt inhibitors including sFRP-1, sFRP-3, and dickkopf 1 (DKK-1) at the protein level. Most MM cells from patients with advanced bone destructive lesions also expressed sFRP-2. Furthermore, exogenous sFRP-2 suppressed osteoblast differentiation induced by BMP-2, and immunodepletion of sFRP-2 significantly restored mineralized nodule formation in vitro, suggesting a predominant role for MM cell-derived sFRP-2 in the impairment of bone formation by MM. Thus, in addition to enhanced osteolysis, MM cells also suppress bone formation at least in part through an inhibition of the canonical Wnt pathway by secreting sFRP-2.Multiple myeloma (MM) almost exclusively develops and expands in the bone marrow (BM) and generates devastating bone destruction by osteoclasts (OCs). The bone destruction causes debilitating clinical symptoms including intractable bone pain, disabling multiple fractures, and hypercalcemia. The severity of bone disease correlates with the tumor burden and is one of the major parameters in the Durie and Salomon clinical staging system. Furthermore, the aggressive features of MM bone lesions have contributed significantly to its poor prognosis despite the recent development of intensive chemotherapeutic regimens. Interaction between receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB (RANK) expressed on the surface of cells of osteoclastic lineage and RANK ligand expressed on stromal cells plays a key role in the development and activation of OCs, whereas osteoprotegerin, a decoy receptor for RANK ligand secreted from stromal cells, inhibits RANK ligand-RANK signaling. Along with enhanced bone resorption, mineralization is impaired in MM bone lesions. Radiographic examinations show radiolucent lesions without calcification known as “punched-out” lesions. Analyses of bone turnover in patients with MM by biochemical bone markers also suggested an imbalance of bone turnover with enhanced bone resorption and suppressed bone formation. A canonical Wingless-type (Wnt) signaling pathway has been shown to play an important role in osteoblast differentiation. Wnts are secreted cysteine-rich glycoproteins, known as regulators of the differentiation of hematopoietic and mesenchymal cells as well as embryonic development. Recombinant human (rh) bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) and recombinant mouse sFRP-2 were obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Goat polyclonal antibody against human noggin, chordin, sFRP-1, sFRP-3, and dickkopf 1(DKK-1), rabbit polyclonal antibody against human sFRP-2, and protein A– and protein G–Agarose beads were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Human MM cell lines, RPMI8226 and U266, and a human osteosarcoma cell line, MG63, were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). A mouse preosteoblastic cell line, MC3T3-E1, was obtained from RIKEN (Tsukuba, Japan). BM mononuclear cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNCs) were isolated by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation (Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology, Uppsala, Sweden) from heparinized BM and peripheral blood drawn from patients with MM under written informed consent, according to the Declaration of Helsinki. MM cells were further purified from BM mononuclear cells with positive selection using CD138 (Syndecan-1) microbeads and the Miltenyi magnetic cell-sorting system (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Primary stromal cells derived from fresh BM aspirates from patients with MM were isolated and cultured as we previously described. MM cell lines and PBMNCs were cultured at 5 × 10 To examine osteoblast differentiation in vitro, MC3T3-E1 cells and BM-derived stromal cells were grown to confluence in 12- or 24-well culture plates in osteogenic medium, α-minimal essential medium (α-MEM) containing 10% FBS, β-glycerophosphate, and ascorbic acid. The medium was replaced every 3 days. For estimation of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, after culturing for 10 days, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and incubated with 200 μL 1 × Passive Lysis Buffer (Promega, Madison, WI). After gentle shaking for 15 minutes at room temperature, the cells were scraped off and centrifuged at 1000 For analyzing mineralized nodule formation, osteoblastic cells were cultured for up to 28 days and fixed with 10% neutral-buffered formalin and visualized by von Kossa staining as described previously. Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). For reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), 2 μg total RNA was reverse transcribed using SuperScript2 RNase H Total cell lysates were prepared with cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA). For immunoprecipitation of human sFRP-2, MM cell lines were cultured at 5 × 10 BM clot sections obtained from patients with MM were fixed in neutral-buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were deparaffinized and hydrated. After a 10-minute blocking process, the sections were incubated with anti–sFRP-2 antibody or control rabbit IgG overnight at 4°C or 1 hour at 37°C. After washing, immunoreactivity was detected by biotinylated secondary antibodies and HRP-conjugated streptavidin (Dako LSAB+ System; Dako, Carpinteria, CA) followed by diaminobenzidine substrate (Wako Pure Chemical) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Isolated MM cells were prepared at 1 × 10 MM cell CM was incubated for overnight at 4°C with constant mixing with either 20 μg/mL rabbit anti–human sFRP-2 antibody or normal rabbit IgG. Protein A–Agarose beads (50 μL packed beads) were then added and further incubated for 1 hour, followed by centrifugation at 12 000 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were harvested, filtered with 0.22-μm filter systems, and stocked at –80°C before use. Primary osteoblasts were prepared from calvariae of newborn ICR mice. Osteoblasts in 12-well culture plates at 50% to 60% confluence were cotransfected with 1 μg TCF reporter plasmid (TOPflash; Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, NY) and 0.025 μg pRL-TK Renilla luciferase plasmids (Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA) using GenePorter 2 Transfection Reagents (GenLantis, San Diego, CA) in opti-MEM (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) with 1% FBS, followed by replacement by opti-MEM with 5% FBS. After incubation for 24 hours, luciferase activities were measured with luminometer (ATTO, Tokyo, Japan) by mixing 50 μL luciferase substrate solution (Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA) with 10 μL lysates. Transcriptional activity was normalized for Renilla luciferase activity. Statistical significance was determined by Student To clarify whether MM cells can suppress osteoblast differentiation, we first examined the effects of CM from MM cell lines on mineralized nodule formation induced by BMP-2. From these observations, we hypothesized that MM cells secrete soluble factors that block BMP-2 actions. Noggin, chordin, and follistatin are among potent soluble antagonists of BMP-2 that interfere with BMP-2 binding to its cognate receptors. We next focused on a canonical Wnt pathway that plays an important role in osteoblast differentiation. Activation of the Wnt pathway induces ALP activity in cells of osteoblastic lineage, To investigate whether sFRP-2 is expressed by primary MM cells in the BM, we next examined sFRP-2 expression by RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry in MM cells purified from patients with bone destruction. sFRP-2 was expressed by 3 of 4 primary MM cells at the mRNA level ( sFRP family members are demonstrated to act as decoy receptors to interfere with Wnt binding to its receptor, Frizzled, and sFRP-1 has been shown to suppress osteoblast differentiation similar to DKK-1. To further establish the role of sFRP-2 in the suppression of osteoblast differentiation in MM, we depleted sFRP-2 from CM of RPMI8226 and U266 MM cell lines as well as primary MM cells from patient no. 4 by immunoprecipitation with a specific antibody and immunobeads. Mineralized nodule formation induced by BMP-2 was almost completely suppressed by addition of these MM cell CM treated with control IgG and immunobeads ( To confirm that MM-cell–derived sFRP-2 suppresses a canonical Wnt–β-catenin pathway, we constructed sensitive TCF reporter assays (TOPflash) responding to nuclear translocation of β-catenin and its binding to TCF transcription factors in osteoblasts by stimulation of a canonical Wnt–β-catenin pathway. RPMI8226 CM suppressed luciferase reporter activity in the presence of BMP-2, indicating the inhibition of β-catenin nuclear translocation ( In the present study, we demonstrated that primary MM cells from patients with advanced bone lesions as well as MM cell lines secrete soluble factors that inhibit osteoblast differentiation and mineralized nodule formation (Figures Tian et al Aberrant activation of a Wnt–β-catenin signaling pathway is associated with tumor progression in a variety of human cancers. In addition to its effect on bone formation, a Wnt pathway is essential for self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells We thank Ms Momoko Nitta, Hiroe Amou, and Asuka Oda for their expert technical assistance.