Purpose: To describe a technique of arthroscopic-assisted reduction and percutaneous cannulated screw fixation for displaced patellar fractures and to present the results of 5 cases. Type of Study: Case series. Methods: Five patients (3 male, 2 female) with displaced patellar fractures treated with an arthroscopic-assisted reduction and percutaneous cannulated screw fixation were prospectively analyzed. The mean age was 53 years (range, 27 to 74 years). All fractures were fixed with at least 2 4-mm cannulated screws under arthroscopic visualization. Cerclage wiring through the cannulated screws was necessary in 2 patients with osteopenic bone. Controlled passive range of motion exercises were started on the first postoperative day. Full weight bearing with an immobilizer-type brace was allowed as tolerated. The mean follow-up was 28 months (range, 24 to 35 months). The patients were evaluated with Lysholm II scores, clinical examination, knee range of motion, thigh circumference measurements, and radiographs. Results: All fractures healed uneventfully. The mean Lysholm II score was 84.8 (range, 75-96). All but 1 patient regained full knee range of motion. A mean quadriceps atrophy of 0.8 cm compared with the contralateral side was seen in unilateral cases. There was no implant failure or infection. Conclusions: Arthroscopic-assisted reduction and percutaneous cannulated screw fixation is appropriate for displaced transverse patellar fractures without major separation and comminution. Longitudinal or oblique fractures, even if there are more than 2 major fragments, are amenable to arthroscopic techniques, providing the fragments are large enough to be fixed with screws. This technique is minimally invasive and does not disturb the vascular supply of patella. It allows clear visualization of the reduction and stability of the fracture, and facilitates early postoperative range of motion exercises. This method is not suitable for highly comminuted fractures or transverse fractures with major separation that are accompanied by rupture of the extensor mechanism.
                  Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic and Related Surgery, Vol 18, No 2 (February), 2002: pp 156–162Patellar fractures are quite common, constituting approximately 1% of all skeletal injuries. We used an arthroscopic-assisted technique to treat patellar fractures in 5 patients from 1997 through 1998. These cases constituted 8% of all the surgically treated patellar fractures in our institution during the same time period. The mean age was 53 years (range, 27 to 74 years); and 3 of the patients were male and 2 were female (Table 1). The procedure is performed on a standard radiolucent operating table. A tourniquet is applied to the proximal thigh and is inflated during the procedure. A leg holder is not necessary. Fracture reduction and fixation are carried out in full extension of the knee. Arthroscopy is performed using standard anteromedial and anterolateral portals. An ancillary superolateral portal is created 1 or 2 cm superior and lateral to the superolateral corner of the patella. The hemarthrosis is drained and the joint space is thoroughly irrigated. Small osteochondral fragments and loose bodies are removed. A full-radius shaver may be used to remove clots and debris to visualize the fracture lines. Reduction is achieved by manipulating the fragments with an arthroscopic probe from the superolateral portal. Percutaneously placed towel clamps may aid in the maintenance of the reduction. Two 18-gauge needles are placed into the joint at the proximal pole of the patella to locate the optimal entry points for the K-wires, as they may be difficult to define in swollen knees. The location of these needles should be at least 2 cm apart and they should be directed perpendicular to the fracture lines. Once these entry points are verified arthroscopically, the needles are withdrawn sequentially and K-wires are placed (Fig 1). Controlled passive range of motion (CPM) is started and full weight bearing with an immobilizer type brace is allowed on the day following surgery. The initial range of motion is between 0° and 40° flexion on a CPM device. The patients are discharged with an adjustable angle knee brace allowing 0° to 40° of range of motion. The flexion angle is increased 20° to 30° weekly, with the objective of full flexion at 4 weeks. Active knee extension is allowed but quadriceps exercises against resistance are delayed for 4 to 6 weeks. Mean follow-up was 28 months (range, 24 to 35 months). All 5 patients underwent regular radiologic examinations until union was confirmed. Clinical evaluation at the last follow-up visit included Lysholm II All fractures healed uneventfully (Figs 3 and 4).  The goal in treating patellar fractures is to restore the continuity of the extensor mechanism and to anatomically reduce the joint surface. Conservative treatment is limited to fractures with less than 2 mm of separation and no significant displacement of the articular surface. Both open and percutaneous surgical techniques have been described for reduction and internal fixation, but the authors are aware of only a single report of 11 cases about arthroscopic-assisted fixation of patellar fractures. Major separation of the fragments in a transverse patella fracture is almost always accompanied by rupture of the quadriceps mechanism extending laterally and medially from the patella. Weber et al. We believe that patient selection is the main key to achieving satisfactory results with this method. Arthroscopic techniques are suited to transverse fractures of the patella with articular incongruity but without major separation and comminution of the fragments. Although there are no clear guidelines, fractures that are displaced more than 8 mm are likely to be accompanied by disruption of the extensor mechanism and, therefore, they are not suitable for arthroscopic methods. Longitudinal or oblique fractures, even in cases that involve more than 2 major fragments, are amenable to arthroscopic techniques, providing the fragments are large enough to be fixed with screws. The possibility of early controlled range of motion in the joint is a further advantage of this technique. The gradual increase in range of motion can be tailored for the type of fracture and rigidity of fixation. Immediate full weight bearing with a knee immobilizer is possible. Apart from the 1 patient with senile dementia, all of our patients attained full range of motion in their injured knees. In conclusion, arthroscopic percutaneous fixation of select patellar fractures offers important advantages over open techniques. The technique is minimally invasive and does not disturb the vascular supply of the patella, permits ideal visualization of the reduction and stability of the fracture, allows concomitant intra-articular pathology to be addressed, and facilitates early postoperative range of motion exercises. The disadvantages of arthroscopic treatment are that it is technically demanding and does not suit all fracture patterns. Patient selection is critical because open repair of the extensor mechanism may be necessary in transverse fractures with major displacement. Although the number of patients in this report is limited, we believe that arthroscopic treatment of appropriate patella fractures is a promising technique with a very low complication rate that offers good functional results.