A study of cell disruption by bead milling for two microalgae, Nannochloropsis oculata and Porphyridium cruentum, was performed. Strains robustness was quantified by high-pressure disruption assays. The hydrodynamics in the bead mill grinding chamber was studied by Residence Time Distribution modeling. Operating parameters effects were analyzed and modeled in terms of stress intensities and stress number. RTD corresponded to a 2 CSTR in series model. First order kinetics cell disruption was modeled in consequence. Continuous bead milling was efficient for both strains disruption. SI–SN modeling was successfully adapted to microalgae. As predicted by high pressure assays, N. oculata was more resistant than P. cruentum. The critical stress intensity was twice more important for N. oculata than for P. cruentum. SI–SN modeling allows the determination of operating parameters minimizing energy consumption and gives a scalable approach to develop and optimize microalgal disruption by bead milling.Microalgae are identified as a promising source of numerous interesting compounds for a large variety of industries such as food, animal feed, biodiesel production, cosmetics, chemicals and pharmaceuticals ( The cell disruption step has been widely studied and current methods can be classified into mechanical and non-mechanical treatments ( Bead mills are already used at industrial scale for fine grinding of minerals, ceramics, paint pigments and other products. The process can be operated continuously as well as discontinuously. In the field of biotechnologies, bead milling has been successfully applied for microorganisms disruption ( Bead milling is a complex process with many operating parameters such as bead diameter, bead density, bead filling, agitator speed and feed rate. In addition, grinding chamber design as well as agitator one can vary. Most of the referenced studies focus on the effect of the different operating conditions on the disruption efficiency and contrary results are often reported. For example, increasing biomass concentration, was found to have positive effects on In order to rationalize the process, some authors have introduced relationships between cell disruption and bead collision frequencies (  This work proposes an experimental study and a SI/SN modeling of cell disruption during bead milling process for two microalgal strains: For both biomasses, culture homogenization was achieved by sterile air injection at the bottom of the photobioreactor (PBR). The pH and temperature were recorded by a pH/temperature probe (Mettler Toledo SG 3253 sensor) monitored by the acquisition software LabVIEW. Biomass concentration was comprised between 0.7 and 1 The  High pressure cell disruption was achieved by using the TS series 2.2 Bead milling was achieved with a Dyno®-mill multi lab from Willy A Bachofen AG (Muttenz, Switzerland). Experiments were run in continuous mode in one single pass. The suspension was pumped from an agitated feed tank to the grinding chamber (600 Cell counting was used to measure the extent of The disruption rate Percentage of disintegrated cells (Eq. As Hydrodynamics inside the grinding chamber was characterized by residence time distribution (RTD) recording and modeling. It was considered that dissolved salts and cells present similar flow path in the stirred media ( Experimental RTD were fitted (minimizing square error) for  The number of stress events SN increases proportionally with the comminution time For each operating condition, SI was calculated. The reduced stress number (SNr In order to evaluate the robustness of The RTD was modeled as continuous stirred-tank reactors in series (CSTR), ( In Online conductivity monitoring during all the experiments (filling ratio: 35–85%; feed rate: 48–170 In addition, as shown in Besides, experiments were achieved with diluted algal suspensions and then no viscosity variation has been observed. Impact on hydrodynamics was then neglected. Cell disruption procedures in bead mills were typically fitted by first-order kinetics ( From the first order reaction (Eq. Then the kinetic constant In In In SI/SN parameters were calculated for all milling experiments and their evolution for However, SN for The intersection of the first part of the curve with the abscissa resulted in a critical SI value, SIc. It corresponded to the SI from which no longer decrease of SN was observed. This SIc was 5.5 The relation between the specific energy required for achieve 90% of cell destruction and stress intensity is presented on log–log scale in The observed energy values for microalgae were significantly higher than those obtained by As result for RTD study and hydrodynamics corresponding to 2-CSTR were used for an accurate first order modeling of cell breakage kinetics. SI–SN modeling was successfully adapted to microalgae bead milling treatment. The two microorganisms had similar responses but critical SI number for This work was financially supported by the