The pilot-scale wastewater treatment system used in this study comprised a 40-l UASB reactor (6-h HRT) followed by three duckweed ponds in series (total HRT 15days). During the warm season, the treatment system achieved removal values of 93%, 96% and 91% for COD, BOD and TSS, respectively. Residual values of ammonia, TKN and total phosphorus were 0.41mg N/l, 4.4mg N/l and 1.11mg P/l, with removal efficiencies of 98%, 85% and 78%, respectively. The system achieved 99.998% faecal coliform removal during the warm season with final effluent containing 4×103
                     cfu/100ml. During the winter, the system was efficient in removing COD, BOD and TSS but not nutrients. The system was deficient in the removal of faecal coliforms during the winter, producing effluent with 4.7×105
                     cfu/100ml. During the warm season, the N removal consisted of 80% by plant uptake, 5% by sedimentation and 15% unaccounted for. A duckweed production rate of 33t dry matter per hectare per 8months was achieved.Affordable and manageable safe sanitation services for small towns and rural communities are needed. Therefore, the objective of national and international policies is to accelerate expansion of environmentally responsible sanitation systems throughout the world, especially in the water scarce regions. The anaerobic treatment process is increasingly recognised as an important step in an advanced treatment technology for environmental protection and resource preservation and it represents, combined with other proper post-treatment methods, a sustainable and an appropriate wastewater treatment system for developing countries ( The nutrient-rich effluent from the UASB should be post-treated, not to remove nutrients but to recover these. High rate algae ponds represent one of the most popular treatment methods and provide a huge amount of algae ( In aquatic macrophyte-based treatment systems, the sewage nutrients are recovered and transformed into easily harvested protein-rich by-products. Recycling systems based on the treatment of municipal wastewater with protein production using duckweed represent a comprehensive solution ( In recent years, research has focussed on duckweed and its role in wastewater treatment and potential for nutrient recovery ( Demonstration of a UASB-duckweed pond system for domestic wastewater treatment and renovation in plant protein production was the aim of the present work. Investigation of the fate of influent nitrogen in the duckweed ponds represents the core of this study. An outdoor experiment was conducted at the Department of Water Pollution Research and Control (National Research Centre), Cairo, Egypt. The experiment covered a period of 1 Domestic wastewater, collected from the neighbourhood, was pre-treated in an UASB reactor at 6 The duckweed species, The plant growth rate and yield were monitored every 48 Sludge accumulation measurements were carried out in all ponds in order to understand the fate of nitrogen in the system better. The measurements were performed using plastic cups placed on the bottom in the centre of each pond. The surface area of each cup was about 71 Volatilisation of ammonia was measured by covering a small surface area of the ponds by using a glass bottle cut at its base. The mouth of the bottle was plugged with a piece of cork with a plastic tube passing through. The plastic tube was connected to a bottle containing boric acid. The bottles were immersed vertically in the ponds with the necks directed upwards. Collected gases were drawn through the boric acid solution, which was subsequently titrated with sulfuric acid to calculate the amount of ammonia present. The evapotranspiration rate was measured using plastic mini-ponds with 0.05 Extensive monitoring of the treatment efficiency was performed by collecting weekly samples from the different treatment units. All physico-chemical and microbiological analyses for pH, COD, BOD, ammonia N, nitrite N, nitrate N, Kjeldahl N, total P, TSS, hydrogen sulphide, dissolved oxygen and faecal coliform count were performed according to Standard Methods ( Analysis of the wastewater during the experimental period indicated that COD, BOD and TSS were not significantly ( Efficiencies of the UASB and duckweed ponds in terms of percentage removal are presented in Monitoring of the duckweed ponds during the year revealed that the total efficiency of the ponds in removing COD and BOD was not significantly ( Nutrient removal in the duckweed ponds was significantly ( Under Egyptian environmental conditions the system seemed effective for the removal of COD, BOD and TSS during the whole year and for the recovery of nutrients and faecal coliform removal only during the warm season (about 8 Yield of duckweed biomass and its characteristics is presented in Monitoring of the domestic sewage over 1 Removals of COD, BOD and TSS from the anaerobic effluent fed to the three duckweed ponds reached about 64%, 73% and 43%, during the warm season and 72%, 75% and 63% in the winter, respectively, at the HRT of 15 In the last two ponds, however, nitrite and nitrate values were generally above 1 In this study, the dry matter content of the duckweed harvest ranged between 4.3% and 5.4%. This range is similar that published in literature. The dry matter content of In this treatment study, it was confirmed that during the summer, the main part of TN removal (78.5%) was recovered by the duckweed (about 80.5%), while denitrification and sedimentation represented 14.8% and 4.7%, respectively. By using a batch wastewater treatment system, Die-off of pathogenic bacteria is considered to be a complex phenomenon in waste stabilisation ponds. While detention time and temperature are considered to be the most influential parameters, other factors have been reported by many investigators. These include the presence of predators, high pH value and solar radiation ( The overall efficiency of the system is promising, especially during the warm season (8  The system is simple in terms of operation and maintenance, and therefore suitable for rural communities. The efficiency of the UASB in removing COD, BOD and TSS was lower during the winter. As a result, the organic surface load to the duckweed ponds in winter was higher. However, this did not affect the removal efficiency in the duckweed ponds. Therefore, the overall efficiency of the system was not significantly affected by temperature. The nutrient recovery from the UASB effluent in duckweed ponds is duckweed growth rate dependent. The duckweed plants captured about 80% of the removed nitrogen, while 5% accumulated in the sediment and 15% was denitrified. The growth rate of duckweed was significantly reduced by lower temperature (13–20 The faecal coliform removal in duckweed ponds is affected by the decline in temperature. Removal mechanisms in duckweed ponds are probably affected by temperature, nutrient availabilities and duckweed harvesting rate. The authors would like to thank the Dutch government for financial support for this research within the framework of the “Wasteval” project. The study was partially financed by the World Laboratory Scholarship (T-1 project).