Bioleaching has gained increased interest as an alternative for processing zinc sulfide ores without the generation of SO2. The bioleaching of sphalerite with mesophile microorganisms at 1% pulp density has been studied. Batch experiments were carried out at 34°C and 200rpm. The effects of pH, concentration of Fe(II), as well as the presence of Fe(III) in the zinc extraction were assessed. Fast zinc dissolution can be achieved working with Acidithiobacillus sp. The best pH for bioleaching is in the 1.75–2.00 range and the presence of Fe(III) has a strong influence in zinc extraction, increasing the rate of dissolution and does not adversely affect the growth of the Acidithiobacillus population.Bioleaching may be applied as an alternative to increase zinc production without the consequent production of SO Since Fe(III) is available from the processing of zinc during the “acid” leaching of ZnO, this work studies the effect of ferric iron in the bioleaching of ZnS. High concentrations of Fe(III) are considered detrimental to the development of This work presents the results of the bioleaching of ZnS with mesophile microorganisms at 1% pulp density. The results show that fast zinc dissolution can be achieved working with The microorganism studied was isolated from a brazilian zinc sulfide mine ( The sphalerite concentrate studied has a particle size 100% minus 45 Bioleaching experiments were carried out in 250 Total iron (Fe Initially, the effect of pH over the sphalerite leaching was studied in a medium containing 4 In the experiments carried out at pH 2.25 and higher, the reduction of zinc extraction can be credited to iron (III) precipitation which probably took place under the jarosite form. Jarosite starts to precipitate at pH 2.0, thus reducing the oxidant (Fe(III)) concentration. There is also a reduction in the cell population in solution for the experiments carried out at pH 2.25 and 2.50, after approximately 90  In the experiments without Fe(II), zinc extraction and bacterial population are much lower than those where Fe(II) was added. This is because there is a lack of substrate for bacterial growth and consequently of oxidant (ferric iron) for the sulfide oxidation. In this case, all iron present in solution (there is around 12% Fe in the concentrate) is provided by ZnS and its concentration in the reactor is not enough to allow bacterial growth under the same conditions as those observed where the substrate was intentionally added.  In this work, zinc extraction over 80% could be achieved in less than 100 Provided an appropriate pH is chosen, the presence of ferric iron in the initial step of leaching has a great impact on the leaching rate. Its presence creates a chemical contribution to the dissolution of sphalerite while the concentration of biologically generated Fe(III) is still low. Concentrations of Fe(III) up to 5 This work was supported by “Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos - FINEP” and the Université Liège.