An aqueous two-phase flotation (ATPF) composed of polyethylene glycol (PEG) and sodium citrate was constructed for direct purification of thermostable lipase 42 from recombinant Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) pLysS. The influences of varying phase forming composition, tie-line length (TLL), volume ratio (V
                     R), crude loading (C
                     L), system pH, gas nitrogen flow rate (F
                     R) and flotation time (F
                     t) upon ATPF partitioning performance were investigated. The optimum purification condition of lipase was achieved at PEG 8000/sodium citrate ATPF comprising TLL of 25.4, V
                     R of 0.3, C
                     L of 20% (w/w) at pH 7 with average F
                     t of 10min and F
                     R at 20mL/min. Lipase was successfully purified using ATPF up to 4.05-fold with a separation efficiency of 99%. Result of this study also demonstrated that recovery yield of lipase in PEG phase of up to 96% was achieved. These results reveal the potential of ATPF partitioning in recovery and purification of recombinant lipase.Lipases (triacylglycerol acyl hydrolases; E.C. 3.1.1.3) are industrially important enzymes that catalyse the hydrolysis of carboxyl ester bonds presence in triacylglycerols to free fatty acids, diacylglycerols, monoacylglycerols and glycerol Recently, there has been a progressive increase in the number of publications related to lipases purification methods such as conventional column chromatography ATPF is a kind of adsorptive bubble separation technique, in which, the proteins (surface-active compound) in aqueous are adhered on the bubble surfaces of an ascending nitrogen gas stream and then released in the polymer (e.g. PEG) layer at top phase when the bubbles rupture. The mass transfer mode of bubble adsorption in ATPF can afford better separation efficiencies, softer mixing and higher concentration coefficients with very low amounts of PEG usage, and the mass transfer mode is also much more effective than the mechanical vibration employed in ATPE Polyethylene glycol (PEG) with different average molecular weights ( The recombinant The apparatus used to carry out the ATPF experiments ( A 10% (w/w) aliquot of crude extract and 120 The ATPF parameters including molecular weight ( TLL which showed the compositions of the two phases at equilibrium was calculated according to Eq. Volume ratio ( Enzyme specific activity (SA), defined as the ratio between lipase activity (AU) and the total protein concentration (mg), was calculated according to Eq. The separation efficiency ( Purification factor ( Yield (%) of the lipase was calculated using Eq. The lipase activity assay was performed according to the method described by Gupta et al. The total protein content in sample was determined according to Bradford method SDS–PAGE was performed in a Mini-Vertical SE250 electrophoresis unit with minor modification as described by Abbasiliasi et al. The effects of various PEG molecular weights (4000, 6000 and 8000 When the volume ratio was kept constant, an increase in the length of tie-line corresponds to the higher concentration of both PEG and sodium citrate. The result obtained from this study showed that the value of the concentration ratio increased with the elevation of TLL. With an increase in TLL, partitioning of lipase from the bottom phase to the top phase was promoted, as there was a decrease in the relative free volume in the salt-rich bottom phase The effect of volume ratio on lipase partitioning is shown in The effect of pH on concentration ratio, separation efficiency, yield and purification factor of lipase on the performance of ATPF is illustrated in The effect of crude extract concentration upon the performance of ATPF is shown in The effects of varying flotation time on the specific activity, purification factor, yield, concentration coefficient and separation efficiency of lipase are presented in The effect of nitrogen flow rate (10–100 The purity of the extracted lipase recovered in ATPF was evaluated using 12% SDS–PAGE analysis. The SDS–PAGE profile of the standard protein markers, partially purified lipase and crude sample is depicted in Under the optimal conditions, ATPF was compared with ATPE for the separation of lipase. Results from this study have demonstrated that the use of ATPF could be a potential approach for the purification of intracellular lipase from recombinant The authors gratefully acknowledge the help from Dr. Ramakrishnan Nagasundara Ramanan (School of Engineering, Monash University) for language polishing and proof reading of the article.