A discrete population balance approach to model batch grinding is presented and used to simulate baryte grinding in a vibratory disc mill. The grinding kinetics used in the simulation are measured independently with the grinding rate depending on the particle size. A bimodal fragment size distribution of a single breakage event according to the Austin approach is used. The resulting model was solved by numerical integration and the results are discussed concerning accuracy and applicability. The experimental data are compared with the calculated results and show good agreement with the simulations. The breakage distribution is calculated for different particle sizes. This approach avoids the fitting of a large number of parameters to few experimental values, making the model more robust and allowing a wider range of applications, e.g. process optimization.cumulative breakage function (–) particle diameter (mm) mean particle size class diameter (mm) deviation (–) volume based median diameter (mm) squared error breakage rate (1/s) mass (kg) total number of classes (–) normalized monodispersity (–) cumulative distribution (volume basis) (–) frequency distribution (volume basis) time (sec) mass fraction (–) differential fragment distribution austin function parameter austin function parameter austin function parameter experimental simulated index particle size class index particle size class coarsest particle class median (volume basis) 25% quantils of cumulative distribution 75% quantils of cumulative distribution Modeling and simulating comminution processes is very important for process optimization to reduce energy costs and increase product recovery. A developed and verified grinding model can be used as part of a general process model which may include separators, mixers and oversize particle recycling. Energy based approaches based on the mass specific grinding energy input were developed Grinding process models represent a challenge as stressing mechanisms, frequencies, energies and particle strength (which are required in unified comminution models A suitable process model must be able to depict the course of a grinding process with the lowest number of estimated parameters Here the process model for the model material of baryte being ground in a vibratory disc mill was implemented by measuring the grinding rates of each particle size class and the breakage distribution represented by the Austin function. The resulting process model showed good agreement with the experimental data allowing for the process to be simulated using a minimum of fitted parameters. The used mill was a lab-scale vibratory disc mill of the type BHK Freiberg, MSL 2, see the operating principle in The whole grinding chamber, held within a frame and supported by springs, is moved in circular motion by an eccentric connected to an electrical drive. The loose disc and the grinding ring inside the chamber effect the grinding. The grinding chamber diameter is 140 The mineral baryte was used as a model material. Baryte (BaSO It can be seen in Particle size distributions were measured using dry sieving in a vibrating sieving tower at a total sieving time of 10 The particles of one size class were weighted to measure the grinding kinetics and calculate the particle size distributions. Batch grinding can be described by discrete population balances for each mass fraction The mass fractions for the coarsest particle class were assigned the index The solution of the differential equation set for all mass fractions requires the knowledge of the breakage rate The differential breakage distribution To conserve total mass, the following conditions must be fulfilled. The breakage distribution kernel characterizes the ground material and applied stress. The Austin kernel The mean class sizes  The breakage distribution parameters can theoretically be obtained by single particles stressing experiments. However, as the applied stress in the vibratory disc mill is however not easily accessible or reproducible in single particle stressing, the three parameters of the Austin breakage function were calculated from the experiment grinding data. For the solution of the grinding equations breakage rate constants are required. It is important to directly measure the breakage rate constants in relation to each particle size to minimize the amount of model parameters to fit. By Integrating Eq. To obtain the breakage rate for each fraction, prior to grinding the material was sieved until only particles within that selected class were obtained as the coarsest particle fraction. A mass of 250 The breakage rate of the smallest particle fraction  The obtained breakage rate for each particle size class decreases with decreasing particle size as shown in This is can be explained by the well-known fact that particle strength decreases with increasing particle size, e.g. predicted by Weibull Using the breakage rates which were independently determined for each particle size class, the simulations were carried out by numerical integration of the equation set shown in Eq. To compare the experimental and simulated particle size distributions, the cumulative distributions were calculated from the mass fractions, see Eq. The experimental and simulated results for three grinding times are depicted below in The simulated and experimental frequency distributions at two grinding times are shown in The simulated and experimental  The results show good overall agreement, with a maximum deviation of 22% for The course of the grinding process, represented by the volume based median particle diameters, is shown in As already measured for the grinding rates of single particle size classes, grinding becomes slower for smaller particles, thus slowing down the process. To show the widths of the particle size distributions at the different grinding times, the normalized distribution monodispersity A distribution monodispersity of 1 indicates a monomodal distribution. The two diameters It is observable that the trends for the normalized distribution width as well and quantities of both model and experiment are matching although deviation increases with increasing grinding time. During the first period of grinding the very narrow feed is ground to a wide range of particle, The cumulative breakage distribution function of one mother particle with It is shown that the particle breakage behavior encountered for baryte in a vibrating disc mill is characterized by a rather large mass loss in a single breakage event. Rougly a third of the mother particle mass is attributed to fragments below 0.65 The implemented model could successfully and accurately describe the time dependent evolution of the particle size distribution of baryte being ground in vibratory disc mill. Moreover, this could be accomplished avoiding fitting a large number of parameters to the experimental results. The Austin breakage distribution was used as a kernel for solving the discrete population balance for all particle size classes. Compared to energy based phenomenological grinding laws (Bond, Rittinger, Kick) it offers a wider range of information, as all size classes are independently balanced instead of calculating just a “lumped” median diameter with no information about distribution width. As the applied stress energies, stressing frequencies and particle strengths at the characteristic stress mechanism are not easily accessible, this simple method allows accurate process modeling, which can be used for process optimization and simulation. Potential extensions of this model are introducing the filling ratio of the grinding chamber and its influence on breakage rates. This project is funded by the German Research Foundation (Grant No. TO 156/31-1).