The waste generated by absorbent hygiene products utilization represents a not negligible fraction of municipal solid waste. In the last decades, different solutions have been proposed worldwide but their sustainability has not been assessed. This paper investigates on a demonstrative scale the technical feasibility, environmental compatibility and social aspects of a recycling process of these wastes. An autoclave, coupled with a sorting machine, sterilizes the waste and separates its cellulosic and plastic fractions. The process recovers the plastics, and utilizes the cellulose in a bubbling fluidized bed gasifier, to produce the steam necessary for the sterilization. The experimental tests assessed the technological feasibility of the process, and identified the operating conditions for an efficient recycling of absorbent hygiene products waste without any external energy support. The results also provide a reliable inventory of environmental burdens for a life cycle assessment of the recycling scheme and the two conventional management options of energy recovery in a municipal solid waste incinerator, and disposal in a sanitary landfill. The recycling scheme provides a strong reduction of global warming potential (−67 kgCO2equiv. vs 215 kgCO2equiv. and 130 kgCO2equiv. for incineration and landfilling, respectively), and non-renewable energy consumption (−4240 MJprimary vs −2180 MJprimary and −245 MJprimary for incineration and landfilling, respectively). Finally, the study investigated the social implications of the three alternative management options, mainly in terms of risk perception, economic advantages for the customers, and the necessary care for citizens' privacy.Site visit or site specific audit Interviews with employees, governmental agencies, management and NGOs Review of organization-specific reports and audits. Site visit or site specific audit Interviews with employees, governmental agencies, management and NGOs Review of organization-specific reports and audits. Site visit or site specific audit Interviews with employees, governmental agencies, management and NGOs Review of organization-specific reports and audits. Absorbent Hygiene Products Air Pollution Control Bubbling Fluidized Bed Gasifier Biochemical Oxygen Demand Chemical Oxygen Demand Dissolved Organic Carbon International Organisation for Standardization Greenhouse Gas Heat Recovery Steam Generator Life Cycle Assessment Life Cycle Inventory Life Cycle Impact Assessment Material Flow Analysis Municipal Solid Waste Non-Governmental Organizations Substance Flow Analysis Social Life Cycle Assessment Total Organic Carbon Volatile Organic Compounds Waste-to-Energy The amount of wastes generated by the utilization of absorbent hygiene products (AHPs) -essentially made of nappies for children, incontinence pads, feminine care products – strongly depends on the social, cultural and economic conditions of each country ( An innovative approach to the AHP waste management does not consider used nappies as a solid waste problem but looks at them as a potential valuable resource. This strategy is able to improve the environmental performances of AHP waste management in terms of “Global Warming” and “Non-renewable Energy” ( The recycling process of wastes generated by the utilization of absorbent hygiene products was proposed in the framework of a “Virgin” project, LIFE 12 ENV/IT/000611, as an evolution of a previous scheme (“Recall“ project, ECO-11/304440). Both the systems utilize the same material recovery section, where the AHP wastes are sterilized in an autoclave and then sent to a sorting machine, which separates the cellulosic fraction (containing large part of the hydrogel used as superabsorbent) and the plastic fraction (essentially made of polyolefins). The autoclave is an horizontal cylindrical vessel (internal diameter = 1.4 m and length = 4 m), able to treat 500 kg of AHP waste, which is heated up to about 125 °C by means of a jacket of saturated “no-contact” steam at a pressure of 5 bar. The injection of another stream of “contact” steam, for a time of 4 min, provides the necessary sterilization of the AHP waste, which is continuously mixed by the rotation and alternative oscillation of the vessel. The former recycling scheme utilizes methane from the grid to produce the steam necessary to the sterilization process. The experiments carried out on the demonstrative scale plant indicated that, for a moisture content of 50%, and with a boiler efficiency of 0.85, there is an average consumption of methane of 0.032 m The driving idea of the new integrated recycling scheme is the utilization of the bio-energy content of AHP cellulose fraction to substitute the fossil fuel utilised to produce the steam necessary for the sterilization stage. To this aim, the material recovery section is combined with two other sections, as it is schematically shown in The cellulosic fraction obtained by sorting of sterilized AHP waste has been mechanically processed to obtain mono-size cylindrical pellets, in order to increase the density of material to be fed into the gasifier. The feasibility of the fluidized bed gasification of cellulosic pellets has been investigated in a pilot scale reactor, having a feedstock capacity of about 70 kg/h of cellulose, and a maximum thermal output of 400 kW (  In the proposed final configuration, the syngas produced by the gasification of the sterilized cellulosic fraction burns in a mild combustor ( A life cycle assessment, carried out in agreement with the Goal of the study was to assess the potential environmental impacts of the proposed AHP waste recycling system, the stages of waste collection and transportation included, and to compare its assessed environmental performances with those of the conventional management options of thermal treatment and landfilling. The functional unit coincides with the service provided by the system, i.e. the treatment of 500 kg of AHP waste. The composition of the AHP waste, reported in In this phase, emissions, material and energy consumption and recovery of the different management options of AHP wastes have been modelled based on a detailed description of mass/substance and energy flows in each of the systems under analysis. The quantified flow sheet of the recycling process has been discussed above and described in detail elsewhere (   A preliminary analysis of the social aspects related to the proposed recycling process and the other management options for AHP wastes has been carried out, based on the Unep-Setac guidelines ( The study assessed the technical feasibility, environmental compatibility and the social acceptability of an innovative recycling process of wastes generated by the utilization of absorbent hygiene products. It also developed comparisons with the conventional management options of energy recovery in a MSW incinerator and disposal in sanitary landfill. A series of tests carried out on a demonstrative scale allowed to verify that the proposed recycling process is able to provide reliable industrial operations, without external support of fossil energy sources. This suggests, in particular, that the proposed recycling scheme, involving the utilization of energy content of the cellulosic fraction of the waste to produce the steam for the sterilization stage, allows closing the loop of the process, improving its overall environmental sustainability. The experimental tests carried out on a demonstrative scale also provided data for a reliable inventory of environmental burdens, necessary for a life cycle assessment. The LCA quantified the environmental sustainability of the recycling scheme, and its better performances with reference to the conventional management options, mainly in terms of climate change and non-renewable resource consumption. The study also developed a preliminary investigation about the social implications of the recycling chain, taking into account the economic advantages for the customers, the protection of their own privacy, and other aspects related to the specific stages of temporary storage, collection and transport, and reprocessing treatment. The results appear to further support the overall sustainability of the proposed management scheme. The study was carried out even with the financial support and in the framework of project The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version of the journal. They refer to the contributional analyses carried out for each option of AHP waste management (Appendix A) and to the sensitivity analysis developed as final stage of the environmental LCA (Appendix B). Supplementary data related to this article can be found at