The simulation of grinding in tumbling mills using size-mass balance is not sufficiently efficient in simulation of AG/SAG mills and their scale-up. Thus, it is also necessary to regard the required energy for material size reduction. In the present work, the novel theory of specific breakage energy was developed to be considered for energy in comminution modeling which was consistent with common empirical size distributions of broken materials, Gates–Gaudin–Schuhmann (GGS) and Rosin-Rammler (RR). In the given theory, “specific breakage energy distribution” is principal rather than particle size distribution. Based on the theory of specific breakage energy, excess specific breakage energy distribution function (ESBEDF) was defined to explain the effect of impact energy and parent particle size on material breakage. The theory of specific breakage energy was validated by fragment size distribution of three different sets of drop weight tests results. Thus, it was found that ESBEDF is compatible with breakage function, which makes it possible to take account of energy in material breakage function. Finally, an empirical equation was proposed to relate impact index (a parameter determined by fitting) to practical specific energy, applied through an impact.equation parameter equation parameter (t/kWh) breakage distribution function excess specific breakage energy distribution function (ESBEDF) parameters indicating to material Strength specific breakage energy of specific breakage energy of the finest size possible to achieve a subscript indicates to progeny particles in a subscript indicates to parent particles in representative size of a particle size distribution net specific energy consumed to comminute until time t a parameter of energy-size relationship (material dependent) fraction finer than x fraction finer than x at time t the finest size possible to achieve without any change in chemical and crystal structure by mechanical size reduction (mm) a subscript indicating to applied specific energy level the weight fraction of progeny particles finer than 1/ the coarsest fragments produced by breakage (mm) upper limit/representative size of geometric mean/representative size of parent particles in applied specific energy in drop weight test (kWh/t) net specific energy consumed to break material through an impact equation parameter equation parameter equation parameter sharpness parameter of a particle size distribution size dependent equation parameter excess specific breakage energy from size minimum excess specific breakage energy identified for the coarsest fragments, maximum excess specific breakage energy identified for the finest size possible to achieve ( experimental and calculated response variable respectively The simulation of grinding in tumbling mills using size-mass balance equations is common. In size-mass balance approach, the values of breakage distribution function assumed to be almost insensitive to mill conditions and presented as Eq. In order to improve tumbling mill simulation, it has been attempted to consider energy balance alongside size-mass balance. These efforts principally have two approaches, first, the effect of consumed specific energy on breakage rate or breakage probability. Second approach is the effect of consumed specific energy on the breakage distribution function. A brief overview of both approaches is as following. Introducing of energy-specific breakage rate ( Breakage rate directly depends on the breakage probability; breakage rate increases with breakage probability correspondingly and breakage probability increases with an increase of consumed specific energy from zero (for negligible specific energy) to unity (for considerable amount of specific energy). Tavares and King performed single-particle fracture tests by Ultrafast Load Cell on different materials and estimated fracture energy in a wide range of applied specific energies, so they considered log-normal distribution for breakage probability [ In another research, log-logistic distribution was proposed for breakage probability [ In Eq. The most renowned step belongs to JKMRC in which the weight fraction of progeny particles finer than 1/10th of the parent size, In Eq. where In both approaches, considerations about energy result in improvement of models and also aid to explain the effect of particle size on breakage function that has been reviewed by Shi [ The new theory, called “theory of specific breakage energy”, is based on four principles outlined in According to the concepts developed by Stamboliadis [ Units of specific breakage energy could be kWh/t or kWh/m The required specific energy to comminute material of size Assuming any change in chemical and crystal structure of comminuted material does not occur. In parallel with second principle, energy-size equation (Eqs. According to the second and third principles, specific breakage energy is defined as Eq. The size distribution of comminuted material is usually explained by Rosin-Rammler (RR) or Gates–Gaudin–Schuhmann (GGS) distributions (Eq. Charles found out the size distribution of ground material in ball mill varies during batch grinding such that sharpness parameter, Therefore, RR and GGS distributions could be written as Eq. According to Fourth principle, the expression [  According to Eq. Eq. Theory of specific breakage energy states: Specific breakage energy is an “intensive quantity” that indicates to the consumed energy, through the most practically efficient comminution, for reducing size of a In mechanical size reduction of brittle homogeneous material, there is the finest size possible to achieve, Comminution is defined as “ With regard to this theory, the distribution of the excess of specific breakage energy, under the inspiration of Eq.  However, size-mass balance equations are not directly considered, a reasonable agreement is observed between Eq. Conventionally, the comminution is presumed as a “size reduction” whereas the theory of specific breakage energy presumes it as an “excess of specific breakage energy”. Thus, the importance of specific breakage energy in the new given approach is the same as particle size in the conventional one. Conventionally, breakage distribution function defined as the particle size distribution of broken As in size-mass balance, Eq. The expression It is reasonable to name Eq.  Size distribution of fragments produced by drop weight test is an actual data of breakage distribution function. We figure out that although the fragment size distribution of a drop weight test does not obey neither The trial and error performed during this research, shows Eq. Apparently, Finally, Eq. The validity of Eq. Specific breakage energy has two parameters Moreover, sum of square of errors is determined by Eq. Parameter In the first case, the fragment size distributions of standard JK drop weight test, which had been performed on a polymetallic ore in 13.2–16 mm, 19–22.4 mm, 26.5–31.5 mm, 37.5–45 mm, 53–63 mm fractions [ This fact implies that the fragment size distributions of drop weight test, as actual breakage function data, are consistent with ESBEDF postulating the validity of the new theory of specific breakage energy. According to The second data set is the drop weight tests performed on a quartz waste rock in 13.2–16 mm and 37.5–45 mm fractions [ The fittings are considerably good, indicating to the compatibility between fragment size distribution of drop weight test and ESBEDF, which validates the new theory of specific breakage energy. In the second case like previous one, the increase of impact energy associated with an increase of Fitting of Eq. In this case, parameter Theoretically, prediction of applied specific energy has two difficulties: In Eq. Eq. There is a difference between applied specific energy in drop weight test and the net specific energy consumed to break material through an impact. An amount of energy is dissipated in drop weight test. If impact is too weak to break material, it passes through material bed to the earth without significant breakage. If impact has excessive energy, the dropped weight rebounds up (the rebounding height indicates to unabsorbed energy); furthermore, the falling of the rebounding weight, may cause some secondary breakage, which is undesirable. Despite the above mentioned, an empirical equation could be proposed for correlating applied specific energy to obtained parameters (Eq. In this work, the novel theory of specific breakage energy was developed in From the perspective of this theory, “excess specific breakage energy” of comminuted material has a According to the theory of specific breakage energy, The proposed equation (Eqs. In spite of arising difficulties, an empirical equation proposed for relating parameters