Recovery of chemicals in papermaking and converting sections are presented in this chapter. Use of wet air oxidation process, OptiThick GapWasher technology (Metso), Trenntechnik (a filler recovery system connected to the effluent treatment plant), forced evaporation, FilRec (Ahlstrom), ultrafiltration techniques, etc. for recovery of coating color, pigments, and fillers are discussed. Metso Paper has developed an innovative filler recovery concept to help producers of coated paper and board ( The Wiggins Teape Group Ltd. (UK) has patented a fiber and filler recovery system, whereby the recovered material from the effluents is reused in paper production (US Patent 5478441, 1995). The first step is the screening and/or cleaning of the paper mill waste sludge from the mechanical primary clarifier to remove large contaminants. This is done at relatively low dry solids content within the range of 2–6% by weight. It is accomplished using a high-density cyclone cleaner to remove the large dense contaminants followed by the further treatment of the accept by means of a high consistency rotating screen to remove lightweight contaminants. The rejects from both the cyclone cleaner and the rotating screen Stora Enso Uetersen mill is using Trenntechnik, a filler recovery system connected to the effluent treatment ( ECC International has applied the technique of forced evaporation to the recovery of diluted coating colors, which have been studied using laboratory and pilot scale tests. The research system included a screening system, a stirred storage tank, a heat exchanger, and a forced circulation design evaporator unit. In a typical experiment, the waste color was screened, and then it was placed in the stirred tank and recirculated through the evaporator via the heat exchanger. The evaporator was operated at 5–10 ECC International has developed technology to incinerate deinking sludges under closely-controlled temperature conditions, so that the decomposition of calcium carbonate is minimized and the reactions between the minerals are prevented. The incineration is split into two stages. In the first stage, the majority of the organic material is burned rapidly and efficiently, and the potential of the sludge for generating high local temperatures is eliminated. The ash from the first stage is then subjected to a more extended calcination in the second stage, in which all remaining traces of char and organic material are eliminated. These are then subjected to conventional mineral processing techniques to produce the desired filling or coating without the necessity of adding any further materials ( Ahlstrom, which is now a part of Metso, has developed a technology called FilRec for pigment recovery. FilRec is the system, in which the pigments of the hydrocyclone system reject are recovered for use as a raw material in the paper production. The ash content of this reject can be as high as 80–85%. The reject of the hydrocyclone system includes a combination of fibers, fillers, pigments, latex, and other additives originating from coating, which are unable to be reused directly, primarily because of their particle shape and size ( In Caledonian Paper in Irvine, UK, the effluent treatment process with the recovery system of pigments started in 1995 (  Ultrafiltration (UF) has become one of the main methods for the recycling of pigments and chemicals while retaining their functional value ( Crossflow filtration streams are divided into three parts: (1) feed that enters the filtration channels permeate, (2) a solution that passes through the membrane pores (clear water) retentate (or concentrate), and (3) the solution retained by the membrane (raw materials). With the turbulence created by the crossflow velocity, particles are continually swept away, thus avoiding the clogging up of the membrane surface. The retentate is the result of the concentration of the original feed stream. It flows through the channel and is recycled back into the feed stream. The UF stage enables the rinsing water to be recycled by decreasing the COD value and lowering the load on the wastewater treatment plant as well as reducing the related operating and energy costs. The UF unit also helps to Cascades Blendecques SA, France Cartiera di Sarego (Burgo Group SpA), Italy Thai Paper Co. Ltd., Thailand Advance Agro Public Co. Ltd., Thailand Susano de Papel e Celulose SA, Brazil. Metso Papers has also developed an UF process called OptiCycle C, the process is designed for the collection and screening of coating color effluent and the recovery of coating color solids. The core of the process is the OptiFilter CR, which consists of flat polymer membranes in a cell construction. Feed flow is kept turbulent by the use of rotors between the cells, which maintains high filtering capacity and promotes longer membrane operating life. The system consists of one or several OptiFilter CR filters, piping, tanks, and dosing systems for the concentrate and permeate, as well as the membrane detergent system. The dry solids content of the concentrate, and the pressure difference over the membranes, are measured and automatically controlled to maintain optimal performance in continuous operation. The concentrate is recycled in the fresh coating color. The permeate can be reused in, e.g., coating preparation as washing water, or as dilution water for starch. The concentration process can be divided into two stages if required. In the first stage, ultrafilter concentrate is pumped to the second-stage filter via an intermediate tank, and the final concentrate of high solids is collected in a storage tank. This process connection results in a considerably higher dry solids content in the concentrate. The second-stage filter can be used alongside the first stage filter if needed. Metso’s two-stage UF plant allows pigments and chemicals to be recovered from coating effluent with solids contents of up to 50% ( A small UF unit can handle 2000 These techniques are required to cut the mill suspended solids discharges and improve the operability of the external effluent treatment. The key factor for implementation of UF is reducing the costs for dumping and savings in raw materials of costly coating colors. Therefore it is crucial for the applicability of this technique that the recovered coating colors can be reused. Several plants all over the world are using this technology (