The comminution of limestone and fused corundum in stirred media mills has been investigated regarding specific energy requirement. The experimental results show that the tip speed of stirrer discs as well as the density and the size of grinding media affect the specific energy required to achieve a certain product fineness. Moreover, for comminution of fused corundum, the Young's modulus of grinding media and of product particles influences the specific energy requirement. The kinetic energy of grinding media is transferred from the grinding media to the product particles during each stress event. For product materials with a high Young's modulus (e.g., fused corundum), the transferred energy strongly depends on the Young's modulus of grinding media, whereas the transferred energy is nearly independent of the Young's modulus of grinding media for weak product materials. The effect of the operating parameters tip speed of stirrer, grinding media size, grinding media density and Young's modulus of grinding media on the comminution result can be described by the stress intensity. The stress intensity is proportional to the energy, which is transferred from the grinding media to the product particles during a stress event. For each stress intensity, a certain relation between product fineness and specific energy exists. Therefore, the comprehensive influencing parameters on comminution of limestone and fused corundum in stirred media mills are the stress intensity and the specific energy.Investigations of Limestone with a median particle size The tip speed of the discs as well as the size and the density of grinding media were varied: tip speed of discs average media diameter media density For the comminution of fused corundum (Al For the comminution of fused corundum, the following operating parameters were used: tip speed of discs average media diameter media density The fused corundum had a median particle size  The studies conducted by The effect of grinding media size on the relation between product fineness and specific energy is based on the fact that the stress intensity and the number of stress events also change with changing media size. With increasing grinding media size, the mass of an individual grinding medium increases and, thus, the stress intensity also increases. However, the number of grinding media in the grinding chamber decreases simultaneously and thus the number of stress events increases too. Below a certain media size (<838 μm), the stress intensity is too small to break a feed or product particle at each stress event. Therefore, for a comminution to progress, product particles must be stressed several times. As soon as the number of stress events at a certain stress intensity is high enough, an effective comminution of the large product particles takes place and leads to a sudden decline of the curve. After all product particles have once been broken to smaller sizes, the stress intensity of the smaller grinding media is also sufficient to quickly comminute the fragments further. The results of the comminution experiments with fused corundum show a similar influence of the stirrer speed on the relation between product fineness and specific energy consumption like it was found for limestone. The influence of size, density and Young's modulus of grinding media on the relation between specific energy and comminution result is shown in As the curves of the 500- and 800-μm sized media in The fluid flow fields in stirred media mills with stirrer geometry were calculated by The condition of the energy transfer from the grinding media to the product particles can be described by a simple spring-mass model without damping as shown in Neglecting the Poisson number of both materials and considering The comminution result is mainly determined by the stress intensity at each stress event. Assuming that the stress intensity is proportional to the kinetic energy of the grinding media, that the velocity The Young's modulus of fused corundum (410 GPa) is much higher than the one of limestone. The Young's moduli of the grinding media that were used for comminution of fused corundum vary between 100 GPa (mixed oxide) and 625 GPa (tungsten carbide). Therefore, the ratios of Young's moduli of grinding media and product material are lower than for grinding of limestone. The curve in The stress intensity of grinding media, SI  For different specific energy inputs, different relations between the stress intensity SI The Young's modulus of fused corundum is relatively high compared to the Young's modulus of the grinding media so that a slight change in the Young's modulus of grinding media material causes a significant change of the portion of the energy, which is transferred from the grinding media to the product particle at one stress event (see Part of the kinetic energy of grinding media is transformed into elastic energy of the grinding media during a stress event. This energy is transformed into other forms of energy after the stress event. Thereby, two limit cases can be distinguished: The entire elastic energy stored in the grinding media is again transformed into kinetic energy of grinding media so that this energy is still available to comminute product particles further on. Due to energy losses the entire elastic energy stored in the grinding media is transformed into heat. Therefore, this energy cannot be used to comminute product particles anymore. Both limit cases affect the comminution result differently. The stirrer moves the grinding media in the grinding chamber and provides them with kinetic energy. The torque and the energy input into the grinding chamber increase with increasing grinding media size, grinding media density and tip speed of stirrer discs. Thus, the kinetic energy of grinding media increases so that the specific energy, For the first case, the entire elastic energy in the grinding media after a stress event is again transformed into kinetic energy, this energy can be used further on for comminution of product particles. This kinetic energy is lower than before the stress event. Moreover, the grinding media are again accelerated by the stirrer to their initial velocity. The energy required for this acceleration equals the energy that was transferred from the grinding media to the product particle during the stress event. The specific energy provided by the stirrer, For the second case, that the elastic energy stored in the grinding media is not available for further comminution of product particles, the grinding media have no kinetic energy after the stress event at all. But the grinding media are accelerated again by the stirrer and their kinetic energy increases again. In this case, the energy transferred from the stirrer to the grinding media consists of two portions: The portion that is transferred to the product particles during a stress event and the portion that was transformed into elastic energy of the grinding media. The specific energy, Assuming that the elastic energy stored in the grinding media during a stress event is afterwards entirely transferred into kinetic energy the specific energy, A more precise consideration of the measured values in Assuming that the elastic energy of the grinding media is not at all transformed into kinetic energy after the stress event the specific energy, The dependency of comminution results of the different specific energies shows different tendencies for both limit cases. Therefore, the actual conditions regarding the transformation of the elastic energy of the grinding media after a stress event are between both limit cases. Part of the energy is transformed into kinetic energy of grinding media, while the rest is dissipated into heat and cannot be used for further comminution anymore. The energy actually crucial for the comminution process can be determined by weighting the specific energy for both limit cases:  The experimental investigations concerning the comminution of limestone in a stirred media mill shows that the grinding media size, grinding media density and tip speed of discs have an influence on the relation between the product fineness and the specific energy input. The effect of these operating parameters can be described by the stress intensity, SI For the comminution of fused corundum, the relation between product fineness and specific energy cannot be described well by the stress intensity, SI Mass concentration of solids (–) Diameter of the grinding media (m) Energy input into the grinding chamber (J) Mass-based specific energy (kJ/kg) Specific energy, taking grinding media wear into account (kJ/kg) Weighted specific energy (kJ/kg) Energy, stored in the product particles during a stress event (J) Energy, stored in grinding media during a stress event (J) Relative energy transferred from grinding media to product particles (–) Force between grinding medium and product particle (N) Mass of the comminution product (g) Mass of one grinding medium (g) Mass of grinding media wear (g) Power input into the grinding chamber (J/s) Number of revolutions (l/s) Stress intensity of the grinding media (Nm) Stress intensity, acting on the product particles (Nm) Torque (Nm) No-load torque (Nm) Time (s) Tip speed of the stirrer discs (m/s) Overall deformation of grinding medium and product particle (m) Deformation of product particle (m) Second derivative of Particle size (m) Median particle size (m) Young's modulus of grinding media (Pa) Young's modulus product (Pa) Abbreviation (m/N Abbreviation (m/N Filling ratio of grinding media (–) Density of the grinding media (kg/m This investigation was financially supported by the German “Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft” (DFG).