Selective separation of platinum group metals from acidic solutions is of great importance due to their cumulative supply risk and environmental concern. In this study, a Pd(II) ion-imprinted chitosan fiber (ICF) was prepared as the novel adsorbent, and a well-designed two-step desorption process was implemented for selectively recovering Pd(II) from acidic solution containing Pd(II) and interfering metals of Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II) and Pt (IV). The ICF showed higher selectivity for Pd(II) adsorption, comparing the non-imprinted chitosan fiber (NICF) towards other metals adsorption. The first selective desorption was achieved by NaOH solution, since only Pt (IV) adsorbed on the ICF in a small amount could be eluted, without any acting on Pd(II) ions. The second desorption process was carried out using acidified thiourea solution for the exclusive Pd(II) ions desorption. Therefore, much higher selective recovery of Pd(II) was achieved through ICF with a good selective adsorption performance and a well-designed desorption process. Furthermore, the mechanisms of selective adsorption and desorption were investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses. Finally, ICF-packed column system was conducted using synthetic multiple metals solution and a practical hydrometallurgy wastewater as influent, respectively, with a good adsorption capacity of 87.2 mg g−1 and 94.2 mg g−1, resulting quite high concentrated effluent consisted of 97.4% of Pd(II) and 99.5% of Pd(II), respectively. It was opened up a promising designed material and technique for selectively recovering Pd(II) in the further practical large-scale application.Platinum (Pt) and Palladium (Pd) as platinum group metals (PGMs), are naturally occurring chemical elements with spectacular physical and chemical properties, rendering them become key components in manufacturing high-tech materials and, widely used in jewelry, coinage, electric, catalyst and corrosion resistant materials industries ( Chitosan, obtained easily from deacetylation of chitin (the most abundant biopolymer in nature after cellulose), has been recognized as excellent adsorbent for metals, due to its abundant functional binding sites, i.e. amine and hydroxyl groups ( Besides, except ion-imprinting adsorbents, various materials, such as Fe Thus, we turned our attention to the subsequent process of adsorption, namely desorption, in order to further improve the selective recovery of a target metal. Thiourea is well known as an effective desorption reagent, for its extremely high coordinate affinity for metals, especially for precious metals ( In the present study, ion-imprinted chitosan fiber was prepared as the adsorbent, and two-step desorption process using NaOH and thiourea as eluents, respectively, were conducted for selective recovery of Pd(II) from acidic solution with interfering metal ions. The adsorption and desorption performances of ICF toward Pd(II) and other metals in batch system and ICF-packed column system were investigated. Precious metals (H The ion-imprinted chitosan fiber was prepared according to our previously reported procedures without significant modification ( Non-imprinted chitosan fibers (NICF) used as the control were prepared followed by an same procedure of ICF, except of the Pd(II) imprinting process. The batch adsorption experiments were carried out at 25 °C and 120 rpm in a multi-shaking incubator (HB-201MS-2R, Hanbaek, Korea) with 10 mg of the NICF and ICF in 50 mL falcon tubes containing 25 mL metals solution containing Pd(II) and interfering metal ions such as Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II) and Pt (IV) with initial concentration of 200 mg L After the NICF and ICF exposed to mixture metal solution at pH 1.0 for 24 h, the metal-loaded adsorbents were regenerated, and the metals adsorbed onto the adsorbent were recovered by two-step desorption: i) the metal-loaded adsorbents were eluted using 25 mL of 1 M NaOH solution at 25 °C for 12 h, and then rinsed with distilled water until neutral pH; ii) 25 mL acidified thiourea (0.25 M thiourea in 0.5 M HCl) was used for eluting the remaining metals from adsorbents. The desorption efficiency (%) was determined from the ratio of the metal mass in the eluent (eluted metal mass, mg) following desorption to that initially adsorbed onto the adsorbents (adsorbed metal mass, mg) as following shows: A glass column (max volume 7.85 mL; Omnifit Labware, Diba Industries, Inc. USA) were packed with 0.2 g of ICF to yield a wadding material volume of 3 mL. The column was then fed with the synthetic metals solution and the hydrometallurgy wastewater, respectively, in an up-flow mode with flow rate of 0.25 mL min The concentrations of metal ions were determined using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES; ICPS-7500, Shimadzu, Japan). The surface charges of NICF and ICF were examined by a Zeta potential analyzer (Brookhaven instruments corporation, USA). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, FT/IR-300E, JASCO, Japan), XPS (JSM-6400, JEOL, Japan) and XRD (PANalytical B.V., Netherlands) were obtained to identify the functional groups responsible for Pd(II) adsorption and the species of Pd(II). To investigate the adsorption selectivity of the ICF, the kinetics uptake of Pd(II) onto ICF was compared with that of Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II) and Pt (IV) in multiple metals solution ( Desorption approach is usually employed to regenerate exhausted adsorbent and recover metals, which will significantly reduce the cost of the adsorbents. To achieve a higher selective recovery of Pd(II), a preliminary trial had been carried out using several kinds of eluents such as NaOH and acidified thiourea to desorb Pd(II), Pt (IV) and other interfering metals from the metal-loaded NICF and ICF. Two-step desorption, using 1 M NaOH solution and 0.25 M thiourea (dissolved in 0.5 M HCl solution), respectively, was confirmed to be efficient for Pd(II) selective desorption from exhausted ICF. The desorption efficiencies of the first and second desorption processes were calculated and illustrated as bar charts in The surface charges of the adsorbents suspended in aqueous solutions with various pH were determined by measuring their zeta potentials. As shown in These electrostatic interaction could be supported by the FTIR spectra data. As shown in To gain insight into the adsorption and desorption mechanisms of ICF towards Pd(II) and Pt (IV) ions, XPS N 1s, O 1s, Pd 3d and Pt 4f spectra were observed before and after metals loading, and after the first-step and second-step desorption, respectively ( As shown in The XPS results could reveal that the positively charged amine groups (-NH To further verify the formation of PdO in ICF after the first-step desorption, XRD patterns were obtained before and after metals loading, and after the first-step and second-step desorption ( Performance of an adsorbent in a continuous flow system is usually the important factor in accessing the feasibility in the industrial scale application ( In this study, the ICF loaded up-flow packed column was devised and employed for the selective adsorption of Pd(II) from the synthetic metal solution and the extremely acidic hydrometallurgy wastewater containing multiple metal ions, i.e. Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Pt (IV) and Pd(II) ( In order to regenerate the exhausted ICF, two-step desorption with NaOH and thiourea were successively carried out on the saturated column after adsorption from the synthetic metal solution and real wastewater, respectively. The desorption curves towards Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Pt (IV) and Pd(II) from the packed column are presented in In summary, the selective recovery of chloride complex anions of Pd(II) by imprinted chitosan fiber (ICF) was investigated in this work. The high selectivity for recovery of Pd(II) was accomplished through the Pd(II) selective adsorption material (ICF) and the well-designed desorption processes. The ICF showed a higher selectivity adsorption for Pd(II) with higher Pd(II) uptake of 112.4 mg g This work was financially supported by the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at