Polypropylene composites were prepared from sugarcane bagasse fibers by extrusion and injection molding. Wood flour was used as reference filler in the study. The fiber content of the composites changed between 0 and 30 wt% in 5 wt% steps. Maleated polypropylene was used as coupling agent to improve interfacial adhesion. Mechanical properties were characterized by tensile and fracture testing, while local deformation processes were followed by acoustic emission and instrumented impact testing, as well as by the analysis of scanning electron micrographs. The results showed that sugarcane bagasse fibers reinforce polypropylene similarly to other natural fibers. They increases stiffness, but decrease tensile yield stress, tensile strength and deformability. Increased interfacial adhesion leads to the considerable improvement of reinforcement. Bagasse fiber and wood flour filled composites have very similar properties. The impact resistance of the composites increased in the presence of both fibers compared to the neat matrix. Debonding is the dominating process in the absence of the coupling agent, while mainly fiber fracture occurs in its presence. Increased plastic deformation after debonding results in slightly improved impact resistance.The use of natural resources increases continuously in all areas of our life. The number of possible raw materials produced by nature is enormous and we use only a small fraction presently. The increase of interest in natural materials is driven by the improving environmental awareness of the public, but also by other factors. Natural fibers are extensively used in the automotive and building industry already now and further increase is expected in the future The properties of heterogeneous polymers including fiber-reinforced composites are determined by four factors, by component properties, composition, structure and interfacial interactions One of the advantages of natural fibers is that they are cheap, especially if they are obtained from local resources very often as waste Accordingly, the goal of the present project was to explore the possibility of using sugarcane bagasse fibers as reinforcement for polypropylene. We prepared composites with various fiber contents in order to determine the effect of composition on composite properties. PP/wood composites were also prepared to use them as reference. In the study, we focused on the analysis of deformation processes and the mechanism of failure in order to find ways to improve properties, if necessary. The potentials of the fibers for practical applications are also considered briefly in the final part of the paper. The polypropylene used as matrix for the composites was the Tipplen H 649 FH grade homopolymer produced by the MOL Group Ltd., Hungary. The polymer has a nominal density of 0.9 g/cm The fibers and the polymer were homogenized in a twin-screw compounder (Brabender DSK 42/7, Brabender, Germany) at set temperatures of 170–180–185–190 °C and 40 rpm. The fibers were dried before extrusion at 105 °C for 4 h. Extrusion was repeated twice in order to increase homogeneity. The granulated composites were injection molded into standard (ISO 527 1A) tensile bars of 4 mm thickness using a Demag IntElect 50/330-100 machine. Processing parameters were 40–170–180–185–190 °C set temperatures, 300–700 bar injection pressure, 50 bar back pressure, 50 mm/s injection speed, 25 s holding time, and 30 s cooling time. The specimens were stored at ambient temperature (25 °C, 50% RH) for a week before further testing. The mechanical properties were characterized by tensile and impact testing. Tensile tests were carried out using an Instron 5566 universal testing machine with a gauge length of 115 mm and 5 mm/min crosshead speed. Modulus, yield properties (yield stress and yield strain), tensile strength and elongation-at-break were derived from recorded stress vs. strain traces. Local deformation processes were followed by acoustic emission testing. Acoustic emission (AE) signals were recorded with a Sensophone AED 404 apparatus. A single a11 resonance detector with the resonance frequency of 150 kHz was attached to the center of the specimen. The threshold level of detection was set to 23 dB. Impact resistance was characterized by the notched Charpy impact strength, which was determined according to the ISO 179 standard at 23 °C with 2 mm notch depth. Instrumented impact testing was carried out using a Ceast Resil 5.5 instrument (CEAST spa, Pianezza, Italy) with a 4 J hammer. The particle characteristics of the fibers as well as the appearance of broken surfaces were studied by scanning electron microscopy (Jeol JSM 6380 LA, Jeol Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Micrographs were recorded on fracture surfaces created during tensile and fracture testing, respectively. Fiber reinforced composites are used as structural materials. Their most important properties are stiffness, strength and impact resistance. Overall mechanical properties of composites are determined by local deformation processes. Accordingly, we discuss tensile properties and reinforcement in the first two sections of the paper. Subsequently we focus on fracture behavior and the analysis of local processes in the next two. Finally, structure-property correlations are discussed in the last section of the paper with some reference to practical consequences. The main role of reinforcing fibers is to increase the stiffness and the strength of the polymer used as matrix. The Young's modulus of polypropylene reinforced with the two types of fibers is plotted against fiber content in Tensile yield stress is plotted against fiber content in The tensile strength of the composites is presented as a function of fiber content in One of the major drawbacks of wood and natural fiber reinforced composites is their limited deformability, which results in very rigid materials with small impact resistance. As shown by A general, qualitative idea can be obtained about the reinforcing effect of the two fibers from The tensile strength of the four sets of composites is plotted in the way dictated by Eq. The conclusions drawn from the direct observation of Impact strength is often a very important property for materials used in structural applications. Because of the dynamic conditions of testing, its composition dependence often differs considerably from that of tensile properties. The impact resistance of the composites is plotted against fiber content in Instrumented impact testing was carried out on the composites in the hope of obtaining more information about the fracture process. The force vs. time traces of selected composites are presented in The previous sections clearly proved that local processes taking place around the reinforcing particles play a role in the determination of impact resistance and generally properties. The study of wood reinforced composites showed that several local processes can take place during deformation, the shear yielding of the matrix, its cavitation, debonding, i.e. the separation of the interface between the filler or fiber and the matrix, fiber pull-out, or fiber fracture The result of such an acoustic emission measurement is presented in Initiation starts at larger deformation than in the previous case and the number of signals is ten times larger. The cumulative number of signal trace increases rather steeply and only one process can be distinguished in this case. The changing shape of the trace indicates a different deformation mechanism, which earlier was identified as the fracture of the fibers Further analysis of local processes is possible, if we determine the characteristic stress values at which the local processes are initiated. The procedure is demonstrated in Further evidence might be supplied by SEM micrographs. Typical micrographs recorded on fracture surfaces generated in the tensile test are presented in The results presented in the previous sections answered a number of questions emerged in the study. The analysis of local processes confirmed our tentative assumption about the larger impact resistance of the composites compared to the matrix by showing that after the debonding of large particles plastic deformation might take place, which consumes energy. It also explained the larger reinforcing effect of the fibers in the presence of the coupling agent. At poor adhesion, the debonding of the fibers may result in slightly improved impact resistance, but only fibers adhering strongly to the matrix carry considerable load. Earlier we claimed that local deformation processes are important in the determination of composite properties. The tensile strength of the composites is plotted against the initiation stress of the various local processes in In the case of structural materials, especially those used in the automotive industry, an important question is the balance of stiffness and impact resistance. Fracture resistance is plotted against stiffness in Sugarcane bagasse fibers reinforce polypropylene similarly to other natural fibers. They increase stiffness, but decrease tensile yield stress, tensile strength and deformability. Increasing interfacial adhesion achieved with the application of a coupling agent results in the considerable improvement of reinforcement. Composite strength increases with increasing fiber content, but deformability decreases even further. Although the very large bagasse fibers debond more easily from polypropylene than the smaller wood fibers used as reference, most properties are very similar in the two types of composites. The analysis of the composition dependence of properties indicated the presence of a slight structural effect, either the aggregation of fibers or the change of orientation with increasing fiber content. The impact resistance of the composites increased in the presence of both fibers compared to the neat matrix. The analysis of local deformation processes indicated that debonding is the dominating process in the absence of the coupling agent, while mainly fracture occurs in its presence. Increased plastic deformation after debonding results in slightly improved impact resistance. Although bagasse fibers can be used for the reinforcement of PP, fiber extraction and handling must be improved to obtain smaller fibers with a better size distribution. A coupling agent must be used in all cases to obtain reasonable properties. The authors thank Judit Kócs for her help in the sieving and handling of the fibers. The