In the last few years, the biomedical research community has devoted a growing interest in silica-based ordered mesoporous materials (SMMs) for bone regeneration technologies. These bioceramics present two remarkable characteristics. The first one is regarding their unique structural and textural properties, with ordered mesopore channels that can host a wide variety of molecules. Thus, drugs in the nanometer scale can be loaded into these matrices to be locally released in the implantation site. The second feature concerns the potential of SMMs to regenerate osseous tissues, as the in vitro bone bioactivity of these materials has been shown by the formation of nanoapatites similar to the mineral phase of bone when in contact with physiological fluids. It is also feasible to chemically modify the external surface of silica walls to graft biomolecules such as certain peptides, proteins, or growth factors that act as osteogenic signals able to induce the appropriate bone cellular functions in the place when needed. Thus, because of their valuable properties, these bioceramics open up promising expectations of being used in the clinical practice. Their biocompatibility, bioactivity, and controlled delivery capability have been demonstrated. Besides, preliminary in vitro and in vivo tests have been positive. Now it is time to optimize all these properties to the current clinical needs and to evaluate their effectiveness compared to that of other widely employed biomaterials such as bioactive glasses.Alendronate Amorphous calcium phosphate Anionic surfactant templated mesoporous silica Bovine serum albumin Octyl chains Octyltrimethylammonium bromide surfactant Decyltrimethylammonium bromide surfactant Dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide surfactant Hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide surfactant Octadecyl chains Carbonate hydroxyapatite Cooperative liquid-crystal template mechanism Critical micelar concentration Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide surfactant Dimethylsilyl groups Electron diffraction Energy dispersive scattering FuDan University Pluronic® F127 block copolymer surfactant containing poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) units (EO Folded sheet materials Fourier transmission infrared spectroscopy High-performance liquid chromatography Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology Liquid-crystal templating mechanism Mesoporous bioactive glass Mesostructured cellular foam Mesostructured cellular foam material functionalized with aminopropyl groups Mobil composition of matter MCM-41 mesoporous material functionalized with dimethylsilyl groups MCM-41 mesoporous material functionalized with methylsilyl groups MCM-41 mesoporous material functionalized with aminopropyl groups MCM-41 mesoporous material functionalized with mercaptopropyl groups MCM-41 mesoporous material functionalized with trimethylsilyl groups Methylsilyl groups Michigan State University Nuclear magnetic resonance Octacalcium phosphate Pluronic® P123 block copolymer surfactant containing poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) units (EO Parathyroid hormone-related protein Polyurethane foam Poly(vinylpyrrolidone) Santa BArbara SBA-15 functionalized with SBA-15 functionalized with octadecyldimethyl (3-trimethoxysilyl-propyl) ammonium chloride SBA-15 mesoporous material functionalized with aminopropyl groups Simulated body fluid Scanning electron microscopy Silica-based ordered mesoporous material Transmission electron microscopy Tetraethylorthosilicate True liquid-crystal template mechanism Tetramethylorthosilicate  Octadecyldimethyl (3-trimethoxysilyl-propyl) ammonium chloride Trimethylsilyl groups Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy X-ray diffraction Pore diameter Pore volume Since their discovery in 1990s, silica-based ordered mesoporous materials (SMMs) have received much attention from the scientific community because of their outstanding textural and structural properties. During the last few years, SMMs have found many applications in catalysis, sensors, separation, etc. It was in 2001 when MCM-41 was proposed for the first time as a controlled delivery system, using ibuprofen as the model drug. The This double scope, controlled delivery capability and As previously commented, SMMs were reported for the first time in the early 1990s by Japanese researchers SMMs are characterized by regular arrays of uniform channels, whose dimensions can be tuned through the chemical nature of the surfactant, additives, and synthesis conditions (pH, temperature, etc.) in the so-called As per the first mechanism, known as Independently of the synthetic route followed, the last step in the synthesis of SMMs consists in the surfactant removal by calcination or solvent extraction. The surfactant removal leaves a network of cavities within the silica framework that will determine the physical–chemical properties of the resulting materials. These materials exhibit outstanding properties, such as stable mesoporous structure, high surface area (∼1000  Bioceramics aimed at bone implant applications must be in contact with physiological fluids. In this sense, long-term biocompatibility, which has been demonstrated to depend on the implantation site, the shape, and size of the material and also on its surface chemistry, is a mandatory requirement that must be satisfied (see Amorphous silica has been generally considered as nontoxic, and it has been reported as biocompatible and degradable in living tissue. The surface area of an SMM has been also reported as an important factor that causes cell death. Thus, the  The above-mentioned results clearly show that toxicity of SMMs strongly depends on the administration route to the living body. Therefore, when evaluating the viability of SMMs as biomaterials for bone tissue regeneration, the first step should consist in performing Once these bioceramics successfully passed the The fascinating structural and textural properties of SMMs made them suitable to act as host systems of a wide range of different drugs for the treatment of bone diseases. This is especially important when dealing with anticancer and antiosteoporosis drugs for the local treatment of osseous tumors and osteoporosis, respectively. The local administration of therapeutic agents by bioceramic matrices presents advantages over conventional therapies, such as oral intake, because a better control over drug loading and release can be achieved. Moreover, the local sustained administration permits to keep constant drug levels in plasma and to reduce undesired side effects. Molecule adsorption and The research performed since 2001 on ordered mesoporous silica indicates that the textural properties, mesoporous structure, morphology, and organic functionalization of the silica walls are the main factors that govern adsorption and release of molecules from SMMs. All these parameters can be tailored for the design mesoporous matrices, opening many paths in this research field. The adsorption of molecules into SMMs depends on the mesopore diameter of the host matrix, that is, it follows size-selectivity criteria. Commonly, pore diameters slightly larger than the molecule dimensions (pore/molecule size ratio >1) are enough to allow the adsorption of molecule inside the pores. On the contrary, if the mesopore diameter is smaller than the molecule size, the molecule would adsorb only on the external surface of the material. This molecule-sieve effect is especially remarkable when the adsorption of large-size molecules, such as proteins, is targeted. Some authors have investigated the adsorption of globular proteins on MCM-41 materials. Among proteins, serum albumins, which are one of the major components in plasma proteins in humans, are of special interest. Albumin is usually composed of a single chain of 582 amino acids with an average length of 10 Pore diameter has been also demonstrated to play a key role in molecule release kinetics. This fact was observed when testing MCM-41 matrices of different pore diameters as ibuprofen delivery systems. MCM-41 materials with pore sizes ranging from 2.5 to 3.6 The adsorption of molecules into mesoporous matrices depends on the adsorptive properties of the silica surface. Therefore, the chemical interactions between the silanol groups covering the silica surface and the functional groups of the guest molecule will determine the amount of molecule loaded ( The same behavior was also observed when carrying out loading and release assays of captopril The adsorption of molecules into SMMs is a molecule-surface interaction, and consequently, the amount of molecule loaded depends on the pore diameter as the size selective limiting factor, and also on the surface area. However, it has been reported performing successive impregnations of MCM-41 material with ibuprofen solutions is possible, which allows to achieve complete pore filling and leads to higher drug loads. The pore volume must be also considered when the confinement of large-volume molecules, such as certain proteins, is aimed. With regard to this topic, MCFs have been proposed as host matrices of several enzymes and proteins. The influence of pore connectivity and structure of SMM into drug release kinetics was observed by using different mesostructures as host matrices. Two SMMs with similar pore size, between 2 and 3 The particle morphology of the mesoporous matrix represents the extension of the interface between the host material and the body fluid, so the effect on drug release kinetics is predictable. For this reason, MCM-41 was synthesized in the form of irregularly shaped powder and monodispersed spheres ranging from 490 to 770 The control of the particle morphology of SMMs is also expected to lead to a more reliable and reproducible controlled delivery system. This control has been achieved by employing an aerosol assisted synthesis to obtain different mesoporous structures in the form of micrometric spheres as delivery system of triclosan, a widely used antimicrobial agent. On the other hand, the use of hollow mesoporous spheres offers the possibility to store higher amounts of guest molecules than conventional SMMs. It has been reported that hollow spheres with mesoporous shells would exhibit more advantages in mass diffusion and transportation compared to conventional hollow spheres of solid shells. Within this porous shell, it is of special interest that porous channels penetrate across the shell for drug storage and delivery systems. This penetrating pore channels can be obtained by using poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as co-templates during the synthetic procedure. The organic modification or functionalization of SMMs using different organic groups has been revealed as the cornerstone to modulate the adsorption and release of molecules from these matrices. In general, there are two main functionalization methods that are applied to organically modify SMMs for controlled delivery purposes:   The functionalization method must be selected considering the targeted guest molecule. For instance, MCM-41 organically modified with aminopropyl groups through cocondensation and postsynthesis routes was used as host carrier for ibuprofen. The chemical nature of the matrix-drug host–guest interaction can be modulated by the appropriate choice of the organic groups depending on the targeted molecule and its application. For this purpose, two main approaches have been widely reported. The first strategy concerns the use of different organic groups able to induce attracting interactions with the functional groups of the guest molecule. For this purpose, the influence of host–guest interaction on drug adsorption and release was investigated by functionalizing MCM-41 through postsynthesis method with several organic functional groups (chloropropyl, phenyl, benzyl, mercaptopropyl, cyanopropyl, and butyl) and using ibuprofen as model drug. The organic functionalization of SMMs with amino groups has been widely reported. For instance, MCM-41 and SBA-15 materials functionalized with aminopropyl groups via the postsynthesis route have been proposed as alendronate controlled delivery systems. Recently, the organic modification of SBA-15 using different aminopropyl functionalization degrees has been reported as a good strategy to modulate alendronate dosage. The organic functionalization of SBA-15 using partially silylated poly(propyleneimine) dendrimers has been also reported as a good strategy to modulate drug dosage. Amino functionalization of SMMs has been also revealed as a good approach to control adsorption and release of proteins such as BSA. Amino functionalization of large-pore and large-volume MCF materials has also been probed to increase the affinity toward BSA molecule. All these findings demonstrate that amino functionalization of SMMs is a suitable strategy for the design of controlled delivery systems of many biologically active molecules exhibiting organic groups which are capable of chemically interacting with amino functions. The organic modification of SMMs with hydrophobic groups is a commonly used way to control the loading and release of certain molecules. For example, the functionalization of SBA-15 with different alkyl chains, octyl (C Tang SBA-15 materials functionalized using hydrophobic groups have been also proposed as controlled delivery systems of When considering any material for biomedical purposes, the first consideration that should be addressed is the interaction between the material and the living body. Thus, the surface of such material must be carefully investigated. SMMs are characterized by exhibiting high surface areas and high surface density of silanol groups (Si–OH). It is well known that the bioactive response of conventional bioactive glasses depends on the presence of silanol groups (see The first reports on the These results clearly indicate that the textural and structural features of SMMs are important factors that are involved in their  A widely employed strategy to induce bioactivity to different materials consists in preparing biphasic mixtures by incorporating another phase that acts as an accelerator of the CHA nucleation. Recently, another strategy has been developed to accelerate the time of bioactive response. This approach consists in using the synthesis methods of SMMs but with the same compositions of glasses. It was in 2004 when the synthesis of highly ordered MBGs in the system SiO The Thus, the MBG material with the smallest CaO content (MG-S85m) but having 3D-bicontinuous cubic structure and the highest surface area values exhibited faster bioactive response than MBG materials with the greatest CaO content (MG-S58m). FTIR and TEM-ED studies revealed an accelerated bioactive behavior for MG-S85m sample, which was able to form a nanocrystalline CHA layer in just 1 Recently, a new property derived from the textural and structural characteristics of MBGs, namely biomimetic behavior, has been reported. This biomimetic mechanism, where there is a sequential transition from amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) to octacalcium phosphate (OCP) to calcium deficient carbonatehydroxyapatite (CHA) maturation, similarly to the Many bioceramics develop a CHA phase MG-S58m sample, with 2D-hexagonal mesoporous arrangement and high CaO content allows an intense Ca To date, the mechanism of All these results bring up the possibility of controlling the reactive properties of MBGs by tailoring their compositional, textural, and structural properties. This new family of ordered mesoporous materials widens the range of possibilities for the use SMMs as new generation bioceramics with outstanding bone-bonding capability. The different research results reported so far confirm that ordered mesoporous materials are characterized by two valuable features: controlled delivery capability and SMMs, with ordered mesoporous channels and pore dimensions in the 2–50 Several recent research works have been reported concerning the fabrication of 3D scaffolds using the highly bioactive MBGs as starting materials. Thus, Yun Li Other authors also have reported the employment of P123 and PUF to synthesize hierarchically structured 3D MBGs-based scaffolds with four different chemical compositions and their The design of 3D scaffolds capable to drive cell in-growth is an important challenge in tissue engineering (see One of the most employed approaches in bone tissue engineering involves the initialization of the regeneration process So, turning back to ordered mesoporous materials, the presence of silanol groups in the external surface of silica walls would allow the organic modification of the scaffold. The choosing of the appropriate functional groups could permit formation of strong chemical bonds between the material surface and different osteoinductive agents, such as certain peptides, proteins, or growth factors, as schematically displayed in At is has been widely reported, SMMs allow the design of controlled delivery systems for drug loading and release. Among other applications, these systems could be very useful to locally treat several pathologies such as bone infection and inflammation, osteoporosis, cancer, etc. However, although such molecules could fit into the mesopore channels, the confinement of osteogenic agents into the mesopores would impede them in carrying out their function. The role of these molecules is to act as attracting signals for bone formation cells, but these cells are too large to fit inside the mesopores (  Bioactive agents are those substances able to induce an effect on or to stimulate a response in a living tissue. Reproducing artificially essential properties of one or several biological systems. It finalizes products and processes as they are used in Nature. Functionalization is the addition of functional groups onto the surface of a material by chemical synthesis methods. The functional group added can be subjected to ordinary synthesis methods to attach virtually any kind of organic compound onto the surface. Release of an agent at a controlled rate for an extended time in a specific place to localize agent action. Macropores are those pores with diameter larger than 50 Mesopores are those pores with diameter in the range 2–50 Mesoporous bioactive glasses are materials with chemical compositions similar to those of conventional bioactive sol–gel glasses (SiO Micropores are those pores with diameter smaller than 2 The nanoscale has been defined as being of the order of 100 A mesoporous material is a material containing pores with diameters between 2 and 50 Rapid prototyping is the name given to a host of related technologies that are used to fabricate physical objects directly from computer-assisted design (CAD) data sources. These methods are unique in that they add and bond materials in layers to form objects. Such systems are also known by the general names solid freeform fabrication and layered manufacturing and offer advantages in many applications compared to classical subtractive fabrication methods such as milling or turning. Short for ‘SURFace ACTive AgeNT,’ it is a molecule that lowers surface tension. Such molecules contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic components and are thus semisoluble in both organic and aqueous solvents.