Centerless grinding has been extensively used in production engineering to produce accurate cylindrical parts together with high productivities. On the other hand, regenerative chatter vibrations are one of the major problems that limit the ability to produce round workpieces. This constraint can be solved selecting proper machine setup conditions, which still largely relies on a trial and error method, and sometimes this approach is not optimum in a productivity sense. This paper shows a novel method to reduce chatter vibrations in a centerless grinding machine using actively controlled piezoelectric actuators. A simplified model of the machine is used to simulate the behavior of several commercially available piezoelectric actuators in two different locations of the machine. Based on these simulations, a selection of proper actuators and their optimal location is obtained and the control system is implemented experimentally. Experimental results show that the control strategy provides a stabilizing effect on chatter. Thus, the viability of using piezoelectric actuators as active components is demonstrated, providing an important advance in the knowledge of chatter control in centerless grinding machines.One of the main reasons that makes difficult to attain the current requirements of precision and productivity related to machine tools is the appearance of vibrations during machining processes. As consequence, it is possible to find many studies about this subject. It is first important to get a major comprehension of the problem and of the involved factors. This would make possible to develop strategies to reduce the presence of vibrations during the machining processes. Most of the carried out studies concerning the different types of vibration that appear during the machining process are devoted to the self-excited vibrations (chatter). Generally speaking, self-excited vibrations phenomena is the result of an interaction between the structural dynamics of the machine tool and the cutting process. As a result the machine vibrates basically at a frequency close to one of its natural structural modes, even without the presence of external acting forces. Different researchers have elaborated models, specially adapted to particular machining processes, based on regenerative forces and the characterisation of the dynamic behavior of the machines Several approaches to reduce the influence of chatter have been developed. Some procedures try to obtain optimized machining work parameters, other implement passive reduction techniques (using elements that store or remove energy), and other introduce secondary sources of energy to the system. At present, it is possible to find systems making use of piezoelectric actuators and implementing active control strategies to reduce vibrations. The operational characteristics of piezoelectric materials allow their integration in the structures of the machines, so that the structural damping is increased and the vibratory behavior is therefore improved The activity deployed in the frame of the presented work consisted in developing an active damping system, using piezoelectric actuators, to reduce the vibrations produced in frequency ranges close the natural frequency of vibration of the machine. The grinding machine behavior was simulated using a lumped parameter model. This machine model was used to define locations and required characteristics of the actuators. A proportional control with a second order filter was used. Next, the machine was modified to incorporate the selected actuators and, finally, several tests were carried out to evaluate improvements in the surface quality of the pieces and in the machine dynamic behavior. In spite of being a wide spread industrial production process, grinding is one of the most complex and less known machining technologies due to the large number of involved variables. The analysis of cutting processes in which abrasive grains are involved is especially complex, due to the random character of the distribution of the edges of cut in the surface of the grinding wheel and their variable disposition produced by wear. Among the diversity of grinding processes, centerless grinding is a chip removal process where the workpiece is not clamped, but it is just supported by the regulating (driving) wheel, the grinding wheel and the work blade. This configuration ( It is possible to operate in two different ways in a centerless grinding: through-feed and in-feed (plunge). In through-feed grinding, the workpiece rotates between the grinding wheel and the regulating wheel. One or both wheels of the centerless grinding machine are tilted from the horizontal plane, which creates a horizontal velocity component to the workpiece so that it moves axially while it is being grinded. In-feed centerless grinding is similar to plunge grinding in a cylindrical grinding machine. Here, the workpiece is placed between the blade and the regulating wheel, which makes the workpiece to turn. Both move it into a programmed feedrate to complete the grinding process. The obvious function of the grinding wheel is to remove material from the workpiece. Nevertheless the regulating wheel has a double function: on the one hand, it presses the workpiece against the grinding wheel, and on the other hand, it controls both the rotational speed and the axial advance of the workpiece. The appearance of vibrations in centerless grinding machines is especially pernicious as grinding is a finishing process. These vibrations generate instability of the machining process, a poor surface finish, a significant wear of the wheels and important stresses in all the elements of the machine. Different authors proposed analytical models for the centerless grinding process Geometric factors cause an instability problem when, under certain operation conditions, initial faults in the surface of the workpiece are reproduced and even increased as consequence of the deviations of the cutting point from the theoretical movements between the wheels and wokpiece. On the other hand, regenerative chatter is the most important type of instability in the centerless grinding process. Unlike other processes, the waviness caused by chatter appears not only in the workpiece, but also in the wheels. For a given machine, its tendency to vibrate depends on the correlation between the machining parameters and the dynamic flexibility of the machine. The selection of the suitable machining parameters for a given operation makes it necessary to carry out a significant number of tests, which depend on the experience of the users and are very time consuming. For this reason, it is preferable to increase the stability of the machine acting on its dynamical behavior. The grinding machine used during present study was equipped with a 500 With the aim to determine the dynamic characteristics of the centerless grinding machine, an experimental modal analysis was carried out using impact testing technique in order to obtain the vibration mode shapes and frequencies. Frequency response functions corresponding to 207 degrees of freedom were measured using triaxial accelerometers at 69 response points. From measured FRF's, a total of 10 natural frequencies, mode shapes and damping ratios were estimated in the 0–150 Some cutting tests were carried out and these tests showed that chatter frequency is close to eigenfrequency at 59 In order to evaluate the attainable performance of the proposed strategy, simulation work has been carried out. A simple model ( The mass and stiffness data were obtained directly from technical characteristics of machine. The variation of the cutting force during chatter was indirectly estimated, from the electric current measured in both the upper slide motor (motor 1, Initially, the maximum displacement amplitude of the vibration under chatter conditions was measured with the help of some accelerometers located in different points of the upper and lower slides. This information will provide the order of magnitude of the maximum displacement that actuators should confront. The tests showed that the maximum values of the vibration displacement produced during chatter in the measured points are in the order of tens of microns. Hence, active control of the centerless grinding machine requires modest values of the stroke of the actuator. On the other hand, the values of the force that should be developed by the actuators are of several thousands of Newton. The system should also give a fast response in the presence of cutting force variations during the grinding process. Piezoelectric actuators were selected for this work because of their high forces and fast response. This type of actuators is easy to use and to integrate into the system. Using models shown in Physical machine design aspects and the authority in the main vibration mode of pre-selected locations have been considered to select the location of the actuators. The distribution of the strain energy is also helpful to select the machine points in which the application of a given force has more authority in the modification of the structure behavior for a given mode shape For this application, commercially available piezoelectric actuators with the following characteristics (PZT PI-247-30) have been selected: Stiffness: The control strategies for mechanical systems Concerning the feedback techniques, although different controller types could be developed depending on the final purpose, the strategy known as active damping stands out regarding this application. The objective of active damping is to reduce the resonant peaks of the closed loop transfer function. It can be achieved with low computational requirements, and the stability is guaranteed if the actuator and sensor are collocated Control for active damping purposes was based on a feedback strategy, like the one shown in In this paper, the obtained results using acceleration feedback with second order filter are presented. Two piezoelectric accelerometers were used as sensors, each one interacting with the corresponding collocated actuator in a decentralized way forming two independent SISO loops. High-pass filters with cutoff frequency of 10 The final position of the actuators in the grinding machine is represented in Tests were carried out to evaluate the influence of the implemented control system on the dynamic characteristics of the machine, the workpiece surface finish, the improvement of stability condition during the machining process and vibration level in the grinding wheel. In order to determine the influence of the control in the damping of the system, several frequency response functions were obtained between the same two points for different values of control gain. The machine was excited with an impact hammer in the grinding wheel head and the responses were measured with an accelerometer attached to the upper slide. The control gain was modified from its zero value (no control) to the value with which the maximum active damping was obtained. In This figure shows an important reduction in the resonance peak amplitudes, demonstrating that the implemented control scheme produces an active damping effect in the system. To evaluate the control system performance during the cutting process, two identical cylindrical workpieces were machined, the first one with no control applied and the second one with control applied. The initial lengths of the workpieces were 184  A roundness error of 27.99 To evaluate the reduction in the vibration level of the centerless grinding machine due to the action of the controller, the four different machining conditions shown in Chatter appearance was concluded when violent vibrations appeared in the machine. In these cases the accelerometer signal amplitude increased with time and a characteristic chatter noise was perceptible. No chatter presence was concluded when the acceleration signal amplitude did not increase with time. In each test, the cutting stiffness was measured and plotted as a function of the corresponding regulating wheel velocity. In Comparing Additionally, the effectiveness of the implemented system was verified by means of monitoring the vibration level of the grinding wheel in different tests. In An important vibration level decrease of the grinding wheel was obtained using the implemented active control system. Vibrations are a major constraint that limit the accuracy and productivity in centerless grinding practice. To overcome this limitation, an active vibration reduction system using piezoelectric actuators has been implemented, which is a novel solution to improve the dynamic behavior of centerless grinding process. In this paper, the active system design criteria has been presented, as well as the required modifications in the machine structure in order to locate the actuators. Several tests were performed and it was concluded from the obtained results that the active control system can be used to modify the dynamic characteristics of the machine, increasing the stable operating range. Also, the vibration level was reduced improving the surface finish of the workpieces. The authors are grateful for the subsidies granted by the Department of Science and Technology of Spain (DPI2005-09346-C03-01) and the support of the University of the Basque Country (9/UPV 00145.345-15302/2003).