This paper presents results from a series of numerical modeling tests conducted with the objective of developing a computational framework for studying rock burst events. A commercially available distinct element code with its explicit time-stepping scheme is adopted for modeling the initial quasi-static and the subsequent dynamic response of rock burst in compression and shear. Ground reaction curves are introduced to discuss criteria for stability of a failure through stress analyses. Energy balance equations are analyzed for assessing the rock burst intensity by estimating radiated seismic energy once conditions of instability emerge. Two methods are discussed for estimating radiated seismic energy: tracking of the energy conversion during failure; recording the kinetic energy that is damped by mechanical damping schemes. Modeling approach and methodologies for studying compressive-type rock burst are developed and calibrated against available analytical solutions with respect to radiated seismic energy and excavation convergence. Factors participating in the intensity of rock burst in compression are examined by modeling a rectangular tabular excavation supported by a single pillar with ductile, semi-brittle, and brittle failure responses under different compressive loading. A shear-type rock burst along a strike-slip fault model is simulated and modeling approach is calibrated by checking the resulting slip distribution, radiated seismic energy, and seismic moment against analytical solutions. Factors contributing to the occurrence and intensity of shear-type rock burst are explored by simulating different slip scenarios under different loading conditions. With presented analyses, this paper provides a computational framework calibrated for studying rock burst events and, as a reference for treatment of more complex cases, shows how Young's modulus of the rock, failure stress drop, rock brittleness, and slip-weakening behaviors of faults govern the rock burst occurrence and intensity.Rock burst events are unstable rock failure induced by excavation advances underground. In stable failure, the process of failure is gradual and allows for arresting the failure by, for example, ceasing to enlarge the area of mining, therefore, the workings remain essentially stable. Unstable failure takes place suddenly with or without prior warning. Cook Salamon Elevation of shear stresses or a drop in confinement on a pre-existing fracture can be a result of the stress re-distribution caused by mining operations, inducing shear slip that can be stable or unstable. While the stable slip is gradual, unstable slip or shear-type rock burst is sudden and generates seismic waves. Pre-existing large fault structures around mine workings behave differently in response to the stress re-distribution and can generate large-scale rock burst and, therefore, tremendously damage underground excavations. Salamon This paper uses UDEC, Failure of rock surrounding an excavation results in the conversion of energy within the rock. The external work The left- and right-hand sides of Eq. Compressive unstable failure is common in mining pillars although this type of failure is also reported in excavation walls and mining faces of longwall panels. Cook Eleven models with the configuration shown in With a damping constant between 0.1 and 0.9, Using laboratory compression tests on cylindrical rock samples, Cook The excavation height, the final excavation width, and loading conditions are kept the same as the model in Three models with brittle, semi-brittle, and ductile responses assigned to the pillar are constructed. It is assumed that the rock surrounding the mine workings is linearly elastic with Young's modulus of 10 GPa and Poisson's ratio of 0.2, so non-linear behaviors are restricted to the pillar. Modeling MCSS is based on the standard Mohr-Coloumb model but allows manipulating failure parameters to simulate different post-peak behaviors. In MCSS, rock deformation is elastic before failure while after failure the total deformation is composed of elastic and plastic parts. By defining different variations of the rock cohesion, friction angle, dilation angle, and tensile strength with the plastic deformation of rock, different strain path lengths resulting in different post-peak behaviors can be simulated as observed in laboratory tests or in site-specific conditions. With excavating each slice through a quasi-static scheme, the roof and floor gradually converge and impose higher compressional loads on the pillar until it fails. Then, the dynamic scheme of UDEC starts simulating the failure process. The average vertical stress and convergence during the loading are recorded within the pillar for brittle, semi-brittle, and ductile behaviors and are represented as black, gray, and red solid curves, respectively, in The main difference between stable and unstable failure is the significant radiation of seismic energy accompanying unstable failure or rock burst. One way to identify the occurrence and assess the intensity of rock burst is to estimate the radiated seismic energy by either Eqs. ( The area below GRCs is the energy density available for failure As expected, ductile failure is stable and radiates near-zero seismic energy since the failure does not propagate autonomously and thus requires an external force in order to continue; however, it records 0.1 J of radiated seismic energy caused by small dynamic effects introduced through the simulated excavation process. With 10.26 J and 10.09 J seismic energy radiation calculated by the dynamic and graphical methods, respectively, the result of the semi-brittle failure falls between the two extremes of the brittle and ductile behaviors. Analyses in In the case of a tabular excavation, the loading system stiffness is in an inverse relationship to the width of the excavation span and in a direct relationship with Young's modulus of the material surrounding the pillar. Assigning Young's moduli of 15 GPa, 25 GPa, and 35 GPa to the surrounding rock, while the pillar's Young modulus is kept constant at 10 GPa, yields GRCs with slopes of 1.6, 2.4, and 3.7 MPa/mm, respectively. Although the MCSS materials ( As mentioned before, the graphical estimates of radiated seismic energy in principle follows the approach in Eq. Another important outcome from this section may be the complexity of studying unstable failure by stress analyses. The agreement between results from Eqs. Stress re-distribution caused by mining activities in the vicinity of fracture zones may induce slip that can be stable causing gradual creep or can be unstable leading to shear-type rock burst. Great-magnitude rock burst events with an earthquake-like signature are reported in several cases of underground excavations in a close proximity to large pre-existing fault structures. Different mining layouts in different geological settings may induce different shear stress distributions on a pre-existing fault, leading to various slip scenarios. Ryder For simplifying fault activation, a single fault ( A Young's modulus of 30 GPa and Poisson's ratio of 0.2 is assigned to the linearly elastic and continuous rock surrounding the fault. Following the analytical solution, a slip-weakening frictional behavior with zero characteristic distance is applied to the fault ( Shear force is developed along the fault by the non-uniformly distributed body force couples that gradually increases from zero to 1 MN and 17 MN based on the pattern shown in Ryder The last piece of the calibration process involves selecting a damping constant that makes results independent of the damping scheme in UDEC. A parametric test is conducted by running the fault activation simulation with 11 different damping constants ranging from zero to one. Maximum shear displacement along the fault and radiated seismic energy are recorded for each simulation and are indicated in From this observation, a damping constant between 0.3 and 0.9 can yield damping-independent results. This study recommends a damping constant of 0.8 for studying shear-type rock burst events. The relative consistency between results in Dieterich Direct shear test configuration can be veiwed as a simplified representation of some fraction of the fault in  For each case, the contact shear stress versus shear displacement is recorded during the slip. GRCs are obtained by recording the shear stress The area below the dashed curves in This condition is similar to the slip instability notion proposed by Dieterich In From analyses in Analyses in The examples of compressive-type rock burst in Modeling shear-type rock burst along a pre-existing fault is checked against analytical calculations. Following the assumptions made by Ryder, Idealized slip along a discontinuity is simulated by the use of a simple direct shear test in This paper uses idealized cases of slip on a discontinuity and failing pillar in a tabular excavation to record GRCs and study rock burst mechanisms in detail through stress analyses; however, in complex modeling cases of mining layouts in the proximity of intersecting preexisting faults encompassed by rock with non-linear behaviors, there is no practical way to obtain GRCs and assess the burst potential of the mining works by stress analyses. Examples presented in this paper show that in the complex cases, relative rock burst potentials in different mining layouts can be assessed by using the developed framework and estimating radiated seismic energy from the dynamic approach in Eq. The main idea of this paper is to employ UDEC, a code capable of handling nonlinear rock behaviors in the fractured ground, and develop a calibrated framework for solving initial quasi-static and the subsequent dynamic process of rock burst for any specific configuration and initial conditions. The framework includes modeling approach and methodologies for estimating the occurrence and intensity of rock burst events in compression and shear by calculating radiated seismic energy. With introduced methods for obtaining the ground reaction to the unstable crushing of rock and unstable slip on a discontinuity, radiated seismic energy is estimated through tracking energy components before and after such unstable events. By calibrating mechanical damping scheme in UDEC, radiated seismic energy is also estimated as the kinetic energy generated in the system after the expression of rock burst. For both compressive- and shear-type rock burst events, a damping constant between 0.5 and 0.9 is shown to yield results within less than 2% error of values obtained from analytical solutions. The calibrated framework is then used to explore factors contributing to rock burst potentials. In the compressive-type rock burst example, a reduction in the strain path length from 3.5 mm to zero increases the rock burst intensity by 86% while an increase in Young's modulus of the surrounding rock from 15 to 35 GPa suppresses the intensity by 62%. Regarding rock burst in shear, a mesh size to slip length of 1:40 is found to produce mesh-independent results. Slip with a 0.45 mm D