A comminution result is determined by the number of stress events and the stress intensity. Against that, the comminution behavior of a mill is characterized by the frequency of stress events and the stress energy acting at each stress event. The product of stress number and stress energy is proportional to the specific energy input. The proportionality factor is the energy transfer factor which describes the percentage of energy which is used for stressing the product particles. Using the characteristic numbers based on a few tests, the operating parameters can be optimized. By comparing the mill characteristics with the breakage characteristics of the feed material, the performance of different mills and different operating states can be evaluated.Presently, the description, selection and design of comminution and dispersion processes are based mainly on practical experience and empirical relations. For the determination of the optimum operation parameters of a grinding or dispersing process or mill, usually several grinding or dispersing tests have to be carried out. Besides that comminution processes are simulated usually by the so-called population balance model, for which model parameters have to be determined more or less empirically. Therefore, in order to reduce the experimental expenditure and to improve the optimization result, a physical grinding model should be developed, which describes the effect of the different operating parameters by characteristic numbers in a combined form. The stress models described in the following can combine the effects of the different operating parameters by characteristic numbers. They focus on the elementary processes taking place in comminution and dispersion processes, i.e., stressing and breaking of individual particles. The basic concept of this idea is not absolutely new; however, up to now, it is not consequently transposed and used to describe and design comminution and dispersion processes. In order to describe the physical processes in mills better and to look at a mill not as a black box, so-called stress models were developed. In principal, there are two possibilities to look on the grinding process: from the view of the feed particles; from the view of the mill. The two different stress models based on the two different points of view are described in the following. The basic idea or principle of the product-related physical model is that for a given feed particle, the product quality and fineness achieved in a comminution or dispersing process is determined by: how often each feed particle and its resulting fragments are stressed and thus by the number of stress events of a feed particle, SN how high the specific energy or specific force at each stress event is and thus by the stress intensity at each stress event, SI. In real comminution processes, the feed particles and the resulting fragments are not stressed equally often with the same stress intensity, but differently often with different stress intensities. Thus, in detail, the number of stress events and stress intensity can only be characterized by distributions, not by single numbers. Both distributions, particularly the magnitude of SN The influence of the number of stress events on the product quality or fineness is obvious: With an increasing number of stress events per feed particle, the product quality or fineness increases. Against that the stress intensity determines, how effective the specific energy transferred to the product is transposed into product quality and product fineness. The principle effect of the stress intensity on the product fineness when single particles are stressed follows from However, if the stress intensity is larger (SI/SI The upper limit can be assumed to be the case when the new surface area increases proportional to the stress intensity. In this case, the slope of the curve is one. The lower limit is equal to a deagglomeration process, in which the size of the fragments does not depend on the stress intensity as long as the stress intensity is higher than the optimum stress intensity. In this case, the slope of the curve and the value of exponent is zero. Real cases of grinding crystalline materials will be between these two boundary cases, so that the exponent of the power function will be between 0 and 1. Therefore, at SI>SI If instead of the product fineness, the energy utilization is used to characterize the effect of the stress intensity, If a single crystalline particle is stressed, right of the optimum stress intensity, the relative increase in product fineness or specific surface is smaller than the corresponding relative increase in stress intensity; hence, the energy utilization, EU, decreases right of the optimum. The more difficult the feed material is to be ground, the smaller the decrease in energy utilization. The upper limit is probable if the energy utilization stays constant while the stress intensity increases. Thus, for SI>SI In case of the product-related stress model, the number of stress events and the stress intensity were related to the comminution of a certain feed particle. Consequently, the stress intensity changes with the mass of particles caught and stressed at one stress event. Moreover, the number of stress events of a feed particle and the resulting fragments, SN For the characterization of a mill, it makes more sense to define characteristic numbers, which are independent on the size and other properties of the product particles. Therefore, instead of a product-related model, the following mill-related model should be used: The comminution behavior of a mill is determined by: the number of stress events which are supplied by the mill per unit time, the so-called frequency of stress events, SF the energy which can be supplied to the product particles by the mill at each stress event, the so-called stress energy, SE. The product of the frequency of stress events, SF, and the mean comminution time, The stress energy, SE, is defined as the energy transferred to one or more product particles at one stress event. As described for the product-related model, the stress energy is not constant at all stress events, so that for an exact description of the mill, the frequency distribution of the stress energy must be known. The frequency distribution like qualitatively shown in The total energy transferred to the product particles can be determined by the summation of all stress energies of the individual stress events. If a frequency distribution of the stress energies like shown in Under the assumption of a constant shape of the stress frequency distribution and the stress energy distribution based on Eq. Using the stress frequency of a mill, SF Using Eqs. The production capacity for a certain product fineness, In a wet operated stirred media mill, the product particles which are dispersed in a fluid are stressed and ground by grinding media, which are intensively moved by a stirrer. As shown in Due to the several different energy dissipations, it can easily be followed that only a small percentage of the power input of the stirrer is really used for the deformation and breakage of the product particles. The main percentage of the power input is transferred into heat by friction. How “well” or how “worse” the grinding effect of a certain mill is and how favorable or unfavorable the operating parameters are chosen depends strongly on how effective the energy is transferred from the stirrer over the grinding media to the product particles. Besides, the level of the stress intensity at a stress event determines the energy utilization and, with it, the specific energy required to obtain a certain product quality. Based on the description of the energy transfer in a stirred media mill, the energy transfer factor of a stirred media mill can be estimated. The energy transfer factor,  the viscosity of the suspension is not too high; the young modulus of the product material is low compared to the young modulus of the grinding media; and the geometry of the mill is not changed. In If the optimum stress energy is known, the operating parameters The grinding material has to be chosen which is most favorable with respect to wear and cost of the grinding media itself as well as to wear of the mill: The optimum stress energy has to be determined by a few grinding tests: After choosing the grinding media size which should be the most favorable, the stirrer tip speed has to determined in a way that the power input is as high as possible for the grinding media size chosen. Therefore, it has to be looked at that the product temperature is not higher than the allowed maximum product temperature and that the mechanical load of the machinery and the grinding media does not become too high: Using the optimum stress energy and the maximum stirrer tip speed determined in If the grinding media size cannot be chosen as necessary according to Eq. In an iteration step it has to be checked, whether at the grinding media size obtained in It has to be noted that besides a maximum power input and optimum stress energy, further conditions have to be considered. On one hand, it should be checked whether the operating parameters chosen are acceptable regarding wear and grinding media compression in front of the separation device. If the product quality is determined by the maximum particle size, the effect of the operating parameters on the residence time distribution has to be taken into account. To summarize the procedure above, in order to achieve a maximum production capacity, the stirrer tip speed should be increased to a value at which the power consumption is the highest possible and at the same time the grinding media size should be decreased to a value at which the stress energy has an optimum value. The application of the product- and mill-related stress models offers a variety of chances in the future. Existing grinding processes can be optimized by adjusting the stress intensity or stress energy to an optimum value. Thus, a maximum production capacity can be obtained at a specific energy requirement which is as low as possible. If besides the mill characteristics (stress energy distribution, energy transfer coefficient, mass of particles stressed at one stress event), the breakage characteristics of a grinding material are known (breakage function as function of stress intensity), mill and operation parameters which are most favorable for a new grinding task can be selected. When it is possible to calculate the stress energy distribution of different mill types and geometries, the design of a mill can be optimized to achieve an optimum stress energy distribution and an optimum energy transfer. The stress models offer the possibility to simulate grinding processes at operating states, which were not investigated experimentally before. For such a simulation besides the mill characteristics, the material characteristics should be known (for first attempts, see