The present paper aims to utilize the fly ash wastes with lightweight aggregates for geopolymer concrete production process in which sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and sodium metasilicate (Na2SiO3) were used as alkali activators, respectively. The designed experiments were examined by the Yates Analyses and so the productions of geopolymer concrete were investigated depending on curing temperature, solid/liquid rate and concentration of alkali activators. The curing temperature and alkali activator concentration were revealed as effective parameters in geopolymerization. The effects of expanded perlite (EP) and acidic pumice (AP) aggregates were discovered for the production of lightweight geopolymer concretes. The microstructural properties of each produced geopolymer concrete were characterized using SEM, EDS and laser particle size analyses. The specifications of the concrete were evaluated based on their uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), point load strength (PLS), sonic speed (SS), Mohs hardness (MH), and water absorption (WAR) ratio results. In addition, the effects of pre-wetting of EP aggregates, which have hydrophilic nature, were examined. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that pre-wetted lightweight EP aggregates were used to produce lightweight GP concretes. As a result of pre-wetting, chemical usage decreased by 32.5%. The UCSs of the lightweight geopolymer concretes were in a range of 10–50 MPa and their unit weights changed between 1250 and 1700 kg/m3. Lighter concretes were obtained by the addition of EP aggregates rather than AP ones.Geopolymer (GP) is the most promising advanced material that substituted the traditional portland cement (PC) and can be used in bottom-up all fields of industry applications [ GP, which was introduced by Davidovits for the first time [ Many materials such as fly ash [ Lightweight concretes, which have a density less than 1920 kg/m One of the most important problems encountered in concretes formed by using lightweight aggregates is their high water absorption capacity. This problem can be overcome by pre-wetting lightweight aggregates. It has been stated in previous studies that concrete samples obtained by using pre-wetted lightweight aggregates may have higher strength [ In this study, fly ash-based GP concretes were prepared by adding AP and expanded perlite (EP) aggregates. The best geopolymerization conditions were revealed after Yates Analyses. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and sodium silicate (Na Class F fly ashes (according to ASTM C618-17a) were taken from Sugözü thermal power station located in southern Anatolia [ X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of each sample were obtained using a Rigaku Miniflex XRD equipped with a Cu Ka radiation in the 2ø range of 5–75° and the material phases were identified through a PDXL software using the current database. XRD patterns of the samples are given in The morphological structures of the samples were analysed by Quanta FEG 650 scanning electron microscope (SEM) and presented in The particle size distribution of fly ash, AP, and EP samples are given in NaOH or Na The relative humidity values were between 45 and 60% during the curing periods. The MH value of each specimen was determined using a shore scleroscope, which measures the hardness by taking advantage of the elasticity of the material [ The experiments were designed based on the 2 Firstly, the preliminary tests were performed and the high and low levels for Yates Analyses were determined. The effects of the alkaline solution nature, solid/liquid ratio and the curing temperature on UCSs of the produced GP concretes were investigated using the Yates Analysis. Concretes were produced in 8 different conditions for each Yates Analysis and the strength tests of the samples were carried out on 1st, 5th, 10th, 15th and 28th days. The obtained UCSs were taken as responses (observed values) for Yates Analysis. Besides, 3 GP concretes produced by mean experimental condition were tested to calculate the sample variance (Se Using the test results in As seen in The 28th day GP concrete produced at the condition of ABC (with Na The effects of these factors on the UCS values of concrete were investigated in detail because the curing temperature and Na Our experiments carried out with mortars prepared at a solid rate of 74%, the strengths of the concrete samples that were kept in the oven at 70 °C for 24 h and were compared with the other concrete samples cured in room temperature, simultaneously. The molarity of solution was 5 M. Geopolymer concrete samples were formed using alkaline solutions at a concentration of 3 (brown), 4 (purple) and 5 M (dark grey) to determine the effect of Na The optimum conditions were then selected as follows: 5 M Na The solid/liquid ratio was set at 74%, while the ratio of AP to the amount of fly ash was gradually increased in each experiment. We observed that the workability of the specimens increased within increasing the ratio of AP/fly ash during the sample preparation processes. As seen in Applying a point force to the specimens for the point load strength experiment, the tensile strength is actually defeated during this test. Therefore, the point load strength can also be considered as indirect tensile strength. It is normal for point load strengths to be lower than UCSs. Because the UCSs of solid bodies is higher than their tensile strength. Stress-strain curves demonstrated in As an expected, the WAR value of the concrete increased when adding AP, which has a porous structure, into the mix proportion. The fact that sound waves spent more time in the pores inside AP resulted in a reduction in SS values (see The effect of AP’s particle size (−0.425 mm, −4+0.425 mm and −12 + 4 mm) on the UCS properties of concrete is listed in In order to investigate the effect of particle size, EP aggregates were first divided into −4+0 mm and −0.425 + 0 mm dimensions and added to the mortar formed by using fly ash. The solid/liquid ratio was arranged at 73.3%. In addition to having a porous structure like AP, EP had a very low bulk density (0.143 g/cm  Lightweight concretes offer numerous benefits such as easier transportation, reduced dead load on structural elements, and better fire resistance. In this study, we demonstrated that the lightweight GP concretes could be produced by utilizing the fly ash wastes with lightweight aggregates. The optimum GP concrete preparation parameters were determined by Yates Analysis. The GP concrete production was modelled and formulated. Temperature and alkaline solution concentration were predominant parameters for the geopolymerization process. The GP concrete specimens prepared by Na Scientific Research Project Unit of The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at