Arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation of glenoid fractures have been well described, especially for glenoid rim (Bankart) fractures, as well as for scapular body fractures with extensions into the articular surface. This approach has the advantage of decreasing comorbidities associated with a standard open approach, but it can be technically challenging and may not be amenable to all fracture patterns. Arthroscopic fixation of scapular fractures incorporating a transverse pattern along the inferior aspect of the glenoid is particularly challenging because of difficulty in accessing this space. We detail the use of a posteroinferior arthroscopic portal for fracture reduction and hardware placement in a scapular fracture with inferior glenoid involvement.Scapular body fractures with extension into the glenoid articular surface are relatively uncommon injuries but can be challenging to treat. Typically, extra-articular scapular body fractures can be managed nonoperatively, but those patterns with extension into the glenoid articular surface often require operative intervention. Ideberg et al. Treatment of scapular fractures through arthroscopic techniques mitigates some of the risks seen with the open approach and may be more appropriate in elderly patients or in patients with multiple medical comorbidities. Arthroscopic treatment for glenoid fractures was first described for an Ideberg type I pattern, or a fracture of the anteroinferior glenoid. Preoperative workup is imperative for patients with scapular fractures because these injuries are often associated with high-energy trauma and associated injuries. Plain radiographs serve as the initial imaging modality ( A team most familiar with shoulder arthroscopy is beneficial in performing this type of procedure. We recommend the use of regional anesthesia, if available, in this case an indwelling interscalene catheter, to help minimize anesthetic use from general anesthesia during the case, as well as to provide postoperative pain control. The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position using a beanbag (Universal Medical, Norwood, MD) with anterior and posterior positioners (Stulberg Hip Positioners; Innomed, Savannah, GA) as adjunctive stabilization. The operative extremity is held in position with the use of a standard traction device (Arthrex, Naples, FL) used for shoulder arthroscopy in the lateral position. The lateral position, in our experience, facilitates access to the inferior and posteroinferior aspects of the glenoid, which is required in the treatment of the Ideberg type V fracture pattern. Before preparation and draping, the C-arm should be placed superior to the head of the patient and placed in full “orbit” such that the receiver lies near the patient's face and the source is at the ventral aspect of the patient. This will allow the surgeon to bring the machine directly distal to obtain appropriate intraoperative fluoroscopic views. A standard posterior portal is made for introduction of the arthroscope into the joint. By use of an outside-in technique with a spinal needle, an anterior working portal is established within the rotator interval. In contrast to fixation of Ideberg type III fractures, it is not necessary to remove rotator interval tissue for adequate visualization. A diagnostic arthroscopy is carried out in standard fashion after fracture hematoma is removed from the intra-articular space. The primary goal of the procedure is to obtain anatomic reduction and secure fixation of the glenoid fracture fragment, but other interventions (labral or rotator cuff debridement) may be carried out at this time. An arthroscopic shaver (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) is used to remove hematoma from the fracture site so that the fracture pattern and orientation can be confirmed. These fracture patterns typically involve the inferior one-third to one-half of the glenoid, and most commonly, the fracture fragment is rotated such that the articular surface is facing superiorly ( A probe is then used to assess fracture mobility. In delayed cases, use of a Bankart elevator provides a more broad and stout instrument with which to manipulate the fragment ( Once adequate mobilization of the fracture fragment is achieved, a probe is placed through the anterior portal into the fracture site, reducing the fragment into position. A non-threaded cannulated screw guidewire (4.0-mm partially threaded cannulated screw; Synthes, West Chester, PA) is then placed through the posteroinferior cannula and passed through this piece so that it just enters into the fracture site. It is important to place the guide pin away from the articular margin to prevent the screw head from abrading the humeral head articular cartilage. The arthroscopic probe is then placed beneath the tip of the wire, using the wire as a manual reduction tool to further manipulate the fracture fragment into position. The guidewire is advanced in a posteroinferior-to-anterosuperior direction into the superior glenoid cortex. The provisional reduction is then assessed, and if adequate, a second guidewire is placed outside, but just adjacent to, the cannula to prevent fracture displacement when placing the screw. The guidewire exiting the cannula is measured to determine the appropriate screw length before a 2.7-mm cannulated drill bit is used to drill the outer cortex of the fracture fragment only. The screw length is selected based on the measured guidewire length and is shortened by 2 mm to prevent screw penetration through the far cortex. During screw placement, compression of the inferior fracture fragment against the intact superior glenoid can be noted and maintenance of reduction can be visually confirmed ( Fractures of the scapula that involve the glenoid can be treated both in an open manner and arthroscopically. Although it is now commonplace for Ideberg type I fractures (bony Bankart–type injuries) to be treated arthroscopically, Arthroscopic treatment of more involved fracture patterns, such as the Ideberg type V variant with an inferior glenoid fragment, as described in this report, has not previously been reported and requires a different surgical approach. One must realize that arthroscopic treatment of this type of scapular fracture addresses only the glenoid articular surface and not the scapular body, which may or may not have significant displacement. We believe, however, that restoration of the articular surface is the primary goal of this type of procedure because non-articular scapular body fractures are most commonly treated nonoperatively. Although this approach does not address concomitant scapular body fractures that may be present, it avoids a larger open incision and its comorbidities and gives direct visualization of the articular surface and reduction through the arthroscope. Although not amenable to all fracture patterns, arthroscopic fixation of a large inferior glenoid fracture as shown in this case is safe and reproducible using the described technique, specifically with the use of a posteroinferior arthroscopic portal technique and inferior-to-superior screw trajectory. The posteroinferior portal for shoulder arthroscopy has been shown to be safe and effective for accessing the inferior aspect of the glenohumeral joint in cadaveric models, with mean distances of 39 ± 4 mm from the circumflex artery and 29 ± 3 mm from the axillary nerve and suprascapular nerve. We found the technique of advancing the guidewire such that it just enters the fracture site and then using a probe to lift up on the wire, essentially joy-sticking the fragment into the correct position, to be very effective. Using a second wire (outside of but parallel to the cannula) for rotational control prevented rotation of the fragment during screw insertion. Regarding instrumentation, it is necessary to use a long guidewire and cannulated screwdriver for screw insertion. This is particularly relevant when a long cannula (≥9 cm) is used in the posteroinferior portal in more muscular individuals. Some of the standard cannulated screw systems may not accommodate this length, and we experienced this with the Synthes 4.0-mm cannulated screw used for this case. If this occurs, the surgeon may use a cannulated screwdriver to partially insert the screw into the bone and then switch to a non-cannulated screwdriver after initial screw purchase in the superior intact glenoid. The choice of short versus long threaded screws will depend on the fragment size, but a transverse inferior-third fragment should allow for a long partially threaded screw to be used to optimize fixation strength. Long-term outcome data on arthroscopic fixation of the Ideberg V variant scapular fracture described in this report are nonexistent. We believe that specific fracture patterns enable the use of a posteroinferior portal for arthroscopic fixation of glenoid fractures, decreasing many of the morbidities associated with a traditional open approach for these complex scapular fractures. 