The first decade of the new millennium has ushered in with it booming commodity prices due mainly to high growth in East Asia. Copper prices in particular have soared 80% between 2001 and 2011, causing Chile, the world׳s largest copper producer, to reap massive windfalls. This paper provides an assessment of Chile׳s commodity dependence with a focus on the manner in which current flows of mining revenue promote sustainable development. The first part of the paper suggests Chile׳s status as a strong commodity producer could be complemented by efforts to achieve a more balanced growth trajectory that would include expansion of domestic demand brought about by rising labor productivity and rising wages and reduced dependence on export demand and foreign savings. We believe such an achievement would greatly promote the fair transfer of resource revenue from exhaustible sources to future generations. In the second part of the paper we provide an empirical assessment of sources and the destination of revenue derived from mineral exports. We focus on usage of revenue flows to government, multinationals in the form of profits and operating expenses, and workers. Our approach is intended to provide a more holistic and meaningful assessment of Chile׳s commodity dependence than what is normally found in the literature. We conclude that while the Chilean government clearly has provided future generations with revenue in the form of offshore sovereign wealth funds, most private resource revenue flows offshore in the form of remittances and profits to multinationals. There is limited use of private and public funds directed at enhancing domestic demand through productive investment.Today Chile is the world׳s largest copper producer and exporter. Together with other net-commodity-producing countries, Latin American economies are in a new phase of re-commodification and deindustrialization largely fueled by rising commodity prices that are due mainly to the rapid growth of China and other emerging market economies ( This is good news for Chile. The country is repeatedly lauded as exemplar in managing revenues from copper mainly in transparent offshore sovereign wealth fund and in containing exchange rate appreciation. The state has been the recipient of an impressive revenue windfall since 2004 thanks to soaring copper prices, and during this period has successfully managed the revenue surge mainly in offshore accounts ( Chile, since the return to democracy in 1990, has been an attractive destination for foreign direct investment (FDI) especially related to the exploration for new mineral deposits and the discovery and extraction of base metals, an attraction that has increased significantly after 2004, given the high price of copper ( In view of its success at attracting foreign investment in the mining sector, the compelling question is whether resource revenue, which represents an asset for future generations ( This paper will proceed as follows. Section “Using resource revenue for the future” provides an overview of the Chilean economy during the current commodity boom, addresses government use of revenue to ensure intergenerational equity and to mitigate Dutch disease effects, and makes a case for sustainable development via balanced growth. Section “Analysis of mining revenue flows” identifies resource flows and analyzes usage of flows using as a benchmark the attainment of growth through generation of domestic demand. Section “Conclusion” presents conclusions and suggests ways to improve allocation of copper windfalls. The issue of intergenerational equity or the sharing of wealth generated from exhaustible resources between current and future generations is an important consideration for resource rich countries when designing strategies for the management of funds. Multiple authors ( Overall, we agree with the importance of both sustainable development and intergenerational equity, two objectives that we believe are highly intertwined. For exhaustible resources to maintain constant or rising living standards for future generations requires the conversion of some portion of current resource assets into long term productive investments unrelated to the extraction and export of commodities. In this manner future generations will benefit from a greater selection of high productivity jobs and rising income even when commodity prices fall and or reserves are depleted. The next section provides an overview of the copper boom that has taken place since 2004 and the impact it has had on Chili׳s economy. In Section “Intergenerational equity and Dutch disease” we look at how the Chilean state manages mining revenue as it relates to intergenerational equity and will highlight its success in mitigating Dutch disease effects. Finally, Section “Sustainable development” addresses sustainable development in the context of the literature on balanced growth theory, an approach we believe has not been undertaken in the literature for Chile. There is every indication that Chile, an upper middle income developing economy, is thriving in its current status as a commodity producer. Since 2004 until 2011 copper prices have soared, a boom interrupted briefly in 2009 by the global financial crisis (Cochilco, 2013; see The massive contribution of Chile׳s copper and copper-related products to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) means that GDP moves up when copper prices rise and falls when copper prices fall. As a result of the copper price boom, Chile’s economy has doubled from 1998 to 2003 until 2004 to 2009 as shown by the average figures of GDP and GDP per cápita for those periods (see The impact of copper on GDP is clear and brings with it challenges—most notably the lack of control over the boom and bust cycle. Not only is Chile vulnerable to commodity price movements, but it also relies heavily upon foreign investment in the copper industry, which leaves the country vulnerable to the possibility that foreign investment can leave the country on a whim. The Chilean economy has been very open to foreign capital and investment since the implementation of free trade under the Pinochet in the early 1970s. In 1973 Pinochet implemented the 18.097 Organic Law that “transformed mining concessions into whole concessions, treating them as private properties” ( After 1990, foreign investment in the mining sector increased by 450% on average ( Writing on mining linkages, To summarize, Chile is highly dependent on the export of copper for economic growth. Given high prices of copper price since 2004, the expanding copper industry has led to rising per capita GDP and swollen the coffers of the government. In addition, there is a greater involvement of foreign mining capital, increasing vulnerabilities to capital flight that could have the potential to slow the formation of upstream and downstream linkages in the domestic economy ( It is not an overstatement to say Chile has been exemplary in its management of copper revenues, both in ensuring future generations of some share of current mining wealth and in mitigating Dutch disease effects. Its success has to do with the adherence to strict fiscal discipline carried over from the Pinochet era, and the holding of revenue in transparent and well-managed offshore accounts. A recession in the early 1980s, forced the state to undermine fiscal discipline as it bailed out banks and spent money to maintain a target exchange rate into the 1990s. Hence, since 2001 very strict conditions have been placed on the state׳s use of revenues embodied in the structural balance rule ( The ESSF, which we regard as a stabilization fund, was established to shield the fiscus during downturns and to absorb the surplus during booms—a countercyclical policy instrument aimed at stabilizing the economy during fluctuations. Using long-term estimates of GDP and prices of copper and molybdenum, the fund maintains a structural balance to isolate the fiscal deficit from cyclical fluctuations in prices and GDP. Thus, government expenditures remain high as a proportion of total revenue during a downturn in resource prices and remain low as a proportion of total revenue during a price boom. During a downturn, savings placed in offshore accounts called sovereign wealth funds are used to meet government liabilities and in this manner shield the economy from price fluctuations ( The PRF, which we regard as a savings fund, is the fund for the government׳s pension obligations. The PRF is clearly a case of saving for future generations in the sense that the younger generations are not only guaranteed a pension when they retire but will not be responsible for the financial security of the older generation. As long as these funds stay liquid it is fair to say future generations will also benefit. Providing for future generations, however, can be difficult during commodity price booms due to such adverse impacts as Dutch disease, the tendency for the exchange rate to over appreciate during booms and subsequent misallocation of resources. As commodity revenue flows into an economy and is converted into the domestic currency its appreciation makes it more difficult for non-mining tradable sectors such as manufacturing and agricultural, to export ( The successful management of these funds provides certainty about exchange rate stability, an important macroeconomic variable. Additionally during the 2008 global economic crisis Chile was able to utilize funds in the ESSF to stabilize the business cycle and in this manner mitigated many of the real economic impacts due to the drop in copper prices ( Whether efforts at promoting intergenerational equity from misallocation of resources arising from the tendency for resources to shift away from non-mining tradable sectors to mining and services given higher returns in the former ( In the sections above we discussed the issue of management of mining revenue in terms of providing for intergenerational equity and mitigating adverse impacts of volatile commodity prices such as the Dutch disease. It is also useful to consider management of mining revenue with an eye to long-term sustainable development. Historically commodity rich economies of the United States, Australia, Canada and New Zealand have utilized resource wealth to transition to an economy “… based on skills, technology and knowledge,” a transformation that involves “attracting capital, human and physical, out of rent seeking, commerce, and commodities and into manufacturing, the heart of modern economic growth” ( The literature on global imbalances has recently emerged or reemerged given concern over global disparities in consumption, savings and production between the United States and developing economies ( Global imbalances have special meaning for commodity rich economies in Latin America given that they work to drive excessive demand for commodities from China, driven in turn by excessive demand for manufactured goods from rich countries ( Hence the great interest in reducing global imbalances means that a country like Chile room has the potential to achieve sustainable growth by finding a balance between purely export led growth and growth generated through promotion of domestic demand.  How reasonable is it to expect Chile and other emerging commodity producing powers such as Brazil, South Africa, Russia, and Mexico, to target domestic consumption as a means of balanced growth? The answer, which has been proposed several times in this paper, lies in targeting the source of domestic consumption, which is income ( The issue of sharing current wealth with future generations fits nicely with the idea of balanced growth through rising income and domestic demand. Currently Chile has a deficit of skilled jobs given that approximately 25% of employment in the country is categorized by the International Labor Organization as elementary labor ( The largest South American commodity producers with the highest proportion of high technology manufactured exports out of all manufactured exports indicate lower proportions of elementary employment out of total employment. The tendency for commodity booms to shift resources away from non-mining tradables, as noted by The decline in manufacturing value is problematic for two reasons: first, it works to counter any movement toward a more balanced growth trajectory as noted above because it undermines the capacity to create high productivity jobs that pay higher wages. Low and stagnant wages can be seen to undermine any attempt to use domestic demand as an engine of economic growth. Second, it reduces intergenerational equity in that it reduces returns to education for future generations, leaving nearly 25% of future workers engaged in elementary occupations. The remainder of this section will summarize the literature on how to enhance the domestic manufacturing sector from the perspective that such a development is greatly complementary to the commodity export sector by reducing vulnerabilities to external demand and supply forces, and further, that it will strengthen the intergenerational transfer of current mineral wealth. The remainder of this paper provides an empirical assessment of the usage of Chile׳s copper revenue and will consider whether such flows align with what is needed for a more balanced growth trajectory. Central to designing policy aimed at more balanced growth, a process that would be fraught with challenges and likely frustrations is the need to nurture “the relationship between household consumption and private investment…” Boosting domestic purchasing power through creation of higher wage jobs is crucial because “labor income is the most important source of domestic purchasing power” ( Rising household income and consumption would generate product innovation and private investment leading to rising labor productivity in non-mining tradable and non-tradable goods sectors, which in turn will raise wages and further fuel domestic demand. Section “Analysis of mining revenue flows” of this paper will assess whether current usage of mining revenue for Chile is by any means consistent with a more balanced growth trajectory. We will ask in what manner copper revenue is utilized to finance domestic investment and technological upgrading. For instance do operating expenses, which represent the largest usage of resource revenue in the form of flows back into the sector for the next round of production, stimulate supply linkages with domestic firms? Do operating expenses facilitate technological upgrading and rising valued added in domestic firms in both mining and non-mining sectors? What role do wages play, if any, in stimulating demand for domestically manufactured goods or does trade liberalization replace imported manufactured goods with domestic? These key questions will be answered in Section “Analysis of mining revenue flows.” Section “Using resource revenue for the future” provides a framework within which to assess usage of commodity revenue. The framework is provided by balanced growth literature which emphasizes the need to achieve balanced growth between commodity exports and domestic demand. In this manner Chile would ensure rising incomes of Chilean workers through increased labor productivity and increased demand for skilled labor. In addition, Chile would reduce vulnerability to foreign forces, and strengthen fair sharing of current windfalls with future generations. This section will assess the extent to which resource revenue in Chile is used directly or indirectly to achieve rising income and subsequent rising domestic demand. This is not meant to be a critique of current government policy pertaining to resource management but rather to provide a more holistic assessment of Chile׳s commodity dependence in light of developing country commodity producer position within the current climate of sustained global imbalance between rich countries and commodity dependent developing countries. Mining revenue from copper, molybdenum and copper byproducts generated in Chile increased by fivefold between 2003 and 2011, due mainly to the current copper price boom, which began in 2004. The value of total mining exports increased 465% between 2003 and 2011, reaching US$50 billion in 2011 ( In order to assess how mining revenue is utilized during the current boom it is useful to identify where mining revenue flows after export, which will then permit an assessment of how mining revenue is utilized. Here we use accounting categories provided by the Chilean Copper Commission (Cochilco), such as operating costs, profits to private mining companies, fiscal revenue, remittances or repatriated flows, and wages. Operating costs represents flows that are used to finance ongoing operating expenses of mines, refineries and production of copper byproducts. Private mining companies mainly include giant multinational corporations that reap profits mainly on account of high copper prices and relatively stable extraction costs. Profits that are not reinvested into Chile and that leave the country are called remittances or repatriated flows. Finally, workers in the mining industry also receive a share of the mining revenue, which as we will see below has fallen considerably since the start of the current boom.  The interesting question is how were these shares impacted by the current boom? As mentioned in Section “Introduction” to this paper Chile has the lowest tax rate on corporate income compared with developing and most developed commodity producers. Thus the surge in fiscal revenue is due mainly to the rising price of copper and not to any significant change in tax policy other than the implementation of a royalty tax in 2005. This royalty tax, with the highest rate at 5%, is based on “taxable income of the mine operator based on annual sales” and applies only to newer firms or those who declined the DL600 tax option ( The following discussion of usage of fiscal revenues does not address other ways the government can influence revenue flows. For example, recent efforts by the Ministry of Finance to develop mining clusters will be addressed in Section XX on usage of operating expenses. In 2011 total mining revenue to the government made up 23% of total fiscal revenue, up from 5.8% in 1995 to 26% for the period 2006 to 2010 ( Government mismanagement of resource rents is the focus of an extensive body of economic literature. According to Fiscal austerity is the cornerstone of Chile׳s constitutional code, which was approved in 1980. The code gives great control of the budget to the executive branch and prohibits congress from implementing any new expenditure ( By not spending the money domestically the Chilean government does not increase demand for the Chilean peso when it converts U.S. dollars into the peso. This helps to mitigate Dutch disease effects which in theory could protect the competitiveness of manufactured exports and reduce the shift in resources away from high labor productivity activity to the mining sector ( However, it is important to point out that Chile is not immune to misallocation of resources. Imported resources in the form of FDI accrue disproportionately to the mining sector; between 1974 and 2000 the mining industry accounted for 35.5% of FDI in Chile compared to 13.1% of manufacturing and 23.8% of services ( Finally, the 1958 Chilean law, Ley Reservada del Cobre, requires that 10% of export revenues from Codelco go to the armed forces. This policy is mandated in the constitution and has been a point of contention in Chile. The policy is expected to be phased out in the coming years. Chile spends about 0.7% of GDP on research and development (R&D), which is low for OECD countries but on par with other Latin American economies. Most R&D is financed by the public sector and about 90% of personnel engaged in R&D work in public institutions. In 2006 the Competitiveness and Innovation Fund was initiated with an initial allocation of US$80 million or 0.03% of GDP ( Private R&D activity was estimated to comprise 0.2% of GDP in 2002, and is mainly concentrated in large firms (26 firms account for 60% of expenditures) (Benavente, de Mello and Mulder, 2005). Most firms spend funds in sectors where Chile has a comparative advantage including manufacturing of pulp, paper products, wood, furniture and food and beverages (Benavente, de Mello and Mulder, 2005; 8). Although the state has made significant efforts to divert resource assets to promote domestic innovation, entrepreneurship and firm upgrading, outcomes are weak overall. This is due to institutional shortcomings on the delivery side that include fragmentation and duplication in the manner in which funds are allocated, delay times and lack of information about funding to the population. In addition, efforts to finance innovation are prohibited by “low-high tech clusters within the country, lack of attention given to informal investment and to training entrepreneurs…,” and lack of financial institutional capacity to support venture capitalists (Benavente, de Mello and Mulder, 2005). Most MNC׳s rely on R&D from outside the country (Benavente, de Mello and Mulder, 2005). Overall there is little attention given to the use of resource revenues to upgrade technological capacity within domestic firms Private corporate profits have reaped the largest windfall from the current copper boom, amounting to US$14.38 billion in 2011, up 73% since 2000. While fiscal revenues garnered a slightly higher proportion during the boom, they compare at US$11.7 billion for the same year. Having domestic firms as suppliers begins the process of upgrading and could contribute to added value and eventually to added value of exports. However, we have yet to mention the use of resource revenues to upgrade domestic firms outside of the mining sector. In theory corporate profits represent a revenue flow that could support growth in the noncommodity sector such as in the form of loans to start up domestic firms attempting to become global competitors in the manufacturing sector or from demand emanating from new investments into high tech sectors ( Consider FDI as a revenue inflow that is motivated and financed in large part by the resources sector. Chile has been one of the highest recipients of FDI in the world, accounting for country size, due to successful macroeconomic stabilization, low inflation, and generous tax and royalty concessions ( Finally corporate profits can also be used for reinvestment back into the commodity sectors, as is currently done by BHP Billiton with its Cluster Program for the Development of World-Class Suppliers. The program, with an aim to “provide(s) opportunities for suppliers to develop innovative technologies and help(s) them grow into world-class, knowledge-intensive businesses that can sell their expertise internationally” came from a broader initiative on the part of the Chilean government to develop domestic firms ( This use of corporate profits on the part of BHP Billiton to generate spillovers to domestic industry could in the medium to long run benefit MNCs by making it easier source mining inputs and services locally. While this is an ideal use of corporate profits, it applies to such a small number of firms it is not likely—in the current application—to create a sustainable platform for improving labor productivity overall and to be a source of rising income. Currently BHP invests a Remittances are revenue that flows out of the country. The flows represent resource revenue that accrues to MNCs and that leave the host country; a big part of the remittances occurs by the liquidation of stocks sent abroad. Combined corporate profits and remittances account for approximately 38% of total mining revenue flows. This number is based on 2011 data but is reflective of the overall substantial proportion of resource revenues controlled by foreign companies; much of which leaves the country. The size of the flows largely has to do with state taxation and royalty policies. Operating expenses are the largest revenue flow generated from the sale of resources. In 2011 operating expenses were US$19,755 million or 39% of total mining revenue. This flow reflects a usage of funds in the ongoing process of exploration, discovery and extraction, and represents a potential source of funds that could facilitate upgrading in the domestic economy through upstream (production level) and downstream linkages (value added processing). This section will focus mainly on mining related value added activity. Copper mining requires massive resources in the form of water, power, equipment, transportation, construction of infrastructure, labor, permitting and environmental compliance, and so on to extract and minimally processed ore. As a result operating expenses represent a revenue stream with potential to upgrade domestic firm activity both upstream and downstream within the mining sector. The literature is scant and inconclusive as to whether mineral based economies in particular are more prone to suffer commodity trap problems than other commodity producers, or are in general poised for growth through establishment of upstream and downstream production linkages ( Upstream upgrading here refers to domestic firms being enabled to supply mining inputs such as parts, equipment, and machinery. Ideally the presence of large foreign mining companies should stimulate domestic firms to upgrade to supply such inputs, a widely held view that a benefit of FDI leads to technological spillovers in the domestic economy. Likewise mining activity should lead to downstream upgrading among domestic firms as firms learn and adopt technology used in refining commodities, such first-use copper goods like wire, pipes, etc. referred to as semis ( For Chile there is little evidence that the presence of abundant mining activity stimulates demand for inputs from domestic firms or that it stimulates much in the form of value upgrading upstream or downstream within the mining sector. In a study by the The following graph shows import volumes by country for 2005. The U.S. is the main country of origin of all goods and inputs imports ( While the U.S. contribution to mining inputs fell sharply from 2000 to 2004 it remained the largest supplier, undoubtedly due to the U.S. history as one of the world׳s largest copper producing economies. The data indicate the lack of domestic production of goods and inputs in Chile and their unlikely production in the future, given the huge investments that are required for start-up capital (Cochilco, 2005). In an ideal world the actual process of exploration for and extraction of resources and the process of basic ore processing initiated by Codelco and foreign mining companies would generate spillovers to the domestic sector such as the upgrading of firms as suppliers of mining goods, inputs and services. To some extent this has occurred as Chile along with China are the largest upstream processors starting with smelting and then refining of copper; in 2009 Chile and Japan each produced 11% of world primary copper metal using the smelter process, behind China at 24%. In the processing of refined copper China and Chile were the top two producers. However, China and India together have made inroads and in 2005 Asia surpassed Latin America in the refining of copper for the first time ( Chile, however, has little involvement in downstream activity, notably as a semi-fabricator. Semi-fabricators make intermediate products; they include ingot makers, master alloy plants, wire rod plants, brass mills, alloy wire mills, foundries and foil mills ( Given low input supply and low downstream activity, domestic firms׳ expenditures on mining activity appear to do little to stimulate growth in domestic-based physical assets. The reasons for this can be summarized using the literature on global value chain analysis to identify internal, external and institutional constraints ( The mining sector in Chile, using Gereffi׳s comparison of producer-driven versus buyer-driven global commodity chains, is in our opinion a producer-driven chain. While the job of mining companies is to extract copper, low regulation and the absence of domestic input quotas, endow MNCs with freedom to recycle resource revenue within the Chilean economy as they see fit. While mining companies might prefer to purchase mining goods, inputs and services domestically, reducing the need to import massive haul trucks and other equipment, they are not in the business of shoring up domestic firms on a large scale, with few exceptions such as participation in the government׳s local supplier development Cluster program. The decision about where to purchase mining inputs is made by a small handful of giant multinational mining companies plus Codelco. Most mining MNCs are giant conglomerates with mining operations in many countries, and with access to already established global supply chains. Today over 82% of copper is produced by the five companies listed earlier. The four private multinational corporations are immense and wield considerable influence in the global mining industry. For instance, in 2013 BHP Billiton had a market capitalization of US$147 billion, nearly one half Chile׳s GDP. It owns two copper mines in Chile and 57.5% of the Escondida mine, the largest producer of copper in the world; it also owns copper mines in the United States, Peru and Australia. Yet copper is only one part of the company׳s total operations. They mine (and commonly process) iron ore, metallurgical and energy coal, conventional and unconventional oil and gas, aluminum, manganese, uranium, nickel and silver in over 26 countries. Anglo American, the fourth largest mining company in the world, earned US$32,785 million in revenue in 2012, 15% or US$5122 million of which came from mines in Chile. In short, mining MNCs in Chile are involved in mining and mineral processing on a global scale and copper is just one facet of enterprise within these firms. Clearly firms of this size benefit from economies of scale ( In addition domestic firm-level constraints such small size, deficit of local supply chains, lack of innovation capacity, low entrepreneurial drive and low interfirm coordination work to undermine any comparative advantage sought out by Chilean entrepreneurs. Such firm-level constraints are well documented in the case of Chile ( In addition to external and internal constraints, the ability to utilize recycled resource revenues to develop mining related downstream supply chains is thwarted by institutional constraints ( The wage share during the current boom has fallen 71%. Between 2000 and 2011 the wage share fell from a low of 6.41% to 1.85%. Historically the wage share was over 30% , but due to increasing productivity and technological advances, the demand for labor has declined precipitously. In theory wages could be viewed as a source of demand for domestically produced manufactured good, which combined with demand from corporate profits and fiscal revenue, provide a key ingredient for balanced growth between commodity and manufacturing sectors (Kaldor, 1979). A lack of import restrictions on manufactured goods opens foreign exchange markets, and low tariffs add to the difficulty of wages—contributing to domestic firm upgrading through the stimulation of demand for manufactured goods. High productivity in the mining sector pushes wages above those in manufacturing and agricultural, both roughly half that in the mining sector, yet only 1% of workers in Chile are employed in the mining sector. In 2011, 10% of workers were employed in agriculture, 14% in industry, 8% in construction, and 66% in services. Although wages for miners have soared during the current boom ( The first part of the paper addressed literature on best usage of resource revenue for developing commodity exporters such as Chile. It focused on literature proposing that countries aim for a more balanced growth trajectory through the strengthening of domestic demand. Achieving growth through a combination of commodity export and rising domestic demand is important to counter vulnerabilities arising from too high dependence on demand especially from rich countries given the projection that it will play a reduced role in global economic growth in the foreseeable future, replaced by global growth driven by rising demand within developing economies. The paper than assesses the extent of commodity dependence in Chile under a balanced-growth scheme whose bottom line is to aim for raising income and domestic demand through the use of resource revenue (for commodity exporters) for long term productive investment in non-mining tradable goods. The four revenue flows generated from the export of copper and copper related byproducts include fiscal revenues, corporate profits and remittances, operating costs and wages. The largest flows take the form of fiscal revenues, corporate profits and operating expenses, hence are seen as potentially having the greatest use value for attaining a balanced growth trajectory. The Chilean government is doing well managing the revenues from the current copper boom: they have increased fiscal revenues by more than 70% while mitigating Dutch-disease effects by holding the revenues in offshore sovereign wealth funds. Nevertheless fiscal contribution to research and development is minimal, is doing little to upgrade domestic industry and diversify the economy for the future. Corporate profits could potentially stimulate domestic demand through the financing of domestic investment. However most investment which takes place in mining and mining related sectors generates few employment opportunities as it is easier and more cost effective to import inputs used in mining operations. With the exception of BHP Billiton׳s Cluster Program which aims to develop Chilean firms into global competitors in the mining supply industry, there is no evidence that private MNCs are investing in Chilean firms, with the intention of upgrading productivity within the domestic sector. The manner in which operating expenses are applied could be important because it could potentially support the upgrading of domestic firms within the mining and mining related sectors, by creating demand for more technological sophisticated inputs. Nevertheless we identify external impediments arising from the monopoly structure of the industry. Giant MNCs have already established supply chains due to their mining activities in countries across the globe, hence are able to substantially reduce costs of production through the attainment of economies of scale. While MNCs might prefer to purchase domestically, low innovative and entrepreneurial capacity among and within domestic firms, prohibit Chilean firms from rising up as suppliers of the massive amount of mining goods, inputs and services required. Overall, there is little indication resource revenue is being utilized in a manner to bring about a more balanced growth trajectory, which likely reflects a lack of will rather than for lack of trying.