Glass ceramics were successfully prepared from amorphized tungsten tailings after magnetic separation. Samples were characterized by DSC, XRD, SEM, and FTIR. The results demonstrated the main crystalline phases of the as-prepared glass ceramics were gehlenite (Ca2Al2SiO7) and hedenbergite (CaFeSi2O6), and the amount and size of the crystalline phases increased with increase of crystallization temperature. The morphology of crystalline grains varied from tiny granular to plate-like crystals. The crystalline phases would melt again, and hedenbergite would partially transform into gehlenite at a crystallization temperature of 1100°C. Based on the kinetics analysis for crystallite growth, the activation energy (E
                     α) and Avrami constant (n) were calculated as 381.16kJ/mol and 2.04, respectively, indicating that the crystallization mechanism followed two-dimensional growth. The glass ceramics from tungsten tailings at 1050°C showed proper crystal structure and high performance, which could be considered for potential applications in building materials.Tungsten tailings are the solid waste from tungsten ore dressing, and its major constituents commonly contain SiO Glass ceramics are polycrystalline materials produced by melt quenching and subsequent crystallization at proper heat treatment. Production of glass ceramics is used in a wide range of fields such as machinable ceramics, bio-ceramics, optical materials, cooking ceramics and building materials In this work, we demonstrated a strategy for the preparation of glass ceramics from the tungsten tailings from Hunan, China, and investigated the crystallization behavior of glass ceramics. To optimize the crystallization temperature, we studied the effect of crystallization temperature on the crystal structure. Tungsten tailings were obtained after tungsten ore magnetic separation from Hunan, China. Analytical reagents of SiO The tungsten tailings and additives were mixed together after grinding. The mixed powders were melted in an alumina crucible at 1400 X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed with a DX-2700 X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (  The SEM images showed that the particles of the tungsten tailings had irregular shapes and smooth surfaces, with sizes from 10 to 100 The nucleation rate was high near the FTIR spectra of the as-amorphized sample and the glass ceramics crystallized at various temperatures are shown in The variations of density and compressive strength of glass ceramics with crystallization temperature are shown in  The kinetics of crystallite growth in the as-amorphized sample can be described by the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) equation The gehlenite–hedenbergite glass ceramics were prepared from tungsten tailings by controlled crystallization. The crystallization mechanism of glass ceramics is two-dimensional growth, and the morphology of crystal grains are from tiny granular to plate-like crystals as crystallization temperature increases to 1050 This work was supported by the