The research work presented in this paper focused on the recovery of cobalt from mixed Co–Mn hydroxide precipitates (obtained from sulphate leach liquors of nickel oxide ore), using ammonia–ammonium carbonate leaching. The characterization of the initial mixed hydroxide precipitates, as well as the corresponding leached residue was carried out by X-ray Diffraction, TG–DTA and Scanning Electron Microscopy.
                  Cobalt and manganese precipitation was based on the statistical design and analysis of experiments, in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the precipitation factors, which were the equilibrium pH and the temperature. Co and Mn were precipitated as hydroxides at pH=10.5 and T
                     =25°C, using 5M NaOH as a neutralizing agent, by 99.9% and 99.5%, respectively. The main mineralogical phases were, Mn3O4 (Hausmannite), γ-Mn3O4 and CoMn2O4, while Co(OH)2 and Mn(OH)2 (Pyrochroite) were also present as minor constituents.
                  Cobalt and manganese separation was based on selective cobalt recovery by ammonia–ammonium carbonate leaching of the produced mixed hydroxide precipitate. The factors studied were the ammonia–ammonium carbonate concentration and the solid to liquid ratio. The cobalt recovery efficiency reached 93%. Mn3O4 (Hausmannite) was the main mineralogical phase of the leached residue, while MnCO3 (Rhodochrosite) and Mn2O3 were also present. Small quantities of cobalt were also observed in the residue as CoMn2O4.The Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens has developed and patented a novel integrated hydrometallurgical method, suitable to treat low-grade nickel oxide ores efficiently and economically. It involves heap leaching of the ore with dilute sulphuric acid at ambient temperature, purification of the leach liquors and recovery of nickel and cobalt by solvent extraction and electrowinning ( Iron, aluminium and chromium removal is the first stage of the downstream process. They are rejected from the solution, by chemical precipitation at 95 The loaded Cyanex 272 organic phase is stripped by diluted sulphuric acid. Subsequently, cobalt and manganese are extracted over magnesium by Cyanex 302. Cobalt and manganese in the organic phase are stripped with dilute sulphuric acid. The resulting final solution contains cobalt (≈5 The present work aimed at the cobalt recovery and its separation from manganese, from the purified sulphate leach liquor. The combined stream of cobalt and manganese, after stripping the loaded Cyanex 302, can be treated with diluted NaOH for the simultaneous precipitation of Co and Mn as hydroxides. After re-leaching the mixed precipitate with ammonia/ammonium carbonate solution, the manganese remains in the residue. Cobalt can be obtained by electrowinning or chemical precipitation. Precipitation is a physical–chemical process, in which soluble metals and inorganics are converted to relatively insoluble metal and inorganic salts (precipitates) by the addition of a precipitating agent. An alkaline reagent is used to raise the solution pH to lower the solubility of the metallic constituent, and, thus, bring about precipitation. One of the most important factors affecting the precipitation process is the nature of the neutralizing agent. Lime, magnesium hydroxide, caustic, or a blend of these alkaline compounds can be used as a source of hydroxide ions for precipitation of metal hydroxides. Advantages and disadvantages of each of these reagents should be considered in the selection of a system for a particular application. In view of its low cost, lime is the preferred choice of base for hydroxide precipitation. Its disadvantage is that introduces variable quantities of Ca On the other hand the use of NaOH as neutralizing agent does not create any additional precipitate, while Na ions can be proved beneficial to the iron, aluminium and chromium precipitation stage, as basic sulphate salts of the jarosite–alunite type. Caustic soda raises the pH rapidly due to its high solubility and quick dispersion. It is often used in the temporary treatment of low flows with high acidity, or in the treatment of high manganese concentrations. The hydroxides of Co (II) are known to crystallize in two polymorphic modifications known as α and β ( Manganese can be precipitated as manganese hydroxide, Mn(OH) Ammonia has been widely used as an effective lixiviant in a number of hydrometallurgical processes for many years, due to its low-toxicity, low cost and ease of regeneration by evaporation. The leaching of metals in ammoniacal solutions is applied primarily to the extraction of non-ferrous metals. The dissolution of a divalent metal oxide (MeO), in ammonia solution can be expressed as follows: The ammine complexes of cobalt are more stable than those of manganese and can be easily oxidized to cobalt (III) hexammine salts in the presence of a complexing agent ( On the other hand, in the case of manganese there are no stable ammonium complexes. Thermodynamics favours manganese to form the corresponding hydroxides or oxides in an ammonia solution. Therefore, it is possible to extract Co preferentially over manganese in an ammonia solution, because in ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate leaching any manganese extracted would be re-precipitated as manganese carbonate while cobalt would remain in solution, as a cobalt (III) hexammine complex (  The present work aimed at the recovery of cobalt, in the presence of manganese, by hydroxide precipitation using NaOH, followed by ammonia leaching using an ammonia/ammonium carbonate leachate. Cobalt can be subsequently obtained from the ammoniacal liquor either by solvent extraction and electrowinning, or chemical precipitation. The resulting precipitates before and after ammoniacal leaching were investigated by X-ray diffraction, TG–DTA analyses and Scanning Electron Microscopy. The initial aqueous phase was a purified leach liquor produced from heap leaching of Greek nickel oxide ores with dilute sulphuric acid. The purification process has been described by The simultaneous precipitation of cobalt and manganese was conducted in 500 The leaching procedure was carried out under atmospheric pressure. All batch experiments were conducted in a 500 The leach liquors, as well as the produced precipitates, before and after leaching, were chemically analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Perkin Elmer 4100). Mineralogical analysis was carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD), using a Bruker D8-Focus diffractometer with nickel-filtered Cu Kα TG/DTA analysis was conducted with a Setaram–Labsys thermal analyzer. Type S-thermocouple is used for temperature measurements in this instrument. The sample was placed in a ceramic crucible and heated from room temperature to 1200 Finally, the morphology of the initial mixed precipitate and the leached residue were also examined by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) using a Jeol 6380LV Scanning Electron Microscope. Experimental conditions involved 20 Preliminary runs were conducted to draw the precipitation curves of cobalt and manganese as a function of pH, by the addition of 5 Factorial design and analysis of experiments were used in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the precipitation factors ( stirring speed initial cobalt concentration initial manganese concentration neutralizing agent The main responses under investigation were the percentages of cobalt and manganese precipitation. They are given in The X-ray diffraction data of the produced mixed precipitate, after drying at 110 Regarding CoMn The main peaks of Mn The results of the differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermal analysis (TG) of the produced mixed precipitate are given in The results of the mineralogical analysis by X-ray diffraction were also confirmed by electron microscopic observations. Cobalt manganese oxide (CoMn Factorial design and analysis of experiments were used in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the leaching factors. The factors studied and their levels, for the Co–Mn mixed precipitate leaching by ammonia–ammonium carbonate are shown in Temperature: 25 Stirring speed Reaction time The main response under investigation was the percentage of cobalt recovery in the leach liquor. As can be seen in The X-ray diffraction data of the leached residue, after ammonia–ammonium carbonate leaching is given in Thermogravimetric studies and differential thermal analysis on the residue produced after leaching are shown in Hausmannite (Mn The results obtained in the present work showed that cobalt can be recovered from mixed Co–Mn hydroxide precipitates, using ammonia–ammonium carbonate leaching. The precipitation of cobalt and manganese by 99.9% and 99.5%, correspondingly, was accomplished by gradually raising the initial pH of the solution to a value of 10.5 at 25 The recovery of cobalt from Co–Mn hydroxide precipitates was conducted using ammoniacal leaching. The optimum conditions determined for cobalt recovery were NH