This study deals with the reduction of Fe2O3 by H2 in the temperature range of 220–680°C. It aims to examine the rate controlling processes of Fe2O3 reduction by H2 in the widest and lowest possible temperature range. This is to be related with efforts to decrease the emission of CO2 in the atmosphere thus decreasing its green house effect.
                  Reduction of hematite to magnetite with H2 is characterized by an apparent activation energy ‘E
                     a’ of 76kJ/mol. E
                     a of the reduction of magnetite to iron is 88 and 39kJ/mol for temperatures lower and higher than 420°C, respectively. Mathematical modeling of experimental data suggests that the reaction rate is controlled by two- and three-dimensional growth of nuclei and by phase boundary reaction at temperatures lower and higher than 420°C, respectively.
                  Morphological study confirms the formation of compact iron layer generated during the reduction of Fe2O3 by H2 at temperatures higher than 420°C. It also shows the absence of such layer in case of using CO. It seems that the annealing of magnetite's defects around 420°C is responsible for the decrease of E
                     a.
                  The rate of reduction of iron oxide with hydrogen is systematically higher than that obtained by CO.Reduction of iron oxide is probably one of the most studied topics. This is due to the importance of iron and steel in the current and future technologies. More than 2 From the industrial point of view, direct reduction of iron ores with H replacement of the expensive metallurgical coke as reducing agent; low carbon content of the produced iron; generated gases are essentially composed of H This paper is focused on the reduction of hematite with hydrogen in the temperature range of 220–680 Reduction of hematite by hydrogen proceeds in two or three steps, under and above 570 Generally, it is admitted that wüstite is unstable below 570 One of the most important parameters of the hematite reduction is the apparent activation energy as it defines the reactor dimensions and the energy consumption. Literature survey indicates that its value depends on the starting raw material, nature of reducing gas, temperature range, reaction step, presence of water vapor in the gas mixture, impurities, physical shape, etc.  Hematite used in this study had a Fe Thermogravimetric (TG) tests were performed using 100  This figure shows that the value of    At lower temperatures, only the plateau at 11% reduction extent is observed that corresponds to the reduction of hematite to magnetite.  It is well known that the hydrogen reduction of iron oxides produces a compact iron layer   To check this hypothesis, a X-rays furnace is used for the in situ reduction of hematite with hydrogen. This furnace allows data collection of formed solids for Eq. Consequently, the decrease of  As indicated in However, this evolution can also be attributed to Hedvall effect To elucidate the decrease of sample weight from 10 to 100 concentration of H nature of the reducing gas: H gas velocity from about 2 to 4 boat's material (Cu or Au); experimental method TGA and in situ XRD. Naeser and Scholz All these authors suggest that the reactivity of solids is influenced by their imperfections. Fagherazzi and Lanzavecchia Fox and Soria-Ruiz Dabosi In absence of studies on behavior of dislocations in iron oxides in function of temperature and with respect to results of several authors Results of the reduction of iron oxides with hydrogen in the temperature range of 200–680 The reduction of hematite in magnetite by H The reduction path of magnetite to iron is function of the reaction temperature. At temperatures lower than 420 The apparent activation energy for the reduction of Fe Mathematical modeling of experimental data suggest that the controlling mechanism is the two- and three-dimensional growth of nuclei and by phase boundary reaction at higher temperature. The decrease of The reduction rate of magnetite with hydrogen is higher than that obtained with CO. The morphological study of the reduced samples of iron oxides by H Part of this work was performed in ‘Laboratoire de Chimie du Solide’ of the University of Nancy, France. The authors thank Dr. Ch. Gleitzer for his help and discussions. They also indebted to Mrs. Ch. Richard for her kind help in technical and administration work.