In the HemiDiHydrate (HDH) phosphoric acid production processes, calcium sulfate hemihydrate (HH) is formed from the reaction of phosphate ore with sulfuric acid. In a second step, the HH crystals are recrystallized to calcium sulfate dihydrate (DH, gypsum). With the phosphate ore, impurities enter the production processes. Some of these impurities, such as the lanthanides, mainly end up in the DH crystals. Some impurities, such as aluminum fluoride and lanthanides, not only cause contamination of the DH crystals, but also retard the crystallization and influence the HH and DH particle shapes. By adding ion exchange resin during the continuously operated recrystallization, lanthanides are removed resulting in cleaner DH and phosphoric acid. The simultaneous ion exchange extraction accelerates the recrystallization and can lead to differences in DH particle shape.Phosphoric acid is mostly produced from a reaction of phosphate ore with sulfuric acid in the so-called wet processes according to In the HemiDiHydrate (HDH) processes, first HH is formed. This is recrystallized in a second step to DH to regain the incorporated phosphates and increase the process efficiency. During this solvent-mediated recrystallization, HH crystals and the incorporated species dissolve and DH crystals are formed from ions in the solution. The HDH processes can be operated in different ways. In the two-filter HDH process, the recrystallization is effected by filtering of the product acid and contacting the HH crystals with a less acidic solution (0.8 M H With the phosphate ore, impurities enter the production process. This is illustrated in In the industrial phosphoric acid production processes, the recrystallization of calcium sulfate hemihydrate (HH) to dihydrate (DH, gypsum) is not performed batch-wise but continuously, as is illustrated in To gain an economically feasible extraction process, the ion exchange resin should be separated from the phosphoric acid slurry to be able to regenerate and re-use the resin. Due to density differences between the resin and the slurry, it is expected that this separation can be achieved by settling. The density of the ion exchange resin is 1.20–1.22 g/L, whereas that of the phosphoric acid slurry is calculated to be 1.49 g/L (33% DH of 2.32 kg/L, 50% phosphoric acid of 1.28 g/L, and 16% ion exchange resin). The separation and regeneration of the resin will not be discussed in this paper. The particle shape is an important process parameter in the production process. It determines, together with the particle size distribution, the filterability or permeability and washability of the filter cake. In general, the filtration rate increases with increasing particle size and increasing regularity of the crystals In addition to the process conditions, various impurities in the solution can also have a large impact on particle shape. An example is aluminum fluoride, which adsorbs on to the {011}and {1̄11} DH crystal faces blocking their growth The impurities, such as aluminum fluoride and the lanthanides, enter the production process with the phosphate ore. The two-filter process studied mainly uses 100% Jordan ore, whereas the one-filter process mainly uses a mixture of 65% Kovdor and 35% Jordan ore. The differences between the two processes result in different particle shapes of DH. The aim of this work is not only to prove that DH can be purified by ion exchange extraction during a continuous recrystallization, but also to investigate the influence of extraction of impurities on crystal shape and agglomeration behavior. Aluminum fluoride Phosphate ore, which consists mostly of fluoroapatite, always contains aluminum as an impurity Which complex is present predominantly depends on the aluminum/fluoride ratio, the absolute concentrations of aluminum and fluoride, the solvent, and the presence of other ions, such as silicon, which forms stronger complexes with fluoride than aluminum. By determining aluminum and fluoride concentrations in the DH crystals Due to the growth-retarding effect of aluminum fluoride, crystals with smaller average size are formed and supersaturation becomes higher. In a more supersaturated solution agglomerates are formed more easily by bridge formation between crystals if they collide So, the presence of aluminum fluoride promotes the formation of small agglomerated crystals, which have a hexagonal type shape (small length/width ratio), instead of large non-agglomerated needle-shaped crystals, which are formed in the absence of aluminum fluoride. In recrystallization processes, the supersaturation for the stable component is limited by the solubility of the less stable component, in this case the HH solubility. The influence of lanthanides on the growth rate depends on the supersaturation. At high supersaturation, none of the lanthanides is able to hinder the growth significantly. At these high supersaturations, the growth proceeds so fast that overgrowth of adsorbed impurity ions occurs more easily. This is confirmed by the increased uptake of impurities with increasing supersaturation. The retardation of the lanthanides depends on the individual lanthanide ion. It was found that the retardation effect decreased in the order Ce The degree of retardation of the lanthanides depends on their ionic radius. Lanthanides with ionic radii comparable to the calcium ion (126 pm The presence of lanthanides does not promote the formation of smaller and agglomerated crystals. This indicates that the retarding effect of the lanthanides is less than that of aluminum fluoride under the given conditions. The presence of lanthanides, as was shown for cerium, does not have a large influence on the crystal morphology. At low supersaturation, the crystals seem to become more needle-like in the presence of cerium ions, and the {011} faces seem to be more preferentially formed. So, the lanthanides retard the growth of all faces except the {1̄11} face. The differences in particle shape of the DH product between the two-filter and one-filter process, shown in In the one-filter process using Kovdor ore, the crystal growth may be influenced by the relatively high amount of lanthanides. During batch recrystallization with simultaneous ion exchange extraction, lanthanides were extracted significantly, whereas aluminum was not extracted For the experiments, phosphoric acid and HH were obtained from the one-filter and the two-filter HDH processes. The acid from the one-filter process contains 3.1 mol/kg H The ion exchange resin used for the experiments was Dowex C-500, which was also used during batch recrystallizations The experimental set-up contains two recrystallizers of 4.7 L each. The experimental set-up is schematically shown in The recrystallizers have a double wall, through which hot oil from thermostats is pumped. The temperature of the slurry in the recrystallizers is controlled by thermocouples that are connected to the thermostats. Due to this, constant temperature was obtained during the experiments, 78 °C during experiments with acid and HH from the two-filter process and 45 °C during experiments with acid and HH from the one-filter process. In the recrystallizers, a draft tube baffle system is present. By using a draft tube in combination with a marine type propeller, classification in the recrystallizers is prevented. Before entering the first recrystallizer, the acid is preheated in a vessel that is also connected to a thermostat. Preheating of the acid avoids the rapid recrystallization of HH. The set-up contains two solid feeders to feed the HH and ion exchange resin to the first vessel. The slurry leaves the vessel by overflow. A chord baffle placed in front of the overflow prevents direct by-passing from the feed to the outlet. The residence time required for the continuous recrystallization is determined from the conversion rate of HH to DH during batch recrystallization. To be able to extract as many lanthanides as possible, complete conversion is required to get access to all lanthanides. The extraction efficiency is also influenced by the conversion rate, which should be low to extract as many lanthanides as possible before they are incorporated into the DH crystals. The low conversion rate results in high residence times. Using the same operating conditions, the conversion rate during batch recrystallization increases when ion exchange resin is added. Shorter residence times are needed to gain the same degree of conversion. Before feeding is started, the vessels are filled with phosphoric acid and HH, which is converted to DH in one residence time. In this way, the experiment is started with compositions representative of the expected steady-state situation. During the experiments, samples were taken regularly. The acid was filtered from the solids by vacuum filtration. Subsequently, the solids were washed twice with a saturated solution of analytically pure DH in ultrapure water to remove phosphoric acid and additionally twice with acetone to facilitate drying and prevent further recrystallization. If ion exchange resin was present in the solid sample, it was separated from the calcium sulfate sample by sieving. With Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), pictures of the HH feed and the calcium sulfate product were made. The degree of conversion was determined by measuring the amount of crystal water in the dried calcium sulfate samples. This was done by first weighing a sample, after which it was calcined at least 12 h. With the weight difference before and after calcining, which represents the amount of crystal water, the degree of conversion is indicated by the relative amount of DH in the sample, The concentrations of impurities in acid and calcium sulfate were determined by High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (HR ICP-MS). Before ICP-MS analysis, the calcium sulfate samples were digested in aqua regia by microwave digestion. From the feed flow of impurity A, In this paper, the terms “incorporation” and “uptake” are solely used for the uptake of impurities by the DH crystals, whereas “extraction” is used for the extraction by the ion exchange resin. HH was successfully recrystallized to DH. About 95–98% of the calcium sulfate leaving the recrystallizers was DH.    The crystals formed in the presence of ion exchange resin show less tendency to agglomerate than crystals in the absence of ion exchange resin. Further, the crystals formed with ion exchange resin are larger despite the shorter residence time, which indicates that the growth rate increased significantly. This results from a decreasing growth retardation, due to the extraction of retarding ions, such as the lanthanides, aluminum fluoride, or both. The absence of agglomerates after recrystallization with ion exchange extraction implies that the supersaturation is lower than that during industrial recrystallization and than that during the recrystallization performed without resin in the experimental set-up. This implies that aluminum is extracted. ICP-MS analysis of aluminum shows that this is actually the case. Without resin, the aluminum concentration increases from 5 to 7 g/kg in the solution, whereas with resin the concentration of aluminum in the solution slightly decreases to 4 g/kg. In both cases, the aluminum content of the crystals decreases from 3 to 0.3 g/kg. Although it is difficult to determine from these pictures, it seems that the length/width ratio is larger for the crystals of The extraction of aluminum contradicts the results during batch recrystallizations with simultaneous ion exchange extraction, during which no aluminum was extracted. It is not clear yet why aluminum, which is indicated as a hard acid according to Pearson's principle on hard and soft acids and bases The conversion of HH to DH was successful for the one-filter process. The product contained 90–93% DH after recrystallization without resin and 93–98% DH after recrystallization with ion exchange resin. By adding 250 g resin/kg phosphoric acid slurry, lanthanides were extracted. This is illustrated in In the one-filter process, the ion exchange resin has to compete less with the DH to extract the lanthanides than it has in the two-filter process, in which the competition between resin and DH is stronger. Therefore, the efficiency is no longer influenced by the uptake by DH in the one-filter process. The extraction sequence equals that from clear phosphoric acid, which decreases from lanthanum to lutetium due to a decreasing charge density of the hydrated ions Comparison of  In There was no indication that aluminum was extracted. For both recrystallizations, with and without ion exchange resin, the aluminum concentration in the acid remained about 0.3 g/kg. Using phosphoric acid and HH from the two-filter HDH process, 250 g ion exchange resin/kg phosphoric acid slurry present during the continuously operated recrystallization of HH to DH resulted in a decrease of the lanthanide concentration in DH from 44% for lanthanum via 28% for neodymium to 54% for ytterbium. It seems that due to the extraction of aluminum, the supersaturation reduces, the growth rate increases and agglomeration of DH crystals no longer occurs. The extraction of lanthanides has a growth rate increasing effect. Using phosphoric acid and HH from the one-filter HDH process, addition of the same amount of resin resulted in an extraction efficiency of 39% for lanthanum to 6.5% for lutetium. The needle shape of the crystals is not influenced by the extraction.