The objective of this work was to develop a numerical simulation method to study the heat transfer process and inactivation of Escherichia coli O157:H7 during gas grilling of non-intact beef steaks (NIBS). A finite difference and optimization algorithm was developed to determine the effective heat transfer parameters during grilling. After validation, these parameters were used in a finite element method to simulate the temperature profiles at various locations of NIBS (2.54cm in thickness). The computer simulation results showed that E. coli O157:H7 may survive the heating processes if normal grilling conditions for intact beef steaks were used. Computer simulation results also suggested that E. coli O157:H7 might be effectively inactivated if NIBS (2.54cm) were evenly flipped (every 4min) and cooked for 16min during cooking. The result of this study may help the food service industry to develop more adequate grilling methods and conditions to cook NIBS.Beef steaks are popular menu items in many restaurants and usually higher in price. The raw materials for beef steaks are usually premium beef cuts. Beef steaks are often cooked on gas or charcoal grills. Depending on the preference of consumers, many premium beef steaks may require only minimum amount of cooking to ensure that steaks are tender and juicy before consumption. As normal intact beef steaks made from healthy cattle are usually free of foodborne pathogens in the interior, only surface contamination may occur. The surface-contaminated foodborne pathogens can be easily killed during grilling. Therefore, it is possible to safely consume intact beef steaks cooked to “rare” without causing any foodborne bacterial infections. Non-intact beef steaks (NIBS), on the other hand, are value-added products made from sub-primal beef cuts that are usually “tough” in structure and less desirable for consumption as regular steaks ( NIBS, however, can present a serious food safety risk if they are cooked using normal cooking conditions for premium beef steaks ( Similar to ground beef, NIBS can be internally contaminated with Computer simulation and numerical analysis have been used recently to study the heat and mass transfer problems during cooking of meat products, particularly frozen ground beef patties. The objective of this research was to investigate the heat transfer and develop a simplified numerical model to simulate the heating process and estimate the inactivation of A commercial gas grill (Model XXE-4, Baker’s Pride, New Rochelle, NY) was used in this study ( Fresh beef meat (bottom round roast) was purchased from a local butcher shop. A custom-designed steak cutter was used to cut the beef meat into slices of 0.02 or 0.03 Two type-T thermocouple probes (Model TMQSS-032(G)-24, Omega Engineering Inc., Stamford, CT) were inserted into the middle of the steak through the open slit. The diameter of Model TMQSS-032(G)-24 probes was 8 The thermocouple probes attached to the steak were connected to a data-logger (Personal Daq/3000, IOTech Inc., Cleveland, OH). Two additional thermocouple probes were installed to monitor the boundary temperature conditions. One Type T probe (Model TMQSS-062(G)-24, Omega Engineering Inc.) was installed approximately 0.5 Thermal resistance of Steak grilling is a complex physical process that involves conduction, convection, and radiation of heat. In Eq. The boundary condition for the flame side steak surface is: For the air side, the boundary condition is In Eqs. To solve Eq. For the first node on the surface facing the flame, with normal convective conditions, the energy balance becomes In Eq. In the above two equations, Similarly, for any interior node (m) in the discretized domain of a steak, the energy balance equation is expressed as The descretization of steak generates a system of finite difference equations that must be solved numerically. The numerical technique used to solve the linear equation systems was called the Gauss–Seidel method ( To solve the heat transfer equations with complex boundary conditions, the effective values of The thermocouple positions might be shifted when the steaks were flipped during cooking, leading to inaccurate measurement of temperature histories. In order to accurately estimate the effective values of After the effective values of After validating the effective heat transfer parameters ( The General Method developed by ( When  The effective thermal conductivity, however, was approximately 50–65% of the thermal conductivity of beef reported in the literature ( When the steaks were flipped to cook the other side, the thermocouples attached onto both surfaces were moved, became loosed from the surfaces of steaks, and got exposed to the air, leading to erroneous temperature measurements on the steak surfaces. Therefore, the surface temperature histories measured after the first stage of heating were not used in the determination of the effective heat transfer coefficients and thermal properties in the previous section. However, since the thermocouples attached to the geometric center of steaks were still firmly attached, these center temperature histories were still accurate throughout the cooking process. If the simulated temperature history obtained by FlexPDE matched the experimentally measured temperature history at the geometric center of a steak, it would be an indication that the estimated effective heat transfer coefficients and thermal properties steaks were accurate.  With the accuracy of computer simulation validated, FlexPDE was used to simulate different cooking scenarios for steak grilling. The objective of computer simulation was to evaluate the effect of different cooking conditions on inactivation of  Generally, a steak with its internal temperature reaches 71 For intact beef steaks, most recipes recommend keeping the raw meat at room temperature prior to grilling in order to produce juicy and tender steaks. Raising the initial temperature to room temperature significantly reduces the cook time, which helps improve the quality of the final products. To prevent the bacteria from growing, however, it is necessary to keep raw meats (such as NIBS) refrigerated prior to cooking. This creates a low initial temperature condition, and extra cooking time is needed to increase the internal temperature of steaks to a point lethal to the bacteria. This example clearly demonstrates the need to adjust cooking time according to the initial temperature of NIBS and to check the internal temperature during cooking. To prevent foodborne infections resulting from In this example, a steak is cooked to a final temperature of 160 F (71.1 The temperature at the geometric center of foods with symmetric geometries has always been used to determine the endpoint of cooking processes if the thermal energy is uniformly applied to the surfaces. However, this example shows that the temperature at the geometric center may not be the most suitable location to determine a cooking process if the heat is not uniformly applied. In this example, one side of the steak receives more cooking than the other side. Therefore, even though the temperature at the geometric center has increased to the final temperature, the side that receives less cooking may still be undercooked, leading to survival of In the previous sections, it is clearly demonstrated that uneven heating during grilling can lead to inadequate cooking and could not ensure inactivation of the contaminating This research developed a simplified numerical analysis method to study the effective heat transfer during gas grilling of NIBS. This method was used to determine the effective surface heat transfer coefficients, thermal diffusivity, and conductivity of beef steaks. After the effective heat transfer parameters were validated, a finite element method was used to simulate the temperature distribution and histories during cooking 1-inch (2.54 The author would like to thank Mr. Aaron Williams for technical assistance, and USDA FSIS for providing funding for this research.