The distraction rate of 0.5 mm/day produces good osteogenesis in small rodents; however, the effects of this distraction rate on muscle are not well documented. We evaluated the soleus and the extensor digitorum longus (EDL) after two weeks of lengthening distraction osteogenesis (DO) at 0.5 mm/day in skeletally mature rats. We found a modest but significant local increase of insulin like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in the EDL, however, muscle growth indicated by developmental forms of myosin heavy chain (MHC) was not detected by mRNA (RT-PCR). To the contrary, the data suggested a decrease in cross-sectional area of the muscle fibers as well as a decrease in mRNA for slow MHC. Immunolabeling of fibronectin in cryosections of the EDL indicated fibrosis of the perimuscular connective tissue while assessment of the passive joint motion did not suggest a lack of excursion on the part of the dorsal flexors. While the literature suggests that IGF-1 facilitates muscle growth especially in young animals, excess of IGF-1 in muscle from adults may exacerbate DO-induced fibrosis.Clinical limb lengthening, even under gradual distraction osteogenesis (DO) is associated with a number of complications Insulin like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) plays in important role in muscle growth and differentiation DO was performed on the left limb of 24 adult male Sprague–Dawley rats (weight 455±35 g). After a one week consolidation period the tibia was lengthened at rate of 0.5 mm/day in two daily increments for two weeks. The research procedures and protocols were approved by the IACUC. A stainless-steel 3/4 circular fixator was placed on the left tibia of each rat ( The animals were randomly placed in one of two conditions: sham-DO animals ( The amount of IGF-1 was determined using a commercial radioimmunoassay (RIA, Diagnostics Systems Laboratories, Webster, Texas) based on competition between a radioactive and a non-radioactive antibody for rat-IGF-1. IGF-1 standards were supplied with the kit. Serum was collected when the animals were sacrificed, it was stored at −80 °C and 50 μl was analyzed. The middle 1/3 of the frozen muscle was pulverized, homogenized in 0.25 N acetic acid in ethanol (1:20, WW:V), incubated on ice for 1 h, centrifuged at 3000 G for 30 min, the supernatant was collected and neutralized 1:1 with 0.85 M Tris-Base, incubated for 1 h at −20 °C, centrifuged at 3000 G for 30 min. An aliquot was used to determine protein content (Biorad-DC, Biorad, Hercules, CA) and 100 μl of neutralized muscle homogenate was used in the RIA. All samples were counted for 1 min in a gamma counter, and data were calculated from the linear portion of the standard curve. Counts per minute were converted to ng of IGF-1/mg protein based on the standard curve in each assay. Total RNA was obtained by extracting frozen muscle samples in TRIzol reagent (1:20, WW:V) (Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD), following the manufacturer's protocol. Samples of 1 μg of total RNA were separated on a formaldehyde 1.2% agarose gel to assess the quality of the RNA. One μg of total RNA was reverse transcribed (Thermoscript, Life Technologies) under the following conditions: 2 μl of random hexamers, 2 μl of primer dT and after denaturation, 8 μl of 5× cDNA buffer, 2 μl of 0.1 M DTT, 2 μl of ribonnuclease inhibitor, 2 μl of dH Frozen, unfixed muscle was mounted in OCT and 10 μm cryosections were obtained. After a 2 min fixation of the sections with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS (pH 7.2), sections were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS and incubated with BSA-PBS (1 mg/ml) for 30 min. The primary polyclonal antibody against fibronectin, a marker chosen to assess the remodeling of the extracellular matrix We determined a level of significance at We used a DO regimen of 0.5 mm/day, which others In order to investigate changes in transcript level of selected genes in the EDL and SOL we performed a semi-quantitative analysis of the message levels of MHC genes ( To investigate whether local IGF-1 levels were changed as a result of DO we quantified the levels of IGF-1 in the serum and in the distracted muscles ( To delineate further differences between the distracted EDL and SOL muscles, we performed immunofluorescence with antibodies against insulin like growth factor1 receptor (IGF-1R, Studies on DO frequently focus on bone remodeling and fracture healing during the distraction. Clinically, however, most of the complications are related to the soft tissues The SOL in both sham-DO and DO groups adapted by a decrease in wet weight, RT-PCR for MHC type I, and cross-sectional area. This is not surprising since slow muscles, such as the SOL are more affected by disuse atrophy than fast muscles, such as the EDL The results of the EDL are intriguing since we expected to find an upregulation of developmental forms of the MHC, especially since we saw an increase in IGF-1 and that the role of IGF-1 in muscle development is well established It is possible that the increase in IGF-1 and its receptor may be associated with fibrosis as seen in pathologies of tissues other than skeletal muscle This work was supported by NIH grant HD-K01-01165. We thank Drs. Dror Paley and John Herzenberg for their support and we are especially appreciative of Drs. Robert Bloch and William Randall for a critical reading of the manuscript.