This work is dedicated to the removal of the very toxic free cyanide from aqueous solution by oxidation with hydrogen peroxide H2O2 in the presence of activated carbon prepared from olive stones. Effects of the initial molar ratio [H2O2]0/[CN−]0, the initial cyanide concentration, the activated carbon concentration and the temperature on cyanide removal have been examined. The removal of free cyanide in absence of activated carbon showed very slow kinetics. The presence of activated carbon has increased the reaction rate showing thus a catalytic activity. The kinetics of cyanide removal has been found to be of pseudo-first-order with respect to cyanide and the rate constants have been determined for different values of the aforementioned parameters. The apparent activation energy has been determined from tests carried out at three different temperatures. It was found equal to 46.2kJ/mol in the presence of activated carbon, which is about half of the 82.7kJ/mol found for the oxidation in absence of the activated carbon.
                  This process can be interesting for the cyanide removal from processed solutions because it does not use soluble metal catalyst and it consumes only hydrogen peroxide as chemical product.Cyanides are considered among the most toxic compounds for humans and nature. They are discharged by various industries, particularly the chemical synthesis plants (nylon, fibres, resins, and herbicides), metallurgical processes (extraction of gold and silver) and plating and surface finishing ( Oxidation by hydrogen peroxide consists in oxidizing cyanides into cyanates CNO This reaction is particularly interesting because it does not form dangerous intermediate products, does not enrich salt water and can eliminate the totality of the free and nonstable metal complex (WADs) existing cyanides. Nevertheless, the principal disadvantage is that this reaction is very slow ( The activated carbons, which are known as excellent adsorbent, are widely used as catalysts and supports of catalysts ( Activated carbon is used in mining industry for precious metal recovery and in polishing process to remove low level cyanide concentration. For cyanides treatment, activated carbon has showed its effectiveness as an adsorbent. However, Oxidation by hydrogen peroxide in the presence of the activated carbon for cyanide removal has not been investigated in available literature. However, use of this process is already studied for other toxic compounds (trichlorophenol, chlorophenol) ( The formation of peroxide group on the activated carbon surface according to the reaction (Eq. This work is carried out to investigate the use of activated carbon for oxidation of the cyanide in solution, by hydrogen peroxide, and to assess the catalytic activity of activated carbon. The catalysis by activated carbon can avoid use of soluble copper catalyst which could in certain cases cause problems in terms of downstream metals removal. Activated carbon is prepared from olive stones and his effect on the oxidation of free cyanides by hydrogen peroxide has been determined. The effectiveness of the method has been examined under different conditions. Effects of the initial molar ratio [H All the chemicals used were analytical reagent grade (MERCK). Cyanide solutions are prepared with KCN (99%) and hydrogen peroxide H The activated carbon is prepared from olive stones recovered from olive oil mill (Agro-oléicole et oléo-technique Boumerdes Algeria). The carbonization-activation of olive stones is performed in a 6 The main properties of the activated carbon (identified by AC-OS throughout this article) are given in The experiments were performed in Batch mode with 1  In the absence of AC-OS, the rate of cyanide removal is generally low but it can be increased by raising the molar ratio [H In presence of AC-OS with a concentration of 10 The cyanide removal by adsorption on AC-OS has been determined from a test which is carried out without hydrogen peroxide ( It can be observed on  Considering the higher values of initial rates of cyanide removal in the presence of AC-OS in comparison with those observed in homogeneous reaction, we can say that the catalytic activity of AC-OS is confirmed for the cyanides removal with the hydrogen peroxide. In presence of AC-OS, all the reactions described by Eqs.  In the batch reactor, rate constants for cyanide removal by hydrogen peroxide for the different studied parameters were calculated and experimental data were found to fit in pseudo-first-order model with respect to cyanide. High values of correlation coefficient The linear plots of ln  In absence of AC-OS, the results are in agreement with those of  Non-linear trend is obtained for The effect of AC-OS concentration ( This equation shows how the rate of removal of cyanides can be influenced by the amount of catalyst under the studied conditions. The value of 0.0030 (min The effect of temperature ( The apparent activation energy of the cyanide removal by hydrogen peroxide is calculated from the linear form of the Arrhenius Eq. After plotting ln The results obtained from our study showed that the activated carbon prepared from olive stones presents a beneficial effect for cyanide removal by oxidation with hydrogen peroxide. This improvement was observed for different initial cyanide concentrations (260–1000 The results demonstrate as well that the kinetics of cyanide improve with the increase of the molar ratio [H The kinetic study shows that the cyanides removal by oxidation with hydrogen peroxide is found to be of pseudo-first-order with respect to cyanide in presence and absence of activated carbon AC-OS. Apparent rate constants values are determined in different conditions. Empirical relations are deduced, they describe the effect of the initial hydrogen peroxide concentration and the amount of Activated carbon on kinetic reaction. The presence of activated carbon AC-OS decreases the apparent activation energy from 82.7 The cyanides removed by hydrogen peroxide in the presence of the activated carbon are for the most part transformed into cyanate except for some 20% which can be oxidized into CO The proposed process has the advantage of avoiding the use of soluble copper catalyst which removal after treatment can cause a problem. This process can remove the totality of cyanide and, in the same time, consumes only hydrogen peroxide as chemical product with rates of consumption close to the process using soluble copper catalyst (6.5 Although interesting results are obtained, this work can be extended with a study including the effect of other parameters such as of the stirring and the particles size. Tests with industrial cyanided effluents and with a continuous system (in completely mixed/suspended or in column reactor) remain important in order to confirm the technical and economic advantage of this process. Such tests are being performed and results will be subsequently published. This work was supported by the