Meadow grass has recently gained increased attention as a substrate for full-scale biogas reactors. However, to increase its biodegradability, pretreatment is needed. In the present work, different harvesting machines were compared in order to assess their effect on biogas production. Specifically, a Disc-mower, an Excoriator and a Chopper were used to define the most appropriate machinery in order to improve the energy output per hectare for full-scale biogas plants. Among the harvesters, Excoriator, a novel simultaneous harvest and mechanical treatment, was found to significantly increase the methane yield of meadow grass by 20% compared to a classical Disc-mower. The positive effect was also validated by three kinetic model equations. The modified Gompertz model was the most capable of determining the kinetics of anaerobic digestion process, pointing out also the superiority of Excoriator. The usage of the novel harvester was associated with increased energy output, either for electrical/thermal energy generation or for transport fuel production, compared to the alternative machineries. Moreover, it was shown that the co-digestion of harvested biomass with different types of manure can enhance the bioenergy output of a full-scale biogas plant in a range of 12%–23%.Depletion of fossil fuels along with the increased greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the atmosphere motivates the global community to substitute fossil fuels with renewable energy. Among the alternative renewables, biogas received increasing attention in industrial scale. This renewable biofuel is produced in biogas plants, either centralized or farm-scale, using various organic substrates as a feedstock, depending on their availability Recently, the conversion of lignocellulosic residues from underutilized areas is considered as a potential solution for enhancing biogas production The aim of this study was to define the efficiency of three harvesting machines in promoting the methane production of meadow grass. Biochemical methane potential (BMP) assays were performed and results were modelled with different kinetic model equations to validate the effect of various harvesting machines on methane production. Moreover, a preliminary technical analysis was carried out in order to compare the results of different harvesting machines and also, a case study highlighted the limiting factors for full-scale co-digestion systems. Thermophilic digestate from a centralized biogas plant (Snertinge, Denmark) was used as inoculum. The digestate was kept in a thermophilic incubator for a period of 10 days in order to be degassed. The main characteristics of the inoculum were: pH: 8.2, total solids (TS): 22.35 ± 0.29 g/l, volatile solids (VS): 15.23 ± 0.29 g/l, total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN): 2.55 ± 0.10 g/l, ammonium Nitrogen ( The lignocellulosic biomass was harvested from a meadow (Lintrup, Denmark) in September 2014. After harvesting and before usage, the biomass was placed in a refrigerator at 4 °C. The main characteristics of meadow grass were: TS: 576.89 ± 29.65 g/kg, VS: 544.40 ± 23.92 g/kg, Cellulose: 392.36 ± 18.21 g/kgTS, Hemicellulose: 198.06 ± 30.04 g/kgTS, Klason Lignin: 203.33 ± 48.08 g/kgTS and C/N: 18.55. The harvesting trial was carried out in a three-level 1-factorial randomized double block design with four replicates, consisting of two outer blocks (swaths 1–5 and swaths 6–12), each with one incomplete and one, respectively two, complete inner blocks ( Chopping was conducted by a front mounted Chopper equipped with a flail mower in order to highly reduce the biomass size ( Biochemical methane potential (BMP) assays were performed under thermophilic conditions (54 ± 1 °C) in triplicates as described by Angelidaki et al. Measurements of TS, VS, Three non-linear regression models were used to simulate the biomethanation process. Hypothesizing simplified first-order kinetics and focusing on hydrolysis Taken into consideration that the methane production is a function of bacterial growth Data analysis for the three non-linear regression models was carried out in Microsoft Excel’s Solver function and also, squared correlation coefficient ( All measurements were performed in triplicate samples and mean data are presented along with the standard deviation (SD). Analyses of methane yield changes caused by the different harvesting technologies were carried out using OriginPro software, version 9.0.0 (OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Fisher’s Least Significant Difference test (LSD, The achieved methane yields of meadow grass mowed with three different harvesters are depicted in The experimental data were fitted in different models in order to elucidate important kinetic parameters for full-scale applications. The results from the kinetic study are summarized in The results among the three different models and the experimental data were in high agreement. Among the three models, the best fit for all the harvesting machines was observed using the modified Gompertz model as the The duration of the biomethanation process lasted approximately 30 days and no extended lag phases were recorded at any treatment ( The three models were used to elucidate the effect of different harvesting machine on the AD of meadow grass and all of them led to the same similar conclusion about the most efficient machinery. As revealed from the kinetics parameters, the Excoriator had the most positive impact (shorter lag phase, highest methane production rate) for implementation on full-scale application, where the hydraulic retention time (HRT) is of major importance. This section presents an overview of the energy amount that can be generated by meadow fields and grasslands mowed with the examined harvesting machines. Denmark was chosen as the reference area of investigation as the biogas in Nordic countries is used for electrical/thermal energy generation (mainly in Denmark) and for production of transport fuel (mainly in Sweden). For the calculation of the energy yield per hectare, the maximum available area in Denmark and the average grass dry matter (DM) yield of the meadow field (2.4 tonDM/ha) were taken into account. In fact, by harvesting the meadow grass with the Excoriator the highest biogas yield (752 m The utilization of the produced methane as a transport fuel poses numerous advantages compared to other liquid biofuels It is important to mention that all the projections are highly conservative, as they were based on the calculation of grass which is produced by one cut per annum, which is not the recommended strategy to be followed in real practice. Conversely, a three or four cut system has been suggested as a proper technique in order to maximize the bioenergy production from grass The addition of meadow grass in full-scale biogas plants was elucidated under three case study scenarios ( Among all process scenarios, the highest methane production was achieved by using cattle manure and grass at a VS ratio of 10:90. More specifically, approximately 2.1 m Regarding the examined sub-scenarios of swine manure, the biogas production was calculated to be markedly increased due to the machinery used ( Similarly to scenario 1, the co-digestion of all three substrates revealed that increment of grass in the feedstock is combined with markedly augmented TS content that can provoke operational problems. As for the bioenergy production, the energy output was significantly lower compared to scenario 1 and conversely, significantly higher than scenario 2 ( Meadow grass was found to be a suitable substrate for methane production. Case study scenarios demonstrated that the utilization of meadow grass as an additional co-substrate in full-scale manure-based biogas plants is recommended as the bioenergy generation can be significantly improved. Specifically, the energy output increased from 12% to 23% due to the selection of the appropriate forage harvester. The utilization of an Excoriator was shown to be the most efficient method to simultaneously mow and pretreat meadow grass enhancing the heat and electricity production from 9% to 20% compared to other commercial harvesters. The improved efficiency of Excoriator was additionally implied by the most important kinetic parameters (i.e. lag phase reduction, methane production rate increase). Finally, the kinetic study demonstrated that the modified Gompertz model and the Logistic model can simulate more accurately the experimental data compared to the first-order kinetic model. This study was supported by the