Fly ash is the residue from the combustion of pulverised coal in thermal power stations. It consists of a variety of particle sizes of hollow silica-alumina spheres, which can be utilised as a custom made filler material in a number of industries, e.g. plastics, rubber, paint, refractories, etc. The 5μm average particle size fraction is popular for its application in plastic products. In order to comply with the requirements for application in plastics, it is essential to understand and characterise the surface of the ultrafine glass spheres coming into contact and interacting with the organic phase of the final composite. This contribution describes the use of a number of techniques, such as EPMA (Electron probe micro-analysis), Raman spectrometry, zeta potential measurements and ICP-OES (Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy) to investigate the surface composition and behaviour of the ultrafine fly ash particles.Fly ash is the residue from the burning of pulverised coal in thermal power stations. It consists of a variety of particles of different size fractions, some of which are hollow silica-alumina glass spheres with average sizes ranging from 5 to 45 Fly ash has a number of useful applications that serves to utilise some of the large amounts being produced. Current South African consumption is around 1.4 million tons per annum A particularly promising and advantageous use of fly ash is as a filler material for polymer products The power supply utility in South Africa introduced post boiler injection of sulphur dioxide (SO The UFFA used in this investigation was extracted from a fly ash plant at the Lethabo power station in the Free State province of South Africa. Three batches of material were used in this study; one collected before commencement of SO For the The surfaces of the various samples investigated were analysed with   The change in gelling and bonding behaviour of the UFFA after SO It was thus decided to leach the UFFA in distilled water for various periods of time and measure the change in pH and sulphur-containing species in the resultant solutions. No change in pH was detected, but the results in The EPMA data summarised in The Ca–S–O type composition is the same in both materials, which seem to indicate that this is not the source for their different binding behaviour. However, this species is absent from the material treated with ammonium hydroxide that displayed normal gelation behaviour. The presence or absence of Ca–S–O alone can therefore not solely account for the difference in binding/gelling behaviour observed between the various batches of material, and other factors probably contribute to this phenomenon as well. The SO Zeta potential measurements at different pH values indicate small changes for both UFFA groups that bind successfully with the polymeric matrix. In the case of the material displaying delayed gelation behaviour, a significant change occurs in the surface charge when the pH changes from acidic to neutral. This once again points to the presence of an active group present on the surface of this material, although its precise nature cannot be deduced. In all likelihood, it is a negatively charged species, because the zeta potential becomes more negative with a decrease in the concentration of the positive hydronium ions in the solution that can neutralise the charge on the surface-active species. The material treated with ammonium hydroxide also has a larger surface charge than the UFFA collected before SO The Raman spectra collected at selected points on the different UFFA batches indicate that the composition of these materials differ from each other. All the UFFA samples had discreet black particles, which displayed Raman shifts at 1313 and 1579 The results of this investigation indicated that the gelation behaviour between UFFA collected after commencing SO Ash Resources (Pty.) Ltd is gratefully acknowledged for supplying the material used in the investigation. Dr L. Marjanovic is thanked for assistance with the ICP analyses. JHP expresses his thanks to TUT (Tshwane University of Technology) and FWO (Fund for Scientific Investigation, Flanders) for financial assistance, while SSPV acknowledges the financial support from TUT and UA (University of Antwerp) for sabbatical fellowships.