Crushing is the key part for the recycling technology of waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs). In this study, the breakage and liberation effects of WPCBs was improved by heat pretreatment technology before crushing (HPBC). Based on the test results, 200 °C was found as the safe temperature for the HPBC of WPCBs. The fracture mode, particle size distribution, and enrichment characteristics of WPCBs were systematically studied. The experimental results show that the HPBC changed the breakage mode from longitudinal fracture to horizontal fracture and improved the liberation of metal from non-metal components. During the crushing process, the increase in the heat pretreatment time (30–120 min) and temperature (100–200 °C) can improve the crushing effect of WPCBs and increase the content of crushing products of −0.3 mm by 3.16% and 5.64%, respectively. Compared to the non-metallic components, the metal components have ductility and are difficult to break into −0.3 mm during the crushing process. HPBC can promote copper enrichment to narrow grain size. In the 0.3–1 mm range, the content of copper increased from 47.87% to 57.61%, an increase by 9.74%. The initial enrichment of copper was achieved by adjusting the crushing time. The recovery rate of copper can reach 85.66%, and the enrichment rate is 1.74 when 0.3–2 mm breaking product is used as enrichment. Therefore, HPBC can effectively improve the crushing and liberation effect of WPCBs and improve the enrichment rate, and thus is an effective pretreatment method.The fast pace development of electronic science and technology has substantially increased the amount of electronic waste. The output of electronic waste in the world is 400 million tons per year, and it is increasing by 4% per year ( At present, the commonly used recycling methods of WPCBs mainly include mechanical physical method, chemical method, and biological method ( Crushing has always been an important part of resource recovery technology. Scholars have conducted a lot of researches towards developing efficient crushing technology ( Microwave heating pretreatment is the common method to promote the crushing effect, while it cannot be used to the treatment of WPCBs. Because it will catch fire and produced a lot of polluted gas. New heating pretreatment method should be proposed. In this study, in order to improve the crushing effect and recovery efficiency of WPCBs, a new pretreatment method before crushing is proposed. The effect of pretreatment conditions on the crushing effect was investigated. The response rule of the heat treatment to the breakage mode of WPCBs has been explained in detail. The mechanism of the pretreatment process to improve the breaking effect was revealed. In addition, the size enrichment effect of the crushed WPCBs was investigated. The WPCBs in this experiment were resourced from a local waste electronic market and mainly produced by household appliances. Before the pretreatment, WPCBs were cut into 3 × 3 cm In this study, a test method combining heat pretreatment with mechanical crushing was adopted. First, the samples of WPCBs were treated by heat pretreatment for different times and temperatures. The crushed products under different heat pretreatment conditions were obtained using a universal crusher. For the crushing test, the FS200 universal crusher was selected. The pre-weakening effect of the heat pretreatment was investigated according to the change in the particle size and morphological characteristics of the products under different crushing conditions. The heat pretreatment time increased from 30 min to 150 min, and the interval was 30 min. The heat pretreatment temperature increased from 100 °C to 300 °C, at a temperature interval of 50 °C. The mechanical crushing time was 60 s. The particle size distribution of the crushed products was investigated. The crushed products were screened with the sizes of +4 mm, 4–2 mm, 2–1 mm, 1–0.3 mm, and −0.3 mm. All the tests were carried out three times to ensure the accuracy of the test data. The changes in the elemental grade of each particle size after crushing and the micro-morphology of the crushed products were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRF), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Infrared spectrum analysis (FT-IR), respectively. For the analysis of XRF and FR-IR, the WPCBs was ground into −0.074 mm. X Ray Fluorescence (XRF) is an important tool for the element measurement ( For this test, The VERTEX 80v Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) machine (VERTEX 80v equipped in the Analysis and test center of China university of mining and technology and was manufactured by Bruker in Germany) was used to measure chemical bond type under different conditions. For VERTEX 80v, (1) Spectrum range: 8000–350 cm For this test, The Quanta 250 scanning electron microscope (SEM) machine (Quanta 250 equipped in the Analysis and test center of China University of mining and technology and was manufactured by FEI in USA) was used to measure micro-morphology under different conditions. The sample was bonded on the Sample holder by the special adhesive tape, and the sample was vacuumed so as to remove the loose bonded sample. The test was conducted at low vacuum mode and the accelerating voltage was set at 25kv. During the test process, the sample position and magnification can be adjusted through the connect computer and then the image was obtained. The copper enrichment ratio can be defined as follows ( It was calculated as a function of each milled particle fraction size as a concentrate in order to evaluate the enrichment ratio under different milling conditions The enrichment rate represents the enrichment degree of copper. The higher the enrichment rate, the better the enrichment effect and the higher the grade of crushed products. The yield of different size fractions can be defined as follows: The Cu yield of different size fractions can be defined as follows: The weights of the WPCBs products under different pretreated conditions were measured. At 200 °C, the pretreated time increased from 30 min to 150 min. At 60 min, the pretreated temperature increased from 100 °C to 300 °C. At 200 °C, the mass of WPCBs does not change with increasing heat time, which indicates that no pyrolysis reaction occurs during the heat process. It can be concluded that no pyrolysis reaction occurs at <200 °C. At 60 min, with gradually increasing pretreatment temperature, the mass of WPCBs changes. When the temperature exceeds 200 °C, the mass of WPCBs begins to decrease, indicating that the WPCBs undergo pyrolysis. At 250 °C, the mass of WPCBs decreased to 77.82%, indicating that 22.18% of the material was pyrolyzed. In this study, the heat pretreatment method was used to pretreat WPCBs before crushing, and then the temperature before pyrolysis was selected for the test. The selected pretreatment temperature does not exceed 200 °C. The fracture characteristics of WPCBs by HPBC were determined by micro-morphology analysis. The breakage characteristics of the untreated and treated samples are shown in Different fragmentation characteristics are shown for the two types of products.  According to the SEM results, the fracture characteristics of WPCBs can be divided into longitudinal and horizontal fracture. The structural characteristics of WPCBs are layered superposition. For WPCBs, the components are different in longitudinal, and the components are the same in horizontal. For longitudinal fracture, it means that the breakage occurred among the same components. For horizontal fracture, it means that the breakage occurred among different components. The main fracture mode of the untreated circuit boards is longitudinal fracture. The breakage ratio between different components is small. Horizontal fracture is observed for the main breakage mode for the treated WPCBs. Based on the layered structure of the circuit boards, horizontal fracture is the main breakage mode for different components to liberate. When horizontal fracture dominates, the liberation effect improves. Based on the mass change mentioned in The effect of the treated time on the crushing effect was investigated. The treated temperature was set at 200 °C for 30, 60, 90, and 120 min. As shown in The increase in the heat treatment temperature or time can improve the crushing effect of WPCBs. The main reason is that the higher the temperature or the longer the heat time, the stronger the thermal energy the received by WPCBs. The thermal conductivity of various components is different. The higher the thermal energy, the greater the temperature difference, and the deeper the weakening degree. In addition, the deep weakening degree leads to significantly different mechanical properties between the components, which eventually can improve the breakage effect. The effects of pretreatment on the breakage characteristics of WPCBs were investigated, and the changes in the particle grade, product yield, and copper element yield between the pretreated and untreated WPCBs were compared. As shown in As The morphological characteristics of the fragmented products are shown in The effect of crushing time on the crushing effect was investigated. The crushing time was 60, 90, 120, and 150 s. Distributions of grade, yield, and cumulative yield of the crushed products are listed in As listed in With increasing crushing time, the enrichment rate first decreases and then increases. In 60–120 s range, the yield of −0.3 mm crushed products increased from 21.06% to 37.50%. The copper content increased slightly, from 6.55 to 7.59%, reducing the enrichment rate. In 120–150 s, the yield of −0.3 mm crushed products increased from 37.50% to 47.22%. The copper content increased from 7.59% to 17.29% and increased by 9.7%, which increased the copper enrichment rate. In 120–150 s, the metal content in +0.3 mm product is higher, resulting in a higher probability for metal component subjected to crushing force and making the metal gradually crushed to fine-grained grade. As listed in In addition, the results have been compared with the results from other literature ( The infrared spectrum analysis was carried out for the circuit board ground to −0.074 mm. As shown in In addition, the metal and non-metal components in the waste circuit board have different thermal conductivities. Under the pretreatment, the temperature differences occur at the interface between the metal and non-metal, changing the mechanical properties and weakening the adhesion between the metal and non-metal components. The crushing process is shown in HPBC was successfully used for improving the breakage and liberation effects of WPCBs. The conclusions of this study are as follows: In −200 °C, the mass of WPCBs does not change with heat time. At +200 °C, the pyrolysis of WPCB begins, and the optimum pretreatment temperature of WPCB was found as −200 °C. HPBC can change the fracture mode of WPCBs, from longitudinal fracture to horizontal fracture, thus changing the morphology of the crushed products. The weakening effect is affected by the treated time and temperature. The crushing effect improved with increasing treated temperature and time. In 100–200 °C, the −0.3 mm content rises from 18.68% to 21.06%. In 30–120 min, the −0.3 mm content rises from 18.93% to 23.54%. The −0.3 mm content for the untreated WPCBs is 17.90%. The copper can be enriched into narrow size by pretreatment of WPCBs. In 60 s, the copper yield increases by 9.74% in the range 0.3–1 mm. Compared to the non-metallic components, the metal components showed ductility, and were more difficult to be crushed into fine size (−0.3 mm). At 120 s, for 0.3–2 mm ranged crushed product, the copper recovery rate is 85.66%, the crushed products yield is 49.25%, and the enrichment rate is 1.74. The copper element can be effectively enriched by HPBC. HTPC technology can change the liberation characteristics of WPCBs. The thermal conductivities of metal and non-metal components are different. After pretreatment, the bonding between the metal and non-metal components weakened, and then the liberation and crushing effect among different components improved. In this work, the crushing effect of WPCBs under treatment was discussed, while the separation effects are not shown in this paper. Such investigation will be further addressed in a future research. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. The work is supported by See