The variogram is an important function in geostatistical applications such as kriging and various conditional simulation methods. In general, the actual variogram function is unknown for a particular application, and inferred from the experimental data. In the same way as first order statistics, the experimental variogram is also affected by preferentially clustered data. The irregularity of sampling has a well-known destructuring effect on the sample variograms, but it is rarely considered in their experimental calculation and modeling. This paper presents a study where a declustering method based on the data polygon of influence was applied in order to weight data pairs in experimental variogram calculations. The sample weighted variograms were appropriately modeled and used in sequential indicator simulations of coal thickness in a large Brazilian deposit.Kriging is a well known interpolation technique that aims to provide the best estimate in a mathematical sense, by minimizing the error variance of the estimate and optimizing the selection of weights given to each sample data. However, its application is problematic with widely spaced exploration drillholes because of the smoothing effect of kriging that often results in an overestimation of the low grade proportions and underestimation of the high grade proportions within a deposit ( Conditional simulation has been developed and proposed for overcoming the problems related to the smoothing effect in the evaluation of recoverable reserves based on kriging estimates ( Simulation can be accomplished by using a growing variety of techniques which differ in the underlying random function model (multi-Gaussian or non-parametric), the amount and type of information that can be accounted for, and the computer requirements. The sequential indicator simulation (SIS) of continuous variables, such as seam thickness or metal grades, is aimed at generating realizations that reproduce the global data distribution (histogram) and the spatial continuity at different cutoffs or thresholds, locally conditioned by the sample data. This procedure has advantages over Gaussian simulation techniques since it permits the straightforward integration of secondary soft data and provides increased flexibility to account for different patterns of spatial continuity at different thresholds, whereas Gaussian methods impose a particular spatial continuity for different thresholds ( Indicator geostatistics for continuous variables requires a transformation of the data values z(x) in a set of 0 The coding is performed for a set of thresholds (z One advantage of the simulation of continuous variables discretized into K mutually exclusive classes is the flexibility to model the spatial distribution of each class by a different indicator variogram ( It is well known that the sample variogram may not be representative of the underlying population if the data locations are preferentially located in high or low-valued areas ( As discussed in the next sections, several authors have already proposed alternatives to declustering data for the purpose of modeling the variogram. This article discusses the potential benefits of using weights to improve the estimation of indicator variograms to obtain a more realistic spatial continuity model. Consequentially better calculated and modeled variograms are expected to lead to a more efficient estimate of coal thickness as well as a potentially more accurate uncertainty model for that variable. The study was carried out by using an exploration dataset from a large Brazilian coal deposit. The variogram is the cornerstone of the two point geostatistics and its proper estimation and modeling impact estimation such as kriging (and its variations) and simulation methods. The weights ω  In this work we are considering a case study in which there is a clustering of the data and weights are assigned to individual points according to their area of influence (Voronoy poligons). There are variations on the methodologies proposed by various authors to deal with the data clustering problem but the core concern was that clustering can lead to inefficient classical variogram estimates even for data arising from a stationary random field. Our concern is to correct the distortion on the spatial continuity measurement caused by the preferential sampling and we refrained from investigating differences in various methods for data declustering. As stated by Given that the indicator variograms will exhibit a sill value associated with the proportion of values below and above a chosen threshold, the definition of an unbiased probability distribution is very relevant. In order to obtain the weighted variograms, the following steps were adopted: the area of influence for each sample was obtained by using Voronoi polygons and the weights were attributed so that the smallest area received a weight equal to 10. After that, this sample was added nine more times to the dataset, simulating the existence of 10 samples at the same point or area; the same procedure was replicated for all data according to their area of influence (or weights); the experimental variograms were then calculated by using this modified dataset and for each lag there were a number of pairs used to compute the variogram according to the area of influence of each sample. The Santa Catarina coal basin has been exploited since the early 1900s ( The Rio Bonito formation is considered one of the most important in the Paraná basin and hosts the known Brazilian coal deposits. Details of the involved stratigraphy are shown in The Bonito Seam is basically formed by coal and shale seams with interbeds of siltstone and mudstone. In some portions of the seam, limestone lenses occur. The available dataset comprises 340 diamond drill holes (DDH) with information for seam thickness from the Bonito Coal Seam. The coal thickness distribution was adequately discretized in nine decile cutoffs plus the 95% quantile and a spatial continuity analysis was done for each one of these thresholds, modeling their major and minor anisotropic directions.  Stochastic simulation of correlated random fields as proposed by In this study, coal thickness data z(x) were transformed into the indicator codes (1 or 0) by the indicator function, according to the threshold values z This data transformation leads to groups of 0 As discussed earlier and according to Eq. SIS was carried out with the GSLIB sisim algorithm ( The indicator approach is much more demanding and labor-intensive than the multi-Gaussian approach in terms of semivariogram modeling due to the need to infer and fit a considerable number of indicator variograms and under these conditions it becomes indispensable to maintain robust and trustworthy variogram models. The destructuring effect of the preferentially clustered data on histogram was clearly seen in As a means of comparison, Despite the small number of simulations generated it was clear that those realizations obtained in using declustered thresholds had a major adherence to the input distribution, and at the same time it seems to have generated less unbiased estimates, mainly for the smallest thresholds.  Note that, except for the lower thresholds, all declustered indicator variogram models were reasonably well reproduced. However, this behavior was already expected since, as the number of cutoffs increases, the lowest and highest cutoff values approach the extremes of the distribution, and their experimental variograms become highly discontinuous and unreliable. As explained before, the sill of each indicator variogram at each threshold should be associated with the proportion of values below and above this threshold. This same proportion is expected to be reproduced ergodically by the multiple simulated scenarios. Note that the proportions are better reproduced by using the declustered approach instead of the first for all quantiles. The higher nugget/sill ratio for the clustered indicator variograms compared to their declustered counterpart also contributed to a noisier texture in the simulated models derived from using clustered variograms ( In Only local uncertainty may be considered with kriging, whereas with the indicator-based simulation method, spatial uncertainty may be examined where equiprobable realizations that honor the indicator data are generated. Sequential indicator simulation (SIS) has advantages over Gaussian simulation techniques since it does not rely on a parametrically determined distribution, and it allows the characterization of the spatial continuity at different cutoffs with different variogram models. This indicates a real benefit of SIS methodology since different grade classes can show different spatial continuities. However, as this paper has pointed out, the indicator simulation-based approach is much more demanding and labor-intensive than the multi-Gaussian in terms of semivariogram modeling, and this raises the importance of using representative variogram models, since the destructuring effect of the preferentially clustered data was also extensively presented. In this paper, it was established that different variogram models produce different results. Obviously, since the true thickness at each grid node within the entire deposit is unknown, the results about weighted variograms are inconclusive unless an exhaustive dataset was used for the sake of comparison. Even though, the authors considered that the results are intuitively better by using weighted variograms as more realistic spatial continuity model is used to control the realizations. The analysis focused on the comparison of two sets of simulations where even the uncertainty range and the inventory of resources were affected by the variograms selected (clustered or declustered). Future work would perhaps generate more realizations to confirm the degree to which the histogram and variogram are reproduced by the simulations and verify the impact in terms of resources and reserves.