Pyrometallurgy is often used in the industrial process for treating gold-bearing slime. Slag compositions have remarkable influences on the recovery of gold and the gold content in slag. A method for determining optimum flux compounding with neural networks is studied in this paper, and the neural network model for estimating the gold contents with different slag compositions is presented. On the basis of the neural network model, an algorithm for searching the optimum flux compounding in the gold-slime smelting process is proposed, and the optimum flux compositions are obtained accordingly.In the gold manufactory industry, pyrometallurgy ( In the last two decades, artificial neural network (ANN) has revealed its huge potential in many areas of science and engineering, with the rapid development in its learning algorithms. Its exceptional function of self-organising, self-study, fault tolerance and high robustness has paved the way for its wide applications such as pattern recognition, pattern classification, tendency analysis, prediction and nonlinear functions. The neural network has also proven to be a powerful tool in many areas including industrial processes ( As such, the ANN approach is adopted in this paper as the substitute for nonlinear regression to identify the optimum slag compositions for the process of gold recovery in pyrometallurgy. We has constructed a neural network model for estimating gold content in slag for the ternary system B As mentioned above, an artificial neural network model was developed for estimating or predicting gold content in slag in pyrometallurgy. As known, artificial neural network is a network with nodes or neurons analogous to the biological neurons. The nodes are interconnected to the weighted links and organised in layers. The performance of a neural network depends mainly on the weights of its connections. The knowledge is represented and stored by the weights (strength) of the connections between the neurons (processors). If correct weights can be trained then an ANN can do an exceptional job. Although, there are different types of ANN, feed-forward multilayer perception (MLP) is probably the most widely used due to its powerful modelling capability ( As mentioned earlier, in order to improve the overall recovery of gold, appropriate fluxing agents should be used. In addition, the amounts of fluxing agents and their combinations should be optimized when smelting the gold-bearing slime. In the previous research, a ternary system B As seen in  On the other hand, the neural network was trained by the training data which are listed in It had been demonstrated that the neural network had better predicted the gold content in slag for different slag compositions with higher precision compared with the traditional regression method. The most important results were shown in In the section above, we have described the established neural network, which is capable of calculating the gold contents in slag for the pyrometallurgical experiments. Because the trained network has already ‘stored’ the nonlinear relationships between slag compositions and gold content in slag, we can now adopt an optimization procedure, which determines the optimum slag compounding that minimises the gold content in slag. The problem can be interpreted mathematically as the follows: Given The proposed algorithm for locating the optimum solution by using the neural network is as the follows: Input any initial state Set state Generate next candidate state Use the trained Set In the above network reasoning algorithm, the objective function is determined for the gold content in slag, four elements in the set As seen in The above optimum slag compositions can be compared with the similar results obtained by using nonlinear regression by We use artificial neural networks to optimize the slag compositions in pyrometallurgical processes of gold slime. (i) The paper has demonstrated that artificial neural network can be used to determine the relationships between slag compositions and gold content in slag. Compared with the traditional regression method, it makes no functional assumptions on the relationships, hence, eliminates the errors brought in by Man. (ii) Further, the algorithm for optimizing the slag compositions in the process of gold slime is proposed and executed by using the neural network. The optimization process yields comparable outcomes and the optimum slag compositions are determined as soda 20–22%, borax 50–52%, silica glass 20–22%, and salt 18–20%. These results produced by the neural network seem more accurate than obtained by the traditional regression method statistically, and has given a very good indication to the direction of future experimental research.