Recent research indicated the potential of glycine under alkaline conditions as a lixiviant for copper from its ores and concentrates. In this research, a systematic study has been made of the effects of glycine concentration, temperature, dissolved oxygen, particle size, stirring speed, on the leaching kinetics of chalcopyrite in alkaline glycine from which a power law rate model has been derived to model the shrinking core kinetics. Ultra-fine grinding reduction to 100% passing 10 µm resulted in an extraordinary improvement in copper dissolution rate and anomalous behaviour compared to changes in rates for larger particle sizes. Kinetic analysis of the two particle size fractions indicated that diffusion through the product layer controlled the leaching kinetics of chalcopyrite at temperatures 40 °C and above. At 30 °C, chemical reaction contributed in limiting the leaching process, but diffusion through the product layer is dominant. For the 20–38 µm size fraction, both liquid film diffusion and diffusion through the product layer limited the leaching process although diffusion through the product layer was significantly dominant. Activation energies for the 20–38 µm size fraction and the ultra-fine size fraction were estimated to be 71.9 kJ/mol and 29.6 kJ/mol respectively. Surface analyses indicated that sulfur is not formed on the leach residue surface and that an iron oxy-hydroxide species was identified on the leach residue. A mixed-rate control shrinking core model is proposed where the rate constant dependence on process variables is given in a power law model form.Hydrometallurgical processing of chalcopyrite to produce copper remains challenging because of its inertness in aqueous systems, particularly at room temperature and atmospheric pressure ( Considering the known challenges with acidic leaching, there appears to be many benefits in using an alkaline lixiviant. The most widely used and industrially applied alkaline leaching reagent for base metals and especially copper is an aqueous ammonia solution and its derivatives ( Despite ammoniacal leaching having the advantage of selectively leaching copper, it has some technical and environmental challenges. It has a noxious odour detected even at low concentrations, is toxic to aquatic organisms and has adverse health effects such as being corrosive to the respiratory tract and can burn the skin. Reagent loss and cost is a barrier to commercial implementation due to volatility and the high lixiviant to metal stoichiometric requirements ( Glycine is an alternative complexing agent without the toxicity or volatility of ammonia. In a similar manner to ammonia, it has been shown to selectively leach copper from its oxides and secondary sulfides while rejecting gangue metals ( Relatively few studies have been carried out on the glycine-chalcopyrite system. Publications to date have focused on establishing alkaline glycine systems as an effective lixiviant for leaching copper from their mineral specimens or ores with no emphasis on the leaching kinetics. Knowledge of the dependence of the rate of reaction on the operating conditions and process variables makes it possible to predict the effects of changes in these variables on the degree of metal extraction. Of equal value is the fact that an analytical expression for the rate of reaction allows simulation and optimization studies to be undertaken in reactor design or operation, and may create a possibility of very large savings in time during pilot plant studies ( The chalcopyrite specimen used in this study was obtained from a museum-quality specimens in Perth, Australia. The mineral was ground and then sieved to obtain five different size fractions, <20 µm, +20–38 µm, +38–53 µm, +53–75 µm and +75–106 µm. The −20 µm fraction was further pulverized with a ring mill and a P80 of 8.56 µm (laser particle size analyser) size fraction obtained. Quantitative XRD analysis of the ground sample showed that the bulk sample contains 67.0% chalcopyrite, 10.0% pyrite and 14.0% ankerite [Ca(Fe, Mg, Mn)(CO While not discussed in this paper, other glycine-soluble metals that are found in trace quantities (as per Experiments were conducted in a 500 mL jacketed glass reactor fitted with a condenser, a thermometer, an overhead anchor-type Teflon stirrer, and rubber stopper for the sampling inlet. The reactor was filled with a 500 mL solution of the desired reagent concentration and pH (adjusted with NaOH). A Syland M6000 dissolved oxygen (DO) controller system is set to measure the DO in solution and maintain a desired DO value by controlling the oxygen flow through a digital mass flow controller. The required solution temperature was achieved and maintained with a digitally controlled heated circulating water bath. On attaining the desired temperature, the required chalcopyrite specimen mass was added to the solution and the stirring was started. After a specific leaching time, the stirring was stopped, a one minute interval was allowed for the particles to settle and 3 mL solution was extracted for copper concentration determination by atomic absorption spectrometry. The percentage of copper extraction was calculated based on the copper released into the solution per total expected. In order to determine the type of species formed during chalcopyrite leaching in alkaline glycine solution that may limit the dissolution kinetics, un-leached and leached samples were analysed by X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Scanning Electron Microscopy equipped with Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (SEM-EDS). The leached residue considered for the analysis was that from a 20–38 µm size fraction leached at 50 °C, [Gly] 0.5 M, DO 15 ppm, pH 11.5, and 400 rpm. At the end of the experiment, the leach residue was rinsed with deionized water to remove any adsorbed species. Part of the washed residue was immediately frozen in a freezer to minimize any further surface oxidation and this portion was used for XPS analysis while the other part was dried in an oven at 50 °C and was used for SEM analysis. XPS analysis was performed using a Kratos AXIS Ultra DLD model. The electron take off angle was normal to the sample surface. Spectra were interpreted using the CasaXPS software package. Scanning electron microscopy analysis used to study the changes in the surface morphology of the leached residue after leaching was done using a NEON Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscope (FIB-SEM). The Zeiss manufactured Neon 40ESM model was operated at 5.0 kV with a beam aperture size of 30.0 µm. Leaching reactions are generally heterogeneous in which reactions occur at the interface of solid and a solute in an aqueous solution. Some processes such as the gold cyanidation and pressure oxidation of sulfides involve a gaseous third phase. A simplified representation of such reactions is shown in Eq. Based on the general rate expression, several models including the shrinking core model (SCM), shrinking particle model, and progressive-conversion model have been developed to study the reaction kinetics of such heterogeneous leaching process. The shrinking core model is seen to reasonably represent reality in a broad variety of leaching situations ( Many researchers have however noted that diffusion controlled or chemical reaction controlled models fail to represent the rate-controlling step of some leaching reactions ( The constants kl, kd, and kr can be determined by a multi-linear regression analysis using the least square method. To avoid negative values for the constants, a constrained least square technique as expressed in Eq. Eq. The two most important factors that influence the rate of leaching reactions are the concentration of reagents and temperature. These two factors in terms of kinetic parameter; the order of the reaction and the activation energy are linked to the reaction rate as described Eq. For reactions to occur, molecules must first of all collide with sufficient energy. This implies that reaction rates are related to collision frequency and collision energy. The Arrhenius equation expresses the rate constant in terms of collision frequency factor and collision energy illustrated in Eq. As guidance, it is generally accepted that systems with activation energy more than 40 kJ/mol are controlled by chemical reaction while those with activation energy less than 40 kJ/mol are controlled by transport processes ( Unfortunately activation energy does not give any more information on the reaction mechanism. The order of the reaction on the other hand describes the dependency of the reaction rate on the reagent concentration. The kinetics and the extent to which a leaching reaction proceeds are also influenced by particle size characteristics, such as particle size, shape and porosity as these factors control the surface area available for reaction with a solution phase reactant ( The effect of glycine concentration on the leaching kinetics of chalcopyrite was studied by varying the glycine concentration from 0.1 to 1.0 M. The particle size range of +20–38 µm was used for other variable investigation unless when particle size is being investigated. The stirring speed of 400 rpm, the temperature at 50 °C, and the dissolve oxygen concentration (DO) at 15 ppm were kept fixed. The initial solution pH used for all experiments was 11.5. The results shown in Some researchers have reported that chalcopyrite oxidation is independent of stirring speed ( In industrial leaching operations, power consumption (comminution), reactor design, and leaching residence time significantly depend on the particle size range being leached (  To further explain the above observation, a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area analysis by TriStar 3000 was performed on the 20–38 and −10 µm chalcopyrite fractions in order to confirm that the observed difference in leaching rate between the size fractions is as a result of mechano-chemical activation of the mineral and/or from particle size reduction. The results show that the 20–38 µm fraction has a surface area of 0.30 m The effect of different DO concentrations on copper dissolution from chalcopyrite is shown in With temperature being the key process variable used to determine the leaching rate controlling step, and given that two types of curve are noted when the effect of particle size was investigated ( Temperature dependence experiments for chalcopyrite dissolution rate were carried out in range of 40–70 °C in solutions containing 0.5 M Gly and DO concentration of 15 ppm for 96 h. The results shown in The kinetics of heterogeneous reactions such as leaching is not only determined by contact area but also by mineral structure which can be altered by intensive grinding ( The rate constants and their correlation coefficients for each process variable were determined from plots of the various shrinking core kinetic models.  The regression coefficients obtained by fitting the experimental data to the shrinking core models are too close to deduce the rate controlling mechanism of copper dissolution from chalcopyrite. On applying the constrained multi-linear regression analysis using the least square technique, it was possible to identify a probable rate controlling mechanism for both +20–38 µm and < 10 µm particle size fractions. The calculated results as shown in On the other hand, when the constrained multi-linear regression analysis using the least square technique is applied on the leaching data of <10 µm ( The apparent rate constants obtained from the plots of 1 − 3(1 − x)2/3 + 2(1 − x) versus time at investigated temperatures were used to create Arrhenius plots for both +20–38 µm and <10 µm size fractions. From the data shown in In order to obtain reaction orders with respect to process variables for chalcopyrite leaching, Kd values determined for each process variable were used to make plots of lnKd versus ln[Gly], ln[O2], ln[SS], ln[PS] to establish an empirical power law model. The slope of the straight line in each plot shows the calculated reaction order with respect to the variable. The order of the reaction with respect to glycine concentration, dissolved oxygen concentration, stirring speed, particle size were 0.21, −0.87, 0.31, and −0.12, respectively. From the obtained reaction orders, the leaching of the +20–38 µm chalcopyrite fraction in alkaline glycine solution can be empirically represented by Eq. In order to validate the empirical equation The surface analysis of chalcopyrite leached residues from different leaching media have shown that the presence of a range elemental species and compounds are precipitated on the surface ( The surface atomic concentrations calculated from the XPS survey spectra indicated the absence of elemental sulphur on leached residue surface ( By analysing both chalcopyrite samples by SEM-EDS analysis, the absence of oxygen atoms on the chalcopyrite surface as illustrated in The effect of process variables such as glycine concentration, temperature, dissolved oxygen, particle size, agitation speed, on the leaching kinetics of chalcopyrite in alkaline glycine solution have been studied. The rate of copper dissolution increased as the glycine concentration increased from 0.1 to 1.0 M. After 96 h of leaching, 0.8 M and 1.0 M glycine both resulted in 28% Cu extraction. A stirring speed of 800 rpm resulted in a copper extraction of 39%. Varying the particle size range from 20 to 38 µm to 75–106 µm had no significant effect on copper extraction as after 96 h, 32% Cu was extracted from all ranges. However, for the – 10 µm fraction, 73% Cu was extracted in under 30 h while 90% Cu was leached after 96 h. BET surface area analysis indicated that the significant improvement in copper leaching from the – 10 µm fraction was also due to mechano-chemical activation of the chalcopyrite caused by fine grinding. Copper extraction increased as DO concentration increases although extraction under 25 ppm levels off at 25% after 48 h of leaching. After 96 h 32% Cu was obtained at 8 and 15 ppm DO. Surface studies confirmed iron oxy-hydroxide (i.e. goethite-like) to the iron product in the leach samples. The kinetic analysis of chalcopyrite performed by fitting the experimental data to the shrinking core model equations could not clearly establish which model rate is controlling because the calculated regression coefficients for all variables are too close. By applying a constrained multi-linear regression analysis using the least square technique, it was established that both liquid diffusion and diffusion through the product layer controlled copper leaching rate from the 20–38 µm chalcopyrite fraction. Diffusion through the product layer was however significantly more dominant. Copper leaching rate from the −10 µm was controlled by diffusion through the product layer when the temperature was 40 °C and above. At 30 °C, the leaching rate was limited by both chemical reaction (lesser contribution) and diffusion through the product layer (dominant). The apparent activation energy for both 20–38 µm and – 10 µm calculated were 71.9 kJ/mol and 29.62 kJ/mol respectively. There are still many unknowns for this system. As we worked with a natural specimen of high purity, but not 100% pure chalcopyrite, aspects such as galvanic effects (with small amounts of pyrite) and potential catalytic effects (e.g. due to the presence of silver) are anticipated to influence the values of the regressed rate parameters. However, the current research identifies the predominant controllable process parameters and the extent to which they contribute to reaction rate. Further research into the electrochemistry of leaching the chalcopyrite is also advised, and it would provide essential insights into the electrochemical phenomena during alkaline glycine leaching. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of