Talc is an industrial mineral that is widely used. It is always associated with other minerals, which determine the quality of talc samples for industrial purposes. Various operating variables control the natural floatability of talc. For enhancement of talc flotation, sodium hexametphosphate is used as a depressant for associated gangue minerals. In addition, oleic acid (in an equal mixture with kerosene) is used as an anionic collector. The results presented in this paper provided useful and important information on how to improve the quality of Egyptian talc, obtained from different sites, for industrial uses. The optimum conditions were obtained at pH=11, depressant dosage=1.0 kg/t, collector dosage=1.2 kg/t and pulp density=200 g/L. At these conditions, SiO2 assay increased from 54.10% to 54.94%, MgO assay increased from 29.90% to 31.76%, CaO decreased from 0.80% to 0.42%, Al2O3 decreased from 5.50% to 3.11%, Fe2O3 decreased from 8.20% to 7.24%, the whiteness increased from 75.4% to 83.7%, and the loss on ignition decreased from 6.64% to 5.21%. The mass recovery of final concentrate was 92.4%. The component recoveries of SiO2 and MgO (the major constituents of talc) in the final concentrate were 93.8% and 98.2%, respectively. More improvement of talc quality was obtained by leaching the final concentrate of flotation with a 10% diluted hydrochloric acid. The mass recovery of final product was about 85% of initial feed. In this final product, Fe2O3 decreased to 3.12%, CaO decreased to 0.38%, and Al2O3 decreased to 3.01%. The assay of SiO2 increased to 58.96%, MgO percent was nearly the same as in the final concentrate of flotation, the whiteness increased to 88.5%, and the loss on ignition decreased to 4.03%. The final product may be suitable for many industrial uses such as low-loss electronics (a type of ceramics), paints, rubber, plastics, roofing, textiles, refractories, insecticides and coating of welding rods.Talc is an industrial mineral, which is composed of hydrated magnesium sheet-silicates with a theoretical formula of Mg The head sample used in the present work is a mixing of four samples obtained from different sites in the Eastern Desert of Egypt (Shalatin area). Petrographically, the talc samples are classified into four different types. From the geochemical point of view, the samples are correlated together with high percentages of aluminum oxide and iron oxide. The details and characteristics of these samples were discussed in a previous published paper ( The flotation tests were carried out using oleic acid (in an equal mixture with kerosene) as a pure collector (iodine value 85–95, acid value 196–204 and molecular weight 282.47). The dosage was varied from 0.6 to 1.4 kg/t ( Laboratory flotation tests were carried out in a 2800 cm Leaching test was executed in a glass reactor of 1000 cm The chemical analysis of the samples was done by XRF analysis carried out at the central laboratories sector of the Egyptian Mineral Resources Authorities, Giza, Egypt. Whiteness of talc was determined by the apparatus of Dr Lang Micro Color V2.0 ( All flotation tests were carried out at room temperature. The total conditioning time was 10 min. The talc sample was added slowly and conditioned with water for five min. Further water was then added to bring the liquid level to 10 mm below the overflow lip. The pH modifiers were added to adjust the required pH. The depressant dosage (sodium hexametaphosphate) was added at the end of the initial conditioning period and was allowed to condition for 2 min. with the pulp. The collector dosage (oleic acid and kerosene mixture) was added at the end of the previous period and was allowed to condition for 2 min. with the pulp. The frother dosage was then added and a further 1 min. of conditioning was allowed prior to aeration. The air supply was gradually opened. The required pulp level was maintained constant. In each experiment, after allowing 15 s for froth to form, a hand skimmer was used to collect the froth over until the froth is stopped. After the process being finished, the products (concentrate and tailings) were dried, weighed and chemically analyzed. The final concentrate of flotation was leached with a diluted hydrochloric acid having a concentration of 10% using a solid liquid ratio of (1:2) and at a temperature of 60 °C for a period of 30 min. The residues of leaching process were washed with acidulated hot water and then with pure water. After the process being finished, the concentrate was dried, weighed, and chemically analyzed. The experimental part of this paper was done in the mineral processing laboratories of the Mining and Metallurgical Department, Faculty of Engineering, Assiut University. Using the mass percent and assays of different constituents in the feed, concentrate, and tailings, the experimental values of mass and component recoveries of the flotation products can be calculated as follows:   The percentage of iron oxide is still high due to the association of iron oxide with all mineral components of the sample, which sometimes appearing as yellowish brown threads along its schistose structure and in other cases, associating with the banded talc-chlorite structure ( The effect of pH values on the mass recovery of concentrate is shown in The effect of pH values on the component recoveries of constituents in concentrate is illustrated also in The above results can be interpreted such that, by increasing the pH, the effective coverage by the collector is enhanced and the resulting talc surface therefore becomes more hydrophobic leading to greater talc recovery. The native talc surface does not become more hydrophobic ( From   The effect of depression dosages on the mass recovery of concentrate is shown in From The experiments of collector dosage parameter were carried out at pH 11, depressant dosage of 1.0 kg/t, and pulp density of 200 g/L.  The effect of collector dosages on the mass recovery of concentrate is shown in The increase of the flotation recovery with the collector dosage may be explained due to the more rapid reaction at higher concentration or due to more rapid approach of the exchanger adsorption equilibrium at higher concentration. This trend can be explained also due to the displacement of the exchange–adsorption equilibrium more and more toward complete collector adsorption as concentration of the collector is increased ( On the other hand, the component recoveries of CaO, Al From  From  The effect of pulp density on the mass recovery of concentrate is shown in The effect of pulp density on the component recoveries of constituents in concentrate is illustrated also in From From From More improvement of talc quality was obtained by leaching of final concentrate of flotation with a dilute hydrochloric acid having a concentration of 10%, solid–liquid ratio (1:2), at a temperature of 60 °C for a period of 30 minutes using a mechanical stirrer. The residues of leaching process were washed with acidulated hot water and then with pure water. After the process being finished, the concentrate was dried, weighed and chemically analyzed. The final results of chemical analysis of talc constituents, mass recovery, whiteness, and loss on ignition in feed, final concentrate of flotation, and leaching product are shown in From the results of this investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn: The floatability of talc increased as the pH increased up to a value of 11. Above this value, the floatability of talc decreased. The CaO and Al Using oleic acid in conjunction with kerosene resulted in an increase in talc recovery up to a maximum of 1.2 kg/t after which recovery decreased. The recovery of talc increased as the pulp density increased up to 200 g/L, above which the recovery of talc decreased. The final concentrate of flotation was leached with a dilute hydrochloric acid (10%). In the final product, SiO The final talc product of this research is suitable for many industrial uses such as low-loss electronics (a type of ceramics), paints, rubber, plastics, roofing, textiles, refractories, insecticides and coating of welding rods.  Mass of concentrate, g Mass of tailings, g Mass of feed, g Assay of constituent in concentrate, % Assay of constituent in tailings, % Assay of constituent in feed, % Mass recovery of concentrate, % Mass recovery of tailings, % Component recovery in concentrate, % Component recovery in tailings, %