The present paper deals with the fatigue life assessment of the large components which are common in heavy plant engineering. A calculation model was developed to estimate the degree of utilisation of structural components based on rainflow counted local strains measured on machines during industrial use. A local approach was followed, but not in the classical cycle by cycle definition, since this information is generally not available from the measurements. For calculation, the rainflow data is transformed element-wise into the damage domain using the damage parameter as defined by Bergmann. The calculation model was calibrated for the ductile iron EN-GJS-400-15U by strain controlled constant and variable amplitude fatigue tests with lives that extended into the high cycle domain. Furthermore, the calculation model was validated by a strain controlled variable amplitude control test. The variable amplitude tests are based on measured rainflow data. For preparation, a method of omitting load cycles from the primary data that had a negligible damage contribution prior to load sequence reconstruction was developed. The sensitivity of the material to mean stress was considered in the process by utilising the damage domain.
                  The comparison of calculated results using the calibrated calculation model with experimental results from the control test shows a satisfactory match when using a constant characteristic damage sum as a failure criterion. The accuracy of the computation can be increased by considering the damage potential of the load spectra.In heavy plant engineering, the dimensioning of machine components is determined by the large sizes and small build quantities of the utilised machinery, making an approach based on prototypes impractical. A typical example of heavy plant engineering is the design of equipment used in the cement industry. The challenges in the dimensioning of this machinery are typically met by using a computational approach. Accordingly, the initial designs of the components are solely based on calculations, commonly using the finite element method. The results of the calculations are assessed by using a local approach. Verification of this practice is achieved by monitoring machines in industrial use. With regard to the local approach, verification is conducted by gauging local strains at design relevant hot spots. This monitoring can last for several years, thus making characteristic load spectra well known. The large amounts of data make the continuous storage of load sequences impossible. Thus, load histories are commonly captured using rainflow counting. To date, no optimised method has been available to use the complete information from the rainflow counted data to assess the utilisation of the monitored machinery. In principle, an instrument at the current state of technology is available via the FKM-guideline In this paper, a calculation model is presented, which allows the estimation of actual local utilisations, solely based on rainflow counted data. Input parameters are the cyclic stress–strain curve, the strain This paper is composed of three parts: In the first part, a typical load spectrum measured on a vertical roller mill, of a type widely used in the cement industry, is presented in order to emphasise the motivation for the given task. In the second part, the developed calculation model is introduced and, finally, experimental verification for the ductile iron EN-GJS-400-15U is shown. In general, the industrial use of the plants chosen for measurement has priority over the data collection process. Test runs, e.g. to collect data on distinctive modes of operation, usually cannot be performed. In order to obtain representative data, measurement systems are typically set up to work over long periods of time – several months or even years. These long time spans of data acquisition make a manual monitoring of the plant operation and, when indicated, a hand-triggered data collection impossible. Accordingly, measurement systems are rigged to work continuously whenever the plant is in operation. However, the continuous data collection makes the storage of strain signals in the time domain impractical. Consequently, the data is reduced to its damage information using online rainflow counting. A typical example of a measurement result is shown in With the large amount of strain information, demand is created for a true fatigue assessment of these data. Due to the large sizes and the costs of typical machinery, damage assessment of the data cannot be conducted by fatigue testing complete components. Accordingly a calculation model was developed suitable for the given task, These material properties are reduced to component fatigue properties using the highly stressed volume approach According to Kaufmann These values were determined on the basis of fatigue tests on specimens made from thick walled components. The basic material for these tests was therefore subjected to manufacturing conditions very similar to those of large components made from EN-GJS-400-15U used in heavy plant engineering, making the specified volume exponent Adequate values for the analysed ductile iron are given with The aforementioned effects are used to adjust the damage parameter With respect to the given task, the description of the service loads is given by a rainflow matrix of local strains. In contrast to the classical local approach, no cycle by cycle analysis is conducted – this information is not available in any case – but, instead, each matrix element is transformed to the damage domain using the damage parameter in the definition of Bergmann The damage parameter used requires, as input, the Young’s modulus In the classic local approach, this is done as a cycle by cycle analysis considering the path in the stress–strain-plane. Since service loads are not available as sequences but only as rainflow matrices, this approach is not applicable. Consequently, the damage parameter can only be calculated for each element of the rainflow matrix, giving to all the load cycles stored inside each separate element the same damage parameter. The schematic of this calculation is shown in With the use of the damage parameter, the rainflow matrix of local strains is transformed into the damage domain. Furthermore, the element by element analysis is much more feasible than a cycle by cycle computation, due to the large number of load cycles, Damage assessment of the transformed matrix elements is done by linear damage accumulation against the damage parameter For an accurate fatigue assessment using the presented calculation model, accurate input data are needed, including the general fatigue characteristics, the sensitivity of the material to mean stress and a failure criterion for the damage accumulation. All of this information can only be obtained by experimental analysis. A decrease in stiffness of the specimens by 10% was used as the failure criterion in accordance with To consider the effects of the thick walled cast iron structures on the microstructure of the material, samples were taken from material blocks cast simultaneously to a grinding table for a vertical roller mill, The general fatigue characteristics, the cyclic stress–strain behaviour and the strain With the knowledge of the general fatigue characteristics of the material and of the parameters needed to transfer the material properties to components, only the sensitivity of the material to mean stress and a failure criterion for the damage accumulation are needed for a correct fatigue assessment with the presented calculation model. These required values can only be determined by experimental analysis. The basic problem of this analysis – giving an accurate fatigue assessment of rainflow counted local strains – makes it obvious that measured and rainflow counted data should be used as a basis for variable amplitude fatigue tests, meaning that the required information is determined using the exact kind of real life data to which the calculation model will be applied. The results of a variable amplitude fatigue test are usually represented as the maximum load amplitude against the number of load cycles to failure. The maximum load amplitude Additionally a mean load ratio is defined as: These definitions are obvious for the analysis of data in the time domain. However, the load level can also be defined as the amplitude of the largest hysteresis. For a hysteresis A load ratio can also be defined for each hysteresis: The differences between the two definitions are demonstrated in For a fatigue test based on a rainflow matrix, reconstruction of a load sequence is required. A solution to this problem can be taken from the literature In this case, the calculation resulted in the mapping of the lowest class, class −50, to a minimum strain of The resulting damage parameter of each rainflow element was assessed as being damage relevant using the damage parameter All matrix elements The presented calculation model requires two parameters: The first parameter By modifying the load data in the rainflow domain, the reconstructed load sequence differs in the progression of strain hysteresis in comparison to the load sequence corresponding to the unmodified rainflow matrix, With the results from the constant amplitude fatigue test and from the two variable amplitude fatigue tests, enough data are available for an evaluation of suitable parameters for a fatigue assessment using the calculation model. However, validation of general applicability is required. Therefore, a third variable amplitude fatigue test, based on the rainflow matrix shown in Post-test calculations of the variable amplitude tests based on the rainflow matrix shown in The result of this calibration of the calculation model is shown in The aforementioned results are based on a constant characteristic damage sum of Input for this calculation are the number of load cycles to failure for a certain load level in the constant amplitude test The results of these calculations are shown in The calculated The large size of load bearing components and the small build quantities are distinctive features of heavy plant engineering. Consequently, the design of the components is solely based on calculations – commonly finite element computations – and routine checking by measuring strains at critical sections of machines during industrial use. Typically, data are collected over a long term and reduced using rainflow counting. The method presented in this paper allows a fatigue assessment of such data that goes beyond a mere check if the strains are within the design limit, but also offers a sophisticated link between the design process and the real life industrial use. This is achieved by harnessing the complete set of available load information to compute an estimate of the real utilisation based on the intended service life of the machinery. This knowledge can be used to gradually adjust the structural design to reconcile assumed utilisation with one closer to reality with every built and monitored machine. This iterative approach respects both the experiences of the manufacturers and the small build quantities of the machinery. The method was developed alongside the practical requirements of the cement industry, specifically for vertical roller mills and the ductile iron EN-GJS-400-15U. Due to almost identical requirements, the approach can be transferred to other machines used in this industry or to adjacent industries such as mineral processing. An extension to additional materials or material qualities – which can be of upmost importance considering the typical sizes of the cast structures – can be achieved by performing the necessary experimental analysis and deducing appropriate parameters for the calculation. In this paper, a method to estimate the degree of utilisation with reference to a planned service life, based on rainflow counted local strains, is presented. A local approach was chosen, but not in the classical cycle by cycle definition. The rainflow counted data were transformed element-wise into the damage domain using the damage parameter defined by Bergmann The results in this paper show for the case studied that a sophisticated fatigue assessment can be done even under adverse conditions such as large components, very small build quantities and lack of information about the load sequences.