This paper demonstrates the possibility of using polycrystalline silicon germanium (poly SiGe), having a Ge content varying from 40 to 70%, as a structural material for surface micromachining of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) on top of standard CMOS wafers with Al interconnects and tungsten plugs, without introducing any damage or degradation in the performance of the driving electronics. It is shown that the post-processing temperature of standard CMOS wafers with Al interconnects can be increased to 520°C. The electrical and mechanical properties of poly SiGe deposited over a temperature range varying between 400 and 520°C are investigated and it is shown that boron dopants can be activated at 450°C. Depending on the germanium content, surface micromachined devices can be completely fabricated at 520°C (Ge content: ∼40%) or at 450°C (Ge content: ≥70%).Monolithic integration of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) with the driving, controlling and signal processing electronics on the same CMOS substrate can improve performance, yield and reliability as well as lower the manufacturing, packaging and instrumentation costs. The post-processing route (fabricating MEMS on top of CMOS) is preferred as it avoids introducing any changes in standard foundry CMOS processes. The main constraint imposed by post-processing is that the maximum fabrication temperature of MEMS is limited in order to avoid degradation of interconnects. This post-processing temperature should not exceed 450 or 520 Poly Si is widely used for surface micromachined MEMS At this point, it should be noted that reducing the deposition temperature of poly SiGe is accompanied by increasing the Ge content as this enhances crystallization. In general, for a given deposition temperature, it is recommended to keep the Ge content to the minimum value that results in polycrystalline film, as a high Ge content affects device reliability due to the fact that Ge is more affected by humidity compared to silicon. GeH species are less stable compared to SiH species and consequently oxidation of Ge is not inhibited In this work, poly SiGe was prepared in two different systems: (i) Oxford Plasma Lab 100 system operated at 2 In this section, we demonstrate the impact of increasing the post-processing temperature, higher than 450 On the other hand, the CMOS front end has been completely characterized and it has been found that the standard characteristics are almost unaffected by increasing the annealing temperature to 520 Reducing the processing temperature of MEMS to a limit compatible with CMOS post-processing might significantly affect the electrical properties of the device because of reduced dopant activation. In this section, we investigate the consequences of reducing the deposition temperature of poly SiGe to 520 At this point, it would be interesting to investigate the possibility of reducing the doping activation temperature to 450 In the previous section, we investigated the effect of reducing the processing temperature to a limit compatible with CMOS post-processing on the electrical properties. Mean stress and stress gradient are two other important parameters that might be seriously affected by reducing the processing temperature and consequently they might dramatically affect the functionality of surface micromachined MEMS. Ideally, zero mean stress and stress gradient are preferred. Practically, a low mean tensile stress is sufficient, whereas, if stress gradient exists, then it is preferred to have the upper layers slightly more tensile than the lower ones as this reduces the possibility of having a direct contact between the suspended structures and the supporting substrate. For poly Si On the other hand, the optimal Ge concentration, which yields the minimal tensile stress in poly Si To have an idea about stress gradient, corresponding to the optimal Ge content of both poly SiGe deposited at 520 To have a better understanding for the dependence of stress gradient on annealing temperature, the grain microstructure of as-grown and annealed poly Si Next, the stress gradient of poly SiGe deposited at 520 It can be inferred from the above analysis that both boron in situ doped poly Si It has been demonstrated that surface micromachined poly SiGe structures can be fabricated at temperatures compatible with CMOS back-end materials. Depending on the maximum deposition temperature allowed, the Ge content can be varied from 70 to 40%. Low mechanical stress was achieved and bolometer structures were successfully fabricated. These results represent a breakthrough for monolithic integration of MEMS with CMOS as required for, e.g. mechanical filters, bolometers, MOEMS and mechanical sensors. The authors would like to acknowledge Matty Caymax for depositing SiGe at 520