Spiral concentrators are one of the most common gravity processing methods extensively used for the concentration of mineral based on their density, particle size and shape. As for every gravity concentration technique, particle size plays a major role in the separation mechanisms within the spiral. Thus, in addition to classical performance indices, such as grade or recovery, partition curves are also a valuable criterion for quantifying the separation efficiency. In this paper, we study and model the influence of wash water additions and pulp density on heavy and gangue mineral partition curves using kaolin residue enriched in heavy minerals and via a design of experiment (DOE). The results show that coarse particle size recovery curves are affected by a systematic decrease, which is mainly impacted by wash water additions. Partition curve modelling through particle size distribution and DOE regression model fitting allow a better understanding of the effect of wash water on the aforementioned phenomenon for each mineral fraction. Gangue minerals are more affected by this phenomenon, which has been interpreted as a result of the Bagnold effect and secondary flows within the spiral. A decrease in the coarse particle recovery represents a significant source of losses, and a better understanding of this phenomenon is necessary to avoid these losses.Rare earths elements (REEs) have garnered considerable interest in recent years due to their high economic importance, which is linked to high efficiency electronics and energy technologies. Concerns regarding their supply risk place them on the European Union's list of critical raw materials (EU) The gravity concentration of primary REE ores is an important initial step in the REE concentration process. It is comprised of a high-capacity gravity separation, taking advantage of the relative high specific gravities (SG) of REE-bearing minerals Despite the critical importance of particle size, most of published spiral studies focus on global recovery and few have investigated the recovery according to size-fraction The main operating parameters of a spiral separator, in addition to geometric parameters, are feed rate, feed solid pulp density, splitter positions and wash water flowrate. The effects of these parameters on the spiral efficiency have been extensively described in the literature This study investigates the influence of wash water flowrate and feed pulp density on the size recovery curves of heavy and gangue minerals in a spiral concentrate using DOE methodology. In addition, a method is proposed to model heavy and gangue mineral size recovery curves and assesses the best operating parameters for the spiral concentrator. Spiral testing was conducted at the STEVAL pilot plant at the GeoRessources laboratory in Nancy, France. This study is based on spiral experiments with a focus on understanding the separation mechanisms within spiral concentrators. The feed material used in this study corresponds to a micaceous residue from a kaolin processing plant. This residue is seen as a potential source of LREE (La, Ce and Nd) and Sn, which is linked to kaolin production The main LREE host mineral is monazite (SG The spiral separator used in this paper is a 5 turn MKIIA Reichert spiral (Mineral Deposit Limited, Australia), with a 387 Each fraction (float and sinks) was separately analysed using laser light scattering, which assessed the particle size distributions. The particle size distributions presented in this article are the average of 5 successive particle size analyses. Particle size analyses were performed using a Helium-Neon Laser Optical System Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd.) coupled with a Hydro Extended Volume (EV) sample dispersion unit. Particle size distribution is typically defined using several data points (passing or retained weight%), which represent potential responses to model using the DOE. However, particle size distributions can be modelled using statistically derived distribution models, which reduce the number of responses. The two most common methods used in mineral processing are the Gaudin–Schuhmann and the Rosin–Rammler models where After spiral testing, each product (concentrate, middlings and tailings) was treated via dense medium separation combined with centrifugation using pure bromoform (SG where leading to: where ( Tests were conducted using a 3 where Spiral separation concentrate recoveries were calculated and particle size distributions were fitted for heavy and gangue minerals, as listed in The highest heavy and gangue mineral recoveries were reached for low wash water additions. The pulp density effect was less significant, but increasing the solid pulp density decreased the recovery for a given wash water flowrate, especially for the heavy minerals. Partition curves were analysed to assess the sensitivity of each size fraction and understand the effects of the wash water flowrate. Experimental size recovery curves were calculated using the recoveries presented in  The partition curves for the 20% solid pulp density tests are presented in The effect of solid pulp density on size recovery curves is illustrated in In total, 6 An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was conducted on each model to determine the regression coefficients and assess their significance (see Appendix A). According to the ANOVA analysis, all of the models are significant, which indicates that the observed variations for all of the responses are likely due to wash water flowrate and solid pulp density variations. Overall, the stated second order models appear to be sufficient, as all of the models display The quality of second order regression model fit is illustrated in From Eqs. Rather than studying the influence of the operating parameters on the The results suggest that the modelled partition curves are consistent with the experimental data, except for fine size ranges below 50 After verifying the models, the effect of wash water on heavy and gangue mineral partition curves was examined. As expected, the wash water flowrate negatively affects the overall recovery of all size fractions. However, the shape of the heavy minerals size recovery curves is minimally affected by wash water additions. Heavy mineral recovery increases with particle size and plateaus. This increase toward coarse particles is typical of gravity separator partition curves The overall effect of wash water on heavy and gangue minerals size recovery curves can be summarised by plotting the 3D response surfaces of size recovery curves as a function of wash water flowrate ( It is difficult to distinguish the effect of the wash water flowrate on the shape of the size recovery curves because the overall recovery effects decrease as the wash water flowrate increases. To only visualise partition curve shape variations, the global recovery effect can be deleted by replacing ( Even if pulp density has no influence on heavy mineral partition curves, according to the ANOVA analysis, it has a significant influence on the A coarse particle recovery decrease has been previously observed for iron ore treatment in spiral concentrators These mechanisms are illustrated for relatively low wash water rate in Pilot tests using heavy mineral rich kaolin residue were used to investigate the effect of wash water additions and solid pulp density on spiral size recovery curves via a DOE methodology. Test results show that wash water is the most significant factor affecting global recovery. However, wash water additions also impact the partition curve shapes, especially for coarse gangue particles, the recovery of which decreases as the wash water flowrate increases. A heavy and gangue mineral partition curve model was derived based on regression models that exhibited satisfactory correlation with experimental data. These models show that both heavy and gangue mineral size recovery curves are impacted by wash water variations. More specifically, size recovery ratio curves indicate that a coarse particle decrease and medium particle increase occur with increasing wash water flowrate. The wash water exhibits a more significant impact on the gangue mineral size recovery curve shape, which is likely due to selective migration phenomenon in secondary flows. The coarse particle recovery decrease in the spiral concentrator is a significant source of losses. A better understanding of this phenomenon and how it is affected by various operating parameters is fundamental for avoiding these losses. The authors thank Imerys Ltd., UK for their logistical help during the sampling exercise. We also wish to thank the members of the STEVAL pilot plant for their technical support. This work has been financially supported by the An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was conducted on each model to determine the regression coefficients and to assess their significance. According to the degrees of freedom (  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at