In the present work confocal Raman microscopy was employed as a non-destructive tool to define the content uniformity and the polymorphic form of a drug substance distributed within a lipid based inhalable powder. Two spray dried powders with different active ingredient concentrations (1.55 and 7.3wt/wt%) and an additional placebo formulation were analyzed with confocal Raman microscopy and scanning electron microscopy to define the distribution of active substance within the lipid based particles as well as its polymorphic form. The formulation containing less drug substance was shown to have a high degree of content uniformity: a complete colocalization of the Raman signal for the lipids and the Raman signal for the drug substance was detected, implying that the active ingredient was homogenously distributed within the lipid particles. Within the higher concentrated preparation, in addition to the colocalized active ingredient, Raman signals of crystalline drug substance could be observed which were not matching with the location of the consistent lipid signal. Those observations gave evidence that a part of the active substance in this formulation was not molecularly dispersed within the powder.
                  It could be shown that confocal Raman microscopy may be used as a fast and convenient method to define the content uniformity of an active ingredient within a lipid based spray dried powder for inhalation. Using this technique the distribution of an active ingredient can be characterized non-destructively, aiding in the understanding of complex drug delivery systems e.g. in the field of inhalable pharmaceutical powders. In addition analysis of solid state is available with confocal Raman microscopy.Administration of drugs through the respiratory tract via inhalation provides an excellent delivery route for a local and systemic treatment. Delivering medications via inhalation generally requires smaller doses, offers a rapid onset of drug action, and reduces adverse effects, compared with other routes of administration due to direct organ targeting ( When the lung is the target for the aerosol (either because the intent is to treat the lung surface or to get the drug into the blood through the capillaries via the alveoli) the inhaled aerosol must consist of particles in a certain size range. This size range, where drug particles can efficiently be adsorbed, is from about 1 to 5 One of the main challenges in the development of DPI formulations is the production of such micronised API particles on a large scale. Crystallization of API particles smaller than 5 microns is rarely feasible, thus comminution e.g. by milling is required. Milling may lead to solid state transformations or amorphization of the drug particles ( Even though the composition of a DPI formulation is rather simple, a homogeneous distribution of the active ingredient is required. Demixing or agglomeration is strongly unfavorable. Content uniformity is absolutely crucial. This is required to ensure that the appropriate amount of active ingredient is equal and correct for each dose. Health authorities are encouraging the pharmaceutical industry to adopt the use of Quality by Design (QbD) approaches where quality is designed into a product rather than testing for acceptability after production ( Chemical imaging, in particular confocal Raman microscopy, provides valuable information on pharmaceutical samples. Various aspects of a product can be characterized by chemical imaging, such as visual appearance [morphology, particle size (PS), particle size distribution (PSD), surface roughness], content uniformity (composition, distribution, homogeneity), chemical identity (structure, stability) and physical state (solid state, polymorphism, crystallinity). Polymorphism is the ability of a compound to crystallize as more than one distinct crystal species. This means that different polymorphic forms (or polymorphs) have different arrangements or conformations of the molecules in the crystal lattice and define a well-ordered state. In contrary, if the molecules are not organized within a long-range order, the solid state is called amorphous ( Polymorphic forms of a drug substance can have different physical and physicotechnical properties. Differences can occur e.g. in packing properties (density, refractive index, conductivity, hygroscopicity), thermodynamic properties (melting point, heat capacity, vapor pressure, solubility), kinetic properties (dissolution rate, stability), surface properties (surface free energy, interfacial tension, shape, morphology), mechanical properties (compactibility, tensile strength). These properties can have a direct effect on the ability to process and manufacture the drug substance and the drug product and on their respective qualities. Polymorphism also effects regulatory approval and intellectual property. Moreover, polymorphism has pharmacological implications due to altered effectiveness. A modified solid state can affect considerably the bioavailability of a dosage form. Thus, polymorphism of an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) can affect the quality, safety, efficacy and developability of a drug product and is therefore of fundamental importance in the pharmaceutical industry ( One well-established technique for identification and characterization of solid state properties of pharmaceuticals is Raman spectroscopy. It is a robust and reliable method yielding information of high quality with a low limit of detection. In addition it requires minimal sample preparation and allows for high throughput screening and automation ( Chemical imaging, in particular confocal Raman microscopy is well suited to the characterization of formulations for dry powder inhalers. In addition, a complementary analysis using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) can lead to further important insights into the properties of a formulation. SEM, a widely used standard method for the characterization of drug substance and drug product, can quickly resolve morphology, surface properties, particle size (PS) and particle size distribution (PSD) covering the nano- as well as the micro-range and also giving information on the tendency of particles to agglomerate. CRM can probe distribution of individual components, chemical identity and in addition is capable of probing solid state. CRM can be applied either to study the original bulk dispersion or the deposits on cascade impactors which simulate the different regions within the pulmonary tract. Characterization of component distribution and deposition of powder inhalation formulations by CRM have been successfully demonstrated in literature. Aerosol particulate deposits produced from pressurized metered-dose inhalers (pMDI) were analyzed by conventional In another study, pMDIs containing a combination formulation with two different drugs were investigated by CRM. CRM and statistical methodology were employed to determine whether there was any co-association between drug deposits from ACI plates. Using a statistical test, it was found that the co-deposition of the two drugs from the combination pMDI was significantly greater than from the separate inhalers ( Bulk powder of a dry powder inhalation formulation was characterized using SEM and CRM. SEM was applied to confirm a uniform content and particle size distribution. CRM was applied to probe tendency of agglomeration of API particles as well as detection of any unwanted polymorphic forms or solid state transformations due to micronisation of the API ( The focus of this study is to introduce CRM as a fast and convenient method to define the content uniformity of an active ingredient within two lipid based spray dried powder formulations at different concentrations. Additionally CRM can help to define solid state characteristics and is recognized as a QbD tool able to deliver product quality results in the early pharmaceutical development stage. Ethanol was of HPLC grade and purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Water was purified on a Milli-Q system obtained from Millipore (Zug, Switzerland). For the preparation of liposomes, unsaturated soybean phosphatidylcholine (Lipoid S 100) was purchased from Lipoid (Ludwigshafen, Germany), N-carbonyl-methoxy(polyethyleneglycol2000)-1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine sodium salt (mPEG-2000-DSPE) was purchased from Genzyme Pharmaceuticals (Liestal, Switzerland), cholesterol was purchased from Novartis (Stein, Switzerland). For the hydration buffer potassium phosphate monobasic and disodium hydrogenphosphate dihydrate were obtained from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). Additionally, a pharmaceutical compound, named “API” and three other excipients, named “auxiliary excipients”, obtained from Novartis Pharma, Basel, Switzerland, were used. A placebo formulation and two active formulations (A and B) were prepared. The concentrations of lipids and auxiliary excipients were the same for all preparations. The composition of the liposomal dispersions was similar to the preparations described previously ( The assay and degradation products of the API were determined using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Therefore a Thermo Separation Products (TSP) HPLC device (Allschwil, Switzerland) was used together with a UV 6000 LP detector from TSP. The average hydrodynamic diameter of the liposomes and the particle size distribution were determined by dynamic light scattering (Zetasizer 3000HS, Malvern Instruments Ltd., Malvern, UK). First, 5 The size and lamellarity of the liposomes were confirmed by cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (CryoTEM). For cryogenic TEM the sample preparation was performed in a cooling chamber which was permanently cooled with liquid nitrogen. A sample droplet was placed on a microperforated copper grid and blotted by a filter paper to receive a thin liquid film. Then the grid was plunged into liquid ethane for immediate freezing. A Leo 912 Omega TEM microscope (Carl Zeiss NTS GmbH, Oberkochen, Germany) was used for inspection. Assay and degradation products for each lipid compound (phosphatiylcholine, mPEG-2000-DSPE and cholesterol) were analyzed with a Thermo Separation Products (TSP) HPLC device (Allschwil, Switzerland) connected to a Corona After the formation of liposomes auxiliary excipients were added to the dispersions to enhance the flowability of the lipid particles during the spray drying process. The spray drying was performed with a lab-scale spray dryer (Mini Spray Dryer B-290, Büchi Labortechnik AG, Flawil, Switzerland) and resulted in a dry free flowing powder with 15.5 The size of the powder particles was defined using laser light diffraction (Helos combined with dry disperser, Sympatec GmbH, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany). The lipid based powder was dispersed on a glass slide, investigated by reflectance microscopy and further mapped using CRM. All CRM work was conducted using a confocal laser scanning Raman microscope (CRM200, Witec GmbH, Ulm, Germany) equipped with a Nd:YAG laser (532 To confirm the results obtained with CRM all lipid based powder preparations have been investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The samples were fixed on a metal stub and sputtered with gold, using a SCD500 high vacuum sputtering device (BAL-TEC, Balzers, Liechtenstein). For all SEM investigations a field emission SEM, Supra 40, (Carl Zeiss NTS GmbH, Oberkochen, Germany) was used. The liposomal dispersions could be characterized as slightly yellow colored colloidal solutions without any precipitates. The assay analyzed by HPLC for the API was defined to be 99.8% for formulation A and 95.4% for formulation B. Degradation products found for the API were within the limits of specification: the amount of each degradation product was ≤0.5% and the sum of degradation products was ≤2.0% according to the FDA's draft guidance for industry on liposome drug products ( A HPLC-CAD The size of the liposomes in the dispersion was determined by dynamic light scattering and found to be 55 The observation of varying liposome diameter due to altered API content can thus be related to a change in packing density due to the intercalation of API molecules into the lipid bilayer. The lipophilic API enlarges the liphophilic membrane domains thus distorting the packing regime. The higher the API concentration within the formulation, the larger the liposomes. The liposomal dimensions were confirmed by cryogenic TEM. CryoTEM images of formulations A and B are presented in Apart from the different size of the liposomes, no differences were discriminated by either method for formulation A or B in dispersed state. The spray drying process resulted in off-white, free flowing powders (Carr's index between 16 and 20, according to the European Pharmacopoeia definition) for all preparations, the lipid based inhalation powders were inspected by laser light diffraction. For the placebo formulation and formulation A, 90% of all particles were smaller than 8 Confocal Raman microscopy of the placebo formulation ( In formulation A, with an API concentration much lower than in formulation B, spherical particles up to 3.5 In contrast, the CRM images for formulation B with a higher concentration of API revealed a different situation. Even though the bulk formulation is uniform, the distribution is not homogeneous on a microscopic level ( To prove the presence of API coexistence together with lipids also in formulation B, Raman spectra from regions of interest (ROI) were extracted from It is obvious from Raman spectra extracted from spherical particles in formulation A and subtracted from lipid background (data not presented) are identical to the red amorphous spectrum in The findings obtained by CRM were confirmed by appropriate SEM images. For the placebo formulation we found powder particles with an average size of 1–2 Taking the SEM images for formulation A with the lower concentration of API into consideration no crystalline structures could be detected either ( In formulation B numerous active ingredient crystals larger than 10 Crystalline API particles from reference material ( Results obtained with CRM and SEM suggest that the lipidic matrix of the powder particles can be saturated up to a certain concentration with lipophilic API. Up to this critical saturation concentration, in this example somewhere between 1.55 and 7.3 The aim of this study was to show that CRM can be employed as a powerful easy-to-use tool in the emerging field of characterizing lipid based powders for inhalation. It was introduced as an analytical tool to qualitatively analyze the content uniformity of the formulated drug substance. In addition, the polymorphic form of the API within the excipient formulation can be revealed by CRM. SEM is a complementary and powerful tool to support conclusions drawn from results of CRM. Chemical imaging delivers fast and non-invasive results, required to ensure a consistent quality of pharmaceutical formulations. Both, SEM and CRM, were successfully employed to confirm a homogenous distribution of the active ingredient within the formulation, a crucial prerequisite for the delivery of a constant dosing during inhalation therapy. Being a convenient tool to deliver additional knowledge of the product quality during the early pharmaceutical development, this approach stands completely in line with the quality by design (QbD) guidelines recommended by the health authorities ( We would like to thank Fadi Eskandar for his help in spray drying of the liposomal dispersions and Dirk Märtin for his assistance doing the SEM. We additionally would like to thank Sabine Barnert for the performance of cryoTEM and Mark Bradley for proof-reading the manuscript.