In the present study, we investigate the kinetics and mechanism of the leaching of calcium aluminate slag in Na2CO3 solution for alumina recovery. The slag consists of leachable phases, e.g., 12CaO·7Al2O3, CaO·Al2O3, 5CaO·3Al2O3, and a non-leachable phase that contains Ca-Al-Si-Ti oxides. A series of leaching treatment is done at different temperatures, leaching times, stirring rates, Na2CO3 concentrations, and different setups which includes wet-grinding and shaking-digestion reactor. The highest alumina recovery up to 90.5% is obtained after the slag is leached by 10 wt% Na2CO3 solution, at low temperatures (30–45 °C) within 90 min. It is shown that the rate of alumina recovery is high at the beginning of leaching and is then slow down due to the calcite layer product nucleation and growth at the surface of slag. The wet-grinding leaching and vigorous stirring increase the possibility of the collision between both particles and the stirrer that breaks the calcite layer, yielding less residue agglomeration and better recovery compared to the slow and mild agitations. A surface observation of the slag using electron microscopy shows that the calcite starts to nucleate at the non-leachable phase as the best deposition site, which has the least mass transfer barrier in the system. The apparent activation energy of the leaching reaction is calculated as 10.8–19.9 kJ/mol, which indicates the reaction is diffusion rate-limited as revealed by the applied kinetic models.Alumina industry is deemed necessary to produce metallurgical grade alumina that has a lower environmental footprint, as the renown Bayer process has been producing a less-utilized residue (red mud) abundantly as nearly as 150 million tons per year ( Exciting results from one of the alternative processes for a sustainable alumina recovery have been reported in the literature ( Authors' studies on the leaching characteristics of synthetic CaO-Al Typical leaching reactions of the Pedersen process were stated in the literature ( NaAlO A leaching residue as the byproduct, which is also referred to as grey mud, and it predominantly consists of CaCO Based on authors' recent study on the morphology and cross-section analysis of the grey mud ( The kinetics equation of solid-fluid reactions in a leaching process can be treated similarly to the solid-gas reaction. The type of heterogeneous reaction to being considered is the reaction of a solid and a liquid that yields solid and liquid products. A spherical reacting particle as one of the most practical models in the kinetics equation, also used in this study to simplify the calculations. In the authors' recent work ( The experiments carried out in this study are elaborated in three different sections, i.e., slag preparation, description of the leaching setups, and techniques used to characterize the samples. The starting material used in this work is a slag that was produced from a smelting-reduction process of low-grade bauxite from our previous work ( Due to a practical reason, we need to use a relatively fine size of slag for the leaching experiment. Therefore, the slag was ground with Retsch™ ring mill for 30 s in 700 rpm. The size distribution of the slag was then measured by using Horiba™ LA-960 in a wet analysis, which was isopropanol based with a refractive index of 1.378. There are two different leaching setups used in the current work. First, a setup for the leaching kinetics observation. Moreover, the second setup is for the investigation of the leaching mechanism. In the kinetics experiment, 10 g of slag was leached with 200 mL of Na The ratio of solid to liquid is 5% in mass, and is assumed constant throughout the leaching treatment, as the water evaporation was considered small; less than 10%. The solid and liquid were stirred at 60, 150, and 300 rpm using a magnetic bar stirrer. The leaching time was up to 90 min. Moreover, during the leaching 3 ± 0.3 mL of the solution were taken as a sample in different periods. The samples were filtered by using a Büchner funnel and an ashless grade of quantitative filter paper, which then separated the liquor and the solid (grey mud). Also, for the kinetics experiment in a 3 wt%Na The chemical compositions of the liquors were analyzed using Inductively Coupled Plasma-High Resolution-Mass Spectroscopy (ICP-HR-MS) Agilent 8800™. On the other hand, the grey mud was qualitatively analyzed using Bruker D8 A25 DaVinci™ XRD machine with CuKα radiation, between 10 and 75° diffraction angle, 0.01° step size, and 2.5° for both primary and secondary soller slit. Moreover, we used a digestion reactor that can be shaken to elucidate the effect of various agitation mechanisms on the progress of leaching reactions. The digestion reactor is a Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)-base with a capacity of 45 mL and covered with stainless steel as the outer body. It was placed on a tilting plate that can move ±45° from the horizontal situation, which gives a shaking effect to the solution inside the reactor. The leaching setup using the borosilicate glass and digestion reactor can be seen in the supplementary material. In the current setup, the objective is to study the leaching mechanism and the growth of the solid product (calcium carbonate) that occurs on the slag's surface while it is being exposed to Na The morphology of the surface of the slag was investigated using Hitachi SU6600™ Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) after 30 s, 1, 5, 10, and 60 min of the leaching treatment. Furthermore, the elemental mapping and chemical composition of the investigated phases were analyzed by X-Ray element mapping and Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) in the SEM. Results of five different subjects are presented and discussed in the current section; characteristics of the slag, aluminum recovery extent, pH property and thermochemical reactions, leaching kinetics, and characteristics of the leached surface of the slag in different durations. Typical Back-Scattered Electron (BSE) images of the cross-section of the slag at 500× and 1500× magnifications are shown in Also, The size distribution of the ground slag is shown in We investigated the effects of different leaching conditions to the aluminum recovery extent, which are temperature, Na   The slags were leached on different stirring speeds at 45 °C in 10 wt%Na It was documented before in the authors' previous work ( The pH and temperature measurements on one of the leaching trials at 45 °C, at 150 rpm, in 10%Na Samples of the solid residue (grey mud) were taken after 5, 15, 30, 45, and 60 min of leaching at 45 °C, 300 rpm of stirring rate, in 3 wt%Na Another distinct pattern that can be seen from the XRD result is the C The SEM images of the surface of the slag after being exposed in 10 wt%Na The 30-s images in Within 1 min leaching, more calcites are nucleated at the surface of the non-leachable phase and in boundaries between resin and slag (see As shown in The calcites have covered all the available surfaces of the slag, as shown in In addition to the surface morphologies described above, a BSE image and EDS spectrum on the surface of slag after 1 min leaching are shown in Also, an X-ray mapping of the slag's surface shown in Based on the obtained results, in In the current study, it is convenient to denote the yield of aluminum recovery (%) as the fraction of conversion ( In ZLT model calculates the rate based on Jander-equation for spherical particles and considers that the concentration of penetrating species does not remain constant and is proportional to the fraction of the unreacted conversion (1 – It is worth noting that the slag particles in the present study do not have a spherical shape and are not uniform in size. The irregular shapes and distributed size made the models less accurate. Also, there is evidence from the results of pH property and thermochemical reactions (shown in As discussed earlier, different mechanisms are occurring throughout the leaching process. Different mechanisms attributed to different process rate constants. Based on the aluminum recovery extent and pH changes shown earlier in The chemical reaction rate-controlling step, which is denoted by The penetration and diffusion of reactants, which is denoted by The outward diffusion of products, which is denoted by According to Levenspiel ( Based on the pH measurement in The value of As seen in A series of leaching treatment of a calcium aluminate slag in Na Leaching reactions between leachable phases, e.g., 12CaO·7Al The calcite phase as a solid product of the leaching reaction starts to nucleate at the surface of the adjacent non-leachable phase in the slag. Calcite crystals can grow up to large sizes (over 10 μm), and bridging occurs between them (agglomeration tendency). The use of stirrer and PTFE-ball during the leaching (wet-grinding) increases the collision frequency between both slag and stirrer that breaks the calcite layer and the agglomerates that leads to higher alumina recovery. Different kinetic models were tried to find out the rate-limiting step during the leaching, and it was found that the diffusion of reactant and productions controls the process rate through the product calcite layer. The calculated apparent activation energy of the leaching reaction is 10.8–19.9 kJ/mol. The values are relatively low, which indicates the reaction is diffusion rate limited. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The NTNU has funded the research, and the work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at