The kinetics of spent nickel oxide catalyst (NiO/Al2O3) leaching in sulphuric acid solutions was investigated. The effects of sulphuric acid concentration, temperature, stirring speed, and particle size on the rate of nickel leaching were studied. In addition, the reaction residues at various levels of nickel extraction were examined by SEM, X-ray diffraction, electron microprobe, and chemical analysis. The results of the kinetic analysis of the leaching data for various experimental conditions indicated that the reaction is controlled by diffusion through the catalyst network with the activation energy of 16.6±0.9 kJ/mol. A linear relationship between the rate constant and the inverse square of the initial particle diameter is also characteristic for a diffusion-controlled process.Recently, relatively great attention has been paid to the research connected with the recovery of nickel from secondary resources. Recycling of spent catalysts became an unavoidable task not only for lowering the catalyst cost but also for reducing the catalyst waste to prevent the environmental pollution. Nickel is widely used as a catalyst in several technological processes: in hydrogenation, hydrodesulphurisation, hydrorefining including fat hardening process (Ni, Mo/Al Typically, nickel spent catalysts contain metallic nickel and nickel oxide, although nickel sulphides may occasionally occur as well as admixtures of coke, hydrocarbons or fat.   In this paper the effects of sulphuric acid concentration, temperature, stirring speed, and particle size on the leaching rate of nickel from a spent catalyst have been examined. Spent nickel oxide catalyst used in this study was obtained from Fertilizers Research Institute in Pulawy, Poland. The spent catalyst was in the form of granules with a diameter of 3.0–8.0 mm. The chemical analysis of the spent catalyst is shown in All the experiments were performed with grains of the size 4.0–5.0 mm, except those relating to the effect of particles size on the reaction kinetics. In each experiment a flask containing 200 ml of sulphuric acid solution was submerged in a tank, the temperature of which was kept constant to within 0.1 °C. When the required temperature was reached, a 0.25 g of the spent catalyst was added and the stirring was started. A mechanical glass agitator of The effect of stirring speed on the nickel extraction from a spent catalyst was investigated in a solution of 2.0M H The results presented in The influence of H The leaching was carried out in the temperature range 30–70 °C with 2.0 M sulphuric acid solution at constant stirring speed of 600 min The experimental data have been analysed in terms of several models connecting the fraction reacted ( The plot of the data from Residues from several leaching experiments at various levels of nickel extraction were examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), microprobe and chemical analysis. The most interesting microscopic evidence found in this study is provided in the cross-section shown in The experiments were carried out with the three particle sizes (4.0–5.0, 5.0–6.3, 6.3–8.0 mm) in 2.0 M H From the results of these studies the following conclusions can be drawn: The leaching rate of nickel from a spent catalyst in sulphuric acid is independent of the stirring speed, which indicates that the reaction is not controlled by the diffusion in the liquid phase. The change in the concentration of sulphuric acid within the range 1.0–5.0 M has no significant effect on the nickel leaching. The leaching rate at temperatures between 30–70 °C is controlled by the diffusion through the catalyst network with an activation energy of 16.6 A linear relationship between the rate constant and the inverse square of the initial particle diameter was established. The authors wish to thank the Polish Committee for Scientific Research for financial support (grant No 4T09B 13725).