Displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures are difficult to treat. We determined the functional results and complications of using allografts or equine xenografts in treating these fractures. We reviewed patients seen at our center from May 2011 to December 2014 with Sanders type III or IV unilateral calcaneal fractures treated with locking plates and an additional bone allograft or equine xenograft. A minimum of 1 year after surgery, a history of infection and functional outcomes were assessed using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society clinical rating system. Changes in the Gissane angle (GA) and Böhler angle were assessed from radiographs. Of the 91 eligible patients, 15 were lost to follow-up, leaving a sample of 76 patients (42 males): 45 received allografts (19 for type III and 26 for type IV fractures) and 31 received xenografts (20 for type III and 11 for type IV fractures). The mean age was about 40 years in both groups. After ≥1 year of follow-up, the proportion of patients in the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society scoring categories did not differ significantly between the 2 groups (mean ankle score, 86.5 in the allograft group and 85.1 in the xenograft group), and the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society functional outcomes were good or excellent in 69% and 68%, respectively (p = .986). The groups did not differ in the incidence of superficial or deep infection (p = 1.000). The Böhler angles were significantly decreased in the xenograft group. Xenografts might be preferred for repairing intra-articular calcaneal fractures because they can perform as well as allografts, avoid donor site morbidities, and are more available and less expensive than allografts.Calcaneal fractures are rare, but severe, fractures that can lead to arthrosis and severe foot deformities An autograft has many advantages because the source is the patient, and it incorporates better than allografts or xenografts. Its osteoinductive and osteogenic properties assist in healing. The main disadvantages are the extra surgical procedures and donor site comorbidities and complications Demineralized allografts are commonly used to fill cavities and spaces. Allografts enhance bone healing in areas where bone healing is difficult and provide osteoinductive properties and mechanical support when needed The main advantages of xenografts are that they are less expensive and easier to obtain We were interested in determining whether equine xenografts would produce clinical and radiologic outcomes similar to those of allografts in treating calcaneal fractures. We hypothesized that equine xenografts would provide functional results and complication rates similar to those of allografts in the first year after surgery. We report the results of our retrospective study in which we compared the clinical and radiographic outcomes of allografts with those of 1 type of equine xenografts. The investigators' institutional review board approved the study. All patients provided written informed constant to participate. A retrospective search of the medical records of all patients presenting to the Ministry of Health's training and research hospital from May 2011 to December 2014 with Sanders type III or IV unilateral calcaneal fractures treated with locking plates and additional bone grafting was done by 2 of us (M.M.S., M.U.). The inclusion criteria for entry into the study consisted of age >18 years, fractures involving the posterior facet classified as Sanders type III or IV, closed fractures, and ≥1 years of follow-up data available. The exclusion criteria consisted of coexistent ipsilateral foot injury, ipsilateral or contralateral lower extremity injury, and/or previous calcaneal disease (infection or tumor) or surgery. Intra-articular fractures with joint displacement of >1 mm, depression and displacement of fracture fragments, shortening and broadening of the calcaneus (>10° valgus or >5° varus), and a Böhler angle (BA) of <15° were the main indications for open reduction and internal fixation. The decision to fill the underlying cavity with a graft was made after lifting the depressed fragments and joint restoration. Cancellous bone chip allografts (Aloha Hans Biomed The physicians did not choose which type of graft to use. Instead, they used the type of graft the Ministry of Health was providing to our institute at the time the surgery was performed. Surgery was performed by 1 of 4 experienced surgeons (M.M.S., R.A., M.U., T.E.) using an extended lateral approach in all patients at an average of 6.5 (range 2 to 14) days after trauma. In all cases, an interlocking calcaneal plate and additional allografts or equine xenografts were used. The cavity was filled with impacted crushed grafts using a curette. All wounds were closed in layers, with a drain placed under the flap. The drain was removed on postoperative days 2 and 3, if output had ceased. Antibiotic prophylaxis and thromboprophylaxis were administered to all the patients. The stitches were removed on postoperative day 14 if the wound had healed, some stitches left in place for as long as 4 weeks until the incision had completely sealed. Radiographic examinations were performed postoperatively after drain had been removed and in the first, third, and fourth months after surgery. Range-of-motion exercises were begun at the end of the seventh postoperative day. Full weightbearing was delayed for 3 to 5 months to prevent loss of reduction, depending on the degree of comminution. The complications identified during the postoperative follow-up period were recorded and classified as major (deep osseous infection, compartment syndrome, wound problems severe enough to require plate removal or plastic surgery) or minor (superficial wound healing problems requiring no plastic surgery). Wound problems occurred within the first month after surgery. The final follow-up examinations were performed by 2 of us (M.M.S., R.A.) ≥1 year after surgery. The clinical results were graded using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society clinical rating system The data were analyzed using the SPSS statistical software program, version 20 (IBM, Armonk, NY). The variables were assessed for normality using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov/Shapiro-Wilk test. Normally distributed data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation and were analyzed using Student’s A total of 91 patients were found who met all the inclusion criteria. Of the 91 patients, 15 were lost to follow-up, leaving a sample of 76 patients ( In 60 of the 76 patients (78.9%), the wounds healed primarily. Superficial defects and infections (wound edge necrosis and injuries to patients treated in outpatient clinics) occurred in 11 patients (14.5%). Serious wound healing complications requiring hospitalization developed in 3 patients (3.9%), and 2 patients (2.6%) required hardware removal and plastic surgery ( The preoperative measurements of the GA and BA did not differ significantly between the 2 groups ( In our study, the functional and efficacy outcomes were similar between the 2 groups 1 year after surgery. The high healing potential and cancellous bone structure of the calcaneus could be main factors in the bone healing process. The median difference between the preoperative and last follow-up measurements was not significant for the GA values in the xenograft group or the allograft group. However, the median difference between the preoperative and last follow-up measurements was significant for the BA values in the xenograft group, although not in the allograft group. We attributed this difference to the low osteogenic and osteoconductive properties of xenografts The incidence of wound complications was similar in both groups. Diabetes mellitus, smoking, open fractures, drug addiction, and neuropathy have been shown to increase risk of wound complications The treatment choice for displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures classified as Sanders type II or greater is stable fixation. Surgery aims to restore the height, length, and anatomy of the subtalar joint surfaces. The reduction of BA and joint comminution are also critical factors for assessment Recent comparative studies have reported that minimally invasive fixation methods are associated with a substantial collapse of the posterior facet and a decrease in BA The incorporation of bone grafts and filling the cavity created by lifting the depressed fragments are essential to achieving structural rigidity in calcaneal fracture repair. Structural rigidity can stabilize the joint for early range-of-motion exercise and weightbearing, which are key to successful rehabilitation. However, the efficacy of bone grafting has been debated. No difference was found in the quality of reduction or immediate or long-term improvement in BA obtained between those patients treated operatively with bone graft supplementation and those treated without bone grafting Bone grafts have been used in foot surgery for many years In well-vascularized bone, such as the calcaneus, autografts and allografts have similar complication rates A xenograft comes from a nonhuman species; thus, antigenicity is greater. The main advantages of these grafts are their price and availability. Bovine xenografts are widely used in orthopedic surgery We found no study testing equine xenografts in orthopedic surgery. In an animal model comparing equine xenografts with bovine xenografts, bovine-derived cancellous grafts showed no signs of biodegradation, and new bone ingrowth was consistently lower in the bovine group than in the equine group The limitations of our study included the potential for referral, diagnostic, and treatment biases, the retrospective nature of the data collection, and the relatively small sample size. The allograft group included many more patients with Sanders type IV fractures. Thus, the similar final American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society scores between the 2 groups might indicate that the results were biased toward the xenograft group. In conclusion, our data support that the allografts and equine xenografts used to repair calcaneal fractures have similar functional, radiologic, and, postoperative outcomes. If validated in other studies, equine xenografts could be a less-expensive, but equally valuable, alternative to autografts and allografts in repairing calcaneal fractures.