Antofagasta, Chile, has one of the most important deposits of saltpetre in the world, which is called caliche. These deposits are mainly composed of nitrate, halite, sodium anorthite, and quartz. Minor species include anhydrite, glauberite, loeweite, calcite, polyhalite, probertite, and gypsum. Recently, several operations began to use heap leaching for the extraction of saltpetre. Modelling the heap leaching of caliche is not straightforward because of the many minerals and their different dissolution rates. Moreover, caliche may have a large fraction of soluble minerals, approximately 40%, which causes the heap to slump. In this work, we present two models. The first, which is a phenomenological model, is an extension of the model published by Valencia et al. (2008). The system is modelled as a column comprised of N small columns, and in each of these small columns, the height of the solids varies with time when the soluble minerals are dissolved. The liquid in each small column has the same composition (well-stirred reactor). The second model, which is an analytical model, is an extension of that published by Mellado et al. (2009) for low-grade minerals, such as copper and gold, which considers that the leaching phenomenon occurs on different scales of size and time. However, in this work, the time scale at the particle level is based on the Bruner and Tolloczko dissolution model. The objective of this work is to test the suitability of the analytical model as a tool for use in optimisation, for which the model needs to be solved many times. The phenomenological model was used to generate simulated experimental data. The results show that the analytical model may be a useful tool in optimisation.cross-sectional area of the modelled column (m solubility of soluble species (kg/m concentration in small column particle diameter (m heap height (m) initial height of the small columns (m) height of column mass transfer coefficient (m/h) dimensionless kinetics constant (–) dimensionless adjusted parameters in Eq. number of small columns (–) number of particles in each small column (–) Peclet number (–) water flux through the column (m initial particle radius (m) recovery at time recovery at generalised dimensionless time recovery at infinite generalised dimensionless time (–) particle radius in small column time (h) superficial bulk flow velocity (m/h) water volume in small column fraction of soluble species (–) porosity of the column and heap (–) air volume fraction (–) water volume fraction (–) dimensionless parameter (–) generalised dimensionless time (–) dimensionless time delay (–) particle density (kg/m dimensionless column-scale time (–) dimensionless particle-scale time (–) adjustable constants in Eq. Caliche minerals, which are found in Northern Chile, are primarily composed of nitrate (NaNO Heap leaching is used widely for the leaching of metals such as copper ( The leaching of caliche differs from the leaching of copper, zinc, gold, and other metals. Regarding caliche, there are several soluble species but few in metal minerals. Copper, zinc, and gold minerals are leached by chemical reactions, however, caliche is dissolved. The variation of heap height over time is significant for caliche but not for metal ores. There are several works related to the modelling of heap leaching, including phenomenological models ( The objective of this work is to test the suitability of the analytical model as a tool for use in optimisation, where the model needs to be solved a very large number of times (hundreds of thousands). The phenomenological model is used to generate simulated experimental data. The analytical model is fitted using a subset of this data and is then used to predict the other data points. In this section, we present two models. The first, which is a phenomenological model, is an extension of the model published by Modelling the heap leaching of caliche minerals is not trivial due to factors such as (a) the caliche composition, which is a mixture of many minerals that may have different dissolution rates and (b) the large fraction of soluble minerals, which reaches values of approximately 40%; therefore, the heap height will decrease appreciably when the soluble minerals are dissolved. The main soluble anionic chemical species in the caliche minerals are nitrate, chloride, sulphate, iodate, perchlorate, and tetraborate. The cationic species are sodium, potassium, magnesium, and calcium. Due to the large fraction of soluble minerals, the heap collapses during the leaching process; therefore, its height decreases with time. A heap of caliche minerals is formed by rocks of different sizes, from a few millimetres to hundreds of millimetres. It is expected that, initially, the minerals at or near the particle surface were solubilised. When a significant fraction of minerals has been dissolved, it is expected that the inert materials that remain on the particle surface were removed (e.g., by the collapse of the particle surface). However, the removal of the inert material is not important; due to the high content of soluble minerals in the caliche minerals, it is expected that the inert material that remains on the particle surface will have a small resistance to mass transport. Another issue is the dissolution rate of the different soluble minerals in the particle. Here, it is assumed that the minerals beneath the particle surface will be dissolved only when these minerals are directly exposed to the action of the leaching solution at the particle surface. Therefore, mineral dissolution will be controlled by those soluble minerals that are found in large concentrations. Minerals that are present in small amounts are dissolved following the dissolution of the major minerals. Minerals that have a low dissolution rate may be separated from the particle simultaneously with the inert materials and be dissolved later. At present, this is not considered in the models. To model the leaching of caliche minerals in heaps and to keep the models sufficiently simple, several assumptions are needed. These assumptions are listed below: The particles are spherical and are initially of the same size. They are non-porous. The soluble minerals and the inert material are homogeneously distributed in the particle. Only the soluble minerals that are on the particle surface are dissolved. The inert materials that remain at the particle surface after the removal of the soluble minerals are separated from the particle surface when the surface collapses. A one-dimensional system is used for the heap, i.e., it is assumed that the horizontal dimensions of the heap are large. Therefore, a column of caliche minerals in the centre of the heap is modelled. Other situations that may be modelled are straightforward; one example is the leaching of caliche formed by particles of different sizes that dissolve simultaneously. To take into account the variation of the heap height with time in a simple way, the system is modelled as a column comprised of When a column is represented by a series of small well-stirred reactors, the dispersive term is omitted in the equations describing the processes occurring in the column or bed. The dispersion is taken into account by the number of reactors used to model the heap. A system formed by a large number of small well-stirred reactors is equivalent to having a high Peclet number, i.e., a small dispersion. The opposite is true for a small number of well-stirred reactors (large dispersion). The relationship between the number of well-stirred reactors and the Peclet number is ( This relationship is valid only for high Peclet numbers. For low Peclet numbers, the relationship is approximated, e.g., for 5 reactors ( Regarding the dissolution of the soluble minerals, it is assumed that the particles initially have the same radius, Here, the equations are written assuming that only one mineral is dissolving from the caliche minerals or that all the soluble minerals are dissolving at the same rate. The material balance in the well-stirred reactor The small columns with height Introducing the expression for the number of particles and the water content into Eq. A relationship between the height of the small column and the radius of the particles in the column is required. This may be determined by performing a mass balance and assuming that the porosity is constant. In this case, the column height is directly proportional to the particle volume ( Taking the derivative of Eq. In this section, an analytical model based on the first-order kinetic equation is developed by following the approach used by Considering that the leaching phenomenon occurs on different scales of size and time and in relation to different phenomena that participate in the leaching process, expressions similar to Eq. This simple observation leads to one kinetic constant for our model in Eq. It is assumed that with the inclusion of both scales in the heap processing, i.e., both at the particle and the heap levels, the total recovery will be the sum of the recoveries on both scales, or Because the height and particle radius vary with time in Eq. To show the characteristics and capabilities of the models, simulations were carried out for different parameter values. The values used in these simulations are shown in To show the properties of the model, simulations using the parameter values for the central case ( The relative recovery is shown in The impact of the main parameters on the recovery of saltpetre from caliche minerals was evaluated in a sensitivity study. The parameters, its central values and the intervals used are shown in The mass transfer coefficient was varied from 0.00003 to 0.0003 These simulations showed that solubility has a large impact on the leaching process ( As indicated in Section The results of the analytical model were compared with the results obtained with the phenomenological model by means of the recovery of the soluble species. The analytical model’s main application is in process optimisation because the calculations may be performed quickly. Therefore, the computational effort is small, even for problems requiring a large number of alternatives to be tested. The properties of the analytical model were tested for different situations. In particular, the predictive capability of the model was tested when a small amount of information is used for fitting the model. The testing procedure for the analytical model was as follows: the phenomenological model is used to generate a set of data, which is considered to be simulated experimental data from an industrial leaching process. From these data (for example, the recovery of the soluble species), six times were chosen: 42, 83, 125, 146, 167, and 188 For the analytical model, the parameters to be adjusted are as follows: the constants First, the fitting capability of the analytical model was tested. The simulated data was obtained using the phenomenological model for various values for the heap height, particle diameter, and irrigation rate, as shown in The capability of interpolation (or extrapolation) using the analytical model is tested by fitting the model to a subset of data points and then predicting the other data points. For interpolation, the model is fitted using the data points obtained with the endpoints of the interval for each parameter, and the central value of the parameter is predicted. For extrapolation, the data for the central value and one endpoint value are used for fitting, and the other endpoint value ( Several cases are considered in which the error is determined only for the fitted data points (Error 1), for all 42 points including the fitted points (Error 2), and for the interpolated or extrapolated points (Error 3). These errors are shown in  Using the values for the central case, the two time constants are calculated:  From the values of The errors obtained in the fitting process are small. This indicates that Eq. Two models are presented. One is a phenomenological model, which considers the decrease of the heap height when the soluble salts are dissolved. Another is an analytical model, which uses an exponential expression for calculating the recovery. This model is useful in an optimisation and sensitivity analysis in which an explicit equation is needed and/or the model is solved a large number of times. As indicated above, the main characteristic of the model is that a small number of data points may be used to predict other parameter values. Some differences are found between the phenomenological and analytical models, but they are not significant. However, the trends are clearly represented. The values used in the simulations are arbitrary; however, this is not a significant matter because the objective of the paper is to show the characteristics and capabilities of both models. An acceptable agreement is found between both models; however, as expected, some differences are also found between them, mainly due to the particular characteristics of the models. The main characteristics and advantages of the analytical model are its simplicity and the small computational effort required. However, some difficulties are encountered in the simulations with this model when the leaching process is controlled by one or two parameters, e.g., when the dissolution reactions are determined by the salt solubility. In contrast, the phenomenological model can more accurately capture the interactions between the different parameters; however, the computational time is longer. Therefore, the applicability of these models is different. The analytical model is useful in the optimisation of complex systems, e.g., when several heaps are simultaneously leached and in other post-modelling activities. This type of calculation requires a large number of simulations; therefore, long computing times would be required for using phenomenological models. In contrast, the phenomenological models are useful in determining the influence of different parameters on the leaching process. They are also useful in the study of new processes because parameter fitting is generally not required. The authors wish to thank