An innovative approach of clean utilization of waste oil is proposed to reduce the risk of environmental pollution and achieve cleaner production of fluorite. The waste oil in kitchen waste was first separated from solid waste and waste water. Further, alkaline hydrolysis was succeeded in preparing soap collectors by saponification reaction. Further, the fluorite flotation was conducted to verify the applicability of the renewable collectors. The results of FT-IR show that the characteristic peaks of the renewable collector appear on the particle surface after the adsorption treatment, which indicates that the collector can be effectively adsorbed. Effect of renewable collector on the charge properties of fluorite surface was analyzed and results show that the electronegativity of particle surface is enhanced after adsorption, which indicates that chemisorption can occur under alkaline conditions. The flotation test results show that the renewable collector has excellent separation effect on fluorite. The flotation kinetic analysis indicates that the four kinetic models have ideal applicability for describing the flotation behavior of renewable collectors for fluorite. The research results reveal the optimistic prospect of harmful waste oil transformation into collectors, and have potential industrial application prospects.Harmless disposal of urban waste is a challenging task ( Biomass is considered to be the only renewable source of organic carbon with the current technologies ( Waste oils, as important valuable components in kitchen waste, are challenging to utilize ( In this study, the flotation separation process of fluorite is concerned. A renewable soap collector from waste oil was prepared by alkaline hydrolysis, and was subsequently applied to the flotation test of fluorite. The adsorption characteristics of the collector and the dynamic characteristics of the flotation process were analyzed. The application of waste oil in mineral flotation process has been further expanded. Fluorite samples used for flotation tests were obtained in Inner Mongolia, China. Mineral composition was analyzed by X-ray diffraction, and the results are shown in As shown in The waste oil was taken from the kitchen waste of the canteen of Shandong University of Science and Technology. Kitchen waste was filtered to filter out solid impurities, and then natural settlement was used to realize the layering of waste oil and waste water. Separation funnel was used for the final separate of crude oil and waste water. 200 g crude oil was used in synthetic experiments. The saponification reaction between crude oil and sodium hydroxide solution with a concentration of 20% was carried out under magnetic stirring and heating conditions of 65 °C. When the stratification disappeared, saponification reaction was completed. Hereafter, 20 g sodium chloride was added to the solution to precipitate sodium fatty acid. The saponification products were separated and heated to remove the moisture in the product. The preparation process is shown in Infrared spectrum analysis (FT-IR, Nicolet 380, Thermo) was used to analyze the adsorption process of soap collectors on the surface of particles. Three samples, fluorite sample, soap collectors, and fluorite sample with collector adsorption, were used for detection by standard procedure. Potassium bromide tabletting was used to prepare samples for detection. The 2 mg sample was mixed with 200 mg potassium bromide (spectrum pure) and was rubbed 3min in agate mortar. Tabletting was completed at the pressure of 8 MPa and maintains 1min. Fluorite particles present a double layer structure in the solution. When the collector is adsorbed on the particle surface, it will lead to the change of the charge property of the particle surface, which is reflected in the change of Zeta potential. The determination of Zeta potential can indicate the adsorption type of anionic collector on mineral surface. Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (MalvernInstruments, UK) was used for the detection with temperature of 30 °C. 0.02 g pure fluorite samples to be tested of mineral samples into 40 mL deionized water. Then renewable collector was added and the pH was adjusted. The suspension was continuously agitated by constant temperature oscillation water bath box for 1 h at 30 °C. Then, the supernatant liquid was used for the detection. Each test was repeated three times, and the average was used as the final result. Based on the analysis of the adsorption characteristics, flotation tests were carried out to verify the flotation effect of soap collectors prepared from waste oil on fluorite. The flotation machine was a single cell flotation machine (XFD The infrared spectra of fluorite samples, collectors and fluorite with adsorbed collectors are shown in As shown in The influence of collector dosage on concentrate grade and recovery rate is shown in  Thus, excellent separation processing can be obtained with the renewable reagent as collector prepared by waste oil. The Zeta potential of fluorite samples and fluorite samples with collector adsorption at different pH values was determined, and results is shown in H This phenomenon indicates that the collector decreases the Zeta potential of the sample, which indicates that the collector has sorption on the mineral surface. Under the condition of less than zero electric point, anisotropic electrical adsorption, i. e. physical adsorption, occurs. Under the condition of greater than zero point, the collector still enhances the electronegativity of the sample surface, which indicates that the collector has chemisorption on the surface of the sample. The flotation test results under different pH conditions with sodium carbonate as adjusting reagent are shown in  The kinetic characteristics of flotation process are analyzed, the experiment temperature is 30 °C and the flotation time is 7 min. The results are shown in It can be seen that with the flotation process going on, that is, with the increase of the flotation time, the value of yield, grade and recovery rate shows a decreasing trend, which shows that the particles with better floatability are easy to float out in the preceding period of flotation. Meanwhile, cumulative yield and cumulative recovery rate showed a gradual increase trend and eventually stabilized, and accumulated grade showed a slow downward trend. Four types of flotation kinetic models adopted in this paper are shown in Since renewable collector is suitable for flotation of fluorite, the sample has an ideal floatability, resulting in the ultimate recovery rate value slightly larger than 100. In addition, from model 1 to model 4, the ultimate recovery rate value continues to increase because the convergence rate of the second-order model was slower than that of the first-order model. It can be seen in  One stage flotation usually cannot meet the requirement of product purity, and more flotation processes need to be carried out ( Compared with Waste oil has potential risk of environmental pollution and clean utilization of waste oil is a worldwide challenge. Continuous research provides a wide range of solutions to this problem. In the field of mineral flotation, efforts to tackle this challenge are also being carried out. In this paper, a new technical approach, that is, the use of alkaline hydrolysis to prepare soap collectors for fluorite flotation is proposed to realize clean production of fluorite. Firstly, the kitchen waste was collected, and the crude oil was prepared. The renewable collectors were prepared by alkaline hydrolysis under heating conditions. Subsequently, the test of renewable collector for fluorite flotation was carried out. Adsorption properties of the collector on the fluorite surface were analyzed by infrared spectroscopy. Results show that the characteristic peak of the collector was found after adsorption, which indicate that the collector can effectively adsorb on the particle surface. Secondly, the analysis of the charge properties of the particles shows that the collector can effectively improve the charge property of the particle surface, and the adsorption type is explained. Third, flotation tests were carried out to illustrate the effect of collector dosage and pH on flotation behavior. The results show that the renewable collector has excellent effect on the flotation of fluorite, the grade and recovery of the concentrate achieve 97.53% and 85.73%, and the suitable separation pH condition is 8.0–9.0. Fourth, the dynamic characteristics of flotation process are illustrated by nonlinear fitting method. The results show that the four traditional kinetic models used in this paper can effectively describe the flotation process of fluorite particles with renewable collector. The potential utilization value of waste oil is further excavated. Based on the results, large-scale industrial use can be expected, and millions of tons of waste oil can be effectively utilized. The research conclusion has important economic and environmental benefits. This work was supported by the