Nickel is 24th in order of abundance of elements in the earth’s crust. The annual world mine production of nickel is approximately 1.1 The extractable sulfide minerals are pentlandite ((Ni,Fe) The Inco process, the Outokumpu Oy process, and the Sheritt Gordon process are primary methods for nickel production from sulfide ores. Nickel briquettes and nickel powder by sulfuric acid leaching, ferronickel pigs by direct reduction, nickel rondelles from matte and nickel oxide sinter by reductive roast and ammoniacal leaching are primary processing schemes for oxide ores. Ocean-based nickel extraction from manganese nodules is also technically viable, using proven extraction methods, with as much as 98% recovery of nickel. Due to the intimate association of nickel oxide with the gangue, mineral processing is not useful for laterites. Sulfide ores are concentrated, however, by mineral processing techniques. Typical steps include crushing in jaw or gyratory crushers, wet-grinding in rod or ball mills, and classification in a cyclone or a mechanical classifier. These steps are followed by magnetic separation or flotation of the fines to separate the valuable minerals from the gangue. The final dewatering is accomplished in thickeners or cyclones by continuous vacuum filtration. The mineral processing flowsheet and variations on processes have been comprehensibly described ( Roasting, smelting, and converting are pyrometallurgical process steps that are based on the relative affinities of metals for sulfur and oxygen. A typical process flowsheet is shown in Almost all the nickel minerals produced from the roaster are sulfides. The reaction is exothermic so it can proceed with almost no additional fuel needs as virtually autogenous roasting. The aim of smelting is to segregate the desired components in a high-grade converter matte and the undesired components in a slag. Some sulfur is retained in the smelter matte product for the same reason that coke and silica sand are used during smelting—the matte liquidus temperature is lower in the presence of sulfur, carbon, and silicon. Silicate flux is added to override the miscibility of iron oxide and nickel sulfide. A top layer of slag is formed over the matte. Addition of lime increases the activity coefficient of NiO, i.e., decreases the nickel solubility. A small amount of lime and alumina lowers the slag melting temperature to ∼1400°C in a high magnesia slag. In the presence of sulfur, nickel-containing mattes can be produced at around 1300°C. Just enough oxygen is added to oxidize iron while nickel and copper remain as sulfides. The amount of SO In flash smelting, the roasting and smelting steps are combined into one step. The concentrate and the sand flux are suspended in the oxidizing medium along with preheated air. The ‘‘flash’’ combustion of iron and sulfur with the oxygen provides operating temperature. The iron sulfide undergoes double decomposition with copper and nickel oxides that have been formed, e.g., Cu The electric furnace is a reduction smelter that operates on the submerged-arc principle and is also good for fine charges. Consumable carbon electrodes in the current circuit are in contact with the slag layer, which resists the current causing the necessary heat. Calcine is fed from the top producing a protective cold top over the slag. As the calcine absorbs heat from the slag it settles into the slag or into the molten sulfide. Iron and sulfur are removed via oxidization leaving nickel sulfide in a Pierce–Smith converter: These converters are horizontal cylinders that are side-tilting to enable separate slag removal and blower positioning. Some degree of magnetite formation is beneficial as a protective coating for the converter. The percent oxygen blown controls the efficiency of conversion as well as the heat generated. Silica flux is also sent in to aid slag formation. Matte preparation in converters is necessary if the ore contains high sulfur ( The low grade of the oxide ores, high water content, and the high liquidus temperatures of slag and metal phases present metallurgical and equipment challenges for the design of cost-effective processes. Crushing and screening only achieve ore preparation. Drying in a rotary dryer at around 250°C eliminates the physically bound moisture. Calcination, chemically bound moisture removal, and reduction take place in a countercurrent rotary kiln. At firing end, temperatures are around 800–900°C and most of the nickel oxide but very little of the iron oxides have been reduced to metal. Smelting for both ferronickel and matte takes place in an electric furnace. MgO-rich slags, ferronickel and low-sulfur mattes require high operating temperatures where refractory corrosion is extremely severe. In ferronickel smelting, the liquidus temperature is mainly a function of carbon and silicon content. Typical liquidus temperatures are approximately 1400°C for low-carbon ferronickel. Ferronickel refining removes impurities such as sulfur, carbon, silicon, and phosphorus via electric arc furnace, oxygen blown converters, or ladle furnaces. In smelting, 450kWh of electricity are required per ton of calcine. The carbonyl process, ammoniacal and acid pressure leaching, chloride leaching, direct electrolysis of matte, electrowinning from chloride solution, and the pressure reduction of metal from solution by hydrogen have all been developed for nickel and cobalt production. Cobalt–nickel ore and concentrates can be leached with ammonia or acid ( For low platinum group metal (PGM)-bearing ores, addition of ammonia–ammonium sulfates causes nickel, copper, and cobalt to dissolve from their sulfide concentrates as ammines while iron remains insoluble. Ammonia is added to the feed solution to give a free NH The largest driving force for hydrogen reduction of nickel is near an NH On acidification, nickel ammonium sulfate is precipitated, while cobalt remains in solution. The slurry is then filtered to recover the nickel. The filtrate, containing cobalt in the cobaltic state, is converted back to the cobaltous state by cobalt powder. Metallic cobalt is precipitated by hydrogen at 21 For high copper and low sulfur-bearing nickel mattes, a hydro/vapometallurgical process removes copper by precipitation with H The nickel–copper matte is leached in two stages in copper-spent electrolyte at 135°C under 1 In the chloride leach process, the concentration of NiCl Feed to the solvent extraction contains about 120g Nil Two hydrometallurgical processes for the recovery of nickel from oxide ores have been commercialized: the reduction roast–ammonium carbonate leach process and the sulfuric acid pressure leach process for the treatment of low magnesia content laterite ores. In general, smelting is applied to ores with greater than 1.7% nickel, while hydrometallurgy is used when nickel constitutes less than 1.5%. Complete separation of NiO from FeO is not possible by selective pyroreduction. Therefore, hydrometallurgical processes are used. The laterite ore is dried and reduction roasted in multihearth roasters in an atmosphere containing hydrogen and carbon monoxide in the absence of air. Nickel and cobalt are selectively reduced to the metallic form and thus rendered amenable to ammoniacal leaching, while iron remains as insoluble oxides and silicates. The reduced ore is cooled and quenched in ammoniacal ammonium carbonate solution and leached in trains of aerated tanks. The pregnant liquor is separated form the residue in a seven-stage CCD thickener circuit using ammoniacal solution as the washing medium. Ammonia is recovered from the washed residue by steam stripping, and the solids are discarded to the tailings system. The pregnant liquor, which contains both nickel and cobalt, is reacted with ammonium hydrogen sulfide in a pipeline reactor to precipitate virtually all the cobalt, and about 10% of the nickel, as a mixed sulfide product. This material is thickened and spray-dried for further cobalt and nickel recovery. The acid pressure leach process works without a prior reduction roast and is applicable to low MgO ores. Screened and thickened ore slurry is pressure-leached at 250°C with concentrated sulfuric acid in autoclaves for one to two hours. Nickel and cobalt are precipitated by reacting the pregnant solution with hydrogen sulfide in horizontal autoclaves at 120°C under 1050kPa pressure. Two processes exist for solvent extraction of cobalt and nickel directly from sulfate leach liquors containing high levels of impurities. Cyanex 272 is used for the extraction of cobalt because of its high selectivity of cobalt over nickel and Versatic 10 is used to extract nickel from raffinate-leach liquor in the pH range of 6–7.5 ( Three distinct processes produce electrolytic nickel: direct electrolysis of nickel matte; electrowinning from nickel sulfate solution; and electrowinning from nickel chloride solution. Crude nickel anodes are made by reducing nickel oxide with coke at temperatures up to about 1550°C and casting into molds. Impure anodes are immersed in the electrolyte. Thin sheets of refined nickel are used as cathodes. To prevent deposition of anolyte impurities, the anolyte is routed through a chemical purification process before the solution reaches the cathode compartment. The attraction of electrowinning is the potential for the production of high-purity metal at the mine site. Nickel electrowinning is done using diaphragm cells to minimize preferential hydrogen formation at the cathode, which might decrease cell efficiency. For nickel electrowinning from sulfate solutions, sodium sulfate levels are kept high in the plating solution to lower resistivity and raise pH. Direct electrolysis of the matte can also be carried out through a mixed chloride–sulfate electrolyte. The matte anodes corrode to produce a voluminous slime of elemental sulfur containing all the precious metal values, which are retained in a loosely woven polypropylene anode bag. The cathode is enclosed in a separate compartment. High-purity nickel may also be produced by the carbonyl process that treats a low sulfur nickel–copper matte with PGMs. Granulated matte is treated with 1 Primary nickel and cobalt are extracted from two different types of ores: sulfide ores and oxide ores. The extraction methods are typically based on pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, and electrometallurgy principles that yield different products bearing nickel and cobalt. Pyrometallurgy produces a sulfur-deficient matte that can be further processed using leaching, solvent extraction, and electrowinning. High-purity nickel is produced after electrorefining or the vapometallurgy-based carbonyl process. Nickel is primarily used in the production of superalloys and stainless steels. It is also useful as a plating material. Cobalt finds applications as an alloy addition as well as a radioisotope.