The objective of this study is to relate the flotation of coarse composite particles with their mineral composition. For this purpose, composites of quartz particles in lead borate matrix were fabricated in different size fractions. The quartz in the composite particles was selectively hydrophobised. The composite particles were floated and backscattered scanning electron microscopy was used to measure the number of particles in each flotation product, their size and liberation class. Results showed that the flotation of these composite particles decreased with increasing particle size, and decreasing the quartz (the hydrophobic phase) liberation class. Furthermore, it was also found that diesel oil addition improves the adhesion of composite particles with bubbles, and consequently enhances their flotation recovery.It is well known that froth flotation is a size dependent process, i.e. fine, intermediate and coarse particles exhibit different flotation behaviour The flotation of coarse mineral particles is always low due to their detachment from bubbles in the high turbulent regions of flotation cells Sutherland Wang and Fornasiero The aim of the current study is to investigate the effect of fine hydrophobic particles (phases) in the flotation of composite particles. Composite particles similar to those prepared by Wang and Fornasiero Lead borate (Merck KGaA, Germany) and pure quartz particles (Sigma, <10 High purity trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) (>99.95%, Merck) was used to selectively hydrophobise the quartz phase After hydrophobisation, 4.5 The liberation class of flotation products was measured using Backscattered Electron-Scanning Electron Microscopy (BSE-SEM) and image analysis. The particles in each of the flotation products and size fraction were immersed in epoxy resin and after curing the resin moulds were polished before the BSE-SEM analysis using a PHILIP XL-20 SEM. The image analysis software, AnalySIS (Olympus Company), was used to measure the number of particles, the particle diameter and grey value mean for each particle from the BSE-SEM images in the four concentrates and tail samples of each size fraction. The grey value mean is the average of the intensity over all the pixels in each particle and therefore, it is a surface characteristic of the composite particles. The proportion of the lead borate and quartz phases in each particle was also calculated. The liberation class (surface percent of quartz in a particle), After analysing the images, the number of particles with different liberation classes, 90–100%, 50–90%, 20–50%, 0–20% and 0% (liberated lead borate) was counted in each concentrate and tail samples, and the recovery in each concentrate was calculated. The standard error of liberation class in this measurement was found to be ±8%. It is likely from stereological considerations that the liberation measurements made on a polished section are higher than the true volumetric values An electro-acoustic technique developed by Xu et al.  The liberation of quartz (by surface as discussed) in the four flotation concentrates and tail samples of the 150–210 and 350–600 The flotation recovery of the composite particles produced in the current study (at two size fractions of 150–250 The final recoveries observed in the present study also increase with the liberation class but they remain more or less constant with increasing particle size, except for the highest liberation class where recovery decreases as it was the case in the previous study The trends in flotation results with particle size and quartz liberation (the hydrophobic phase) observed in this study are similar to those reported by Sutherland The critical amplitudes for the detachment from a bubble of liberated quartz particles (with contact angles The effects of frothers (MIBC and Dowfroth 250) and oily collector (i.e. diesel oil) on the composite particle-bubble detachment were also investigated by measuring the critical amplitude of detachment, with and without addition of these reagents. These tests were carried out using the 300–350 The oily collector provides a stronger adhesion between composite particles and bubbles, and therefore this should reduce coarse particle detachment during flotation, especially if their overall hydrophobicity is low (such as in the case of composite particles). It is known that oily collectors improve the flotation performance. For example, diesel oil is commonly used in coal and molybdenite flotation The attachment force of particles from bubbles ( The results of calculations of the attachment forces using the values of critical amplitude of detachment are shown in The attachment force for the quartz and composite particles in the presence of diesel oils was also calculated ( Composite particles of fine quartz particles (<10