Based on successful preliminary bench scale experimental studies for treatment of industrial wastewater contaminated by nitrocellulose, a pilot plant is constructed for results assessment.
                  Bench scale experimental work proved 55%, 73% recovery of nitrocellulose without and with chemical addition respectively within 10min flotation compared to 35%, 69% recovery within 2–0.5h settling respectively.
                  The treatment process aims the recovery of nitrocellulose through an efficient dissolved air flotation (DAF) unit.
                  Different operating conditions have been studied for different effluent characteristics with and without flocculating agent.
                  Nitrocellulose recovery reached 80% by flotation without chemical, which is increased to 87% using cationic polymer, but both exploring suitable pathways to solve the recovery problem.The experimental results are considered suitable basis for full scale design of the industrial treatment unit.Wastewater effluents generated in factories producing energetic materials, usually contain energetic and other extraneous materials as a result of washing of the final products and the production lines. These effluents should be treated before being disposed to water bodies or land. Nitrocellulose is considered as one of the main pollutants in energetic materials industries. Based on the fact that nitrocellulose has similar physical properties to that of cellulose except the hazardous effect, and is generally recovered using dissolved air flotation (DAF) method NC is used in various lacquers, plastics, medicines and artificial leather. It is also used for the production of propellant for guns, small weapons, and small missiles. The presence of nitro compounds materials in the wastewater effluent causes severe environmental problems Nitrocellulose (NC) is notoriously unstable at elevated temperature. At 125 Currently, NC fine particles are separated from wastewater by settling or centrifugation. The NC fines are then recovered and reused as “pit cotton”. Furthermore, the energetic material industries are considering terminating the reuse of pit cotton and consequently need to develop some other technology for reuse or treatment. NC fines separation is difficult because the fine sizes vary widely, from sub-micron to a few millimeters, and the wastewater is corrosive and hot, moreover, NC waste has proved to be remarkably stable. Furthermore, stringent military specifications make reuse difficult. There is a need for a holistic approach to develop a new, in-depth understanding of pollution prevention, separation, treatment, and disposal methods for NC fines. Some technologies Different treatment techniques which can be applied for wastewater contaminated by nitrocellulose are summarized in the following points: Thermal decomposition: thermal decomposition of NC was investigated at different temperatures and conditions Photo decomposition laser: a study of the destruction of NC by the irradiation of pulsed laser was conducted Chemical precipitation: chemical precipitation of colloidal NC fine could be achieved when sufficient amount of lime is added to increase the wastewater pH to 11.8. Solids could settle out within 30 Alkaline decomposition: alkaline hydrolysis Acid decomposition: NC fines are converted to glucose and alcohol using strong acid hydrolysis Biological treatment Other treatment processes are investigated that include: ultra violet degradation The use of integrated processes could be a promising alternative for the treatment of these kinds of effluents. One of the combinations described in the literature for cellulose industry effluent treatment is the use of heterogeneous photo catalysis in combination with biological treatment These technologies remain as options depending on concentrations and costs at the time of implementation. Dissolved air flotation utilizes the property of micro-bubble adherence to suspended solids, increasing the tendency of particles flotation. After the suspended solids have floated to the surface, mechanical scrapers skim the solids from the surface into a collecting bin. The principle of dissolved air flotation has been developed for many different industrial applications, from mineral processing to concentrating the solids in waste activated sludge. The size of the bubbles greatly affects the efficiency of the flotation process, with bubbles smaller than 100 Other operating variables which affect the performance of DAF include the operating pressure; recycle ratio, retention time, the air/solids ratio, solids and hydraulic loading rates, and application of chemical aids. The present article is an experimental study for the suitability of the DAF process to recover nitrocellulose from wastewater. Composite sample from end pipe of the whole industrial wastewater effluent is represented in It is to be noted that the main problems in the wastewater are the nitrocellulose content, suspended solids and the acidity caused mainly by sulfuric acid and partially by nitric acid. To minimize the effluent to be treated for nitrocellulose removal, the inlet wastewater from the NC department was isolated from the whole industrial wastewater containing other types of pollutants. After isolation of wastewater from NC production department, composite sample is analyzed and results are shown in It is shown from the table that there is a big diversity in COD&SS values which varies according to different type in NC produced. Different compartments in the NC processing other than the washing section are responsible for effluent acidity. Finally it was preferable to separate wastewater from the NC washing system (1200 COD is determined using HACH DR/2000 spectrophotometer according to closed reflux calorimetric method Set of laboratory scale experimental work are done for testing the separation of NC from the effluent wastewater by settling in jar test apparatus and by diffused air flotation (DAF) with and without polyelectrolyte in bench scale DAF system. Pilot plant experimental work is done to test the efficiency of NC separation by diffused air flotation for the effluent from end pipe from NC production department and from the separated outlet from NC washing section. The pilot plant consists essentially of a continuous operating flotation unit capacity 10 Engineering design data for the flotation unit are: Volume Flow water input rate Residence time Rate of water recycle Air pressure in the pressure cylinder The unit is composed of the following: Air pressurizing unit with air feeding 6.5 Flexible pipe for wastewater input to flotation unit of 70 Flexible pipe for floated sludge drain of 60 pH adjustment tank. Three tanks for flocculent, alkali and acid connected to the pH adjustment tank. An electric panel power feeding 360 Sand filter (50  Start-up feeding pump for input wastewater at a rate of 10 When water reached the appropriate level for flotation, the air pump is started up at a pressure of 5.5 The rotating bridge starts also to collect the floated sludge on the top of the unit which is collected for reuse. Results from laboratory scale experimental work are summarized in From the previous table it can be concluded that separation by DAF is more efficient with or without polymer and in less interval time. It is also observed that the settled suspended solid, in case of settling experiments, is not pure NC but contains settled impurities. While in case of DAF procedure floated particulates are only NC, only containing the polymer added in case of polymer addition. DAF experiments on pilot plant are done on the same experimental conditions. The efficiency of nitrocellulose removal is strongly influenced by the effluent characteristics which differs in SS, COD, pH and dissolved solids.  It is shown from the last two tables that the DAF process is more efficient in case of treatment of isolated stream from NC washing section. This is due to that the suspended solid from this section is pure NC but the suspended solids from the end pipe of NC department contain impurities other than NC which are not floated by DAF system. These results indicate that the isolation of the washing NC stream is necessary to recover and reuse pure NC. The relations between the effluents in study and as these are generated are represented in Specifications of NC obtained after DAF process from NC washing system are as follows: % N: 11.65–11.92 Viscosity (cp): 1.93–3.91 % Humidity: 84 Which are considered the same as the produced NC and can be used for the same purpose. Nitrocellulose recovered may reach 50 From these results it is shown that, percentage recovery of nitrocellulose on pilot plant reached about 80% from nitrocellulose department, which is estimated to increase in full scale after waste homogenization and adjustment of air flow rate, bubble size and wastewater flow rate. Using polyelectrolyte addition the percentage recovery can be increased to reach about 87%, but if it is to be reused for the same purpose, i.e. in the same degree of purity it has to be floated with no addition. The remaining can be floated in a second step using polyelectrolyte but to be used in other purposes. Based on pilot plant experiments and chemical analysis it can be concluded the followings: Pilot DAF separate up to 80% of NC washing section effluent or up to 55% for end pipe effluent from NC department, which is increased to 87% by cationic polymer addition. 50 End pipe effluent from the factory will be free from energetic material and after neutralization with lime, to precipitate the sulfate, can be reused as irrigation water for non-edible plants, according to the applied Law in Egypt, ( It is to be noticed that from previous studies degradation of nitrocellulose reached 92.6% by combined fungi and photo catalytic process Acknowledgements are due to the Italian factory Idrosystem Energy SRI for supplying the pilot plant for free to the chemical factory under study. Research team of the work is considered as consultant to the factory for constructing a water treatment plant to treat hazardous material in waste effluent. 