The paper presents data on cobalt extraction from sulfate solutions with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR, trade mark CYANEX 301) diluted with nonane and toluene. Using the cobalt distribution data, electronic spectroscopy and IR-spectroscopy methods, it was concluded that cobalt extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid is characterized by a fast reaction resulting in the formation of the tetrahedral СoR2 complex in the organic phase followed by Co(II) oxidation with air oxygen and the formation of the octahedral СoR3 complex.
                  Using a spectrophotometric method, it was shown that the oxidation rate of cobalt with air oxygen essentially increases in the presence of dithiophosphinic acid in the organic phase. In the absence of HR, there is no evidence of cobalt oxidation in the extracts over a long time period (up to 24h). The cobalt oxidation reaction is first order with regard to both the metal and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid concentrations.
                  Oxidation of cobalt(II) dithiophosphinate to cobalt(III) dithiophosphinate by the disulfide of dithiophosphinic acid (R–R) has been studied. The cobalt oxidation reaction is second order with regard to the metal concentration and first order with regard to the disulfide concentration. The redox process was shown to be reversible. The stoichiometry of the reaction has been determined.
                  Suggestions for prevention of cobalt oxidation with air oxygen during extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid are given.Thioorganophosphorus acids have always attracted attention of researchers specializing in the field of liquid–liquid extraction. The acids are characterized by high selectivity towards a number of non-ferrous metals and by the ability to recover the metals from acidic media. Interest in these reagents has grown recently due to the introduction of CYANEX 301 to the market, the active component of which is bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR) ( Particularly, the great interest in this reagent is because it has been selected as the reagent of choice for cobalt and nickel extraction when processing nickel laterite leach liquors in the Vale Nouvelle Caledonie (formerly INCO's Goro) project in New Caledonia ( The work on cobalt extraction with CYANEX 301 has mainly been on practical applications; however, taking into account the significant interest in these systems, it is necessary, in our view, to carry out investigations which can clarify the chemistry of cobalt extraction with CYANEX 301. Some limited investigations have been carried out ( It should be noted that in the majority of cases, apart from the studies referred to ( In earlier work ( Taking into account the quite close similarity of the chemical properties of dithiophosphoric and dithiophosphinic acids, one can assume that similar processes will take place during cobalt extraction with CYANEX 301. Investigations of cobalt extraction as well as the redox processes proceeding in the systems with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid are of both scientific and great practical interest, since, as stated above, this extractant can be used successfully for cobalt recovery from process liquors of various compositions ( This article presents the results of an investigation of cobalt extraction from sulfate media with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid as well as of the redox processes proceeding in the extraction system. Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR), purified through the formation of its ammonium salt according to the published procedure ( The disulfide of bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (R Сo(II) dithiophosphinate was prepared by exchange extraction, in a short-term contact of 0.001–0.01 Nonane and toluene of pure grade were used as the diluents without further purification. The mineral salts and acids used were of chemically pure or analytical grades. The liquid–liquid extraction testwork was carried out by mechanical mixing of the phases for 20 The aqueous phases (raffinates) were analyzed for cobalt while the cobalt contents of the organic phases were calculated from the mass balances. In several cases, to ensure accurate results, the cobalt-containing organic phases were completely stripped by mixing with 5.5–6.0 The cobalt concentration in the aqueous phases (initial aqueous solutions, raffinates and re-extracts) was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The concentration of dithiophosphinic acid in the organic phase was determined by potentiometric titration with sodium hydroxide in a water–acetone solution (1:4). The electronic spectra of the organic phases were recorded with a Shimadzu UV-300 using a 0.2 Infrared (IR) spectra of the nonane-diluted cobalt extracts were recorded using an IR-Fourier spectrometer Vector 22 from Bruker in the 400–4000 For curve fitting, the least squares method was used. The accuracy of the calculated values was characterized by confidence bands for a confidence probability of 95%. When bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid is quickly loaded with cobalt, absorption bands in the stretching vibration range of the extractant S–H group (at 2580 Cobalt oxidation with formation of more stable compounds leads to a gradual increase in the metal distribution coefficient. Also, the fraction of the cobalt form which is poorly stripped gradually increases over time as the cobalt(III) complexes are characterized by high inertness and are not decomposed even during long-term acid treatment ( Therefore the contact time for the experiments on cobalt extraction was 20 The data obtained are not equilibrium data. Therefore, the dependences presented in Spectrophotometry is the most convenient technique for the investigation of cobalt oxidation in these systems since the electronic absorption spectra (EAS) of the cobalt(II) and cobalt(III) compounds are essentially different. The bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid concentration is one of the most significant factors affecting the rate of cobalt oxidation. In the absence of excess extractant, no significant cobalt oxidation with air oxygen occurs ( In The detailed mechanism of cobalt oxidation in the systems with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid requires, apparently, a separate investigation which is clearly beyond the scope of the present work. However, based on the data obtained, one can assume that, after fast extraction, cobalt(II) dithiophosphinate (СoR Redox processes in the system studied are not limited to the process of cobalt(II) oxidation with air oxygen. In particular, a back process, namely the reduction of cobalt(III) to cobalt(II), is possible. Under normal conditions, this process is characterized by an extremely low rate, however when increasing the temperature, it becomes pronounced ( The effect of the cobalt(II) and disulfide concentrations on the rate of cobalt oxidation has been studied. The rate of cobalt oxidation was shown to increase linearly with increasing disulfide concentration in the mixture ( These data correspond completely with the results obtained for the system with D2EHDTPA where the Сo(II) dithiophosphinate oxidation reaction is first order with respect to disulfide and second order with respect to cobalt ( This conclusion is also confirmed by the data on the reaction stoichiometry obtained using the isomolar series method ( Similar results were obtained for the cobalt(II) di(2-ethylhexy)dithiophosphate–disulfide system ( Thus, the overall process of cobalt extraction with CYANEX 301 can be described as the following: a) cobalt(II) extraction (Eq. b) the subsequent cobalt oxidation with air oxygen in the presence of dithiophosphinic acid by scheme (3): The resulting СoR As seen, the cobalt‐bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid extraction system is characterized by complicated behavior as along with the cobalt(II) extraction, redox reactions in the organic phase, affecting the cobalt distribution, take place. Obviously, this should be considered when studying cobalt extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid which was not taken into account in the studies referred to ( Such investigations are extremely important from a technological point of view. As mentioned above, the formed Co(III) complexes are very inert under normal conditions (at 25 To carry out cobalt extraction in an inert atmosphere, for example, in an atmosphere of nitrogen or carbon dioxide. This method has been used in Vale's Nouvelle–Caledonie project when processing the leach liquors of lateritic nickel ores ( To use as an extractant not CYANEX 301 itself, which promotes cobalt oxidation, but its salt (for example, NaR, NH To use, as the extractant, mixtures containing CYANEX 301 and electron-donor additives (L). The formation of the mixed ligand–cobalt(II) dithiophosphinate complexes with the additives essentially decreases or even completely prevents cobalt oxidation ( Apart from that, as one of the options, it is desirable to occasionally treat the organic phase with reductants at elevated temperature to reduce disulfide and to partly decompose the cobalt(III) complexes. Cobalt extraction from sulfate solutions with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR) diluted with nonane has been studied. Cobalt extraction was shown to be quite rapid. When contacting the phases for a long time, an increase in the cobalt distribution coefficient is observed which is due to Co(II) oxidation with air oxygen in the organic phase to Co(III). Based on the extraction regularities of cobalt distribution and using electronic and IR absorption spectra data for the cobalt extracts, it was concluded that cobalt is initially extracted into the organic phase as Сo(II) with the formation of the tetrahedral СoR Using a spectrophotometric method, cobalt oxidation in the organic phase with air oxygen has been studied. It was shown that, in the absence of HR, no evident cobalt oxidation in the extracts occurs for a long time (up to 24 Using a spectrophotometric method, oxidation of cobalt(II) dithiophosphinate to cobalt(III) dithiophosphinate by the disulfide of dithiophosphinic acid (R–R) has been studied. This process was shown to be reversible, and the resulting cobalt(III) dithiophosphinate disproportionates subsequently to Co(II) dithiophosphinate and disulfide. The reaction stoichiometry has been determined by the isomolar series method. The reaction of cobalt oxidation is second order with respect to the metal and first order with respect to the disulfide. Suggestions for prevention of cobalt oxidation with air oxygen during its extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid are given. In particular these are: to carry out cobalt extraction in an inert atmosphere; to use as an extractant not CYANEX 301 itself but its salt (for example, NaR, NH Our special thanks go to CYTEC INDUSTRIES INC. Canada for free samples of CYANEX 301. Appreciation for valuable remarks is extended to Dr. D.S. Flett.