Due to diverse applications of light rare earth metals (LREMs) oxides in advanced electronics and material/alloy, the recovery of pure LREMs oxides from the rare earth metals (REMs) mixture is one of the important areas of separation science. Present paper reports the systematic and selective precipitation studies to produce pure oxides of LREMs from the leach liquor of Korean monazite. Various process parameters like precipitant dose, pH of the solution, temperature and time were varied for obtaining the optimal conditions for the selective precipitation of pure LREMs from leach liquor which contains REMs and other metallic impurities. The use of 4 g/L of disodium oxalate (Na2C2O4) was found to be suitable to precipitate 98.10% of pure LREMs leaving unwanted metals in solution within 10 min when maintaining pH < 1 at room temperature. The Eh-pH diagram satisfactorily validated the obtained experimental data for LREMs recovery. The collected precipitate of LREMs as oxalate was converted to oxide at elevated temperature 400 °C in 3 h. Based on the experimental results, a flow-sheet has been proposed for the production of pure LREMs oxide from monazite leach solution. Based on the laboratory scale proof of concept and validations, the process seems to be feasible for commercial exploitation after scale-up/ pilot trials.Globally, acceleration in the development of advanced technologies in the area of electronics, solar and metal/ alloy industries has created the demand for rare earth metals (REMs) as well as their compounds individually or collectively ( Various methods to separate individual rare earths from the leach liquor of monazite have been reported by different researchers. Solvent extraction, a complex separation process is generally used on commercial scale to separate the REMs from monazite leach liquor because of its good selectivity and recovery. The extraction of LREEs (Light Rare Earth Elements) from chloride solution uses Cyanex 272 and its mixture with solvating, cationic and anionic extractants like TBP, TOPO, DOS, Cyanex 301, Versatic-10, Alamine 308, and Alamine 336 ( To mitigate solvent extraction problems, the behavior of REMs precipitation and complex formation have been studied using precipitation technique. Extensive studies have been undertaken to produce pure REMs and avoid inclusion of aluminum and other impurities in the leach liquor. In order to inhibit aluminum co-precipitation along with REMs from ion-adsorption rare earth ores, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate were used as compound lixiviant while ammonium acetate was used as an inhibitor of aluminum ( Group separation of REMs up to trace level from different monazite samples has also been investigated using different precipitants. The stability of REMs complexes formed at various pH ranges was also studied and found that during hydroxide precipitation in highly basic medium, formation of soluble hydroxyl complex caused to decrease the separation efficiencies. Likewise, carbonate and sulfate precipitation suffers from the same problem. The use of fluoride concentration to precipitate REMs generates hazardous gas (HF), thus not recommended from environmental point of view. Ammonia solution has also been used to precipitate REMs from Malaysian monazite ( Based on the above problem and drawbacks, the present research work reports a novel, efficient and complete process flow sheet to recover pure salts of LREMs from actual monazite leach liquor involving systematic and selective precipitation studies. To study the precipitation behavior of REMs, a diluted monazite leach liquor (previously leached by our group) ( Various set of monazite leach liquor (25 mL) mixed with different weight of Na All precipitates were digested as per standard analytical procedure using nitric and hydrochloric acid. The samples were diluted using de-ionised water. All solutions was analysed using an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) (Model No iCAP Duo 7600, Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA). A Metrohm Basic Titrino 797 with a glass pH combination electrode with automatic temperature correction was used for pH measurements. The experimental data was incorporated into a standard Eh-pH diagram to validate the process. An initial literature search was undertaken to identify suitable reagent for the separation of LREMs. Various additives like sodium hydroxide (NaOH), ammonium carbonate ((NH After selection of the suitable additive, studies were undertaken to determine the effect of pH variation on behavior of different LREMs present in leach liquor of monazite for their maximum recovery. In this paper, focus on separation of LREMs is made due to their greater ionic radii (unlike HREMs) which decrease in tendency to form complexes as well as their solubility during oxalate precipitation ( After studying the effect of pH, it was concluded that the control of pH was minutely required. The majority of the LREMs precipitated selectively at lower pH (1) compared to HREMs due to their greater ionic radii. Other than REMs, Al and Ca were the main impurities present in the leach liquor with minor quantity of Cu and Pb. The presence of these impurities was also affected by variation in pH. Purity of any salt/oxide is very important in view of commercial exploitation and various applications. However, these non-ferrous metal impurities were present in ppb/ ppm concentration which were already below permissible limit. As well these non-ferrous metals typically precipitate at higher pH (>3) than that the pH at which REMs precipitates. Thus, few set of experiments were also carried out with increased pH (up to 5) and were found that the quantity of impurities increased in the complex formed. This was due to the hydroxide formation of other metals present in the provided liquor. An interesting observation in case of Al and Pb were noticed. Their concentration decreases after pH of solution was more than 4. This might be due to the formation of oxyanions (aluminate or plumbate) or better solubility of their oxalates above pH 4–5 ( In order to validate the result of LREMs precipitation, Eh-pH diagrams were drawn using Medusa database. For convenience only four metals of La, Ce, Nd and Sm are presented in In order to study the effect of doses of Na Variation in the oxalate concentration can be used to analyze the amount of oxalate reacted with LREMs present in leach liquor compared to total doses of additive. Based on this, the amount of Na The plot for the Na The co-precipitation of impurities present in the leach liquor was also studied ( In order to observe the effect of time and temperature on the precipitation of LREMs, experiments were performed at various temperatures (25 °C, 45 °C and 60 °C) at regular time intervals (10 min, 30 min and 60 min). The oxalate concentration used, the stirring time and pH of the solution were kept constant for all set of experiments. It was observed that increase in temperature increased the percentage precipitation of LREMs. The effect of temperature on every LREM was studied and observed that precipitation increased with temperature ( Although all experiments were carried out at 60 min time, no considerable changes were noticed after the settling time 10 min ( Based on the obtained experimental results for separation and recovery of LREMs from the leached solution of monazite using precipitation technique, the following conclusions have been drawn: Mixture of pure LREMs were precipitated from leach liquor of monazite using 4 g/L Na 98.10% of LREMs were found to be precipitated with purity 99.50% at lower pH (<1), thus chances of co-precipitation of other metals was reduced. Filtration separates the oxalates of LREMs as residue and all other impurities gets collected in the filtrate. However, controlled pH and additive dose were not required to separate LREMs from HREMs due to the greater ionic radii in comparison to HREMs. The oxalates of LREMs formed using Na The developed process will be economical as it consumes comparatively less amount of energy and time than the processes reported previously. The complete process flow-sheet is shown in After extraction of LREMs, the effluent generated can be further treated for the extraction of trace amount of valuable metals present using ion exchange method. This experimental paper is based on the research work related to precipitation of LREMs carried out at CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-NML), Jamshedpur, India. Authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-NML for the permission to publish this paper. One of the authors, Ms. Archana Kumari would like to extend her sincere gratitude to