It is well accepted that the surface texture appearance of the flotation froth involves crucial information about its separation process, which can be used as an effective criterion for the qualitative assessment of the flotation performance. To obtain the distinctive characteristic of the froth surface appearance under various production conditions, a texture feature extraction method based on color co-occurrence matrix (CCM) is presented compared to the commonly used gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM). First, the HIS (Hue, Saturation and Intensity) color space is employed to exhibit and quantify the froth image, which yields a more intuitive description of the color properties in comparison with the RGB (Red, Green and Blue) color space. Then, the CCM is computed and the corresponding feature statistics of the froth surface texture are extracted based on the proposed matrix. Next, a new feature parameter is defined and extracted to describe the froth texture complexity based on the aforementioned texture feature statistics. After adequate offline froth images have been obtained from a bauxite flotation plant located in China under various production statuses with the corresponding concentrate grade in the froth assayed manually, the qualitative relationship between the texture complexity and the corresponding concentrate grade is investigated. Consequently, the optimal texture complexity range to achieve satisfactory production index is obtained for the further research of the optimal control of the flotation process. Experimental results have verified the effectiveness of the method and demonstrated its superiority over the previous texture feature extraction methods based on GLCM.Froth flotation is one of the most broadly used mineral separation methods in the mineral processing industries. It aims to separate valuable minerals from useless materials or other materials based on the difference in wettability of different minerals ( However, many problems exist in the naked-eye observation based flotation process operation and control: (1) Human observation is qualitative and lacking in quantitative measurement of the froth surface. The evaluation criteria of the froth surface appearance vary significantly. Even for the same froth flotation production status observed at the same time, different operators might report quite different perceptional results. (2) Operators cannot monitor the whole flotation circuit effectively because the whole flotation circuit is a long and continuous process including dozens of flotation cells. Furthermore, operators are inevitably tired of the long-term observation and cannot accurately identify the froth state with the instantaneous observation information about the froth surface. (3) It demands highly experienced workers that sometimes might not be available. Therefore, due to the temporal, spatial limitations with the subjective metrics caused by naked-eye observation of the froth surface, it is difficult to maintain the flotation process in the optimal production states stably by naked-eye observation based flotation process control and operation, resulting in either low utilization of the mineral resources or excessive consumption of the flotation reagents with fluctuate product quality. To overcome these defects, machine vision has long been acknowledged as a promising technology introduced to flotation process monitoring and control. By extracting the distinctive parameters of the froth image and analyzing the potential relation between the metallurgical parameters with the froth surface appearance, it is able to provide operational guidelines to the plant operators and effectively improve the production performance. With the variation of the flotation production states, froth surface appearance exhibits special texture characteristic, which directly reflects the flotation operation condition in return. Froth image texture feature, which describes the roughness of the forth surface, is closely related to the mineral content in froth layer and consequently indicates the concentrate grade ( In order to extract more representative froth texture features to provide objective flotation performance evaluation criterion for froth process monitoring, a color co-occurrence matrix (CCM) method is proposed to replace the traditional GLCM method for froth image texture analysis in this paper. Subsequently, an effective froth texture measurement parameter (texture complexity) based on CCM was defined and extracted to capture the more distinctive description of froth surface texture feature. This method is applied to a bauxite flotation plant located in China for single flotation cell performance monitoring and process operation guidance. After collecting a great amount of froth images with the corresponding metallurgical parameter (concentrate grade assayed manually, represented by the mineral content in the froth layer of the monitored flotation cell), the quantitative relationship between the froth texture complexity and the corresponding concentrate grade is analyzed. At last, the best froth texture complexity range for flotation froth phase monitoring and production operation instruction to achieve high concentrate grade is obtained from the established mutual relation. It has been demonstrated that the froth surface color involves essential information of the mineral content in the forth layer by the long-term observation of the flotation process on industrial scale ( HSI uses H(Hue), S(Saturation) and I(Intensity) to describe the color features. It is a very important and attractive color model for image processing applications because it is similar to the way humans perceive the object color. In this color space, H and S contain the chromatic information, I, which has nothing to do with the color information, stands for the luminance information. In the HSI color space, the Hue component describes the color itself in the form of an angle between [0°, 360°]; the Saturation component denotes how much the color is polluted with white color with range of [0, 1]; the range of Intensity is [0, 1] and 0 means black, 1 means white. Given the range of each component of the RGB color space is [0, 1], the conversion formula from RGB color space to HIS color space is as follows: Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM), which is a popular way of describing the second order statistical texture features of gray images, proposed by The value of the matrix element (  For each color image, six CCMs can be obtained from the mutual combination of different color components. Taking an image in the HSI color space for example, whose color space is quantified into eight levels, one of its CCM (CCM A series of statistics representing the image texture features can be calculated based on CCM. The long-term observation reveals that the froth image texture complexity is a dominant feature indicating the mineral content in the froth layer, which hence is an important indicator to the flotation performance. However, froth surface texture complexity is a subjective qualitative expression of the image texture, which lacks of effective quantitative expression method. In this work, we define a novel feature parameter to quantify the froth texture complexity by the commonly used features statistics based on CCMs. The detailed texture feature extraction procedure based on CCM is as follows: The acquired froth image is converted from RGB color space to HSI color space. A suitable color space for image representation and processing would achieve better results. Though the commonly used color space is RGB color space, Palm compared the performances of several image texture features coded in different color spaces and concluded that HSI color space is more adaptive than RGB for color texture discrimination ( In terms of the powerful cognitive ability of the human vision system, it is beneficial to simulate the visual perception process of human beings to achieve good visual processing results. As is known, humans’ visual resolution has certain limitations. For instance, only the most salient features of the object are important to the following visual perception. Therefore, it is necessary to quantize the HSI color space to a small number of color levels to facilitate the subsequent texture feature extraction, thereby retaining some distinctive color information and discarding the trivial information. The detailed method of quantizing the HSI color space by some unequal intervals employed in this work can be found in the literature ( The CCMs of the froth image in HSI color space is calculated. Calculate the six CCMs of froth image by using Eq. Haralick features are extracted from the froth images. Based on the CCMs, some image texture statistics of second order, Haralick features ( Entropy Inverse Difference Moment Angular Second Moment Contrast Correlation Texture complexity of the froth image is defined and calculated. To reduce the computation and preserve the distinctive description of froth image texture complexity at the same time, two features related to the complexity and uniformity of texture directly are extracted from each CCM in the experiment. Experiments are carried out on industrial scale in a bauxite flotation plant Located in China. The whole industrial flotation process is a complex, continuous and long-term process, which consists of several flotation banks, e.g. rougher bank, cleaner bank and scavenger bank (or sweeping bank). Each flotation bank is comprised of several flotation cells. Flotation cells are generally arranged in banks to allow multistage treatment of the slurry, with recycled loops to ensure that no excess of valuable particles are lost in the final tailings. A concise flowchart of this flotation circuit is displayed in The test set-up consists of RGB cameras with 49 In this work, we mainly focus on the froth surface appearance of the first cell in the cleaning banks, whose position is explicitly denoted in the A great amount of cleaner froth images of nearly 1 In order to validate the effectiveness of the texture feature extraction method and to achieve the optimal froth texture range for flotation process monitoring and production performance evaluation, we set three experiments to analyze the relation between the froth image texture features with the metallurgic parameter (the concentrate grade in the froth layer is mainly concerned in this work). Experiment 1: The stability analysis of the texture feature of the froth images under the comparable production conditions An effective froth image texture feature extraction method should offer similar texture features for different froth images as long as they are under the similar flotation performance conditions. To validate the effectiveness of the of the proposed image texture feature variables, we compare the image texture features of a bunch of froth images under the similar flotation performance conditions in advance. In this experiment, 16 frames of froth images are selected manually from the froth image database, whose corresponding concentrate grades in the froth layer are very similar. Five above commonly used Haralick features based on the CCM are extracted from each image. Since we can get six groups of independent feature statistics based on each of the CCMs, the average of these texture feature statistics from the six CCMs are used as the final froth image features in the following data analysis. The computed texture statistics of these images can be seen in Experiment 2: Texture features vs. Concentrate grade To monitor and evaluate the flotation performance effectively in real time, the relation between the commonly used Haralick features (contrast, correlation, IDM, entropy and ASM) based on CCM and their corresponding froth concentrate grade are analyzed. The data analysis results reveal that there is no very obvious relationship between the commonly used Haralick features and the concentrate grade. However, the proposed texture complexity significantly relates to the concentrate grade, which can be used as an effective indicator to the flotation performance. In order to qualitatively analyze the relation between the texture complexity and the concentrate grade, three froth videos are used to analyze the texture complexity We also compare the effectiveness of texture complexity to indicate the flotation performance calculated between GLCM and CCM. Experiment 3: Extraction of the best texture complexity range for flotation process monitoring In order to further analyze the correlation between froth image texture and mineral grade (mineral content of the forth layer, A/S) and to achieve the best texture range for froth phase monitoring, we collect many more froth images under various production conditions for the following data analysis. We calculate texture complexity of each froth image by CCM algorithm, and then statistically analyze the correlation between image parameters and mineral grade. The range of statistical mineral grade is [8.5, 17.29] and texture complexity calculated by CCM algorithm is [1.2037, 2.5301]. In order to visualize the correlation between them, the experimental data points are fitted with a curve line. 85 groups of data are used for fitting analysis, and the fitting result is shown in The fitting result in Since the froth texture complexity is closely related to the concentrate grade, an effective indicator to evaluate the current flotation performance can be generated based on the froth surface texture monitoring and measurement. According to the curve trend of the fitting result, the best range of texture complexity for flotation production is about [1.6, In this work, a froth texture feature extraction method based on CCM is presented to monitor the froth phase. In comparison with the commonly used GLCM based froth texture feature extraction method, the color information of the forth image is taken into account to obtain more distinctive description of flotation froth image texture. Since the HSI color system is similar to the way of human tending to perceive the color information, the froth image is converted from the RGB color space to HSI space, where the CCM is calculated. Haralick features that reflect textures relationship as well as color composition are then extracted for the froth image description. Furthermore, a texture complexity parameter of the froth images is defined and extracted. The optimal froth texture complexity range is obtained based on the relationship analysis between the froth image texture complexity and the concentrate grade. Experimental results demonstrate that, CCM based feature extraction method is superior to the commonly used GLCM based feature extraction method in the description of flotation froth image texture. The extracted best range of the froth texture is convenient for monitoring and evaluating the current froth production state. It can be used to remind the operators to adjust the flotation operation in time to achieve high production performance when the froth texture complexity is found out of the optimum range. This froth phase monitoring method paves the way for the further research of optimal control of the flotation process. The authors would like to thank Dr. H Zhang with Central South University for valuable discussions, and the editors and anonymous reviewers for suggestions and very careful checking that helped to improve the paper. This work is supported by the key Program of the