The wastes coming out from a foundry located at Carmagnola, near Turin (West Northern Italy), producing about 30000t/year of aluminium castings for automotive industry, are considered in this work. The moulding operation is performed by means of semi-permanent mould casting and also by means of lost foam casting.
                  The foundry produced 12400t of wastes in year 2002, made of the following materials: several types of muds and dusts coming from dust abatement plants (28.7%), furnace and ladle slags (21%), aluminium shavings (21%), machinery emulsions (9.8%), exhaust moulds and cores (4.7%), various materials packing (4%), refractory material from furnaces (3.5%), saline solutions containing phosphates (3.5%), wastewater treatment mud (1.6%) and other materials (1.7%). Among these wastes only slags and aluminium shavings are sold for a recycle outside the foundry; the other materials, making about 8200t/year, are landfilled. After a careful study of the foundry production cycle, several waste materials have been studied to evaluate their reuse/recycle possibilities. Considering the obtained results the authors are able to hypothesize a reuse inside the foundry of the dusts and a kind of mud (about 1900t/year of wastes) and a recycle outside the foundry, as inert material, of the exhaust moulds and cores and another kind of mud.Foundries of secondary fusion produce a large quantity of wastes varying from 0.25 to 2 The moulding operation is realized by semi-permanent moulds and by the lost foam system. Semi-permanent moulds are outside made by a steel shell that could be reused and inside by a suitable refractory material to form the cavity in which the molten metal will be introduced: the cavity has to retain its shape until the metal has solidified and the casting is separated from the mould by means of the shakeout operation. Cores are employed to determine the negative characteristics of the casts. Moulds and cores in the aluminium casts production are made employing two different processes: hot box and cold box ( The lost foam casting is based on the dressing of an expanded polystyrene model. The granular polystyrene is pre-expanded with aqueous vapour and pressed in slices into aluminium moulds at the temperature of 115 The employed aluminium is liquid (only a small aluminium quantity is fed to the furnace in lingots) and is fed to the furnace with produced cast shavings. Sodium and potassium chlorides are added in the ladle in order to avoid the contact between the liquid aluminium and the air (that would determine the metallic aluminium oxidation) and to allow the skimming of the superficial layer made of aluminium oxides and chlorides salt (aluminium slags). Sodium is added too as a modifying agent. The melt is performed by gravity die casting ( The cast shakeout, cleaning and finishing operations are realized in order to eliminate sand, fine particles and the metal fins. The cast is shaken out opening the permanent shells and/or eliminating sands by means of a sieving phase, a shot blasting phase or a thermal treatment depending on the kind of adopted molding system. Then there is the shaving operation. Further finishing treatments foresee the cast control by means of pressure tests and the dimensional control by means of penetrant fluids and radiographic techniques ( The different kinds of wastes that are produced in the Carmagnola foundry plant together with their destination are reported in The wastes reported in italic character (see All the reagents employed are A.C.S. grade and the flasks and the glassware are A class. All the analyses were performed on dried samples. The particle-size analysis was realized on samples of about 5 The metals (Na, K, Mg, Mn, Fe, Cr, Zn, Pb, Cd, Cu, Ca) contents were obtained through an acid digestion of 0.5 The aluminium content was gathered through an acid digestion of 0.25 The results of the particle-size distribution analysis of the considered Carmagnola wastes are reported in The sample FATA mud has a fraction below 0.1 The Policast mud and the SIAT powder that have a similar particle-size distribution analysis show a very different silica and some metals content (particularly Al and Mg). Besides the chemical analyses indicated that Policast mud is polluted and with impurities so it cannot be easily recycled for lost foam moulding. Fata mud has a high silica content and a low calcinations loss, therefore is possible to hypothesize a recycle as silica sand for semipermanent moulding lines after the elimination of the fine fraction below 0.1 The cleaning powder is characterized by a low silica content, a high metals content (particularly Mg, Fe, Zn, Cu and Al) and a high calcinations loss indicating that this is a very polluted sample with heavy treatments required for recycle/reuse alternatives. Furnace slags were chemically characterized to evaluate the reuse as inert material in civil employment. The characterization results show a high Cr content. On the grounds of the afore mentioned observations the suggested waste recycling and/or reuse solutions are the following: The FATA mud (1050 The SIAT powder (1120 The wastes Policast mud (1050 The furnace slags were tested to be reused as inert material. The 0.1–0.6 Compliance Test EN 12457/4 adopted by the European community to evaluate the required landfill disposal (1999/31/CE, 2003/33/CE) and it is employed by the Danish country too in order to assess the inert materials reuse (really the Danish country applies the Test EN 12457/3 characterized by a solid/liquid ratio equal to 1:2 b.w.). Italian law test for the facilitated recovery of not dangerous waste (DM 5/2/1998). The test EN 12457/4 is a batch test and is performed on materials with particle-size dimensions below 10 The Italian law test is a sequential batch test and is performed on materials with particle-size dimensions below 10 The 0.1–0.6 The furnace slags do not complies with the requirements of the Italian law for the facilitated recovery of not dangerous waste (DM 5/2/1998) because of the chromium value, so it cannot be defined as “inert waste”. Besides this residues agrees with the European Community “not dangerous waste” definition for landfill disposal (2003/33/CE) because the chromium value obtained by means of test EN 12457/4 is too high for the “inert waste” definition. This residue does not comply with the requirements of the Danish law for the 1st category inert materials (26/6/2000) because of the chromium value. On the grounds of the performed chemical and physical characterization and of the treatment laboratory tests applied on the residues of the Carmagnola foundry plant it was possible to underline the following technical solutions able to recycle/reuse about 3300 Internal recycle of 860 Internal recycle of 1060 Internal recycle of 80 External reuse of 1350 No recycle/reuse solution was singled out for the furnace slag wastes (540