The computational fluid dynamics (CFD) has been recently recognised to be a very powerful tool for analysis of contactor behaviour or for reactor design, both being of considerable interest to chemical engineers. In this paper, a model of turbulent two-fluid flow is applied to the simulation of hydrodynamics in discs and doughnuts pulsed columns. The task concerns a two-phase countercurrent turbulent non-stationary flow in a complex geometry with high volume fraction of the dispersed phase in some areas resulting in global hold-up up to 30%. The simulations have been performed using the CFD software ASTRID developed by Electricité de France (EDF). Concerning hydrodynamic parameters (continuous phase velocity, turbulent kinetic energy, hold-up), the results follow the tendencies of the experimental knowledge. The model validation is based on the mean hold-up determination upon a representative column compartment, which is compared to experimental data. The work demonstrates a possibility for prediction of the mean column hold-up using the Eulerian approach.Liquid–liquid extraction consists in separation of one or several components (solute) from a liquid phase mixture by addition of another non-miscible or partially miscible liquid phase (solvent), in which the solute is preferentially dissolved. This separation process is often operated in continuous mode in column-type gravitational contactors with internals (packing, baffles, various types of plates, etc.) mounted in the apparatus body. Two immiscible liquid phases flow countercurrently, one being dispersed into the other. Each extraction equipment attempts to produce larger interfacial area often by applying mechanical agitation to better disperse the phases ( While thermodynamics determines the number of theoretical stages, the mass transfer efficiency is governed mainly by local hydrodynamic characteristics as local volume fraction of the dispersed phase (hold-up), velocity and stress fields, and interfacial area. These parameters are not easily accessible for measurement and are even more difficult to predict, due to complexity of the real two-phase turbulent flows. For a long time, these predictions appear as a main goal for contactor design methodology development ( In this context, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) has become a promising powerful tool of considerable interest to chemical engineers, which is permanently improved concerning physical and mathematical modelling, numerical treatment, validation, and applications. The same path of improvements has been followed in the case of solvent extraction equipment, with a particular focus on DDP columns mentioned above. They offer a complex situation including almost all difficulties accompanying the operation of liquid–liquid contactors: sophisticated geometry, turbulent flow containing high volume fraction of a second dispersed phase (hold-up), unsteadiness due to flow pulsation, drop size distribution resulting from breakage and coalescence processes, interfacial deformation under certain conditions, interactions between the fluids and the material of walls and packing, etc. As the development of models accounting for all phenomena is still far from completion, generally two parallel ways contribute to validation of existing CFD tools: experimental studies on specific phenomena in order to acquire data for supporting their modelling, and more global validations of CFD software at industrial or semi-industrial scale with objective to test the models performance and their limits at a given level of development. This study belongs to the second type, continuing a series of works devoted to particular equipment chosen as a test case (DDP columns). As a first step, the attention has been focused on single-phase flow prediction. A two-phase liquid flow in real industrial equipment (average hold-up larger than 10%) is often far from dilute state and can be quite dense, especially in some local zones and near to flooding regime. At these conditions, the dispersed phase constituents (droplets) modify the continuous-phase flow. Also, droplet interactions become more pronounced and should be taken into account. One-way coupling Lagrangian approach does not manage these two aspects. Lagrangian two-way coupling approach is able to account for the dispersed phase influence on the carrier phase, but in situations of larger hold-up it leads to quite difficult numerical management of interparticle and particle–wall interactions. An interesting alternative lies in Eulerian presentation of two-phase flow hydrodynamics. It uses two-fluid models that treat each phase separately. They are formulated in terms of two sets of conservation equations governing mass, momentum, and energy balances in each phase. These type of models ( In the present work, Eulerian approach is used for describing the hydrodynamic behaviour of a two-phase countercurrent flow in a DDP column with drop breakage and/or coalescing processes being in equilibrium. It means that no change in the ratio of these processes along a large number of compartments is assumed, which results in a stable drop size distribution and stable mean drop size. This assumption corresponds to real column operation at stationary conditions ( The main goal is to verify whether Eulerian simulations are able to represent the global behaviour of a countercurrent turbulent flow within an apparatus of complex geometry. Special attention is focused on the local spatial hold-up distribution in a compartment along a pulsation period and on the mean hold-up (spatial–temporal average), the latter being compared to experimental data. The CFD software ASTRID developed by Electricité de France (  Two phases flow countercurrently through the column due to their density difference. In our case, an ascending lighter liquid takes the role of continuous phase, while a descending heavy phase is dispersed into drops. Two settlers with diameter larger than the column are located at each end of the contactor in order to facilitate the separation of phases after their contact in the column body. Mechanical pulsations are imposed to the whole column volume, aiming at phase mixing and generation of turbulence. In this complex baffled geometry, a turbulent flow aids at creation of favourable conditions for breaking down of drops (high shear stresses), thus producing large interfacial area required for an efficient interphase mass transfer. Furthermore, the direct through-column passage is hindered by the internal obstacles (discs being larger than doughnuts apertures), which creates flow circulations and ensures prolonged time for contact between the phases. In the classical two-fluid model formulation, the equations for each phase are directly derived from the local instantaneous conservation equations for single-phase flow by density-weighted averaging, adding also terms for mass, momentum and energy transfer rate at the interface ( For weighted averaging, the characteristic phase function   It is seen that the averaged phase characteristic function corresponds to the phase volume fraction The phase average value The corresponding set of equations for each phase is   A standard More detailed formulation of the two-phase turbulence equations can be found in At small dispersed phase hold-up, The collision model is based on the kinetic theory of granular flows. Considering gas–solid systems involved in fluidised and circulating beds, Here The evolution of The situation of The interfacial momentum transfer model (Eq. In Eq. The term The drag force A summary of drag coefficient correlations for a single sphere In a multiparticle system, the drag force acting on each particle is affected by the presence of surrounding particles. A number of empirical correlations have been derived to account for this effect. As it has been justified above, we could assume the droplets as spheres with immobile interfaces. Consequently, the models developed for solid particles ( In a cloud of mono-sized spherical particles, the number of particles per unit volume expressed as a function of dispersed phase volume fraction Neglecting the effect of surrounding particles on the drag force acting on each droplet, the resulting drag force per unit volume becomes The impact of particle cloud on the drag force can be accounted via modifications of the drag coefficient in Eq. An expression relating  As seen from A study of The same expression is used in Wallis correlation. So, the latter seems to be the most representative for our two-fluid system having physical properties approaching these of the solid–liquid systems used for correlation development. In order to assure correct comparison with available experimental results (  The results presented below are obtained by simulations over six compartments, the hydrodynamic structure observed being identical over the four central ones. Both first and last compartments serve to introduce the boundary conditions. The axial symmetry allows the calculation in this domain to be reduced to two-dimensional calculation between the axis and column wall in cylindrical coordinates 27 lines in radial direction, 5 of them in the disc free area and 12 in the doughnut free area; 14 lines in axial direction in the space separating two successive baffles, 2 lines cover a baffle thickness. The column has been run with two liquid systems with properties summarised in For the purpose of comparison, the simulated operational regimes reported in In standard operating conditions, the continuous phase instantaneous bulk velocity  The dispersed phase is fed into the column with a permanent flowrate In all simulation runs the same calculation strategy has been followed: as a first step, a permanent flow corresponding to the maximal oscillating flowrate for the continuous phase and to very small dispersed phase flowrate has been simulated until convergence. Then, in a second step, a countercurrent pulsed flow has been simulated until a local periodical flow has been obtained, which corresponds to the continuous phase bulk velocity The time step Friedrichs and Levy's convection number to be smaller than unity for both phases: The diffusion number of phase For all simulations, Friction boundary conditions for the continuous phase are obtained on all solid walls by use of a classical “wall function” ( Symmetry conditions are applied on the column axis. At the open boundaries, represented by the space between the wall and a disc, the continuous phase velocity is assumed uniform over the radius and variable with time according to The dispersed phase flowrate is not the same at the compartment entry and exit, because it depends on the instantaneous drop accumulation inside the compartment. For this reason, the boundary condition for the dispersed phase at the open boundaries is imposed as a constant pressure gradient. The turbulent quantities are calculated as a function of the inlet flowrate with respect to the hydraulic diameter. The main objective of the simulations performed in this work is to calculate the dispersed phase hold-up in the column in countercurrent flow regime. Firstly, a brief presentation of velocity and turbulent kinetic energy fields within a compartment during a pulsation period is made, which helps to visualise and better understand the flow structure and energy distribution. Then, the dispersed phase behaviour along a pulsation period is illustrated in terms of local volume fraction (hold-up) distribution. Further, numerical and experimental results are compared in terms of space and time-averaged hold-up (over a compartment and a pulsation period). For better understanding of the flow behaviour, we remind that the ascending flow velocity is maximal at Due to spatial periodicity, each field is shown for a single central compartment, bounded by the column axis at the left, by the column wall at the right, and by two successive discs at the bottom and top. The results presented here are obtained at the following conditions:   Globally, a very similar picture as for single-phase case is observed when dispersed phase is present. Small difference between the pictures of single-phase oscillating and two-phase pulsed flows has been observed in the moment It should be noted that the recirculation regime in both cases of one- and two-phase flow is unstable. The vortices appear and disappear in the course of a pulsation period. For a similar column ( Generally, the small difference between the one-phase oscillating flow and two-phase countercurrent pulsed flow can be explained by an unimportant contribution of permanent flow velocity  Unlike the situation observed in velocity field comparison, there is no symmetrical shift of the turbulent kinetic energy field in the adjacent cells during a cycle (compare  In the considered case (the dispersed phase being heavier one) the droplets accumulate preferentially on the packing elements attaining local hold-up values In the ascending part of pulsation, the gravitational downward movement of droplets is nearly completely ( During the descending part of the cycle ( The model validation is based on comparison of simulated space and time-averaged hold-up (over a compartment and along a pulsation period) with the experimental measurements of mean stage hold-up on the column with same geometry parameters and for identical operational conditions (  Firstly, the rigid obstacles and walls modify the momentum transfer between the phases. Secondly, in order to simplify the model, the dispersed phase boundary conditions postulate zero normal velocity component. This assumption should also contribute to increasing of hold-up, because it makes more difficult the return of the droplets in the continuous flow after their collision with the wall. It is indirectly shown by Although all above shortcomings, it seems that the integrated contribution of unconsidered factors appears to be not very pronounced. It is worthy to mention that accounting for the available and trustworthy knowledge, the CFD simulations presented here lead to results with estimated accuracy obviously better than the general precision used now in the design procedures of these contactors. Eulerian approach is applied to the study of two-phase turbulent countercurrent flows in extraction columns with complex geometry (DDP columns). They are characterised by high local values of the dispersed phase volume fraction (hold-up), thus being representative of a dense liquid–liquid medium with significant effect of the interparticle interactions, which are accounted for by incorporation of a collision model. The results of this study give ground to advance in several important points: It seems that the drag function correlation of It is demonstrated that the collision model based on the kinetic theory of granular media seems capable to predict correctly the inter-droplets collisions in some dense liquid–liquid systems, for which the droplets interactions result in collision-like behaviour, without significant droplet deformation. For systems with low interfacial tension, when droplets interaction results in intense deformations, this model would have certainly to be adapted or modified. The validation of simulation results is based on the average hold-up determination, the difference with experimental data being estimated at 12%, which is lesser than the precision actually used in the design of this type of equipment. The present work traces a more realistic way to investigate two-phase countercurrent flows in extraction columns, aiming at accumulation of information needed for design of industrial equipment. Generally, the two-fluid approach shows promising potentials for development in this area. 