Geological discontinuities such as natural fractures can have a significant effect on propagation behavior of hydraulic fractures. The effect of discontinuities depends mainly on ancillary parameters such as the permeability of natural fractures, frictional properties, in-situ stresses, fracture spacing and orientation, treatment pressure, and fracturing fluid viscosity. Interaction between natural fractures and advancing hydraulic fracture is a key challenge, especially in unconventional oil and gas reservoirs, since without fractures it is not possible to recover hydrocarbons from these reservoirs. For naturally fractured formations under reservoir conditions, natural fractures have narrow apertures which are around 10 Experimentally, several researchers Many field experiments have also been conducted to investigate the effect of natural fracture on the propagation of an induced hydraulic fracture Although various studies have been conducted on the interaction between hydraulic and natural fractures, but the propagation path of the induced hydraulic fractures at interacting with natural fractures that vary in both dip and strike relative to the initial hydraulic fracture and have a decisive impact on hydraulic fracture propagation in naturally fractured reservoirs have not yet been studied. This paper investigates the effect of dip and strike of a pre-existing fracture in a rock on the propagation behavior and geometry of hydraulic fracture when it intersects the existing fracture. The study is conducted on Portland cement blocks with a pre-existing fracture using laboratory hydraulic fracturing experiments and under true tri-axial stress conditions. The cement blocks were prepared in the State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing at China University of Petroleum. To select the most appropriate construction materials, the following factors were taken into consideration: materials should have the required strength and integrity in such a way that the tests can fully be carried out without any premature failures; materials properties should be representative of real reservoir rocks in terms of physical and mechanical properties; values of materials properties should be in such a way that they help the application of scaling analysis technique and; materials should be easily available, inexpensive and easy to work with in a laboratory setting. The blocks were constructed from the mixture of Chinese Portland Cement no. 325 and sieved fine sand by a fine-screen shaker. The mass ratio of cement and sand was 1:1. The ratio of material to water was 40%. These materials fulfilled the selection criteria given above. After the model blocks were cured into a metal mold with an inner space of a cubic of 300 The hydraulic fracturing tests on synthetic rock specimens (model blocks) were conducted using a tri-axial hydraulic fracturing test system ( To prevent shear stress between model block and pressure platen, a thin Teflon sheet covered on both sides and Vaseline was inserted. A MTS 816 servo hydraulic pump was also applied to inject the viscous fracturing fluid into the sample borehole. The laboratory hydraulic fracturing experiments were carried out to study the influence of horizontal differential stress and the pre-existing fracture dip and strike on propagating hydraulic fracture when hydraulically induced fracture interacting with a pre-existing fracture in fractured medium. The simulation of in-situ stresses conditions is a key point in the experiments of hydraulic fracturing. All the experiments were simulated in a normal-faulting stress regime. In this case, the vertical stress In the experiments, all wellbores were vertical and parallel to vertical principal stress. In addition, two values of the horizontal differential stresses, i.e. 5 and 10 Hence, with respect to design of nine types of dip and strike for the pre-fracture and considering horizontal differential stress factor in the model, a series of 18 hydraulic fracture experiments was conducted. Then, guar gum, as fracturing fluid, with a viscosity of 135 During the injection portion of the experiments, wellbore pressure was increased until the point where fracture initiation and propagation can be observed. The fluid injection continued, allowing the fracture to propagate until the fluid reached the model block boundary. Following the fluid injection and hydraulic fracturing portion of each of the experiments, the blocks were inspected to determine the extent of fracture propagation. Visual inspection of the block faces was followed by splitting the block to reveal the discontinuity and hydraulic fracture geometry. Finally, some photos were taken from each block slice. These photos were applied to analyze the propagation direction of hydraulic fracture before, during, and after interaction with a pre-existing fracture. Considering the conducted experiments, it was found that under conditions under which high differential stress exist, hydraulic fracture tends to be single and straight By conducting laboratory experiments, three types of interactions between hydraulic and pre-existing fractures were observed ( arrest by opening and dilation of the pre-fracture as indicated by fluid flow along the pre-fracture; arrest by shear slippage of the pre-fracture without dilation and fluid flow along the pre-fracture and; pre-fracture crossing. By considering two values (1 and 2.5) of horizontal differential stress to investigate the influence of dip and strike of the pre-fracture on hydraulic fracture propagation behavior in fractured reservoirs, the hydraulic fracture experiments were designed in two phases as following: In this phase, nine cases of the pre-fracture dip and strike with angles of 30°, 60° and 90° were used. The results of these experiments have been indicated in When dip and strike of the pre-fracture are near to right angle (90°) and intermediate to high (60° to 90°) respectively, at high dip (90°) and at intermediate and high strike (60° and 90°) of the pre-fracture, hydraulic fracture crossed the pre-fracture whilst hydraulic fracture was arrested by opening of the pre-fracture at low strike of the pre-fracture (30°). In other cases, when the pre-fracture dip was low and intermediate (30° and 60°) and its strike was low to high (30–90°), hydraulic fracture was arrested by opening and shear slippage of the pre-fracture. In other words, when the pre-fracture dip and strike were decreased, propagation behavior of the hydraulic fracture in the models was changed from crossing to arrest (by shear slippage or opening of the pre-fracture). At low and intermediate dip (30° and 60°), strike of the pre-fracture did not play a considerably important role on hydraulic fracture propagation, but when the pre-fracture dip was high (90°), strike of the pre-fracture played an important role on advancing hydraulic fracture behavior. In this phase, laboratory experiments were carried out on nine blocks prepared similar to previous phase in a normal stress regime. In fact, horizontal in-situ stresses conditions were changed and value of the horizontal differential stress was increased to 2.5. The experimental results demonstrated that with decreasing dip and strike of the pre-fracture, propagating hydraulic fracture behavior was changed to crossing from arrest. When dip and strike of the pre-existing fracture were decreased from 90° and 60° to 30°, the pre-fracture was opened and hydraulic fracture did not cross it ( For all cases, in other words, when the pre-fracture dip was 30°, 60°, and 90°, hydraulic fracture propagation behavior was almost similar to each other. As hydraulic fracture crossed the pre-fracture when the pre-fracture strike was 60° and 90° and when was decreased to 30°, hydraulic fracture was arrested by opening and shear slippage of the pre-fracture (except test 2–6). Therefore, when Overall, three different behaviors of hydraulic fracture propagation within each of these two phases were found. They were a function of the horizontal differential stress and the pre-fracture dip and strike ( These laboratory experimental results have also confirmed Potluri et al.׳s  In opening behavior, hydraulic fracture with the pre-fracture after interaction caused the fracturing fluid turned into the pre-fracture and propagated along it until the fluid reached the pre-fracture tip and stopped then. Hence, with continuous fluid pumping, two geometry types of the induced fracture growth were observed. Hydraulic fracture broke out and propagated from the tip of the pre-fracture along the direction of maximum horizontal stress. This case was observed in tests 1–4 and 1–7 that strike of the pre-fracture was 90° ( Hydraulic fracture propagated along the height direction of pre-existing fracture until the fracturing fluid reached the model boundary ( Hydraulically induced fractures were simple, straight and bi-wing before interaction with the pre-fracture whilst after interaction with the pre-fracture; tortuous fractures were observed along the height direction of pre-fractures. It was also observed that with the increase the Analysis of the experimental results clarifies that hydraulic fracture geometry was affected by dip and strike of the pre-fracture and horizontal differential stress. Therefore, two hydraulic fracture patterns were observed in a normal-faulting stress regime. It was found that it caused fractures with interacting branches due to the presence of pre-existing fracture in the model blocks. In this pattern, all the hydraulic fractures were vertical and perpendicular to the minimum principal stress. The hydraulic fracture tortuosity was observed along the direction of fracture height when dip and strike of the pre-fracture were low. What can be concluded from above is that the geometry and propagation behavior of hydraulic fractures are mainly controlled by in-situ stresses conditions and natural fractures geometry in naturally fractured reservoirs. It also appears that the complexity of induced fracture pattern causes some restrictions for fracture width at the intersection point, which could have a considerable effect on the proppant transport. Consequently, the resultant proppant bridging can affect the fracture network conductivity and well performance. Various authors (Blanton Based on experiments, Zhou et al. Moreover, three types of the pre-fracture dip and strike (30°, 60° and 90°) were considered by using a printer paper to simulate them in the model blocks. Laboratory experiments indicated three interaction modes of fracture at interaction point with pre-fracture: crossing, opening and shear slippage of the pre-existing fracture. After interaction, different cases of the induced fracture propagation in the models were also observed. For instance, hydraulic fracture was either propagated from the pre-fracture tip along the direction of maximum horizontal stress or propagated along the height of pre-existing fracture in the normal stress regime after interaction and opening of the pre-fracture. The first case was in agreement with both Potluri et al. Laboratory experiments on large size synthetic rock specimens were conducted to investigate the influence of the pre-fracture dip and strike on the hydraulic fracture propagation behavior and geometry in a normal faulting regime. The results of this research study indicated that hydraulic fracture geometry was a straight, simple, bi-wing, planar fracture before interaction with the pre-fracture, but after interaction its geometry was affected by differential horizontal principal stress and the pre-fracture dip and strike. It was also clear that the applied stress had distinctly different effects on the hydraulic fracture geometry. At low horizontal differential stress, the pre-fracture dip and strike played a key role on hydraulic fracture propagation. Meanwhile, the role of strike in a pre-fracture with low dip was less effective concerning the hydraulic fracture. Therefore, arrest of the fracture propagation was a dominant fracture behavior for hydraulic fracture. But with increasing the horizontal differential stress, the interaction between hydraulically induced and pre-fractures was decreased. Crossing was another dominant fracture behavior for pre-fracture with a small aperture. Under such conditions, with the interaction between hydraulic fracture and pre-fracture decreasing, the influence of the pre-fracture dip on hydraulic fracture propagation behavior is also decreased whilst the pre-fracture strike played a significant role in propagating hydraulic fracture behavior. Experimental results demonstrated that the hydraulic fractures were tortuous at low dip and strike of the pre-fractures. It was a non-planar propagation behavior along the direction of fracture height. Another thing required mentioning is that tortuous hydraulic fractures were not in relation with to the value of horizontal differential stress. Finally, it is evident that the dip and strike of the pre-fractures have a substantial influence on the hydraulic fracture propagation behavior and geometry. This work is financially supported by the