A powder containing about 90% of clinoptilolite in ammonium form, previously employed in a study concerning the thermal transformations of NH4-clinoptilolite, was used to prepare three samples with the following Cs+/NH4
                     + ratios: 0.51; 1.16; 5.00. These samples were subjected to thermal treatments of 2 h up to 1200 °C. Further treatments were executed at 1100 °C for 4, 8, 16 and 32 h. (NH4, Cs)-clinoptilolite underwent dehydration, de-ammoniation, dehydroxylation followed by amorphization and crystallization of new phases. Amorphization temperature increased, from 800 to 1000 °C, with the increase of cesium content. The composition of extraframework cations played the main role in determining the type and quantity of phases in the final products, as well as the kinetics of the crystallization. Basically, the thermal transformation of (NH4, Cs)-clinoptilolite can be described by two reactions producing: i) CsAlSi5O12 (CAS) + pollucite + glass, occurred in all samples; ii) mullite + cristobalite/tridymite + glass, occurred when Cs+/NH4
                     + ≤ 1.16. All samples showed the lowest residual glass content after 32 h at 1100 °C. The treatment of (NH4, Cs)-clinoptilolite with Cs+/NH4
                     + ≥ 1.16 allowed to confine all the cesium in crystalline phases, and the residual glass was below 15%. Conversely, when Cs+/NH4
                     + = 0.51 most of the cesium was in the prevalent (≈60%) amorphous phase.Literature reports the thermal transformation of synthetic Cs-exchanged zeolites to crystalline phases of potential interest for the storage of Theoretically, the thermal transformation of a NH At the same way, by considering the Si/Al ratios of clinoptilolite (from 4 to 5.7 Actually, the system might not evolve so “linearly” as indicated by the reactions (2–4). In fact, pollucite and silica can coexist, as reported for a natural sample This work examines the thermal transformations of (NH The material used in the present research is a powder enriched in clinoptilolite and conducted in NH Three materials based on bi-cationic clinoptilolite (hereafter BCMs), having different cesium and ammonium contents, have been prepared by ionic exchange starting from ES-NH (see above). The first sample has been prepared by contacting, for 2 h at 25 °C under continuous stirring, ES-NH with a 0.5 M solution of CsCl (pH 6.50; VWR Prolabo salt; purity 99.9%), setting a concentration of 30 g of ES-NH for 1 L of solution. After the exchange, the powder has been recovered by centrifugation and thoroughly washed with deionized water until complete removal of chloride solution (test performed on elutes with AgNO The second sample, ES-NC2, has been prepared starting from ES-NC1, contacted for 1 h under continuous stirring at 25 °C with a 0.05 M NH The third sample, ES-NC3, has been obtained by following the same procedure adopted to realize ES-NC2, except for the concentration of the NH Thermogravimetric, Derivative Thermogravimetric and Differential Thermal Analyses (hereafter, TG, DTG, and DTA) of the BCMs have been carried out using a TA Instrument Q600 simultaneous thermal analyzer. Amounts of about 19 mg of each sample have been heated to 1200 °C in an alumina crucible at the following operating conditions: 10 °C/min; air flow 100 ml/min. Analyses have been performed twice to improve the statistic of observations. The software TA-Universal Analysis has been used to evaluate the results. Chemical analyses of the three BCMs have been carried out at the Activation Laboratories Ltd (Ancaster, ON, Canada). Major elements have been determined after lithium metaborate/tetraborate fusion of the sample through Inductive Coupled Mass Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES), performed with a Varian Vista 735 ICP. Cesium content has been determined by ICP Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS; Perkin Elmer Sciex ELAN 9000) after sodium peroxide fusion of the samples. Ammonium content has been calculated on the basis of the Total N, determined through the Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) method. The Loss on Ignition (LoI) of the BCMs has been determined, in duplicate, in our laboratory by calcination for 2 h at 1000 °C. The H Thermal treatments have been performed in a muffle furnace (Vittadini mod. FS.3) using high-alumina crucibles (Coors™). Aliquots of about 250 mg of the BCMs have been subjected to a sequence of thermal treatments, each of 2 h, in the range 200–1200 °C. After each treatment, the samples have been analyzed through X-Ray Diffraction (see paragraph 2.6), then heated again by increasing the temperature of 100 °C. A second set of the three BCMs has been subjected to a series of thermal treatments of 4, 8, 16, and 32 h at 1100 °C, carrying out XRD analyses after each heating cycle. This type of treatment has been also performed at 1200 °C, but only on the sample ES-NC3. In all treatments, the samples have been put in the muffle at room temperature, brought to the desired temperature and heated for the set time, then extracted and left to cool in air. The three BCMs, both unheated as well as after each thermal treatment, have been analyzed employing a diffractometer Bruker D2-Phaser and the following conditions: 30 kV, 10 mA, CuKα radiation, LynxEye detector with an angular opening of 5°, 2θ range 6–70°, step size 0.020°, time per step 2 s, spinner 15 rpm. Before the analysis, all samples have been micronized using a Retsch MM400 mill (ZrO Morphological observations have been carried out on the BCMs heated at 1200 °C. The materials, placed on aluminum stubs, have been gold coated (AGAR automatic sputter coater B7341) and observed using a ZEISS EVO LS-10 Scanning Electron Microscope. The chemical compositions of the three BCMs are reported in The variation in the cationic population of the BCMs determines some changes in the XRD patterns of clinoptilolite. In particular, in The TG-DTG-DTA curves of the BCMs are reported in Also the last loss of weight, linked to dehydroxylation, depends on the ammonium content. The corresponding DTG peak at about 700 °C is particularly elusive, in fact it is weak for ES-NC3, almost imperceptible for ES-NC2 and undetectable for ES-NC1, whereas dehydroxylation determines a sharp peak at 673 °C in the NH The results of the 2-h thermal treatments are observable in ES-NC2 remains amorphous up to 1200 °C whereas, at the same temperature, the X-ray pattern of ES-NC3 shows weak reflections of cristobalite and mullite (  Merging the results of thermal and X-ray analyses, it can be said that (NH The chemical compositions of the heated BCMs in The data above reported point out that, basically, all the cesium contained in ES-NC1 and ES-NC2 can be confined in crystalline phases, whereas the majority of the cesium present in ES-NC3 remains in the glass, regardless of temperature and duration of the treatment. It should be recalled that in ES-NC3 mullite begins to nucleate before CAS ( The chemical compositions of the materials plotted in the tetrahedron of Many factors can favor or prevent phase transitions in a given zeolite, such as the chemical composition of the framework and extraframework, the synthesis conditions, and the heating modalities, either near or far from thermodynamic equilibrium In our experiments, the products containing the lowest amounts of glass are always those obtained after a treatment of 32 h at 1100 °C, hence with the same heating (and cooling) modalities, but the residual quantities of amorphous are very different ( Another aspect worthy of discussion is the presence of pollucite traces (≈1%) detected in some products, because this phase does not belong to the mullite-CAS-silica sub-system ( Basically, the thermal transformation of (NH As concerns the potential applications of the materials obtained through transformations thermally induced of (NH Upon heating, (NH The thermal transformation of (NH The composition of extraframework cations is the main factor in determining the type and quantity of phases in the final products, as well as the kinetics of the transformations. It should be noted that pollucite, albeit in traces, crystallizes even for compositions extremely poor of cesium which belong to the sub-system mullite-CAS-SiO As for the three compositions tested (Cs Basically, the treatment of (NH Further studies may elucidate which are the lowest cesium and ammonium contents that, in (NH Antonio Brundu acknowledges the financial support granted by the project “ The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at