The present special issue of ‘Materials Chemistry and Physics’ is the Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on sintering held in New Delhi from 22 to 25 February, 2000, the first international conference on the theme in new century and millennium. These conferences are periodically (once in 4 year) organised by the International Institute for the Science of Sintering, which has its head quarters at Belgrade, Yugoslavia. This is the second time that Delhi hosted this conference, the earlier being in 1983. The historical city, Delhi has in its credit the biggest ancient manmade sintered artifact, the famous iron pillar of Delhi, not hitherto manufactured anywhere. It is befitting that the conference was held in this city. The conference attracted more than 100 participants from 16 countries. From overseas the number of participants was as follows: Israel (7), Japan (5), USA (4), UK and Germany (3 each), Sweden and France (2 each), Australia, Austria, Canada, S. Korea, Taiwan, S. Africa, Yugoslavia, Brazil and Spain (1 each). In the inaugural session, in addition to the presentation of the message from the Secretary General of IISS Academician M.M. Ristic, the recently published book of Prof. G.S. Upadhyaya entitled ‘Sintered Metallic and Ceramic Materials’ (Wiley, UK) was released by Prof. S. Somiya, the Hon. Member of IISS. The conference was divided into 15 technical sessions, which included invited and contributed papers. In all, there were 72 technical papers, the quality of which were quite high. The present proceedings include most of the invited (28) and some contributed (18) papers after due peer-reviewing. They are classified in the following sections: fundamentals, ferrous metals, non-ferrous metals, oxide ceramics, non-oxide ceramics, cermets, ceramic matrix composites, magnetic and electronic materials and applications. Some of the papers are followed by discussions, which are published for the benefit of readers, who could not actually participate in the conference. The editor would like to thank his ex MTech student Mr. Pradyot Datta for helping him during editing. He once again expresses his gratitude to all the authors in extending their full support. It is unfortunate that Prof. Kolar the member of International Committee of the Conference died just before the conference. The proceeding is dedicated to him. It is very much hoped that the present volume shall be useful to researchers, teachers and technologists who wish to be on the forefront of sintering science and technology. The organising committee is indebted to the Indian sponsors of the conference namely IIT, Kanpur, PMAI, Mumbai, RRL, Bhopal and Widia (India) Ltd., Bangalore. Last but not the least, the editor is grateful to Prof. Lih J. Chen, Editor of the Journal of Materials Chemistry and Physics and Dr. V. Kiruvanayagam of Elsevier, Oxford for all the help offered for the timely publication of the proceedings. He is also extremely grateful to Academician M.M. Ristic and his able staff at IISS for all the co-operation.