Objective
                  This was a retrospective case-control study on total ruptures of the extensor apparatus of the knee, aimed to compare patella fractures with tendinous ruptures.
               
                  Methods
                  The sample included 190 patients and 198 total ruptures of the knee extensor apparatus. All patients were evaluated by the same examiner after a minimum one-year follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  Tendinous ruptures occurred most frequently in men, in younger patients, and had better clinical and functional outcomes when compared with patella fractures; however, the former presented higher levels of thigh atrophy. Patella fractures occurred most frequently in women and in older patients and caused most frequently caused residual pain, muscle weakness, and limitations in daily activities. Comminuted fractures were related to high-energy trauma, lower clinical and functional outcomes, and higher levels of residual pain and osteosynthesis failure. Early removal of osteosynthesis material was related to better outcomes. Regarding the tendinous ruptures, over half of the patients presented risk conditions for tendinous degeneration; a longer delay until surgery was related to lower Kujala scores.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The surgical repair of bilateral ruptures of the knee extensor apparatus resulted in satisfactory clinical and functional outcomes, which were better for tendinous ruptures when compared with patella fractures. However, these lesions are associated with non-negligible levels of residual pain, muscle weakness, atrophy, and other complications.The extensor apparatus of the knee consists of three basic structures: two tendons, the quadriceps and patellar; and one bone, the patella. The total rupture of this apparatus can occur through the bone or tendon, leading to an inability to actively extend the leg. Patellar fractures are more frequent than tendinous ruptures, in ratios ranging from 17:1 to 43:1; ruptures of the quadriceps tendon are more frequent than those of the patellar tendon. This was a retrospective study, comprising a mean of 5.1 years (range 1–10); 190 patients were retrieved, corresponding to 198 total ruptures of the extensor apparatus of the knee that were surgically treated. All patients with other associated traumatic injuries and those who could not be followed-up for a minimum of one year after surgery were excluded. The clinical evaluation included functional assessment, measurement of range of motion, and the application of a validated score for patellofemoral pathology, the Kujala score. The sample consisted of 190 patients or 198 ruptures, as eight were bilateral. The mean age was 58.82 In the analysis of the group with patellar fractures, the most common mechanism of injury was low energy (87.1%) direct trauma (86.4%). The predominant types of patellar fracture were C1, C3, and A1 considering the AO classification ( Regarding the group of tendon ruptures, falls were the cause of injury in 70.69% of cases, and indirect trauma was the most frequent (91.38%). The predominant mechanisms of injury were knee torsion (67.92%), hyperflexion of the knee (15.1%), and counter-resistance with the knee in semiflexion (9.43%). Five tendon ruptures occurred by direct trauma and consisted of fragments with direct tendon cut. The collapse occurred more frequently at the midpoint of the tendon (43.10%), followed by patellar insertion (39.66%), myotendinous transition (13.79%), and insertion at the level of the anterior tibial tuberosity (3.45%). Recurrence of tendon rupture was observed in 3.45%, ruptures in the context of total knee replacement in 3.45%, and bilateral ruptures in 12.07% of cases of tendinous rupture. Half of the patients with tendinous rupture were considered to be at risk for degeneration and tendinous rupture of the extensor apparatus, and 2.07% presented risk drug intakes ( The present study demonstrated that the grade of comminution of patellar fractures was associated with higher-energy trauma and with less favorable clinical and functional results. The comminution, a difficulty to achieve anatomic reduction and stability of osteosynthesis, as well as the need to use circular and double tension bands, likely contribute to the fact that C3 fractures and these types of osteosynthesis present higher levels of osteosynthesis removal and residual pain, which leads to a worse prognosis of these fractures. Although consolidation is achieved in most cases, allowing for reasonable clinical and functional outcome, the surgical treatment of patellar fractures leads to high levels of residual pain, atrophy, muscle strength deficit, and other complications, which is in agreement with the literature. Tendon ruptures occurred more frequently at the midsection of the tendon and patellar insertion. This is in agreement with the fact that almost all tendon ruptures of the knee extensor apparatus occur after a degenerative and inflammatory process, which is more pronounced in the tendinous midsection and in osteotendinous junction in which the tendon resistance is significantly reduced and the risk of rupture, increased. When comparing groups of patellar fractures and tendinous ruptures ( Limitations of this study are related to the fact that it was an observational retrospective study with a subjective clinical assessment and to the difficulty of controlling the variables that determine clinical and functional results, and complications. The strengths of the present study include the large number of patients in each group, as well as the use of objective and validated measures for clinical and functional assessment of range of motion and the Kujala score. Surgical treatment of total ruptures of the extensor apparatus of the knee provided good functional results, which were superior for tendon ruptures when compared with patellar fractures, probably due to higher age of the latter patients. Nonetheless, rupture of the extensor apparatus is associated with high levels of residual pain, muscle weakness, muscle atrophy, and other complications, which is probably due to a loss of dynamic balance of the patellofemoral joint. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. To Dr. Margarida Marques, from the Statistics Department of the Hospital and University of Coimbra, for her collaboration.