This paper develops a procedure for the design or improvement of mineral flotation circuits, based on a mathematical programming model with disjunctive equations. The model developed corresponds to a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP), avoiding nonlinear expressions.
                  The procedure is characterized by: (1) The development of two hierarchized superstructures, such that the first level represents processing systems, which must satisfy certain tasks. The second level represents circuits of equipment needed to carry out the tasks of each system. (2) The superstructures are modeled mathematically including the selection of equipment, mass balance, and operational conditions. (3) The objective function is the maximization of profits.
                  With the help of examples that are included to demonstrate the advantages of the procedure, it is shown that the method can be useful in deciding the configuration of the flotation circuits and the operational conditions.Mineral flotation processes consist of several units that are grouped into banks and interconnected in a predefined manner in order to divide the feed into concentrate and tailing. The behavior of these processes depends on the configuration of the circuit and the physical and chemical nature of the slurry treated. Many of the complex circuits used in the industry are the results of attempts to find more efficient methods for treating minerals so that the recovery of the minerals is maintained at a maximum while the dilution of the concentrate by gangue is maintained at a minimum. The design of these circuits is carried out based on the experience of the designer, with the help of laboratory tests and simulations. Some attempts have been described in the literature on automated methods for the design of these types of circuits Studies carried out to date can be classified as those that consider operational cost and capital as an objective function The present study presents the formulation of a procedure for the conceptual design or improvement of flotation circuits for minerals, characterized by: Superstructures are developed in a hierarchical form, so that at the first level, processing systems are presented which must carry out rougher, cleaner, and scavenger tasks. At a second level, equipment circuits are presented for the completion of each task. A mathematical model for the superstructures is developed, which includes mass balance, operational conditions, logic expressions, and disjunctive expressions for the selection of the equipment. The resultant model represents a MILP model. The objective function represents maximization of profit. The design strategy includes two levels of hierarchized superstructures. The upper level includes a task superstructure, in which a rougher system (the task of which is feed processing to obtain the maximum separation), a cleaner system (the task of which is purification of the concentrate from the rougher and/or scavenger to obtain the final concentrate), and a scavenger system (the task of which is the treatment of the tailings from the rougher and/or cleaner to obtain the final tailings) are included. The problem can then be defined as, given its technical characteristics, costs, prices, and the feed mass flow find the topology or structure of the process circuits (by searching through a group of hierarchized superstructures) as well as the operational conditions that maximize the profits of the plant. The strategy to be utilized includes establishing the previously mentioned superstructures, and then generating a mathematical model for the superstructure. The mathematical solution to the problem should deliver mass flows (zero mass flows represent the non-existence of streams), equipment selection and size, and the configuration of the plant. First, it is necessary to define some sets, parameters, and variables in order to develop the model. Then, using these definitions, the equations may be developed, which include mass balances, yields, and operational conditions. The principal sets are: Also, the following sets are necessary: Since the superstructures are analogous, the sets Also LL, LS1, and LS2 are subsets of In the mixers and flow dividers, there are: The assignment of the feedstock flows for each species Equations similar to  The mass balance equations in each flotation step are The separation factor may be obtained from plant data, values from pilot plants, or theoretical or empirical models. For example, The input and output streams of each system are connected to stream of the task superstructure, thus In Operational conditions, such as streams with zero flow, and upper or lower bounds for flows of each stream are easily included in the model. It is also possible to include logic expressions when these are required. For example, if the stream 12 (streams between cleaner and scavenger) wants to be excluded, then stream 12 should not be included in set The optimal selection of the circuit requires that an appropriate objective function be defined upon which the values of the operational and structural variables may be determined. Since in the present case, the income depends on the structure and operational conditions, a useful function is the difference between income and costs. This can be observed as a multi-objective function, in which income is maximized and the costs are minimized. The objective function to be developed is generalized and may be adapted to other situations. For example, in plants where amortization of capital has already been achieved, the objective function may simply be the maximization of income minus the operational costs, or in plants where the mineral content of the concentrate and production levels are known, total costs may be minimized. The generalized objective function is: Different relations may be applied for calculation of the income depending on the type of product and its market. For base metals, the formula net-smelter-return may be utilized The annualized costs of the plant may be considered as the sum of the operational costs and the capital costs. This is: The operational costs include energy, consumption of reagents, labour, and maintenance. Majority of these costs depend more on the feedstock flow into the plant than on its configuration, and thus are not considered in this analysis. Only the energy costs of mixing the slurry, generation of bubbles, and dispersion are considered, that is: The capital costs may be determined using exponential expressions of the capacities,  In these equations, WI The objective functions 14, 16, 17, 20 and 25, subject to restrictions 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12 and 13, represent a problem of mixed-integer linear programming (MILP). This is termed model P1. The variables to be optimized are mass flow rates ( Since The disjunctive The objective This section presents the applications of models P1 and P2 to the design of a copper concentration plant, whose species are: Case 1 represents model P1 with 15 cells per bank in all the stages. Flow division was not considered ( Case 2 represents model P2 with three levels of cell numbers (10, 15, and 20) per bank in all the stages. The possibility of separation of flows in all the separators was not considered, that is, only two levels of flow division were considered in this case (1/0 or 0/1). The circuit obtained has the same structure of case 1. However, the number of cells per bank in the rougher was only 10, and for the cleaner–rougher, cleaner–cleaner, and scavenger the cells per bank were increased to 20. The variation in the number of cells changes the performance of each bank and therefore the mass flow in the circuit (see The sensitivity of the solution found to other levels of stream division was considered. Several other situations were studied. To study the potential effect that variation can have on the metal price in the structure of the circuit, the metal price was changed from US$1500/ton to US$2030/ton; no changes were observed in the circuit structure and mass balance. To study the effect that an improvement can have in the flotation conditions, the flotation rate of species 1, for the cleaner–cleaner stage was increased from 2.265 to 3.800. Here, both the configuration of the circuit and the number of cells per bank showed modifications. Finally, to study the effect of increasing the number of stages available, three situations were included: First, a scavenger–scavenger stage was added to the scavenger system, second, a cleaner–scavenger stage was added to the cleaner system. In both cases, no variations were observed, this means that the stage added was not selected. Third, cleaner–cleaner, cleaner–scavenger, scavenger–cleaner, and scavenger–scavenger stages were included. In this case, the topology selected is shown in A procedure has been developed for the design and improvement of mineral concentration plants. The most important feature of the model is its linearity, avoiding nonlinear characteristic of this problem. The mass balances in flotation bank and stream divider were represented by disjunctive equations that permitted the presentation of bilinearities with mixed-integer linear equations. The results showed that for the example studied the division of flows had little effect on determination of the most efficient circuits. This result agrees with practice since it is unusual to divide a stream in mineral concentration circuits. Also, when several levels of stream division were considered, the solution found includes the division of several streams, which complicate the circuit configuration. Modeling of the flotation banks was carried out using disjunctions with discrete values for the concentrate/feedstock ratio. This is only half-truth since this ratio varies discretely according to the number of cells, but varies continuously with other parameters such as the residence time. The results showed that for the example studied these ratios can have an effect on the solution found. The study of several other situations proves that the model can be useful in the analysis and design of circuits for mineral concentration. Several situations can be evaluated, such as: removal of crossover streams, changes in logic relationships, adjustment in the number of banks, selection of banks, selection of number of cells in each bank, etc. Future study will include extension of the model to examine the possibility of selecting between various types of equipment (columns and banks) and incorporation of intermediate milling. The authors wish to thank CONICYT for financial support, through Fondecyt Project 1020892.