The dust waste formed during steelmaking in electric arc furnace (EAF) is rich in ferrous and nonferrous metals. Recycling of this dust as a raw material in iron or steel-making is hazardous and therefore it is mostly dumped. This paper demonstrates recycling of EAF dust through selective dissolution of metal oxides in a deep eutectic ionic liquid. It was found that about 60% of Zn and 39% of Pb could be dissolved from the dust when stirred for 48h in 1 choline chloride:2 urea ionic liquid at 60°C. The resultant electrolyte was subsequently fed to a conventional three-electrode cell where cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were conducted to describe its electrochemical behavior. Two deposition peaks were determined and ascribed to deposition of zinc and lead. Static potentials were successively applied to electrowin metallic zinc. SEM/EDX investigations showed that the zinc electrowon contained remarkable contents of lead.Electric arc furnace (EAF) is used for steelmaking from ferrous scraps, as the main charge material, mixed with pig iron and/or direct reduced iron. It produces between 10 and 25 The type of scrap melted in the EAF predominantly determines chemical composition of the dust generated. When galvanized steel scraps are used in the EAF, most of the zinc ends up in the dust and fume due to its very low solubility in the molten steel and slag The main quantitative constituents in the dust are iron and zinc These aspects, combined with growing concern about environmental issues, led researchers and steelmakers to develop several approaches for recycling EAF dust. These approaches are mainly categorized under hydrometallurgical As a new approach for using non-aqueous solutions to dissolve selective metals from oxide mixtures, a recent study In a more practical approach, a new class of environmentally friendly ionic liquids has offered not only the possibility of selective dissolution of some metal oxides, but also the subsequent electrodeposition of the metals The aim of the present study was to verify a new approach by which zinc and lead-bearing compounds were dissolved from EAF dust in a deep eutectic solvent, namely 1 choline chloride:2 urea ionic liquid. This was followed by electrowinning of zinc layer containing remarkable contents of lead. The electrodeposition of metallic phase from the ionic liquid was characterized by cyclic voltammetry measurements. In addition, the microstructure and composition of the electrowon metal was described by SEM/EDX investigations. The study included also the assessment of the chemical composition of EAF dust, as-received and after dissolution experiments, by X-Ray fluorescence (XRF). The EAF dust investigated in this study was obtained from Suez Steel Company, Suez, Egypt. The major oxides composition of as-received dust was investigated by X-ray fluorescence (XRF), and listed in The deep eutectic ionic liquid consisted of choline chloride and urea. Choline chloride (HOC Choline chloride and urea with a stoichiometric eutectic molar ratio of 1:2, respectively, were mixed in a glass beaker, and heated gently up to 90 10 Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements and electrowinning experiments were carried out at 60 For CV measurements, a platinum sheet with working area of 1 cm For electrowinning experiments, two platinized titanium network sheets (80 Before CV and electrowinning experiments, the electrodes were prepared. Copper strips were pickled in concentrated HCl for 2 For measuring the typical current efficiency, each specimen was weighed before and after electrowinning and the mass (M) of the electrowon alloy was found as: M The cathodic current efficiency of the alloy was calculated as The electrochemical equivalent of the alloy was calculated as: The chemical composition of EAF dust, as-received and after dissolution experiments, was investigated by X-Ray fluorescence (XRF) apparatus with the model “Axios (PANalytical) with SuperQ and Omnian”. X-ray diffraction (XRD) investigations were conducted on EAF dust samples using the diffractometer model “X’Pert PW3020 (PANalytical) with X’Pert Industrie and X’Pert High Score” with Cu target. The dust sample was step-scanned from 5° to 80° 2 The typical major oxide composition of EAF dust, as-received and after dissolution in the ionic liquid, is presented in In addition to Zn and Fe oxides and oxides coming from fluxing additives such as CaO and SiO The mineralogical composition of the dust was revealed by XRD, as shown in In a comparison observation between the chemical composition of the as-received dust and that of the dust residue after dissolution experiment, The solubility of a range of metal oxides in 1 choline chloride:2 urea ionic liquid has been quantified in a relatively recent study  Although the cathodic sweep showed two distinct cathodic peaks, Pb was possibly co-deposited with Zn during the cathodic sweep within the Zn deposition peak. This was supported by the notice that the charge of Pb anodic peak, expressed by the area enclosed by the Pb anodic wave in In order to demonstrate the effect of magnitude of the reductive potential applied on the composition of the metal or alloy electrowon, a set of CVs were run on the ionic liquid electrolyte and graphed in   Following the variation of the coulombic current efficiency ( The current efficiency values estimated from CV diagrams ( Potentiostatic electrodeposition experiments were conducted in order to electrowin the possible metallic species from the deep eutectic ionic liquid used for dissolution of EAF dust. Potentiostatic mode was chosen to apply the valuable results obtained from the CV measurements presented above.  The present study demonstrated an approach showing a successful extraction of Zn and Pb from EAF dust into 1 choline chloride:2 urea ionic liquid followed by direct electrowinning of Zn–Pb alloy from the ionic liquid. Eventually, it can be stated that the approach presented is promising and the following advantages can be claimed: It allows direct electrowinning of Zn metal which has an economical value albeit containing Pb. Zn–Pb alloys can be used as a master alloy in production of Cu–Zn–Pb alloys; commercially named leaded bronze (89% Cu, 9.25% Zn, 1.75% Pb), leaded brass (Cu, 32–38% Zn, 1.5–3% Pb), and leaded nickel silver (65% Cu, 2%Pb, 25% Zn, 8% Ni) The residual dust, after its extraction in the ionic liquid, with lower contents of Zn and Pb oxides and higher contents of insoluble Fe oxides can be recycled in the EAF Having lower contents of Zn and Pb, the residual dust will be more preferred than the as-generated EAF dust for incorporation in cement synthesis. Higher ZnO content retards hydration of Portland cement and consequently postpones concrete hardening, as well as lowers the concrete strength Even if the residual dust will be dumped, decreasing Zn and Pb contents enables stabilization by using Portland cement as a binder for detoxifying the EAF dust prior to its landfill disposal However, about 60% of Zn and 39% of Pb in the dust were extracted, and the electrowon metal was a Pb-contained Zn alloy which has not a specific practical application. In this context, further research is recommended in two directions: Firstly, focusing on how to recover Zn and Pb separately. CV measurements shown above illustrated that separate cathodic waves for Zn and Pb were observed and they are separated by ∼640 Secondly, increasing the solubility of Zn and Pb in the ionic liquid through studying the influence of grain size of the dust. Milling of the dust might help to increase its solvation. Furthermore, the effect of drying the dust and ionic liquid, prior to the dissolution experiments, on the Zn solubility may be an important point of research. A deep eutectic ionic liquid, namely 1 choline chloride:2 urea, was investigated to dissolve metal oxides present in a dust sample generated from an Egyptian electric arc furnace. About 60% of Zn and 39% of Pb found in the dust as complex compounds were selectively dissolved. Cyclic voltammetry measurements showed the possibility to electrowin Zn and Pb and determined the potential range to be applied. Then, Pb-contained Zn layers were electrowon on copper substrates through potentiostatic electrodeposition procedure. The approach presented was found to be promising not only because it enables direct electrowinning of Zn which has a high economical value albeit containing Pb, but also it allows the residual dust – with lower Zn and Pb contents – to be recycled in steelmaking processes, reused in cement synthesis, or stabilized before landfilling. Further research was recommended to recover Zn and Pb separately. The author would like to thank Prof. Volkmar Neubert for facilitating SEM, XRF and XRD investigations in labs of Clausthal University. Thanks also to World University Service (WUS) program funded by