This paper presents an experimental investigation on the behavior of stiffened octagonal concrete-filled double-skin tube (CFDST) stub columns subjected to axial compression. A total of eight specimens were prepared and tested under axial compression aiming to study the effects of longitudinal stiffeners and hollow ratio on the elastic-plastic local buckling and ultimate load-carrying capacity of the test columns. The specimens consist of two control specimens without stiffeners (unstiffened columns) and two specimens stiffened with outer-inner tubes welded stiffeners (OI stiffeners) in four sides of the octagonal steel section. In addition, four specimens were stiffened with two types of stiffeners: OI stiffeners and outer tube welded stiffeners (O stiffeners) in eight sides of the outer steel tube section. Furthermore, two hollow ratios were employed. Based on the test results, the ultimate load-carrying capacity, load-displacement curves, load-strain response, ductility, and failure modes were discussed and clarified. The test results indicated that the strength and ductility of the specimens were improved greatly by the presence of the stiffeners. The stiffeners significantly enhanced the confinement and prevented the occurrence of elastic-plastic local buckling of the outer tube. Besides, current design equations were used to predict the ultimate load-carrying capacity of octagonal CFDST stub columns. The test results were then compared with the predicted ultimate capacities of existing design equations. These predictions showed good agreement with the test results.Concrete-filled steel tubular (CFST) members have been widely adopted in modern structures because of their superior structural efficiency, aesthetic appearance, economic benefits and speed of construction [ Substantial interest in adopting CFDST columns has been grown throughout the world. As a result, different types of CFDST columns have been developed whether by using new construction materials or modifying the configuration of conventional CFST columns in order to improve their structural performance and meet the specific design and economic requirements [ For the development of concrete-filled tubular axial members with octagonal cross-section, considerable efforts have been spent on investigating the behavior of octagonal CFST columns under axial compression. Aoki et al. [ Limited studies were also carried out to investigate the axial behavior of CFDST stub columns with octagonal cross-section. Firstly, Yang et al. [ From the aforementioned literature on concrete-filled tubular columns, it can be found that most of the studies in the last few decades focused only on solid and hollow CFST columns with circular and square (rectangular) sections. In addition, considerable attention was paid for solid CFST columns with octagonal section. However, the investigations on the axial behavior of octagonal CFDST columns is still very scarce. Moreover, the stiffening methods were only provided for the outer steel tubes or inner tubes. Hence, it is needed to provide relative experimental data for the development of proper design guidelines for the application of the stiffened octagonal CFDST axial members in the field of civil engineering. Accordingly, this research is conducted to further improve the advantages of constructability and confinement effectiveness of octagonal CFDST stub columns by enhancing their strength and ductility with longitudinal stiffeners. Therefore, the authors proposed two types of longitudinal stiffeners namely outer-inner tubes welded stiffeners (O To investigate the general behavior of unstiffened and stiffened octagonal CFDST stub columns under axial compression. To discuss the effects of longitudinal welded stiffeners and hollow ratio on the behavior of octagonal CFDST stub columns. To observe the contribution of stiffeners in delaying the elastic-plastic local buckling of outer steel tubes, improving strength and enhancing the ductility. To compare the experimental results with the existing equations predictions. In total, eight CFDST stub columns with octagonal cross-section were designed, fabricated and tested. These columns included two unstiffened specimens, two specimens with outer-inner tubes welded stiffeners (O In this study, the actual slenderness ratio ( Prior to casting of the specimens, the octagonal CFDST stub columns were carefully positioned. The columns were then filled with normal strength concrete (NSC) in the cavity between the outer and inner steel tubes. Poker vibration was used to compact the concrete in order to expel the air bubbles in the freshly poured concrete. Concrete was cast in two batches due to the limited capacity of concrete mixer. Prior to the cast of concrete infill, the top of columns was ground smooth and flat to ensure a uniform load would be applied to the columns. During the casting process, three concrete cubes were cast and cured in similar condition as the CFDST specimens for each batch to evaluate the compressive strength of NSC. The octagonal CFDST test columns were labeled such that the hollow tubes, O Grade Q345 steel plate with measured thickness of 2.73 mm (nominal thickness However, for stiffened specimens, all the sides of octagonal-section and stiffeners were initially cut into segments to facilitate the welding process. The O The material properties of outer steel tubes, stiffeners, and inner seamless steel tubes were determined by tensile coupon tests in accordance with GB/T 228.1–2010 [ The locations and dimensions of the steel coupons are depicted in Full stress-strain curves up to failure of three tensile coupon tests are presented in In this investigation, the strength of concrete does not importantly contribute to the scope of experiment so that only normal strength concrete (NSC) was used as sandwiched infill between the external and internal steel tubes. The material ingredients of the infill concrete included: 42.5 Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC), sand, (5–10 mm) and (10–15 mm) coarse aggregate, water, and polycarboxylate superplasticizer. The mix proportion is shown in The materials were then mixed using concrete mixer on site in Chongqing University. The concrete was mixed in two batches to suit the mixer capacity. Prior to the cast of specimens, three standard concrete cubes of 150 mm × 150 mm × 150 mm were cast and cured in the same conditions as the CFDST stub columns. The cubic compressive strength test was conformed to GB 50107–2010 [ A hydraulic compression machine with a capacity of 10,000 Axial load was applied at a rate of 1.5 The prominent failure modes of the octagonal CFDST stub columns included local buckling of steel tubes, concrete crushing and weld cracks. The unstiffened specimens O1S00 and O2S00 suffered end-buckling at the top end of the outer steel tubes, which was followed by sudden weld crack in one-line weld, as shown in For inner components analysis, the outer skin of the specimens was cut along two longitudinal edges and removed. Thus, the damage of inside concrete, stiffeners and inner tubes could be observed. The failure mode of inner components of octagonal CFDST short columns were concrete crushing, inward buckling of inner tubes and lateral buckling of stiffeners. The sandwiched concrete of the control specimens O1S00 and O2S00 crushed at the top where the buckling and weld crack occurred, whereas the sandwiched concrete of the stiffened specimens was damaged in local concrete crushing mode and the crushing zone also appeared at locations where the local buckling occurred in the outer and inner steel tubes, as depicted in As shown in The axial load versus the corresponding displacement ( It is clearly seen that all curves composed of initial linear elastic part at the beginning of loading. After that, the elastic-plastic stage followed and usually started from 80% of the ultimate strength [ At the start, it should be noted that the strain recorded by each gage only represented the location of the measured point, and sometimes it would vary if the local buckling occurred at that location. The average strain (axial or transverse) was taken for the analysis. The average horizontal and vertical strains were calculated as the average readings of four horizontal and eight vertical strain gages installed at the mid-height of the outer steel tubes for the test specimens, respectively. The vertical and horizontal strains at the mid-height of the inner circular steel tubes were directly taken from two strain gages attached to the mid-height of inner tubes horizontal and vertically. In addition, the vertical strain at the mid-height of stiffeners was recorded by single vertical strain gage. It can be observed from When the imposed load reached 80% of the ultimate load, the yielding process was initiated. All the specimens experienced the elastic-plastic stage, in which no visible local buckling of outer steel tubes was observed. The unstiffened specimens were an exception since local buckling initiated near their top ends right before reaching ultimate load. This elastic-plastic local buckling was due to the absence of the constrain provided by stiffeners. After attaining the ultimate load, the curves began to descend. The descending branch of the curves developed after reaching the ultimate strength of the test specimens. In the load-strain curves, evident dramatic decreasing trends after the ultimate load are observed for unstiffened specimens due to the inefficient end-restrain and weak composite action between the steel tubes and the sandwiched concrete. On the other hand, the curves of the stiffened specimens are reduced more gradually with longer descending branch and higher strain value, indicating better ductility owing to good composite action between steel tubes and the concrete provided by longitudinal stiffeners. For the stiffened specimens, the decreasing trend is longer as the number of stiffeners on each specimen increases. All specimens suffered local buckling and weld cracks as well as concrete crushing. The local buckling of reference specimens occurred right before reaching the peak load followed by weld cracks at the top ends of specimens in the post-ultimate stage. However, for stiffened specimens, local buckling of outer steel tubes was initiated after attaining their maximum load-carrying capacities, which was followed by concrete crushing and weld cracks. Overall, the results demonstrated that elastic-plastic buckling of the stiffened octagonal CFDST short columns was prevented by longitudinal stiffeners. Besides, these stiffeners could also delay or even prevent the occurrence of end-buckling and make the failure of welds more gradual rather than sudden in the post-peak loading stage owing to the constrain effect for the concrete core by the steel tubes. Therefore, stiffened specimens octagonal CFDST stub columns attained higher strain after peak-load compared to the non-stiffened counterparts. Similarly, load-strain curves are generated for inner tubes and stiffeners taken from the strain gages installed at their mid-height, as plotted in Ductility is an essential property for the evaluation of deformation capacity of structural members. The ductility factor To investigate the enhancement of ductility of the stiffened specimens by the stiffeners over that of the unstiffened ones, ductility enhancement index (DI) defined as the ratio of ductility of stiffened specimen to that of the unstiffened specimen, as calculated by Eq. The ductility factors ( To further investigate the effects of the main parameters of the study: hollow ratio, outer-inner tubes welded stiffeners (O Based on the obtained ultimate loads presented in In terms of ductility, stiffeners significantly enhanced the ductility of CFDST stub columns. In brief, the stiffeners not only enhanced the axial capacity, deformation and ductility of specimens but also prevent the elastic-plastic buckling and delayed the buckling and weld cracks in the post-ultimate phase of loading. They provided effective strengthening and confinement between the steel tubes and the concrete infills. Due to these reasons, significant increase in the load-carrying capacity of concrete was achieved resulting in higher strength and good ductility. In this investigation, it was observed that the specimens with smaller hollow ratio of ( Design equations have been previously proposed to evaluate the ultimate strength of CFDST stub columns with outer octagonal steel tube section. Most of these equations were developed assuming that the ultimate strength of CFDST of octagonal sections was between those of circular and square sections. To fully employ the strength of inner tube with different lengths of hypotenuse and vertical edges of the outer steel tube, a design formula by Yang et al. [ Another design equation proposed by Yuan and Yang [ Design equation also outlined by Ge et al. [ Using the unified strength theory yield criterion, the equivalent circular outer tube's plastic bearing capacity subjected to circumferential pressure [ Considering that According to Zhong [ Core concrete nonlinear yield equation is given by Cai [ Using the plastic mechanics of thick cylinder theory [ A unified design formula for circular and polygon concrete-filled steel tube columns under axial load was suggested by Yu et al. [ In the aforementioned equations, the contributions of O The experimental and calculated ultimate load-carrying capacities of octagonal CFDST stub columns are listed in Design calculations were employed in this study to evaluate the feasibility of current design equations in estimating the load-carrying capacity of the tested columns. The factor of safety was taken as the ratio of the predicated column capacity to the experimental one, as plotted in It is obvious that design equations proposed by Ge (2013) [ This paper presents an experimental investigation on the compression behavior of octagonal CFDST stub columns subjected to axial loading. The effect of two types of stiffeners, namely Outer – Inner tubes welded stiffener (O In general, the octagonal stiffened CFDST stub columns achieved higher load-carrying capacity and good elastic-plastic buckling resistance subjected to axial compression. The failure patterns of outer tubes, the sandwiched concrete, stiffeners and inner tubes were similar for all stiffened specimens. In comparison, the non-stiffened specimens showed lower load-carrying capacity and local buckling occurred at the top before reaching the ultimate strength. Their modes of failure were end-local buckling at the top of outer tube followed by weld cracks and concrete crushing at the top. The load-strain curves dramatically fell after reaching the ultimate strength of non-stiffened CFDST octagonal short columns. On the contrary, the load-strain curves of the stiffened members had longer descending branches and larger strain values depending on the type and size of stiffeners used. The hollow ratio contributed considerably to the ultimate capacity of specimens regardless of the difference in the diameters of inner tubes. Within the scope of the current study, a comparison between the experimental results and existing design equations was carried out to better understand the test data. The calculated load-carrying capacities were in good agreement with the experimental results and tended to be conservative. Hence, these design equations had potential to be used in practical design. In summary, the stiffeners can enhance the compressive behavior of octagon-shaped CFDST stub columns to a great extent as they resist the elastic-plastic buckling and prevent the end-plate failure of the outer steel tubes, hence the confinement on the annular concrete is enhanced.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the support of this research provided by graduate scientific research and innovation foundation of