This study reports on the mineralization of model naphtenic acids (NAs) in aqueous solution by catalyst-free thermally-activated persulfate (PS) oxidation. These species are found to be pollutants in oil sands process-affected waters. The NAs tested include saturated-ring (cyclohexanecarboxylic and cyclohexanebutyric acids) and aromatic (2-naphthoic and 1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-2-naphthoic acids) structures, at 50mgL−1starting concentration. The effect of PS dose within a wide range (10–100% of the theoretical stoichiometric) and working temperature (40–97°C) was investigated. At 80°C and intitial pH=8 complete mineralization of the four NAs was achieved with 40–60% of the stoichiometric PS dose. This is explained because of the important contribution of oxygen, which was experimentally verified and was found to be more effective toward the NAs with a single cyclohexane ring than for the bicyclic aromatic-ring-bearing ones. The effect of chloride and bicarbonate was also checked. The former showed negative effect on the degradation rate of NAs whereas it was negligible or even positive for bicarbonate. The rate of mineralization was well described by simple pseudo-first order kinetics with values of the rate constants normalized to the PS dose within the range of 0.062–0.099h−1. Apparent activation energy values between 93.7–105.3kJmol−1 were obtained.Exploitation of non-conventional gas and oil resources has to deal with important challenges Some non-destructive methods, like adsorption, allow successful removal from the aqueous phase but transferring the NAs to the solid adsorbent which then has to be conveniently treated or disposed Besides, mechanistic studies have shown that hydroxyl radicals, generated from the interaction of PS and hydroxide ions and/or water (Reactions In recent years, several evidences have been reported that oxygen acts positively in PS-based oxidation systems at ambient conditions in the presence of various catalysts by transforming into reactive O The mineralization ability of PS-based systems has been investigated with different organic contaminants. Complete Because of the well-known stability of PS, remote/localized or even direct heating activation of PS could be used in several in situ thermal remediation (ISTR) technologies. Increasing the temperature will not only promote the decomposition of PS to sulfate radicals, but also would favor the activation of other related radicals A few hydroxyl or sulfate radical-based AOPs using different activation approaches have been checked for the degradation of NAs, such as UV/H In the current work, the mineralization of four NAs (with and without aromatic rings) by catalyst-free thermally-activated PS oxidation is investigated and the corresponding constants are given. The NAs used as target pollutants include cyclohexanecarboxylic acid (CHA), cyclohexanebutyric acid (CHBA), 2-naphthoic acid (2-NA) and 1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-2-naphthoic acid (1234-T-2-NA). The two former are saturated-ring structures while the last are aromatic ring-bearing bicyclic ones. The role of oxygen is studied, as well as the effect of potential scavenging ions, like chloride and bicarbonate commonly found in OSPWs. The NAs tested (CHA, CHBA, 2-NA and 1234-T-2-NA, see Fig. S1 in Supporting information) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (purity ≥98%). PS oxidation experiments were carried out in 100 The samples were cooled in water bath to room temperature after reaction and analyzed immediately. The concentrations of CHA and CHBA were measured by Gas Chromatography with Flame Ionization Detector (GC-FID) in a GC 3900 Varian provided with a 30  To learn more on the degradation of the NAs, the evolution of TOC upon reaction time was also followed and is included in Different relative amounts of PS were tested, varying from 10 to 80% of the corresponding theoretical stoichiometric dose and the results in terms of mineralization are depicted in Opposite to the observed at 100% and 80% of the stoichiometric PS dose, the kinetics of mineralization under strongly substoichiometric conditions (10%–60%) can be well described in all the cases by a sole rate equation covering the overall TOC vs. time curve with correlation coefficients between 0.95–0.99 ( The values of the pseudo-first order rate constant at different initial PS/NAs molar ratios are plotted in Experiments were carried out at different temperatures (40, 60, 80, and 97 The values of the mineralization first-order rate constants at different temperatures are collected in The results obtained under substoichiometric PS doses suggest that sulfate radicals must not be the only reactive species to degrade NAs but some other must also contribute. In fact it has been reported that PS gives rise to other active species in addition to sulfate radicals in AOP systems The enhanced efficiency of the system under available oxygen is more noticeable as oxidation proceeds which can be explained by the increasing contribution of Reaction According to the results so far, the reaction of PS oxidation can be rewritten to take into account the contribution of oxygen: CHA: CHBA: 2-NA: 1234-T-2-NA: According to those reactions and our experimental results, the nature of the target compound is of great importance regarding the contribution of oxygen in thermally-activated PS oxidation. The system is, in that sense, especially more reactive toward saturated rings than to aromatic ones. To learn more on the radical mechanism involved, some quenching experiments were carried out with 1234-T-2-NA, selected because it contains both naphthenic and aromatic ring. TBA and EtOH were used as quenching agents at 500/1 alcohol/PS molar ratio It has been reported in the literature that the role of hydroxyl radicals in PS oxidation systems varies according to the reaction conditions, most in particular the pH of the medium Spectroscopic studies by EPR can contribute to better elucidate the radical mechanism involved in persulfate as well as other oxidation processes. However, much effort needs still to be done in the future to allow identifying the wide diversity of short-lived species in such complex reaction media. In a recent paper, C. Zhu et al. OSPW in general contain fairly high concentrations of chloride as well as bicarbonate, both being potential scavengers To learn on the effect of those ions on the breakdown of 1234-T-2-NAs by PS oxidation, experiments were conducted at 80 Oxidation with thermally-activated PS at 80  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: