Metal matrix composite (MMC) strip has been made in single step through ingot metallurgy route using single roll continuous strip casting (SRCSC) technology. Composite melt of Al–Si alloy matrix and SiC particulate was prepared through vortex disperion method. Wetting characteristics of particles were improved by alloying with magnesium, preheating of particles at high temperature and stirring of composite melt. Process parameters of composite melt preparation and strip casting were optimized and composite strips were produced with different sizes of reinforcing particle and with different wt.% of particle. Particle recovery and distribution, quality of composite strip and mechanical properties at room temperature as well as at high temperature were studied w.r.t. size of particle, amount of particle added to the matrix and rotational speed of caster drum.
                  It has been observed that size and distribution of reinforcing particle in the matrix affects the mechanical properties. Smaller size particles improve the strength and hardness of the composite. But in case of coarse particles (53–75μm), distribution and recovery is found to be better than that of smaller size particles (<25μm). Better distribution of particles and increase in strength was also observed at higher rpm of the caster drum. Composite strips have shown better strength at elevated temperature (<250°C) than the matrix alloy. Improvement in ductility of composites was also noted at elevated temperature.Composite materials are being used nowadays in every sphere of life. Among them, metal matrix composites with particulate reinforcement are finding applications in various fields There are four major processing routes to prepare particulate based MMCs Blending and consolidation of metal and ceramic powders by powder metallurgy techniques. Infiltration of liquid metal into preforms of ceramic fibers or particles. Spray deposition of streams of molten metal and ceramic particles onto a substrate; and particle mixing in to liquid melt (vortex dispersion method). The last method is less expensive and easier to perform than other processes and was used here in this study. However, there were three major fundamental problems in particle mixing due to: non-wetting characteristics of particles; sinking or floating behaviour of particles in the melt, depending on particle-to-liquid density; and increase in viscosity of molten mixture with increase in percentage of particles. The above problems could be solved by the use of alloying elements to improve the wetting properties of particles, use of suitable mechanical stirrer to maintain particles in suspension and by controlling the viscosity of melt through temperature manipulation. Similarly, particle recovery (i.e. amount of particles added to the melt minus loss of particles in the melt due to agglomeration or non-wetting) and distribution of particles were very important factors, which affects the mechanical properties of the composite and so study was carried out with different sizes of particles and with varying amount of particles added to the melt Composite strip can be produced by conventional method through ingot casting followed by metal working processes. However, it becomes very expensive due to high rejection rate during mechanical working. In this context development of new technologies to produce composite strip becomes very important. Recently, several new techniques have been developed to replace the conventional methods of strip production The key to controlling the properties of MMCs depends on the selection of the reinforcing phase and efficient bonding between the matrix and reinforcing phase. Strong interface requires adequate wetting of reinforcement by matrix in molten metal Recovery of particles is the actual amount of particle available in the composite melt during strip casting and subsequently in the composite strip. This study was carried out to understand the efficient mixing and retaining of particle in the matrix. This was done through measuring the weight of particles present in the crucible after casting, which was the loss of particles added to the melt. Single roll strip casting machine is made up of hollow cylindrical copper segment with internal water-cooling arrangements. A schematic diagram of single roll strip casting system is shown in Samples for tensile tests, hardness and metallography studies were cut from the cast strip in the longitudinal ( The tensile properties and hardness of the strips produced at various caster drum speeds, and for various wt.% of particle with various size of particles in the composite, were measured. Tensile testing was carried out in the INSTRON 1195 tensile testing machine. High temperature (150, 200, 250 and 300 Under optical microscope, distribution of the particles and microstructure of the matrix phase were observed using Olympus make microscope. JEOL scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to observe the distribution of particles, microstructure of matrix phases, shape of the particles, etc. Photomicrographs were recorded at various magnifications to reveal the distribution of particles. Several variables were optimized during melt preparation to achieve proper wetting and homogeneous distribution of particles in the melt without loss of particles by dissolution or by any other means. It required avoidance of gas entrapment, inclusion, segregation of particles, etc. Many of these could be controlled at the cost of the other one, and so it became very important to adjust the parameters so that it should not impair the properties of strip. Variables, which have been optimized is broadly divided into three groups. Process based parameters: temperature of melt, melting time, rpm of the stirrer, duration of stirring and pouring temperature. Parameters based on reinforcing particles: size of the particles and percentage of the particles. Drum caster parameters: rpm of drum caster and flow rate of water for internal cooling of drum. Process based parameters and parameters of internal cooling of caster drum were optimized during the processing. Parameters based on reinforcing particles and rpm of drum caster were studied in detail. The percentage recovery at different wt.% of particle w.r.t. size are shown in Metallographic examination showed that the distribution of particles is homogeneous for the coarse particles (53–75 From the visual examination it has been observed that the roll side surface was smooth while the top surface was comparatively rough. This is in agreement with the study carried by Rao and co-workers on aluminum strips Internal quality of strip is affected due to presence of inclusions, dissolution of particles, damage of particles, presence of porosity, etc. Following factors were found to be influencing the quality of strip. In case of large reinforcing particles (>44 In order to incorporate large percentage of particles long stirring time is needed, which increases the damage of particles, along with erosion of crucible, stirrer blade, rod, etc. and results in increase in inclusion content. Particle incorporation delay was avoided to optimize stirring time and study was carried out for vol. fraction of 5, 10 and 12% particle to the matrix. Up to vol. fraction of 12% particle in the melt, satisfactory results were seen w.r.t. particle addition to the melt and subsequent recovery and distribution. Two important effects of the rpm of the stirrer were observed. At lower rpm, particles do not go into melt but float to the top of the melt. This impairs its recovery. At higher rpm the amount of dissolved gases increases due to high vortexing. These two opposite factors were considered and the rpm of the stirrer was optimized to 400–450 Higher temperature and longer stirring time improves the wettability of particles rpm of the drum affects the internal porosity. It was observed that the strip produced at lower rpm has less porosity as compared to the strip produced at higher rpm. This could be due to higher rate of solidification at higher speeds that allows lesser time for the entrapped gases to escape from the melt. Similarly, the segregation level in the strip was observed to decrease at higher rpm due to rapid engulfment of particle by solidifying front The mechanical properties of composite strips are affected by the size of particles and percentage of particles added to the melt. The effect of particle size and percentage of particles on the longitudinal and transverse tensile strength is shown in The particle size has a very important role on tensile strength of the composite. It can be deduced from the figures, that strength of the sheet is higher in the presence of smaller particles. This may be because of improved bonding of particles with the matrix, which avoids premature failure of composites. The fracture of particles is also avoided where the particle size is small. However, in case of large size particle reinforcement, premature failures were observed. This may be either due to brittle failure of particles or by debonding and fracture along the interface between the matrix and the particle. Debonding is favored for large size particles due to the presence of microcracks. The high residual stresses may also lead to premature failure of the composite As shown in For good strengthening, <25 Hardness ( Speed of the rotation of the caster drum is the one of the most influencing factors regarding the properties of the strip. It is seen that tensile strength increases when the speed of rotation is changed from 12–16 Enhanced heat transfer (because of the higher rate of heat withdrawal); produce a product with fine grain structure at higher rotational drum speeds Elevated temperature tensile strength and % elongation is shown in But at elevated temperatures, matrix deformation plays a key role. At higher temperatures (≥150 As shown in Size of the reinforcement particles directly affects the mechanical properties and distribution of particle in the matrix. Smaller size (<25 Larger size (> 40 Tendency of particles to segregate increases as the size decreases. The roll side surface of the strip is smooth as compared to the topside surface. Increase in rpm of the drum caster gives better distribution of particles and increases the strength. Hardness shows the similar trends as that of strength. Composite strip shows better strength at elevated temperature (<250 Ductility of the composite decreases with increase in wt.% of the particles. Using the optimum value of the process parameters in the different stages of this process technology, a reasonably good combination of properties could be achieved. The authors acknowledge the help extended by their colleagues and lab technicians at IIT, Kanpur. They acknowledge their gratitude to Director, IIT Kanpur for giving permission to publish this work.