The original geometallurgical model for the Namakwa Sands deposit was modified to accommodate ore blends in addition to the various single ore types. A process mineralogy approach was followed in a structured and systematic manner to evaluate the integrity of the adjusted model, particularly for ilmenite and zircon, the minerals of highest intrinsic value. This study reproduced recovery relationships predicted by the geometallurgical model for each of the key process functions, and as a result the integrity of the geometallurgical model is validated. Overall, the recovery potential determined for ilmenite and zircon are well adjusted to model estimates. Poor mineral liberation, an anomalously high abundance of garnet and pyroxene and variation in particle chemistry are recognized as the key recovery penalties. The gangue content is the most significant constraint to ilmenite recovery, whereas zircon chemistry is the most important negative factor in the production of a premium quality zircon product. Results of this study contributed to the refinement of the current geometallurgical model and also identified opportunities to optimise mineral resource utilisation in the future.Tronox Mineral Sands is presently operating the world-class Namakwa Sands heavy minerals deposit which is located along the west coast of South Africa. Estimated pre-mining mineral resources are in excess of 1 100 Geometallurgical challenges related to the heterogeneity of the ore prompted systematic intervention, endeavouring to improve mineral resource intelligence ( The primary objective of this study was to modify this ‘starter’ geometallurgical model in order to quantitatively evaluate its ability to determine mineral recovery potential for The original geometallurgical model describes selected relationships between ore characteristics and mineral recoveries that were determined from controlled sample populations. These ore characteristics manifest as bulk properties, for example oversize contents (+1 The ore type compositions of monthly ore blends were determined from geological block model depletions and used as inputs in the geometallurgical model to calculate the mineral recovery potential at key processing stages over an 18 Monthly composite samples representing key sampling points at several processing stages were collected with automated samplers. Samples were investigated using a variety of analytical techniques. Optical microscopy assisted with mineral typification, X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy provided bulk chemical assays, QEMSCAN quantified mineral composition, and electron microprobe and laser ablation techniques were employed to determine the chemistry of selected heavy minerals. The Namakwa processing flow sheet starts with two primary concentrators, PCP East and PCP West, which are fed by separate mining operations ( The key purpose of the primary concentration process is to remove the low density minerals from a dressed ore (45–1000 Actual grade-recovery data traverse the model grade-recovery curves relatively well ( Theoretically, the recovery of heavy mineral particles on a spiral is dependent on their hydraulic behaviour, which is mainly a function of their particle density ( Previous studies showed that wet spirals have limitations in recovering heavy minerals reporting to the −45 Detailed QEMSCAN analysis revealed that up to 35% of the zircons reporting to PCP West tails are poorly liberated. Evidently, the cemented nature of the ore fed to PCP West reduces the effective particle density of the heavy minerals, resulting in increased losses of valuable minerals to tailings ( The balance of the zircon and ilmenite in PCP West tails is properly liberated, but are notably finer compared to zircon and ilmenite reporting to concentrate ( Wet spirals appear particularly effective in rejecting the bulk of lower density gangue heavy minerals such as pyroxene ( The present study indicates that the starter geometallurgical model incorrectly highlighted feed grade as the chief recovery driver for the primary concentration process. Instead, the recovery of ilmenite and zircon appears to be related to their degree of liberation and the pyroxene feed grade ( The secondary concentration process utilises wet high intensity magnetic separators (WHIMS) followed by wet spirals to split the primary concentrate blends into magnetic and non-magnetic concentrates. Both concentrates are subjected to mechanical attritioning to reduce surface related contamination such as duricrust cement, ferruginous and siliceous coatings as well as clays. A reclaim route serves the re-treatment of reject material ( The geometallurgical model predicted that feed grade and particle size affect zircon recovery the most, whereas magnetic susceptibility is less important ( The majority of zircon not recovered to non-magnetic concentrate, register in the reclaim. These zircon particles are slightly coarser than those in the non-magnetic concentrate ( Ilmenite recoveries to magnetic concentrate usually reach 80%. Approximately 14% of ilmenite not recovered reports to reclaim and another 4% ends up in the non-magnetic concentrate (NMC), of which nearly 40% is altered, or is intimately associated with other low iron bearing phases ( In summary, ilmenite and zircon recoveries in the secondary concentration process are essentially influenced by the quantity of garnet in the feed and not the ilmenite or zircon feed grades as the geometallurgical model predicted. Other recovery penalties such as magnetic susceptibility and particle size are confirmed to be subordinate. The latest findings highlight the difficulty of conventional WHIMS to effectively separate heavy minerals that display extreme differences in magnetic behaviour due to variations in chemical composition. The mineral separation process has the purpose of upgrading the SCP concentrates to pure saleable products by removing unwanted contaminants. Ilmenite is beneficiated with magnetic and high tension separators whereas the production of zircon follows a separate and more elaborate processing route that in addition includes wet separation stages ( Actual ilmenite recoveries are usually above 85% and were found to be unrelated to feed grade. The current data confirm that ilmenite recovery is mainly controlled by the intricate deportment of SiO Actual zircon recoveries generally average around 70%, which is significantly lower than ilmenite recoveries. Titanium and iron, the two most important penalty elements related to zircon product quality, present major recovery constraints. Titanium deportment is mainly in the liberated form of very fine rutile and Fe–Ti oxides that were most likely entrained. The deportment of iron, a more significant product quality penalty is relatively more complex. About 25% of the iron is in the form of finely liberated garnet and Fe–Ti oxides that co-report with zircon to the product ( In conclusion, this study proved that feed grade is not a recovery driver in the mineral separation process as the starter geometallurgical model assumes. Particle chemistry controls the recovery of ilmenite fundamentally and imposes an even larger penalty on the recovery of zircon. The original geometallurgical model, which characterises individual ore types, indicated that only mineral grade, liberation, magnetic deportment, particle size and particle chemistry meaningfully influence ilmenite and zircon recoveries ( The present study confirmed all the findings mentioned above. Feed grades, however, were found to be proxies, rather than true determinants of ilmenite and zircon recoveries in the primary and secondary processes. Ilmenite and zircon recoveries are evidently controlled by the abundance of gangue minerals, particularly garnet and pyroxene in the feed, which are inversely related to ilmenite and zircon grades. Overall, the gangue content represents the most detrimental constraint to ilmenite recovery. The gangue content and zircon chemistry impose an equally significant penalty to zircon recovery ( The recovery potential observed for zircon is close to model estimates, although there are slight deviations for the various recovery penalties highlighted ( The geometallurgical model under consideration is validated as the observed data are convincingly aligned to the recovery relationships depicted by the model. Furthermore, these recovery relationships were implicitly explained in terms of the established behaviour of heavy minerals in key separation processes. Deviations from the model are explainable and findings from this study represent the foundation of continuous efforts to improve the geometallurgical model. It is recognised that actual ilmenite and zircon recoveries are lower than determined potential. This presents enticing opportunities to improve mineral resource utilisation by creating a better fit between mineral characteristics and related behaviour, processing technology and market requirements. The current findings serve as a valuable guide to help focus strategic interventions that aim to optimise mineral resource utilisation for various blending scenarios. An extra comminution stage is considered a feasible concept to improve mineral liberation. Separate fine and coarse spiral circuits and the latest developments in wet density and magnetic separation are being investigated to deal with the negative effects of gangue minerals. More effective alternatives to dry screening for the removal of coarse gangue are being pursued. Opportunities to address the issue of zircon quality are situated in optimised grade control and value in use applications such as product diversification. The process mineralogy approach followed in this study provided a structured and systematic means to validate the integrity of the Namakwa Sands geometallurgical model, which was adjusted from a ‘starter’ single ore type model to accommodate ore blends. Overall, the recovery potential determined for zircon is well aligned with model estimates. The impact of particle chemistry on ilmenite recovery, however has been overestimated in the model, and as a result the recovery potential for ilmenite proved higher than previously determined. The findings of the current study present substantial incentives to further refine the geometallurgical model, which could find application in the broader mineral sands industry. Mineral liberation, gangue content and particle chemistry are confirmed as the key recovery penalties. Several proposals to address these constraints are mainly directed to better align mineral resource characteristics, processing technology and market dynamics. Geometallurgy remains integral to Namakwa Sands’ mine planning strategies that endeavour to optimise mineral resource utilisation that is sustainable across life of mine. Currently, there is a methodical focus to investigate alternative technologies and research the latest developments in heavy mineral separation to help narrow the gap between actual mineral recoveries and determined recovery potential.