Flotation circuit control is typically based on regular on-line elemental analyses. In base metal applications the conventional assaying method is X-ray fluorescence (XRF), which has proven to be a reliable and accurate technology. However, in large flotation plants with many sample streams to be analyzed, the measurement frequency for individual assays decreases because a centralized XRF analyzer can only measure one stream at a time. This results in unnecessary delays that reduce the control performance. Nevertheless, by integrating reflectance spectroscopy measurement with the conventional XRF technology, a practically continuous assay can be obtained. In this paper the advantages of improved analysis cycle to process performance via faster automated higher level flotation circuit control are demonstrated. The presented technology enables capturing and reacting to grade fluctuations that may have been missed with longer measurement intervals. Moreover, response time to drastic changes in flotation circuit operation is significantly reduced which results in better process performance.Froth flotation is a beneficiation process where valuable minerals are separated from the gangue by benefiting from the hydrophobicity of certain particles, created by the process chemistry. The advantage of this method is that it enables economical mining of very low grades and complex ore bodies. A typical flotation circuit consists of multiple flotation stages: roughing, where the initial separation of the valuable minerals is performed; scavenging, where slowly floating particles of the rougher tailings are separated; and finally cleaning the concentrates. Continuous changes in the feed ore and complexity of the process chemistry often demand flotation control actions to maximize the process performance. Nevertheless, the flotation control is dependent on the primary information from the process, provided by plant instrumentation, laboratory and on-stream analyzers. Elemental assays of different slurry flows are among the most valuable measurements of the flotation process. Especially flotation feed, final concentrate and final tailing concentrations give essential information on process overall performance for flotation control. There are many different technologies for measuring elemental assays. The most utilized method for on-line elemental analysis is X-ray fluorescence (XRF), which measures the characteristic fluorescent radiation of different elements excited with high-energy X-ray radiation ( Typically, on-stream analyzers are centralized and one measurement probe analyzes data from multiple slurry line locations, as this enables the use of highest quality components in the measurement probe thus enabling highest accuracy while keeping component cost reasonable. However, as traditionally one analyzer probe is only able to measure one sample at a time, in large scale systems, the measuring interval of a certain slurry line may be increased. For higher frequency, the XRF method can be complemented with reflectance spectroscopy, which analyzes the absorbance properties of the slurry in visible and near-infrared wavelength range. The combination of XRF and reflectance spectrum analysis has been extensively studied (see e.g. More and more concentrator plants have increased the level of automation through advanced process control (APC) in order to stabilize the flotation process and reduce variance in process performance caused by plant operators’ different perceptions. Further, APC uses large scale of data for determining its control actions, and among the most important information for this is the elemental analysis. Obtaining as accurate and up-to-date data from the process results in faster control actions and better process performance. Thus, higher frequency of elemental assay results measured by reflectance spectroscopy method may also result in faster and more reactive process control. This paper presents potential advantages of using reflectance spectroscopy beside traditional XRF measurement to advanced higher level process control. The plant tests are performed at Kevitsa copper-nickel-PGE concentrator. Kevitsa concentrator treats ore in a sequential flotation process to recover copper and nickel minerals respectively. The valuable mineral is finely disseminated in the ore body requiring a fine grind of 75% passing 75 µm as feed to flotation circuit. Addition of reagents is done prior to and during flotation. The aim for the copper circuit is the recovering 80% of copper in feed at a Cu final concentrate grade of 23% Cu with ≤1% Ni. The roughing stage has the TC500 cell (500 m The main challenge in the Cu circuit is to prevent Ni contains into the Cu final concentrate with minimal impact on Cu flotation. The rougher and scavengers are operated at natural pH of about 9.5 and Cu collector is used to selectively float Cu. However, some of the Ni floats together with Cu, needing to be depressed with lime dosage at the final cleaning stage. The high concentrate target on TC500 is aimed at selectively floating most of the liberated Cu minerals and allowing mixed grains to be recovered through scavenger cells for regrind in the HIGmill. The scavenger tailings grade helps to determine mass pulling rates and collector dosage on the scavenger cells whereas cleaner 1 tailings helps determine how fine the HIGmill product should be. This implies that the rougher/scavenger concentrates grade targets are revised depending on the Cu losses to Ni circuit, whereas the HIGmill product is varied between a P80 of 35–45 µm depending on how much Ni is reporting to Cu concentrate and Cu losses through cleaner 1 tailings. The Cu tailings are treated for Ni recovery and later on for sulphur recovery as shown in Kevitsa flotation plant has been utilizing an APC solution for flotation control all the way from the site startup. The system is implemented using the Outotec ACT platform and includes also grinding and dewatering plant controls, integrated into a single system. The APC solution has already been shown to provide benefits to the performance ( The first level of the flotation control system is a feed forward level control stabilization system integrated to the automation system's level controller PIDs, which is balancing out tank cell surface fluctuations. This stability is vital to the higher level controls that rely on the froth flow rates to be controllable. In the intermediate level, a froth imaging system is measuring various froth characteristics, one of which is the speed of the froth flow as it crosses the lip of the cell as concentrate. The froth speeds are then controlled by a froth speed control APC application. The control is done by adjusting the air flow rate and level controller setpoints for each individual or paired tank cell separately. Purpose of the system is to stabilize the process and provide control to the mass pull rates of the cells, which can be used to control the resulting grades. The high-level part of the APC application, “Flotation Control” system, is controlling elemental grades by adjusting the froth speed setpoints, thus affecting the mass pull of each cell. Due to the concentrate always being collected and sampled for a group of cells, the high level control actions are also directed at a whole group of cells at once, usually corresponding to a certain assay sampling point. The system in Kevitsa currently has five straightforward single-grade controls and two more advanced three-grade multistate controls. Simpler controls adjust the setpoints of the froth speed control system according to a single measured grade each. The more complex controls use a state determination, where each state is a combination of three distinct assay measurements' states. According to this overall state the control affects the setpoints of multiple separate flotation sections' froth speed setpoints. In this study one of the simple grade controls was selected for the trials. Target grade values for each flotation section are defined by the process metallurgists and they change the operation conditions considering the mineralogy of the feed varies over time. For each of the controlled grades a range of acceptable values is defined by low and high limit parameters. Control is based on the principle of reducing or increasing mass pull by adjusting the froth flow speed whenever the relevant grade is outside the limits. In Kevitsa, the currently deployed XRF measurement provides an assay measurement at intervals of 10–30 min. Due to a relatively high amount of sampling points at the plant the primary assays such as process feed and final concentrate are prioritized to be measured more often, whereas less critical assays will then update quite infrequently. The intermediate grades could be easily controlled faster, if there was more data available. For our test case the XRF assay measurement interval of the rougher concentrate is approximately 25 min. The grade is controlled by adjusting the froth speed setpoint. The actual interval and the magnitude of each setpoint change have been set to agree with the target grade sampling rate, so that 1–2 control operations are performed per each new assay. The changes need to be of considerable magnitude, due to the target measurement being so intermittent. For process stability and accuracy of control, smaller control steps would be more preferable, though. Limits to the overall rate of grade control come mainly from the lag in the response of lower level froth speed controls, especially due to the flotation cells' air flow rate control instrumentation and tuning. Noting this, a too fast overall control rate is likely to cause unwanted oscillations in the process. All this implies that a higher rate of on-line grade measurements would allow the controls to be done more gradually, reacting to changes would be faster and the overall stability and control accuracy of the process would be better. Reflectance spectrum analysis of mineral samples is based on the characteristic absorption properties of the minerals in the visible and near-infrared wavelength range. The sample is illuminated with a broad band light source and the scattered light is measured by a spectrograph. This gives the reflectance spectrum of the sample, i.e. the relative reflected light intensity as a function of the wavelength. For an individual mineral, the absorption can be caused by several different processes ( Reflectance spectrum analysis of slurries can be compared to the analysis of mineral streak in geology since the ore is typically ground to small particle size before flotation. However, in a typical reflectance spectrum analyzer the color measurement is done using hundreds of intensity bands instead of the three seen by human eye (roughly corresponding to red, green and blue). Furthermore, the reflectance spectrum analysis can be extended to infrared radiation (wavelengths over 700 nm). This means that more absorption information is obtained with a higher accuracy than in the analysis of the streak. In the case of complex mineral slurries the measured spectrum is a combination of the absorbance of several mineral species, and the effect of individual minerals cannot be isolated from the total spectrum. However, it has been shown ( The reflectance spectrum measurement system is installed in the secondary sampler unit of the XRF analyzer at the Kevitsa flotation plant as illustrated in For accurate reflectance spectrum analysis, frequent calibration is required to compensate for the changes e.g. in mineralogy and particle size distribution ( The reflectance spectrum based rapid measurement option can be installed to existing XRF analyzer setups as well as to completely new XRF analyzers. A number of reflectance spectrum probes share a centralized probe control unit and a spectrograph. The reflectance spectrum probes can be installed to those sample lines where the frequent analysis is most beneficial. The relevant performance improvement is related to the controllability of the target grade, and how it differs between having the target acquired from XRF or from rapid measurement. The copper rougher/scavenger concentrate grade control was selected to be used for the tests. This particular control is a fairly well isolated part of the process and was deemed suitable to be used in the tests. Also the required instrumentation for the tests was present in this sample line. The test sequence was contrived in advance as a paired on-off type test. The test period duration was 9 days, and 15 valid data pairs each containing 6 + 6 h of normal (XRF) and fast (rapid measurement) control were obtained. Control performance difference was measured for each pair separately, using the paired In order to run the test as well as possible, an automatic switch between running modes was implemented into the ACT system. For the grade control in question, an alternate “fast” control mode was added to use the rapid measurement as the target grade. When in fast mode the control frequency was multiplied by a factor of ten to make use of the extra data coming in. The rate of control was eventually the same as in the “normal mode”, as the control magnitude per cycle was also scaled down by a factor of ten. When actually using the rapid measurement, the control could be implemented to work much more continuously and be tuned without the original restrictions of the intermittent nature of the XRF, even further improving the control. The operation of the rapid measurement in the grade control was evaluated by calculating the copper rougher-scavenger concentrate grade deviation from the target value during the test period. The actual deviation value was calculated as the root mean square error (RMSE) between the low-pass filtered rapid measurement grade and the average of the upper and lower grade limit of the controller. The RMSE was calculated for each on and off period, and the values were then averaged over the whole test duration (N = 15 periods for both control options). The purpose of the copper rougher-scavenger concentrate grade control at Kevitsa is to keep the grade between an upper and lower grade limit. It was detected that the grade deviation from the target was 22.7 percent smaller when the rapid measurement was used for the control. This indicates the expected performance improvement obtained by the faster reaction to grade changes. The rougher-scavenger circuit recovery, feed grade and feed grade deviation were also recorded during the test period. No statistically significant differences were detected in these variables between the XRF and rapid measurement control periods. However, the feed grade deviation was on average higher when the rapid measurement was used for the control, making the optimization of the concentrate grade more difficult. Without this difference the detected improvement in the control performance would probably have been even higher. The rapid measurement of the grades can also reveal fast changes and oscillations in the grades, which cannot be detected from the traditional XRF values. The source for the oscillations was tracked down to an alternating slurry level in a process pump sump, from which the primary sample stream for the XRF and rapid measurement is pumped. In a later study, this was investigated further, and the correlation between the pump sump level and the rapid grade measurement was clearly seen ( The advantages of on-line elemental analyzers in flotation plant control have been generally acknowledged for decades. The sampling frequency of centralized slurry analyzers has typically been fast enough for basic flotation control, especially when manual controls have been used. However, as the higher level automatic process control solutions for the flotation applications have been introduced, also faster and more accurate control of grades has become possible. When the sampling frequency of the elemental analyzer is increased, the full potential of the APC can be utilized and even better control performance can be reached. This study demonstrated the utilization of the rapid elemental analysis based on the reflectance spectrum analysis combined with a centralized XRF analyzer. The practically continuous copper rougher-scavenger concentrate measurement was used for the grade control in turns with the traditional XRF assay, and the results of the two were compared. It turned out that the control error was significantly smaller with the rapid measurement. The main reason for that is that the APC controller can react to changes in the grade much faster with the rapid measurement, because the information is available as soon as the changes in the grade take place. Improved control means that the grade variations are reduced and the circuit is operating closer to the target grade and higher recoveries could be achieved. Moreover, if the grade control is more accurate and more reactive, the grade can be controlled to stay closer to the minimum limit, which may result in reaching even higher recovery. This together with improved stability and faster control reactions in grade fluctuations have a significant potential in improving the cost efficiency of the process and bringing major added monetary value to the concentrate product. For example in Kevitsa, a modest hypothetical 0.1%-point increment to recovery would result in 15 tons/year more produced copper. This would translate to an addition of roughly 180,000 U$/year revenue from copper concentrates only. Further advantage of the rapid grade measurement is that it reveals the fast changes in the grades that are not visible by the traditional measurements. In this case, occasional grade oscillations were clearly detected and the root cause for them was found to be the pump sump level oscillations in the copper rougher-scavenger concentrate line.