In this research, the effect of chemical properties of coals on coal free swelling index has been studied by artificial neural network methods. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) method for more than 300 datasets was used for evaluating free swelling index value. In this investigation, some of input parameters (nearly 10) were used. For selecting the best model for this study, outputs of models were compared. A three-layer ANN was found to be optimum with architecture of 12 and 5 neurons in the first and second hidden layer, respectively, and 1 neuron in output layer. In this work, training and test data’s square correlation coefficients (R
                     2) achieved 0.99 and 0.92, respectively. Sensitivity analysis shows that, nitrogen (dry), carbon (dry), hydrogen (dry), Btu (dry), volatile matter (dry) and fixed carbon (dry) have positive effects and moisture, oxygen (dry), ash (dry) and total sulfur (dry) have negative effects on FSI. Finally, the fixed carbon was found to have the lowest effect (0.0425) on FSI.Coals are organic sedimentary rocks that have their origin from a variety of plant materials and tissues deposited in more or less aquatic locations ( The simplest test to evaluate whether a coal is suitable for production of coke is the free swelling index test. This involves heating a small sample of coal in a standardized crucible to around 800 The free swelling index in British Standards Index (BSI) nomenclature (the crucible swelling index number (CSN) in ISO nomenclature) is a measure of increase in the volume of coal when heated, with the exclusion of air. This parameter is useful in evaluating coals for coking and combustion. Coals with a low free swelling index (0–2) are not suitable for coke manufacture. Coals with high swelling numbers (+8) cannot be used by themselves to produce coke, as the resultant coke is usually weak and will not support the loads imposed within the blast furnace ( When bituminous coals are heated, they develop plastic properties at about 350 Gieseler plastometer and Ruhr dilatometer are commonly used to study coals’ plastic properties for coke making. In Gieseler plastometry, the softening temperature, re-solidification temperature and maximum fluidity of coals are determined to predict their coke ability. In Ruhr dilatometry, the coking capacity, When the coal particle is heated, its surface becomes plastic while devolatilization occurs from both inside and outside the particle. Various parameters such as coal type, heating conditions and coal properties affect on free swelling index. For example, Kidena studied effect of hydrogen/carbon, oxygen/carbon, volatile matter and heating conditions on CSI ( After heating for a specified time, or until all volatiles are driven off, a small coke button remains in the crucible. The cross sectional profile of this coke button compared to a set of standardized profiles determines the free swelling index ( Artificial neural network (ANN) is an empirical modeling tool, which is analogous to the behavior of biological neural structures ( In the procedure of ANN modelings the following contents are usually used: choosing the parameters of ANN collecting of data pre-processing of database training of ANN simulation and prediction by using the trained ANN. In this paper, these stages were used in the developing of the model. The collected data was divided into training and testing datasets using sorting method to maintain statistical consistency. Datasets for testing were extracted at regular intervals from the sorted database and the remaining datasets were used for training. The same datasets were used for all networks to make a comparable analysis of different architecture. In the present study, more than 300 datasets were collected among which 10% were chosen for testing. These data were collected from Illinois state coal mines and geological database ( In the current study, input parameters include moisture, ash (dry), volatile matter (dry), fixed carbon (dry), total sulfur (dry), Btu (dry), carbon (dry), hydrogen (dry), nitrogen (dry) and oxygen (dry) for predicting the FSI. The ranges of input variables to FSI prediction for the 300 samples are shown in Artificial neural network models have been studied for two decades, with an objective of achieving human like performance in many fields of knowledge engineering. Neural networks are powerful tools that have the ability to identify underlying highly complex relationships from input–output data only ( ANNs derived from their biological counterparts, ANNs are based on the concept that a highly interconnected system of simple processing elements (also called “nodes” or “neurons”) can learn complex nonlinear interrelationships existing between input and output variables of a data set ( For developing ANN model of a system, feed-forward architecture namely MLP Various algorithms are available for training of neural networks. Feedforward back-propagation algorithm is the most versatile and robust technique, which provides the most efficient learning procedure for multilayer perception (MLP) neural networks. Also, the fact that the back-propagation algorithm is especially capable of solving predictive problems makes it so popular. The network This algorithm is more powerful than the common used gradient descent methods, because the Levenberg–Marquardt approximation makes training more accurate and faster near minima on the error surface ( The method is as follows: In Eq. If the scalar After each successful step (lower errors) the constant The net input ( In general the output vector, containing all When a network is trained with a database containing a substantial amount of input and output vector pairs the total error To reduce the training error, the connection weights are changed during a completion of a forward and backward pass by adjustments (Δ Designing network architecture requires more than selecting a certain number of neurons, followed by training only. Especially phenomena such as over fitting and under fitting should be recognized and avoided in order to create a reliable network. Those two aspects – over fitting and under fitting – determine to a large extent the final configuration and training constraints of the network ( As the above-mentioned, the input layer has six neurons Nonlinear (LOGSIG, TANSIG) and linear (PURELIN) functions can be used as transfer functions ( The number of input and output neurons is the same as the number of input and output variables. For this research, different multilayer network architectures are examined ( During the design and development of the neural network for this study, it was determined that a four-layer network with 14 neurons in the hidden layers (two layers) would be most appropriate. Artificial neural network (ANN) architecture for predicting of the free swelling index is shown in To determine the optimum network, SSE was calculated for various models by the following formula: The learning rate of the network was adjusted so that training time was minimized. During the training, several parameters had to be closely watched. It was important to train the network long enough so it would learn all the examples that were provided. It was also equally important to avoid over training, which would cause memorization of the input data by the network. During the course of training, the network is continuously trying to correct itself and achieve the lowest possible error (global minimum) for every example to which it is exposed. The network performance during the training process is shown in For evaluation of a model, a comparison between predicted and measured values of FSI can be fulfilled. For this purpose, MAE ( For the optimum model A useful concept has been proposed to identify the significance of each factor (input) on the factors (outputs) using a trained network. This enables us to hierarchically recognize the most sensitive factors effecting coal swelling index. This is performed by incorporating values of ‘relative strength of effect’ (RSEs) ( Since the activation function is sigmoid Eq. Obviously, no matter what the neural network approximates, all items on the right hand side of Eq. Definition of RSE: For a given sample set It should be noted that the control of RSE is done with respect to the corresponding output unit, which means all RSE values for every input unit on corresponding output unit are scaled with the same scale coefficient. Hence, it is clear that RSE ranges from −1 to 1 ( Compared with Eq.  In this investigation the effect of coal chemical properties on free swelling index were studied. Results from neural network showed that nitrogen (dry), carbon (dry), hydrogen (dry), Btu (dry), volatile matter (dry) and fixed carbon (dry) had positive effects on FSI, respectively. The negative effects of input parameters were related to, moisture, oxygen (dry), ash (dry) and total sulfur (dry), respectively. The results of artificial neural network shows that training and test data’s square correlation coefficients ( In this research, to evaluate the effects of chemical properties of coal on FSI, artificial neural network approach was employed. Input parameters were moisture, volatile matter (dry), fixed carbon (dry), ash (dry), total sulfur (organic and pyretic) (dry), Btu/lb (dry), carbon (dry), hydrogen (dry), nitrogen (dry) and oxygen (dry). According to the results obtained from this research, the optimum ANN architecture has been found to be 10 and 4 neurons in the first and second hidden layer, respectively, and one neuron in output layer. Higher nitrogen (dry), carbon (dry) and Btu (dry) contents in coal can result in higher free swelling index and higher moisture, oxygen (dry) and ash (dry) contents in coal results in lower free swelling index. In ANN’s method, results of artificial neural network shows that training and test data’s square correlation coefficients ( Results from sensitivity analysis show that nitrogen (dry), moisture, oxygen (dry), carbon (dry), ash (dry), total sulfur (dry), Btu (dry) and volatile matter (dry) were effective parameter on free swelling index (