The extraction and transport of cadmium (II) and lead (II) in supported liquid membrane (SLM) using tributylphosphate (TBP), tris-ethylhexyl phosphate (TEHP), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) and di-2-ethlylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) as mobile carriers was studied. The liquid–liquid extraction tests showed a maximum distribution coefficient when the carrier concentration was greater than 10−3
                     M. In transport experiments the transmembrane flux increased with increasing carrier concentration reaching a limiting value (∼5×10−10
                     molcm−2
                     s−1) at greater than 10−3
                     M concentration. An impregnation time of 1h of the support in the organic phase is necessary for giving a good efficiency to the supported liquid membrane (SLM). The other fundamental parameters optimum (carrier concentration, metal concentration and support characteristics) were determined. The permeability was significantly higher using Celgard 2400 support with respect to Celgard 5550, 3401, 2500 and 2402. A comparative study of the transport across such a membrane containing TBP, TEHP, TOPO or D2EHPA has shown that the cadmium (II) and lead (II) transport efficiency was decreased using a mixture of D2EHPA with other carriers.Industry generates large amounts of wastes which can harm nature and human health. Metal ions such as cadmium and lead are some of the harmful species found in these wastes In the liquid–liquid extraction technology, the extractant plays a characteristic role for the separation of metal ions. A suitable choice of the extractant decides the success of the extraction process. Several extractants were developed and their properties of extraction were evaluated for various metal ions In general, membrane techniques of separation, purification and recovery using Donnan dialysis These techniques have their own inherent limitations such as less efficiency, sensitive operating conditions, production of secondary sludge, high capital, and operating costs, and further the disposal is a costly affair Liquid membrane processes have become an attractive alternative to conventional solvent extraction for selective separation and concentration of compounds such as metals and acids from dilute aqueous solution because they combine in a single stage, an extraction and a stripping operation. Development of supported liquid membrane (SLM) is now of significant importance in separation, purification, or analytical applications in areas such as biomedical technology or water treatment The main use of organo-phosphorus compound is in solvent extraction of metals. The high lipophilicity and high polarity are properties key to this application. Their high polarity, which results from the dipolar phosphorus–oxygen bond, allows this compound to bind to metal ions. The octyl groups confer solubility in low polarity solvents such as kerosene. The major uses of organo-phosphorus compound in industry are as a component of aircraft hydraulic fluid and as a solvent for rare earth extraction and purification. In the present work, we compared the behavior of a di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D Analytical-grade inorganic chemicals: lead nitrates and cadmium nitrate (Pb(NO Double distilled water was used as the stripping solution. The aqueous solutions are prepared by dissolving different reagents in bi-distilled water (∼2 Analysis by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) requires the use of high purity reagents and solvents to ensure the accuracy and precision of measurements. Water is used to prepare blanks, standards, and in the sample preparation procedure, hence it should be free of the elements under investigation, as well as any elements and compounds whose presence could interfere with the analysis. Equilibrium investigations were carried out by liquid–liquid extractions: equal volumes of the aqueous phases (10 The experimental studies on lead and cadmium extraction were carried out using organic feed concentrations of 10 The metal ion concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by analysis using atomic absorption spectroscopy technique (AAS) and the distribution ratio ( The pH of the aqueous solution was adjusted by adding small amounts of HNO Transport experiments were carried out in a permeation cell made of Teflon in which the membrane film was tightly clamped between two cell compartments ( Polypropylene microporous membranes with different characteristics – Celgard 5550 (porosity The active area of the supports in the cell was 9.6 Then the SLM was placed between the two half-cells. The two compartments of the cell were filled with the feed and the strip solutions. The concentrations of cadmium and lead ions and that of the carriers were fixed at 0.1 Permeability, The equilibrium reaction can be schematized as The extraction constant Eq. The variation of Log Extraction and transport of a metal cation by an acidic carrier is governed by the exchange of the metal ion for protons of the carrier. Consequently, counter-transport of protons is the driving force and is achieved by maintaining a suitable pH difference between the strip and feed solutions. In addition, careful pH control in the source solution can result in good selectivity as in the case of solvent extraction systems using acidic reagents. The equilibrium reaction can be schematized as: The extraction constant Eq. In this hypothesis, the variation of Log The equilibrium behavior of the interfaces was studied by means of liquid–liquid extraction tests. The extraction percentages as a function of the initial extractant concentration obtained for the two ions Cd The slopes of the curves (Eqs.  The amount of solvent required for SLM is much less than conventional solvent-extraction systems (between 10 and 100 We examined the effect of the impregnation time of the membrane in the organic phase on the fluxes of transfer of the metallic ions. Celgard 2400 support has been impregnated at variable times (15  Membrane supports have been soaked during 1 An increase of the permeability with the concentration of the carrier is observed. Beyond a concentration of 10  Thickness and porosity of the membrane support are also some fundamental operative parameters which can influence the stability of the SLM and therefore the value of the metallic ion transfer flux. The influence of these parameters has been studied using five supports of different physical characteristics. The obtained results ( The membrane Celgard 2400, the more porous and less thicker, is the one which gives better mass fluxes of the two metallic ions. The membrane supports were soaked in different organic solutions containing one of the four organo-phosphorus carriers at variable concentrations. As it is seen from Under certain well-defined conditions, the mixture of two extractants can lead to the extraction of certain metals stronger than those produced by a separate action. To quantify the synergic effect, the synergic coefficient (S.C.) was defined as: If S.C. is >0, a positive synergic effect is said to occur. If there is an antagonistic effect (negative synergism), then S.C.  We note that the quantities of lead transferred in the strip phase using a mixture of the two carriers is a lot weaker than those gotten with the only D The cation exchange is the principal mode of action of D This work shows that liquid–liquid extraction and facilitated co-transport and counter-transport of lead and cadmium with D However, other physical and chemical factors also influence the efficiency of transport: impregnation time of the membrane in the organic phase and membrane support characteristics. Carrier and metal concentrations of 10 The present study demonstrates that D  co-ion concentration, mol flux, mol carrier concentration of carrier in the organic phase, mol metal ion mole number, mol permeability, cm membrane surface, cm time, s volume, cm Support for this work comes from