This paper describes uranium extraction from aqueous phosphoric acid medium using a silica/polymer based D2EHPA-TOPO adsorbent. The mixture of di-2-ethyl-hexylphosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO) was impregnated and immobilized into the pores of SiO2-P particles. The various experimental parameters such as the synergistic mixture ratio of extractants, phosphoric acid concentration, the contact time and the temperature were investigated. The results showed that 95% uranium extraction was achieved after 10min contacting time using D2EHPA-TOPO/SiO2-P (mass ratio=3:1 w/w) adsorbent from 1M phosphoric acid solution containing 165ppmU (VI), 5000ppm Fe (III), 1000ppm Ca (II) and 1000ppm Al(III) at 25°C. Also, the obtained results displayed the high adsorption capacity for Uranium as high as 48mgg−1 at the mentioned conditions. The rate constant (1.62gmg−1
                     min−1) was calculated by the pseudo-second order equation and it shows that reaction rate was controlled by the chemical adsorption of uranium. Furthermore, D2EHPA-TOPO (3:1)/SiO2-P has a good selectivity for U(VI) among the co-existing elements (Fe, Al and Ca). The adsorption isotherms were well described by the Redlich–Peterson equation, closely followed by the Langmuir equation which confirms the mechanism is chemical monolayer adsorption. Obtained thermodynamic parameters (∆H°
                     .∆S°
                     and∆G°) reveal that the U(VI) adsorption to be an exothermic and spontaneous process.Uranium is a key material in generation of nuclear power. However, its limited primary resources are depleting fast. Among the secondary resources of uranium, phosphate rocks are known as an important sustainable source of uranium because the phosphoric acid (PA) produced from phosphate rocks contains uranium in the range of 50–300 Solvent extraction has been reported to be a successful process for industrial recovery of hexavalent uranium from phosphoric acid medium. The most common extractant used in this technique is the synergistic mixture of di-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO) in Kerosene ( Although liquid-liquid solvent extraction is widely used in industry, this process is being applied with limitations due to the heavy usage of organic solvents and diluents. Solid phase extraction is one of the effective separation methods because it usually combines the selectivity of solvent extraction with the simplicity and multistage character of column chromatographic system. It has many advantages such as minimal organic solvent utilization, compact equipment, simultaneous recovery process and less radioactive waste accumulation ( The main aim of this study was to develop a silica/polymer based D2EHPA-TOPO adsorbent for selective recovery of uranium from phosphoric acid medium. In order to investigate the efficiency of the method, first, the conventional synergistic extractant (D2EHPA–TOPO) was impregnated and immobilized into the pores of SiO Furthermore, radioanalytical wastes and the phosphoric acid produced by the wet process usually contain a significant number of elements which reveals that the uranium selectivity of adsorbent should be considered. The effect of Mg The silica/polymer based D2EHPA-TOPO adsorbent was synthesized in our laboratory by impregnating D2EHPA The SiO Extraction efficiency (E) and distribution coefficient (K Where, C In addition, stock solution of uranium (1650 The uranium adsorption from varying concentration of phosphoric acid medium using D2EHPA-TOPO/SiO The synergistic effect of D2EHPA–TOPO in uranium recovery from impure phosphoric acid solution containing Fe, Ca and Al is shown in In addition, These findings disclose that the uranium adsorption was reasonable when the concentration of phosphoric acid is less than 3 The adsorption kinetic of D2EHPA-TOPO/SiO Kinetics study provides valuable information such as the solute uptake rate and mechanism of adsorption reactions that they are necessary to design the column parameters in uranium recovery process. Two adsorption kinetic models, i.e. the pseudo-first-order model and the pseudo-second order model were applied to interpret the experimental data( The pseudo-first-order model ( The pseudo-second order model( Where k It is apparent from the error functions which are shown in To study the influence of impurities on the uranium selectivity of adsorbent, adsorption efficiency of uranium, aluminum, calcium and iron onto D2EHPA-TOPO (3:1)/SiO  In order to study the adsorption isotherms, several models such as Langmuir, Freundlich and Redlich–Peterson models were attempted to describe the adsorption phenomena. The Freundlich isotherm (Eq. Where K Eqs. Therefore, the uranium adsorption onto D2EHPA-TOPO/ SiO Different mechanisms have been established for uranium extraction from phosphoric acid using D2EHPA-TOPO in different working conditions and the following reactions are the common mechanisms of the uranium extraction from phosphoric acid solution ( Furthermore, the dimensionless constant separation factor (R Where C The thermodynamic parameters such as changes in standard enthalpy (∆ Where R (8.314 In fact, the negative values of ∆ Solid phase extraction was studied as a good alternative technique for the uranium recovery from phosphoric acid mediums. The macroporous silica-based D2EHPA-TOPO polymeric adsorbent was synthesized through impregnation of synergistic mixture of D2EHPA and TOPO into the pores of SiO The obtained results clearly showed that D2EHPA-TOPO (3:1)/SiO The adsorption kinetics was well explained by the pseudo-second order equation and the calculated rate constant indicate that the adsorption was controlled by the chemical reaction of uranium. The thermodynamic parameters showed that the uranium adsorption is exothermic process and is favored at lower temperatures.