Correct energy management offers the best possibility for reducing the costs in agricultural production. In present day farming energy and agronomic efficiencies are both important factors. As the working-width of implements has increased, air-seeding is the best solution for the sowing of cereal crops. One of the problematic areas is the design of the air-delivery system, particularly if the pneumatic conveying system is wrongly dimensioned. The flow of seeding material during conveying must be high and regular enough for a high-speed seeding. There are three parameters that ensure the conveying of seeding material in a pipe: air velocity, flow concentration and pipe diameter. It is demonstrated that the outlets of the divider heads are the most critical part of the conveying system. Outlet pipes relatively small diameters and must allow for the highest seeding rates without clogging. It was hypothesised that the air velocity in outlet pipe may be used as an input data for designed a completed conveying system. This paper determines I) a minimal air velocity and flow concentration per type of seeds relative to pipe diameter; II) establishes a method to measure the air velocity of the loaded flow, which could be used to optimise existing seeders from an energy point of view; III) describes a global design methodology for air-seeder conveying systems; IV) reports an comparative study of energy of the most commonly used outlet pipe diameters within the air-seeders; V) describes a method for calculating the energy consumption evaluation; VI) prescribes the optimum outlet pipe diameter deduced from our experimental results, necessary for the design of the following divider heads. Tests were carried out using for wheat and barley seeds, starter fertilisers and a wheat–fertiliser mixture, for three currently used pipe diameters (20, 25 and 30 mm).Volumetric air-flow rate required from a fan unit, kg s Mass material rate, kg s Air flowrate, kg s Mass flow concentration, kg kg total system pressure losses, Pa Horizontal conveying pressure losses, Pa Vertical lift pressure losses, Pa Pressure losses in bends, Pa Equivalent particle diameter, Pa Linear pressure losses, Pa Pressure losses dues to material conveying, Pa Pressure losses dues to material acceleration, Pa Pressure losses between two points, Pa Static pressure in upstream and downstream, Pa Air velocity in upstream and downstream, m s Air velocity, m s Material velocity, m s Stagnation velocity, m s Length and diameter of the conveying pipeline, m Resistance coefficient Resistance coefficient for agricultural seeds Reynolds number Air density, kg m Kinematic viscosity of the air, m Gravitational acceleration, m s Height of lifting, m Power consumption, W The key component for designers of pneumatic seed drills is the design of the pneumatic conveying system. It must be precise in terms of uniformity in order to achieve the overall agro-technical objectives. It must also allow high flows without causing damage to the seeds. Air-seeders have been commercially available for almost 50 years ( The subject of the low transverse distribution accuracy has been widely studied ( The pneumatic conveying of solids has been well known for quite some time in the fields of chemical engineering, mining engineering, food processing and pharmaceuticals production ( Conveying system parameters are often chosen intuitively and sometimes incorrectly, which can lead to clogging of pipes or to unjustified energy losses (e.g. excessive pressure drops and the use of oversized fans). Thus, air velocity values calculated using methods for the steady state industrial processes should not be accepted for air-seeder designs. Since a theoretical definition of these parameters is impossible, a rational method for the experimental definition of the optimal air velocity for various seeds and fertilisers for the air-seeders is developed. The distribution system of air-seeders is a network of pipes of variable diameters and cross-sections. The stationary pneumatic conveying installations that convey seeds at constant material flowrate operate between 8 and 10 kg s Depending of an air/solid ratio two conveying regimes can be distinguished: dilute phase and dense phase conveying ( Firstly, agricultural seeds, because of their dimensions and density are hardly fluidizable ( However, during seeding operation air-seeder conveying pipes can be susceptible to the risk of sudden clogging. This can be caused by the hygroscopic properties of fertilisers (which are often applied by the same equipment), by the delivery system overloading and by a shortage of air velocity. The primary area of concern is the outlet pipes which are situated just after divider devices. These pipes have small diameters (typically 20–30 mm) and air velocity is usually reduced in the divider head upstream. It should also be noted that high air-velocities can also be unwanted ( From a design point of view, following the classic methods of determining pressure drops in pipes it is necessary to provide from the literature two interconnected parameters: flow concentration and conveying velocity. Pressure drop values are used to define the static pressure requirements of the fan. The volumetric air-flow rate required from a fan is given by: It is difficult to correctly interpret the machine's airline network structure configuration and detect all problem areas that can cause energy loss and flow disruption. It is important to note that the conveying of particles in air-seeders is assumed to be dilute phase conveying. The total system pressure drop is a totality of losses, Horizontal conveying losses can be presented as: These losses can be calculated ( Vertical conveying is controlled by the same principles as in horizontal areas, except that in vertical conveying the influence of gravity and the impermanence of flow concentration has to be considered. Pressure drop was described by The losses in bends It remains to be seen what part of the conveying system should be designed first. To make this choice, observations and field measurements were carried out to find which was the part of the system that suffered the most frequently problems of clogging or flow heterogeneity. The long-term experience of air-seeding, testified about the numerous stagnations and clogging between the distribution head and openers. The trouble areas showed inflections of the flexible pipe and low initial air velocity. For these reasons it was proposed to define the maximum flow-concentration and the minimum air-velocity in the outlets of distribution heads for different crops and pipe diameters. These concept was that these values must avoid clogging of the system. Further, searched parameters will be used as input data for the design of the pneumatic conveying. These values will lead (according to the mass conservation law) the design of the upstream pipe of the conveying system (in which air velocity will be higher because of a total lower cross-section of the feeding pipes). In terms of dimensioning of the outlet pipes, air-seeder manufacturers world-wide follow the historical choice: European seeders (Horsch, Kuhn, Pöttinger) use a diameter of 30 mm ( To determine by design the choice of outlet pipes diameter the following criteria must be taken into account: Transfer capacity (characterised by the maximum possible of material flowrate, which could pass through a pipe cross section per unit of time). Flow stability, without obstruction. Energy consumption. Numerous authors (e.g. According to Because several conveying velocities and several pipe diameters are possible, it is proposed in this paper to choose the most energy efficient solution. The design of the conveying system involves the definition of an internal pipe diameter, the calculation of pressure drop and the specification of a fan unit. The power of the fan must be lower as possible and depends both of the pressure loss and the volumetric air-flow rate. In this section, our experimental setup, experience plan and the measurement methods of the main parameters used in this work are presented. The experimental setup allowed each parameter to be studied individually regardless of other parameters. The study was carried out using a specific experimental setup ( Referring to Air velocity was measured using venturi (differential pressure) meters, according to The first measurements of air velocity were made with a Pitot-tube but this did not give adequate results. The Pitot-tube was introduced into the centre of a straight pipe (far from any unsteady flow area) and provided values corresponding to local air-velocity ( The air velocity According to the agronomic requirements ( Three commonly used diameters (20, 25, 30 mm) of flexible pipe were tested. The tests was made for the seeds of wheat, barley, granules of a starter fertiliser (18% of Nitrogen, 33% of Phosphorus, 16% of sulphur) and a barley–fertiliser mixture (with a mass proportion 60/40%). The material flowrate was calculated using the technical requirements for a ground speed of 10 km h Each test was carried out for horizontal and vertical pipes using the following sequence: the metering unit was set to a precise material flowrate. The fan flowrate was set to a high and sufficient level to ensure material conveying. The airflow decreased by progressive closing of the valve, waiting at each position to ensure that the flow stabilized until the particles begin to sediment and stagnate in the bottom of the pipe. At the point when material stagnation was detected, the data from micro-manometers was collected. To ensure the most accurate results, a first manipulation was devoted to defining the range of air velocities corresponding to particle stagnation. As soon as the velocity range was known, and when approaching the stagnation air velocity, the valve was closed more slowly and precisely, fixing air velocity to the value at which clogging began. Each test was replicated 5 times. After the known material flowrate and the stagnation velocity were measured, the maximum flow concentration was calculated using: The experiment was carried out using flexible pipes Merlett Oregon ANTISTATICO PU (Polyurethane polyester hose with PVC spiral, Merlett Tecnoplastic SpA, Daverio, Varesse, Italy) with diameters of 20, 25, 30 mm (test length equal to 4 m), using certified barley seeds. The same model of pipes, with the same overall structure and same construction material was used in order to ensure the greatest similarity between conditions. The pipe was disposed horizontally, avoiding any flexing. Measurements were made in permanent flow areas. The material flowrate was given by the standard agro-technical requirements, assuming a specified seeding rate per hectare for the ground speed of 10 km h Each test had a following test sequence: the metering roller speed was setup to the precise seeding rate, the blower was then adjusted to the air velocity according to the conditions mentioned above. During the experiment, the values of the air velocity Designers often wrongly estimate the energy consumption by only using pressure drops. However, there is a physical value which directly characterise power consumption. Power consumption The pressure drops were ( Stagnation air velocity corresponds to the minimum quantity of energy necessary to move materials and air itself. Stagnation air velocity during vertical conveying of wheat is always higher than during horizontal conveying ( Stagnation velocities for high concentrated flows in horizontal and vertical pipes are similar regardless of pipe diameter (each point is the mean of 5 measurements and the values are very close to the mean value). However, pipe diameter probably influences the horizontal stagnation air velocity, especially when flowrate of grain is low. Physically a low rates of grain flow permit the use of less energy for the conveying and so the use of a lower air velocity. It may be assumed that the deposition of seeds (when the air velocity can be low) occurs more easily and has more effect on airflow homogeneity (a deposit generates a pressure drop and a deflection of the airflow) in wide pipes than in narrow pipes ( These data on fluidisation and pick-up velocities can be compared to literature data ( There are ambiguous observations concerning the conveying of the barley–fertiliser mixture. The results obtained with barley, fertiliser and their mixture are grouped on the same diagram. The stagnation velocity of the mixture in the smallest pipe (diameter 20 mm) is identical to that of barley (green curves, In the larger 25 mm dimeter pipe the effects of fertiliser are more perceptible with the stagnation curve of the mixture lying just between the barley (green) and fertiliser (red) curves ( Increasing the pipe diameter to 30 mm (black curves), gave similar results as for the 20 mm pipe. So further experiments and statistical analysis are required but in the first instance, the higher stagnation velocity of one part of the mixture, here the fertiliser, could be used to design the conveying system. For the dilute phase conveying, oversizing pipe sections is not a possible solution. Particles present in the lower part of section of wide pipes offset the maximum of air velocity towards the upper part of the pipe. The subsiding grains then create a resistance to the air ( For the satisfactory functioning of an air-seeder it is necessary to create appropriate conveying conditions, ensuring local velocities are always greater than the critical velocity. The first parameter to define is the air velocity in the pipes after divider heads. It is proposed to set this value from Previous calculations were made for pipes located after the distribution head. In an air-seeder, the sum of the sections after the distribution head is greater than the section before it. According to the matter conservation law, the airflow velocity before distribution head will so be higher and air velocity before head of distribution will be high enough to avoid particles stagnation. All tested diameters provided regular and stable conveying at most seeding rates. However, there were significant differences in terms of energy consumption. It should be noted that energy consumption is a function of three factors: air flowrate, material flowrate and pressure drop in the conveying pipe. The analysis of three-dimensional data ( However, there is another relationship with energy consumption. The largest diameter pipe tested, 30 mm, consume more energy when the other parameters held constant (  However, it can see that between the two factors, air velocity has the largest influence on power consumption. In contrast, pressure drop are depends more on material flowrate than on air velocity. It should be also noted that the energy expended to produce the required air flowrate exceeds that due to overcome hydraulic resistance. Thus, the 30 mm diameter pipe is more “expensive” in terms of energy. Although the 30 mm diameter pipe has a high transfer capacity, and is able to ensure the implementation of broad ranges of seeds and seeding rates, it should be avoided because it induces unnecessary energy losses. Concerning the choice of pipe diameter, in terms of the flow stability, the results are somewhat ambiguous. High material flowrates in the 20 mm diameter pipe, were accompanied by high static pressure fluctuations. The magnitude of total fluctuations reached the considerable values of 2–3.5 kPa which contrasts with typical normal values which did not exceed 0.4–0.5 kPa. This suggests about pulsating conveying. According to diagrams of It was therefore concluded that the 20 mm diameter pipe is the most favourable energetically. But, this pipe section is unable to meet the agro-technical requirements for the stable delivery of seeds, particularly for the high seeding rates, and so its use should be avoided on the air-seeders. Nevertheless, the 20 mm diameter pipe could be employed on the micro-granular hoppers where low seeding rates are applied simultaneously with the soil cultivation or harrowing. The following conclusions can be drawn concerning pneumatic conveying in air-seeders: Starting point of an air seeder design should be the optimisation of conveying in downstream sections of the outlets of the distribution head. The design of the rest of the conveying system follows from this first step. An experimental set up was design to obtain experimental values for the maximum flow concentration and the minimum air velocity suitable for pneumatic conveying. Pitot-tube probes were unsuitable for this work and it was necessary to develop an innovative sensor system. Further development of this experimental set-up could use image analysis in order to correlate pressure measurements with the formation of seed clusters. Experimental curves of minimum air-velocity can be used to define the conditions of conveying for a type of seeds. These data could then be used to develop an automated control system which anticipate clogging. It is recommended to use narrow pipe sections to promote homogeneous and regular airflows and to reduce the energy costs of conveying. In order to develop knowledge on the conveying of mixtures further experiments should be carried out with varying proportions of fertilisers and seeds. Same work must be made for other species of seeds, and for different qualities of seeds inside a species (regarding to humidity, size homogeneity …) in order to study the robustness of our results. The key parameter characterising energy consumption is consumed power. Most of the energy losses in the supply pipes are due to the airflow movement and not to overcoming pressure drops. The overloading could not be solution to energy conservation. In our opinion, the optimal compromise is the 25 mm diameter pipe, knowing that we are reaching the limit for very sizable seeds (spelt and some beans). The authors would address their kind regards to the company Kuhn SA (France) for providing the experimental equipment and financial support. This work was also supported by the Agricultural Machinery and New Technologies Chair, backed by UniLaSalle with the financial support from the