As a very effective metallurgical method for processing complex metal minerals, Chlorination metallurgy has been widely used in the metallurgical industry. In this paper, the chlorination agents used in the process of chlorination metallurgy were summarized as gaseous chlorination agents and solid chlorination agents. the advantages and disadvantages of each of them were compared and analyzed, and the main mechanisms involved in the process of chlorination roasting and chloride separation were discussed and analyzed, respectively; The research results of related scholars on chlorination metallurgy were summarized, and the application progress on sulfide ores, oxidized ores, wolframite concentrates and rare earth ores was introduced in detail, and from the perspective of thermodynamics, the feasibility of treating complex metal ores with chlorination metallurgy was analyzed, in order to provide some help and reference for the subsequent research and application of chlorination metallurgy.Treating ore with chlorination metallurgy is a kind of metallurgical process of comprehensive recovery and utilization of ore resources by means of chlorination metallurgy. Chlorination metallurgy, in a broad sense, refers to the reaction of various metals or metal oxides, sulfides and other compounds to be extracted with highly chemically active chlorine under certain conditions by adding chlorinating agents (Cl The development and application of chlorination metallurgy can be traced back to the middle of the 16th century. At that time, it was found that the recovery rate of metals can be improved by adding a certain amount of salt to the leaching process of ores containing gold and silver. It was not until the 18th century that the leaching process with salt gradually evolved into the chlorination roasting-leaching process for treating precious metal ores, which was more effective. By the middle of the 19th century, people tried to use chlorine gas to treat gold ore, which was the first application of chlorine gas as a gaseous chlorination agent in chlorination metallurgy. At the same time, chlorination metallurgy has been gradually expanded to treat low-grade copper ore and pyrite cinder. This is also an important development of chlorination metallurgy into heavy non-ferrous metals metallurgy. In the 20th century, the development and application of chlorination metallurgy has become more and more rapid. In addition to magnesium extraction from magnesite, chlorination segregation was used to extract heavy non-ferrous metals (mainly copper), and high-temperature chlorination volatilization roasting to treat low-grade tin ores was studied. Since the 1950s, chlorination metallurgy has been widely used in the metallurgy of rare metals such as titanium ( The process of chlorination metallurgy usually consists of the following five basic processes: raw materials preparation process, chlorination process, chlorides separation process, metals extraction process from chlorides, and chlorination agents recycling process. According to the different separation methods used in the chlorination process, chlorination metallurgy can be divided into five different types: chlorination roasting, chlorination segregation (referred to as segregation method), chlorination of molten salt medium, chlorination refining of crude metal melt and chlorination leaching (including hydrochloric acid leaching, chloride salt leaching, chlorine gas leaching and electrochlorination leaching). However, the methods of chlorination metallurgy commonly used in industrial production mainly include chlorination roasting, chlorination leaching, chlorination segregation and chlorination refining of crude metal melt ( According to the current research situation of chlorination metallurgy, the main mechanism of chlorination volatilization is to realize the purpose of metal separation and enrichment with the help of chlorination agents. However, according to the different types of chlorination agents, they can be divided into gaseous chlorination agents and solid chlorination agents. The chlorination mechanism of these two different phase chlorination agents is briefly described as follows: In the practical application of chlorination metallurgy, the commonly used gaseous chlorination agents generally include chlorine gas, hydrogen chloride and so on. The chlorination reaction of metal elements (Me), metal oxides (MeO) or metal sulfides (MeS) with gaseous chlorination agents can be expressed by the simplified general equations For the oxides of some relatively common metals, such as Ag, Cu, Zn, Pb, etc., it is easy to be chlorinated by the gaseous chlorination agents to form a corresponding stable chloride during the chlorination roasting process. However, for the same metal, its metal sulfide is usually more easily chlorinated than its corresponding metal oxide under the same conditions. The main reason is that the affinity of the metal to sulfur is smaller than that of the metal to oxygen, so it is easier for the chlorine element to replace the sulfur element from the metal sulfide than the oxygen element from the metal oxide ( Many researchers have carried out a lot of selective chlorination experiments on different metal oxides and sulfides with gaseous chlorination agents. The chlorination roasting of pure copper in O The chlorination mechanism of gaseous chlorination agents is directly involved in the chlorination reaction. Therefore, the chlorination volatilization effect of gaseous chlorination agents on metal oxide and sulfide is better ( Compared with gaseous chlorination agents, solid chlorinating agents not only have a wide range of sources and less corrosiveness, but also have good chlorination effect. Generally, solid chlorinating agents are often used in the chlorination roasting process of non-ferrous metal raw materials. The commonly used solid chlorination agents mainly include NaCl, CaCl Compared with the reaction mechanism of gaseous chlorination agents, the reaction mechanism of metal oxides and solid chlorination agents are more complicated. The occurrence of chlorination reaction mainly through three ways: Cl The interaction between solid chlorination agents and metal oxides mainly depends on the binding energy of metal elements Me and R to chlorine and the kinetic conditions of chlorination reaction. In general, poor kinetic conditions of chlorination reaction caused by poor contact between solids, which severely limits the rate of chlorination reaction. Therefore, the main way of chlorination of solid chlorination agents is not the direct interaction between metal oxides and solid chlorination agents. In general, under the action of other materials in the chlorination roasting system, the solid chlorination agents will decompose to produce Cl Taking CaCl According to the above analysis, Cl The chlorination roasting of raw materials is only a basic process in chlorination metallurgy. the chlorination separation of chlorides also take place at the same time in the process of chlorination roasting, which is mainly based on the different physical and chemical properties of metal chlorides. The chlorination separation of chlorides can be realized by controlling the temperature of chlorination roasting. Therefore, the chlorination separation rate of chlorides is directly related to the chlorination roasting temperature ( As can be seen from For the characteristics of various kinds of metal ore resources, high impurity content and serious co-occurrence of multi-metals, many scholars have carried out a lot of experimental studies on it by using chlorination metallurgy technology. It is proposed that chlorination metallurgy technology can be used to treat low-grade or refractory ores and various kinds of metallurgical wastes, which can comprehensively utilize the metal ore resources. Pyrite (FeS For the application of chlorination metallurgy in treating sulfide ores, After several decades of development, the chlorination process has not only been successfully applied in industrial production, but also formed a relatively complete system. For example, in the metallurgy of magnesium, titanium, beryllium and other metals, because of their active properties and strong ability to combine with oxygen, the process of preparing their oxides and then reducing them, which not only requires high temperature, but also the presence of oxygen is liable to cause pollution to the metal products, thus reducing the properties of the product. However, the above problems can be solved completely by using chlorination method in production ( The production of magnesium metal in the world, magnesium chloride molten salt electrolysis method accounts for about 80%, the rest is silicon thermal reduction method. In magnesium chloride molten salt electrolysis, magnesite or magnesium oxide is usually treated by chlorination metallurgy, chlorine gas is used as chlorination agent, petroleum coke or other carbonaceous substance is used as reducing agent, and molten magnesium chloride is prepared in a chlorination furnace with the temperature controlled at 800–1000 °C ( In beryllium metallurgy industry, molten salt electrolysis of beryllium chloride is also commonly used to produce metal beryllium. The main process includes preparation of beryllium chloride, purification and electrolysis of beryllium chloride, and product treatment. Beryllium chloride is mainly formed by chlorination of beryllium oxide in the presence of carbonaceous reductant, and the process of chlorination is the same as that of magnesium oxide. Chlorine gas can be chosen as the chlorination agent at 700–1000 °C, while carbon tetrachloride is chosen as the chlorination agent, the temperature only needs to be controlled at 650–700 °C ( The most typical example of the application of chlorination metallurgy to the treatment of rare metal ores is the industrial production of titanium. Because of the limited primary natural mineral resources, most of the factories adopt the method of adding carbon chlorination to treat titanium slag (mainly composed of TiO With the development of chlorination metallurgy technology, chlorination metallurgy has made new progress in recent years, besides the above-mentioned ores. For example, in the treatment of wolframite concentrate, the successful application of chlorination method also provides a new treatment idea for tungsten metallurgy industry ( In recent years, with the deepening of the research on chlorination metallurgy, the application of chlorination metallurgy in rare earth minerals has also made great progress. For example, For Ce and Pr with variable valence, the main possible reactions are CeO Therefore, when NH According to the application of chlorination metallurgy in the above ores, it can be found that the chlorination metallurgy process can be used to deal with low-grade metal ores or complex co-associated metal ores by virtue of its strong adaptability to raw materials. So as to achieve the purpose of metals separation, and it is an ideal method to realize the comprehensive recovery and utilization of metal mineral resources. By analyzing gaseous chlorination agents, solid chlorination agents used in the process of chlorination metallurgy and the separation of metal chlorides, the main mechanism involved in the process of chlorination metallurgy was introduced in detail. The advantages and disadvantages of different chlorination agents were compared and analyzed. The gaseous chlorination agents can directly participate in the chlorination reaction, which is beneficial to the reaction, but corrosive to the equipment. Solid chlorination agents have low requirements for equipment performance, but chlorination reactions are more complex. The thermodynamic feasibility of treating complex metal ores by chlorination metallurgy was analyzed by introducing the application progress of chlorination metallurgy in sulfide ores, oxidized ores, wolframite concentrates and rare earth ores, which provides a reference for the research and application of According to the present application situation of chlorination metallurgy, the process of chlorination metallurgy can deal with various kinds of raw materials and has strong adaptability to raw materials. At the same time, the operating temperature is lower than other pyrometallurgical processes, the separation efficiency is high, and the comprehensive utilization effect is good. Therefore, with the utilization of various kinds of complex metal ore resources, it will be a very effective metallurgical method to treat ores by the process of chlorination metallurgy. However, it is still necessary to continuously improve its economic benefits in the development of chlorination metallurgy, among which the key problem is to improve the utilization efficiency of chlorination agents and the reuse of chlorination agents in the process of chlorination metallurgy. At the same time, it is necessary to continue to solve the corrosion problem of equipment, and to strengthen the research of anti-corrosion materials.  The authors are especially grateful for the support received from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: