The adsorption of modified polyacrylamides (PAM) at the silica surface has been studied by ellipsometry. To study the influence of the type of modification of the polyacrylamide on the adsorption behaviour, we have used cationic, anionic and hydrophobically modified polyacrylamides with varying charge density and degree of hydrophobisation. The adsorbed amount and adsorbed layer thickness were obtained at a neutral pH and at a constant ionic strength (c
                     KCl=0.1M). The effect of surfactant present during the polymerisation process has also been investigated. Cationic modified polyacrylamides have been found to adsorb most strongly onto the silica surface and a large overcompensation of the surface charge has been observed in all cases. For cationic modified polyacrylamides having additional hydrophobic groups the adsorbed amount decreases with density of hydrophobic groups, and the adsorbed layer thickness is larger. Anionic modified polyacrylamides also adsorb onto the negative silica surface, though the adsorbed amounts are small. The presence of the surfactant Tween 80 leads to an increase in the adsorbed amount for the polymers which adsorb weakly in the absence of the surfactant. However, for the polymers, which have already shown a good ability to adsorb on silica, the addition of surfactant has no significant effect on the adsorbed amount.Adsorption of polymers onto solids from aqueous solutions is of large importance in numerous applications, like stabilisation of colloids, mineral beneficiation, oil recovery, detergency, food processing, biotechnology, medicine and coatings Polyacrylamides (PAM) are among the most commonly used polymers in industry Polymers were synthesised in SNF Floerger, under PDVSA request, by proprietary micellar polymerisation methods, using redox systems as initiators. The surfactant used in the synthesis was polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan monooleate (Tween 80). The chemical structures of the monomers used in this study, besides acrylamide and acrylic acid, are shown in Polymer stock solutions were prepared by dissolving the polymer powder in 0.1 KCl solution to a final polymer concentration of 1000 All experiments were carried out in electrolyte (KCl) solutions at a salt concentration Polished silicon wafers (p-type, boron-doped, resistivity 1–20 The oxidised silicon wafers, cut into The ellipsometry measurements were performed with a modified, automated Rudolph Research thin-film null ellipsometer, model 43603-200E, equipped with high precision stepper motors and controlled by a personal computer. The method and experimental set-up are described in details in The optical properties of the oxidised silicon substrate were obtained by measuring ellipsometric angles A known volume (250 The adsorption experiments were performed at 25±0.1 The obtained values of To calculate the refractive index of the solution, one has to take into account the contribution of all solution components (water, salt, polymer, and surfactant): In this study, we have focused on how the chemical composition of polyacrylamide affects the adsorption behaviour and therefore worked at a constant pH and ionic strength (0.1 Before discussing our data it is important to note that polyacrylamide solutions have shown to be subject to ageing The surface excess and the adsorbed layer thickness were measured as a function of time and the plateau values are summarised in  The slopes of the initial part of the We also note that the scatter in experimental First we will discuss the results of the adsorption from purified (dialysed) solutions of the polymers, while the second part deals with adsorption of polymers containing the non-ionic surfactant used during synthesis. All the results presented below correspond to the plateau values of the adsorption isotherm. As shown in Although the adsorption of the non-ionic PAM on siliceous materials has been investigated in a number of studies, the reported results are contradictory. There is no consensus whether they do adsorb onto silica surfaces or not. The question is—if they do, then what is the mechanism of adsorption. Lecourtier et al. Bjelopavlic et al. Generally, the adsorbed amount depends on the difference in interaction between a polymer segment and a solvent molecule with the surface. Hence, the net adsorption energy depends both on the solvent and on the nature of the substrate. With solid substrates strong van der Waals forces, dipolar forces or even hydrogen bonds are possible. However, it is not always obvious which component, solute or solvent, will bind the strongest We do not believe that hydrogen bonding can be the main driving force for the adsorption of polyacrylamide onto the hydrophilic surface of silica as it has to compete with water, which more easily forms hydrogen bonds with the surface hydroxyl groups. We also note that hydrogen bonds have highly directional nature, which requires a certain, entropically unfavourable, orientation of the polymer. But hydrogen bonding could play a secondary role and strengthen the otherwise weak interaction of polymer with the surface. Therefore, a more comprehensive understanding of adsorption processes requires determining specific contributions of hydrogen bonding and solvation/desolvation forces. Also, since both the surface and polymer are less polar than water, there will always be a contribution of hydrophobic interactions. At present, the magnitude of those can not be demonstrated. We also note that, although extensive dialysis was employed to purify the polymer solutions, it cannot be ruled out that the solutions still contain surfactants that can affect the adsorption. For polymer–surfactant mixtures we always observed large adsorbed amounts as compared with the corresponding dialysed samples (see below). Only modified polyacrylamides containing cationic groups adsorb extensively onto the negatively charged silica surface (see The cationic polymers in this study contain a maximum of 10% of charged groups and with a fairly high concentration of background electrolyte (0.1 If we assume that electrostatic interactions are the only driving force for adsorption, the surface excess is limited by the charge compensation condition: For very low The presence of non-electrostatic forces makes it possible for non-ionic polymers to adsorb and leads to charge overcompensation of oppositely charged polymers. The charge of adsorbed polymer then exceeds the surface charge and the charge ratio Charge reversal has been observed upon adsorption of cationic polyacrylamides on a range of surfaces, like carboxylic latex, constant charge density polystyrene latex and colloidal silica particles However, it is important to note that our conclusion regarding charge overcompensation is based on the assumption that the number of available surface charges is not affected by the polymer adsorption. During adsorption on charge regulating surfaces, like oxides and clays, the polyelectrolyte will change the structure of the electrical double layer. In turn, this can induce additional dissociation of the surface sites, responsible for the charge built-up. Thus, the estimated value of Theory predicts To further explore these effects, the adsorption behaviour of the polyacrylamides, with a small number, 0.5–1%, of hydrophobic moieties, were investigated. At constant charge density, The self-assembly of the polymers may change the conformation in such way that the interaction between charged segments and the surface is reduced due to the presence of the hydrophobic groups. This anisotropic segment distribution can explain the larger thickness in spite of the lower amounts adsorbed. Somewhat unexpectedly, we observed that also the anionic modified polymers adsorb on the negatively charged surface. However, the adsorbed amount is quite small, about 0.1–0.3 The adsorption of the different polymers was also investigated before removing excess of surfactant (Tween 80), used in synthesis, from the samples by dialysis. The surfactant content, given in The presence of Tween 80 leads to an increase in the adsorbed amount for most of the polymers, as shown in Unfortunately, ellipsometry does not allow us to separate the fraction of the observed surface excess that corresponds to surfactant and polymer adsorption, respectively. To estimate the contribution of the surfactant adsorption, we have also studied the adsorption behaviour of the surfactant alone. The amount of Tween 80 adsorbed from a solution with a surfactant concentration of 3×10 The same phenomena of increase in the adsorbed amount upon adsorption of anionic PAM It is noteworthy that the impact of the surfactant is larger under the condition where the polymer itself shows a weak adsorption, i.e. non-charged or anionic polymers. The adsorbed amount is larger, and the adsorbed layers in these cases also seem to be thinner than without excess of surfactant. For instance, in case of H0.5A10, the purified sample shows the adsorbed amount 0.3 The available experimental data does not allow us to establish the mechanism for how the presence of the Tween 80 can promote the polymer adsorption. The used surfactant concentration (3 The silica substrates were kindly provided by Dr. Stefan Welin-Klintsröm, Linköping University, Sweden. The polyacrylamide samples were kindly provided by Dr. Yann Le Cor, SNF Floerger, Saint Etienne, France. Yulia Samoshina thanks the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (Stiftelsen för Strategisk Forskning, SSF) for financial support through the Colloid & Interface Technology program.