The conversion of conventional pulp and paper manufacturing processes into an integrated forest products biorefinery has great potential in the context of sustainable development. In this paper, we present a process concept which uses induced air flotation technology for recovery of manool, a valuable bioproduct, from the condensate of the multi-effect evaporation system in the kraft pulping process. The results showed that approximately 70% (purity of approximately 35%) recovery of manool was achieved from crude manool when the aeration time was about 7min. The glass microbeads were effective in preventing sticking, due to their hydrophobic nature, and facilitating froth collection. Also, the use of a silicone defoamer at a dosage of approximately 40ppm mitigated excessive foaming in the process.Natural compounds, such as those from trees or other biomass sources, are in demand from the public. Manool, a terpene, is commonly available from trees (both softwood and hardwood) and plant materials. It has desirable flavor and fragrance properties, as well as cosmetic, medicinal and antimicrobial effects Hydrodistillation and solvent extraction are common methods used in the extraction of manool from different sources. Farhat et al. extracted manool (5.5–13.1% based on oil) from Tunisian cultivated Salvia officinalis L. by hydrodistillation In kraft pulp mills, condensate is generated from the multiple-effect evaporator system The efficient conversion of renewable resources into various sustainable products is essential for a green economy Induced air flotation (IAF) is a well-known commercially practiced technology that has wide applications in wastewater treatment and separation of suspended streams In this project, the potential of using induced air flotation in recovering manool from the aforementioned RO concentrate was investigated. To this end, in the context of a kraft mill based integrated forestry biorefinery, the concept of using induced air flotation, in combination with skimming for manool recovery was explored. The study was aimed at: 1) determining the effect of aeration time on manool recovery; 2) using a low density, surface active medium to overcome the difficulty of flotation froth collection; 3) investigating the effect of using a defoamer to control foaming issues. Softwood-derived RO condensate samples were collected from a kraft pulp mill in Eastern Canada. The wood chips used contain mainly black spruce (about 95%), and a small amount of pine (about 5%). This mill has a RO process to concentrate the evaporator. The manool concentration was approximately 0.6 The induced air flotation used a Plexiglass column with an air sparger at the bottom and a volume holdup of 1600 After the flotation was completed, the flotation froth, containing the glass microbeads and crude sample, was carefully collected from the walls and the top of the column into a beaker. The remaining RO concentrate in the flotation column was collected into another beaker and subsequently subjected to solvent extraction with dichloromethane (DCM). Ethyl acetate (EA) was added to the beaker containing the flotation froth and mixed well. The manool was extracted using EA (the ratio of EA to the flotation froth was 10 The characteristic vinylic proton in the manool structure (refer to In the context of integrated forest biorefinery, the efficient recovery of valuable organics from the waste streams generated in pulp and paper manufacturing processes, followed by value-added utilization, is expected to provide additional revenue for the pulp and paper industry The key elements include the RO concentration process and the IAF recovery process. As shown ( During the black liquor evaporation process, condensates are generated, which contain valuable wood extractives that are dissolved from wood chips during the pulping process. The evaporator condensate is cooled to about 40 Manool, usually found in the essential oils of sage (Salvia officinalis, a common aromatic herb), is a commercially available diterpene that has high value and applications in the production of various products, particularly in the flavor and fragrance industry. The manool concentration in typical kraft 5th effect condensates is about 2–30 The proposed add-on IAF recovery process is shown in Manool recovery as a function of aeration time was studied, while other parameters were fixed. As shown in Manool recovery (flotation efficiency) in the flotation column is mainly dependent on four transfer processes The RO concentrate was a viscous liquid, which contained surface active substances such as resin acid and fatty acid, resulting in the froth being very sticky and stable, which in turn led to problems in collecting the froth. The excessively stabilized foam led to many problems such as pumping and post-treatment, thus a defoamer or antifoam was used to suppress foam (or froth) formation, or to destroy already formed froth The silicone defoamer used in this study was an insoluble and hydrophobic liquid with a low surface tension, which can destroy the foam using an oil bridge deformation and/or an oil spreading mechanism In following the integrated forest biorefinery concept, manool (a high-value product from nature) was recovered from the reverse osmosis (RO) concentrate of the evaporator condensate from the kraft process using an induced air flotation system. Aeration of about 7 The authors wish to acknowledge the support from Canada Research Chairs Program. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 