The characteristic Monteggia lesion, comprising a proximal ulna fracture and radiocapitellar dislocation, was first described in the orthopedic literature 2 centuries ago. Initially classified by the direction of radial head dislocation, improved understanding of the natural history revealed that the type of ulnar fracture and the presence of concomitant radial head or coronoid process fractures were very important. This has led to further characterization and advancements in optimal treatment. This chapter begins by detailing the history of Monteggia lesions and anatomical considerations, and it describes the different classification systems currently in use that help guide treatment. This is followed by an in-depth description of preoperative considerations and indications for operative and nonoperative treatment in children and in adults. The core section of the chapter details the current recommendations regarding treatment of the various subtypes of this injury, including nonoperative and operative correction of the ulna, radiocapitellar dislocation, and associated fractures of the radial head and coronoid process. The chapter concludes by discussing the common complications and indicating further directions for research.Associated with osteoporosis, which can compromise stability of internal fixation Commonly has an anterior triangular or quadrangular fracture fragment defect in the anterior cortex leading to persistent anterior angulation of the ulna and posterior radiocapitellar subluxation Use dorsal contoured plating bending around the proximal aspect of the olecranon to obtain additional proximal fixation and to restore the compression-resistant anterior buttress of the ulna Preserve periosteum and soft-tissue attachments to maximize healing properties Associated LCL injury in one-half to two-thirds contributing to ulnohumeral instability Repair via lateral exposure Associated coronoid fractures must be addressed, otherwise suboptimal outcome is possible If large fragment, then fix with cannulated screws If small fragment, then repair with suture inclusive of the anterior capsule Associated radial head fractures present in almost all cases ORIF for partial articular with single fragment or complete articular with <3 fragments Radial head excision The eponymous set of injuries categorized as “Monteggia” refers to an ulnar-based forearm fracture in association with a proximal radioulnar joint dislocation. When traumatic force dissipates through the forearm, there are only a few circumstances that result in disruption of one of the bones. When one of the bones is injured, a corresponding fracture or dislocation of the other is likely and must be highly suspected. Monteggia-type injuries represent bony failure of the ulnar aspect of the forearm, with ligamentous failure of the radial portion and resultant dislocation of the radial head. It is important to have a firm grasp of the anatomy and the anatomic variations included within the eponym of Monteggia lesion because variations in fracture patterns require different surgical treatments. The forearm is a unique, two-bone construct with dual intra-articulations that allow for rotational motion. It is important to understand the unique proximal radial and ulnar anatomy. The ulna proximally comprises two main anatomical entities, the olecranon and the coronoid process, and it articulates with the humerus and the radius. The olecranon is the centerpoint for the hinge aspect of the elbow, and its trochlear notch acts to constrain the olecranon fossa of the humerus. The proximal radius is shaped to allow for articulation with multiple surfaces during both flexion-extension at the elbow and supination-pronation of the forearm. The head is cup shaped and concave to allow for flexion-extension over the spherical capitellum of the humerus, and it is cylindrical to allow for axial rotation for supination-pronation within the radial notch of the ulna and the annular ligament. Although the anterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament is the primary stabilizer to valgus stress at the elbow, the radial head acts together with and as an independent secondary stabilizer. The annular and quadrate ligaments maintain stability of the proximal radioulnar joint. The annular ligament is fibro-osseous and circumferential, attaching to the anterior and posterior aspects of the ulna’s radial notch. It does not attach to the radius, allowing the radial head and neck to rotate within the ligament. Understanding the pathoanatomy of Monteggia fracture dislocations is necessary for treatment decision-making. In most cases, the annular and quadrate ligaments are disrupted, whereas the majority of the interosseous membrane and the entirety of the triangular fibrocartilage complex remain intact. The proximal portion of the interosseous membrane is also generally disrupted, thereby allowing dissociation of the proximal radioulnar joint and dislocation at the radiocapitellar joint. However, because the majority of the interosseous membrane remains intact, anatomic reduction of the ulna frequently restores congruity at the proximal radioulnar and radiocapitellar articulations. As noted previously, the original Monteggia injury was described as a proximal-third ulna fracture with an associated radial head dislocation. The most well-known classification of the Monteggia lesion was first described by Jose’ Luis Bado over 150 A Bado Type I fracture is a proximal- or middle-third ulna fracture with an anteriorly dislocated radial head, and it is quoted in the original paper to be approximately 60% of cases in adults and children. A Bado Type II fracture is a proximal- or middle-third ulna fracture with a posterior or posterolateral dislocation of the radial head, and it was thought to be 15% of all cases. A Bado Type III fracture is a fracture of the metaphyseal ulna with lateral or anterolateral dislocation of the radial head. This is thought to represent approximately 20% of cases and to be the second most predominant lesion in children. A Bado Type IV fracture is a proximal- or middle-third ulna fracture along with anterior dislocation of the radial head and fracture of the proximal third of the radius. Because of the problematic nature in treatment of the posterior, or Bado Type II lesion, Jupiter further classified these lesions into four subtypes on the basis of the location and type of ulna fracture sustained. Type II fractures commonly involve a fracture of the radial head as it shears against the capitellum during posterior dislocation. In addition to the four principal fracture types, Bado also included several so-called Monteggia-equivalent injuries based on the similarity of their proposed injury mechanism. Patients will acutely present after a trauma with pain, swelling, decreased range of motion, and commonly deformity about the forearm. Radiographs of the elbow and wrist should be obtained in all cases of forearm injuries. Although the ulnar shaft fracture is often obvious on X-ray, isolated views of the ulna are not sufficient because the radial head dislocation is commonly missed. Indeed, despite an increased awareness of these injuries, there are multiple case reports documenting a significant occurrence of missed diagnoses. In children, radiographs must be scrutinized closely in cases of presumed “isolated” radial head dislocations because plastic deformation of the ulna represents a substantial proportion of anterior Monteggia lesions (31% of anterior lesions, 17% of overall). It is interesting to note that the direction of the ulnar angulation typically points in the same direction as the radial head dislocation. Historically, outcomes of closed-reduced Monteggia lesions in adults are poor, and as such, unless the patient is too sick to tolerate an operation, treatment of these fractures As mentioned above, closed reduction and cast immobilization have been advocated by many and can be effective for Monteggia injuries with incomplete fracture of the ulna (plastic deformation, metaphyseal buckle-type, or greenstick fractures). Careful attention must be placed in regard to the initial reduction and dressing placement of these fractures in the postoperative period because there have been case reports of anterior interosseous nerve compression secondary to tight wool dressings inside plaster casts. Surgical reduction and fixation is recommended in all Monteggia lesions with complete fracture of the ulna. The K-wire or flexible nail can be inserted into the intramedullary canal of the ulna in a percutaneous manner through a posterior triceps split approach. The ulnar fracture is then close reduced and the intramedullary device is advanced antegrade past the fracture site, restoring length and alignment. Closed reduction of the radiocapitellar dislocation is simultaneously performed, and adequate reduction and intramedullary placement is confirmed using intraoperative fluoroscopy. The intramedullary nail can then be bent and cut outside of the skin to facilitate consequent removal in 3–4 Unlike short oblique or transverse ulna fractures, intramedullary fixation of comminuted or long oblique ulna fractures is not considered to be adequate surgical stabilization given the likelihood of displacement or shortening. Unfortunately, an acute Monteggia fracture is misdiagnosed in up to one-third of cases. Historically, treatment of the adult Monteggia lesion is notoriously difficult. Correction of Bado Type I and III Monteggia lesions—anterior or anterolateral fracture dislocations or subluxations—is usually accomplished via anatomic reduction and fixation of the ulna fracture and rarely requires open reduction of the radiocapitellar joint. Except for the rare case in which there is an interposed annular ligament, any residual subluxation of the joint in these lesions is almost always a product of residual malalignment of the ulna. The patient is placed in a lateral position with the upper limb flexed over a bolster. Severely comminuted ulnar fractures can prove difficult in regard to restoration of anatomic length, rotation, and alignment. Ebraheim et al. reported favorable results using a technique of first reducing the proximal radioulnar articulation, then establishing length by temporarily pinning the radial head to the proximal ulna with K-wires, followed by reconstruction of the comminuted ulna fracture. Bado Type II injuries, or posterior Monteggia lesions, are a spectrum of injuries that require different treatments based on the level and structures involved in the ulna fracture. Fixation of the ulna follows the same principles and methods discussed previously in regard to anterolateral Monteggia fracture treatment. Simple diaphyseal fractures can be fixed with dynamic compression or limited contact-dynamic compression plating, making sure to engage at least six cortices proximally and distally from the fracture site. Again emphasized is the superior fixation obtained by placing the plate on the dorsal surface of the proximal ulna instead of over the medial or lateral surface. When considering the posterior Monteggia lesion, it must be noted that unlike anterolateral Monteggia lesions, these (1) are associated with osteoporosis, which can compromise the stability of internal fixation; (2) are associated with lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex injuries contributing to ulnohumeral instability; (3) may When the proximal ulna fracture is complex, it is recommended to approach it via a direct posterior midline incision. With anatomic reduction and fixation of the ulna, the radial head almost always spontaneously reduces. If the radial head does not reduce, then one must always double-check to make sure ulnar fracture reduction is adequate. Other causes for failed radiocapitellar reduction include an interposed capsule, annular ligament, Patients who have Monteggia lesions with unaddressed associated coronoid process fractures tend to have unsatisfactory results complicated by instability, pain, and radioulnar synostosis. It is not uncommon for posterior Monteggia lesions to have associated LCL injuries that contribute to ulnohumeral instability. In the pediatric patient, who can usually tolerate longer periods of immobilization, the arm is almost always put in a long-arm bivalved cast. The amount of elbow flexion The adult elbow is much less tolerant of long periods of immobilization, with postoperative stiffness as a real concern. As such, it is recommended to limit the initial postoperative immobilization to a period of 2–3 In the pediatric population, acute Monteggia fracture dislocations, treated appropriately (closed reduction of incomplete ulnar fractures or surgical stabilization of complete ulnar fractures along with reduction of the proximal radioulnar joint), do remarkably well. Multiple studies show that treated pediatric Monteggia lesions heal with almost universal bony healing, joint stability, and restoration of forearm and elbow motion. In the adult population, outcomes are highly variable. Before modern methods of internal fixation, good outcomes were infrequent at best. In a series of 68 patients in 2004, Korner et al. noted that Bado Type I lesions tend to do well as long as the radial head is uninjured and no coronoid fracture is present. However, when evaluating outcomes in those lesions without associated radial head or coronoid process fractures, adult patients do relatively well. In 1998, Ring et al. obtained satisfactory results in 39 of 48 patients using the Borberg and Morrey scale. In addition, good results have been reported with repair of noncomminuted, straightforward (Mason Type II) radial head fractures. Complications of Monteggia lesions are numerable and include persistent stiffness, malunion, nonunion, persistent subluxation or dislocation of the radial head, radioulnar synostosis, infections, and nerve palsies. Failure to recognize the radial head dislocation or failure to recognize recurrent instability from inadequately treated Monteggia lesions is the most common and most devastating complication of Monteggia fractures. Because of its intimate relationship with the radial neck, posterior interosseous nerve palsies are seen in up to 20% of acute injuries. As with any other high-energy traumatic injury, compartment syndrome is a real risk with these injuries, and patients must be preoperatively and postoperatively monitored for signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome. Plate loosening occurs most often in older, osteoporotic patients, when a noncontoured plate has been applied on either the medial or lateral side of the ulna, although other causes of loosening such as infection or re-injury must always be ruled out. Recurrent ulnohumeral instability postoperatively presents in posterior Monteggia patterns A and C with a fractured radial head and often a fracture of the coronoid process. The rates of nonunion or malunion in Monteggia lesions, especially Bado Type II, are much higher than the general forearm fractures’ nonunion rate of 2%. As mentioned above, it is not uncommon for chronic pediatric Monteggia lesions and acute adult lesions to have postoperative stiffness and decreased range of motion, especially in regard to forearm pronation. Any elbow trauma can result in associated loss of elbow motion, especially when there is associated capsular or ligamentous injury or prolonged immobilization. Heterotopic ossification can cause synostosis and associated loss of motion. Decreased postoperative immobilization protocols have been successful in decreasing rates of stiffness, and elbow contracture release can be a successful surgical intervention. Intervention is generally indicated when the arc of motion is inadequate, and recent techniques have improved arcs of motion by 50–70° in 80–90% of patients, Posttraumatic radioulnar synostosis is generally considered to be a rare complication after elbow and forearm fractures, with an estimated incidence of 1–6% after treatment with compression plating and a higher incidence in those with head injury. In 2005, Strauss et al. published a rare subtype of posterior (Bado Type II) Monteggia lesions that not only included the proximal ulna fracture and posterior radial head fracture, but also a subset of individuals who had associated posterior ulnohumeral dislocation. Of their 23 patients, the 6 who had the accompanying ulnohumeral posterior dislocation had worse outcomes in terms of elbow motion and when evaluated by the Broberg and Morrey scale. Although every attempt was made in this chapter to give the most up-to-date information, with a constantly evolving body of literature, new case series and surgical techniques may be published in the interim. In addition, although many operative techniques are described within this chapter, for greater depth and instruction many references are readily available. For detailed operative technique in regard to pediatric Monteggia lesions, the chapter in the text by Drs Waters and Bae is invaluable.