A mature safety culture is regarded as an important means of ensuring good safety performance, particularly in reducing accidents. However, there is little empirical evidence in the literature that links safety culture maturity with actual safety performance metric. In this study, a safety culture maturity framework was used to examine the safety culture maturity level of mines in Ghana, and to explore the relationship of cultural maturity with accident rates. The safety culture maturity framework used consisted of 3 person and 10 system elements across five levels of culture maturity. A survey comprising the 13 elements was conducted among 828 employees of four large-scale gold mines in Ghana. Through principal component analysis, the structure of the framework was found valid and produced a good fit after testing the model through confirmatory factor analysis. One-way ANOVA showed that the mines had statistically significant differences in their mean incidence rate and pairwise comparison test revealed specific statistically significant mines. Similarly, Kruskal-Wallis H test also showed that the mines’ safety culture maturity scores differed significantly from each other and a pairwise test identified specific mines with significant differences. It was found that mines with lower incidence rates consistently had higher safety culture maturity scores for the elements than mines with higher incidence rate. Also, correlation analysis indicated a strong negative correlation between the incidence rate and most elements of the safety culture maturity framework. The model/framework used was found useful and practical to both employees and management, enabling the identification of weak areas that require improvements interventions.Over the past three decades, safety culture has been deemed as a significant component of safety management systems (SMS) of many safety-critical industries including transportation ( The term safety culture has been defined differently by different authors, and a collection of these definitions is provided by According to Safety climate and safety culture evolved in the 1980s, originating from the overarching concept of organisational climate and organisational culture ( Although scholars stress the importance of safety culture maturity for improving safety performance, most of the works completed are conceptual. Most of the existing empirical works focus on workers’ risk behaviours and their perceptions on the safety climate of their organisations ( In this study, we developed a safety culture maturity framework, validated the usefulness of the framework in Ghanaian mines and assessed the relationship between safety culture maturity and actual accident reports. We do so with incident data supplied by Ghanaian mining companies. We argue that accident rates maintained by these companies might be a good data source if validity and reliability can be ascertained. It has been recognised that the accident rate of the mining industry remains alarming. The International Labour Organisation has stated that mining which employs 1% of the world’s workforce is responsible for 8% of the global workplace deaths ( Maturity models involve the use of several criteria on different maturity levels to evaluate the effectiveness of an analysed unit such as an organisation ( The term safety culture framework as used here refers to a range of key aspects of safety culture across all levels of the maturity model that can be used by organisations to understand their safety culture. Whilst the maturity model refers to the level/stage of maturity, the framework refers to specific safety cultural elements such as management commitment and safety communications. Based on these elements, questionnaires and/or audits tools are developed with respect to the maturity model to study the safety culture maturity level of an organisation. Safety culture maturity model is a relatively new concept in the mining and minerals industry. There are disparities in safety culture within the industry and safety management varies across different operations, limiting the effectiveness of best practices that are introduced. As noted by This research involved collecting safety culture and incident rate information from four large-scale mines in Ghana. The four mines together employ 9767 workers and were selected to enable a comparison of their incidence rates and self-reported safety culture maturity scores to determine if any association exist between their incidence rate and safety culture maturity level. All four sites are large-scale open-pit metalliferous gold mines, with Mines B and C having underground operations. However, the data used for this study excludes the underground operations. Mining currently takes place in 2, 4, 2, 1 open-pits at Mines A, B, C and D respectively. Mines B, C and D operate a conventional carbon-in-leach (CIL) milling operation, whereas Mine A operates a carbon-in-pulp processing plant. Accessibility to the production areas of all four mines is through ramps. The mines have been operating for different years and had different incidence rates. The 5-level safety culture maturity model of Hudson’s was adapted for this research. This model was found to be more suitable for use in the Ghanaian mining industry (GMI) than Based the model, a framework consisting of various elements and indicators was developed based on the literature ( The safety culture maturity of the mines was determined through self-reported rating. A multiple-item questionnaire based on the safety culture maturity model and framework was administered during working hours to a random sample of 1040 employees across the four mines. The questionnaire consisted of 34 items; 6 and 28 items for the person and system elements respectively. Each item had 5 statements representing the five levels of culture maturity. For each of the 34 items, respondents were expected to choose one of the five statements that best reflects the current culture of the mine. The self-report questionnaires used for the study is shown Of the 1040 distributed questionnaires, 850 were returned, however, 22 were incomplete and were removed. The average age and total mining experience of the respondents were 35.1 (±15.5) years and 12.7 (±9.6) years respectively. 83% were males and 17% were females. Concerning their hierarchical levels at the mines, 32% and 42% were frontline workers and frontline supervisors respectively, and 19% and 7% were middle and top managers respectively. Regarding the working groups the respondents belonged to, 44% were involved in mining operations, 17% in metallurgical and mineral processing, 18% in maintenance and engineering and 21% in support services. The data used comprised of a five-year monthly injury data containing the number of injuries recorded in a month, the total hours worked and the number of monthly employees each for the four mines. Injury data was also obtained during field visits to each of the mines. The injury data used in the study is the total recordable injury cases as defined by the At all the mines, the frequency of less severe injuries such as medical treated injuries (MTI) and restricted work injuries (RWI) far exceeded fatalities and lost time injuries (LTI). For the five-year period, there were 2, 1, 2, 3 and 4, 8, 12, 5 fatalities and LTIs respectively at mines A, B, C and D. Thus, there were more LTIs than fatalities at all the mines, with the LTIs being more frequent at mine B and C than A and D. The monthly incidence (total reportable injury) rates of each of the sites for each one hundred workers employed were computed based on the The focus of this analysis was first to determine the perceived safety culture maturity levels of the mines with respect to the elements of the framework and then determine whether any statistically significant differences exist between the maturity scores of the mines. Since some elements were assessed using multiple indicators, the average position of those elements was determined so that each element was represented with a single indicator. Then, the percentages of responses for each element across the five maturity levels were computed for each of the mine sites. To determine whether any statistically significant differences existed between the safety culture maturity levels of the mines, Kruskal-Wallis H test was conducted where the mines was the independent variable and the maturity levels (1-basic, 2-reactive, 3-compliant, 4-proactive, 5-resilient) the dependent variable. The Kruskal-Wallis H test was chosen after results of Shapiro-Wilk normality test and Levene test for equality of variance showed that the maturity level scores were neither normally distributed nor had a homogeneous variance. Moreover, the safety culture data was viewed as categorical and not continuous. Dunn’s post hoc test using Bonferroni correction was carried out to determine the specific mines that were statistically significantly different from each other with respect to the safety culture maturity levels of the various elements. To determine whether any association existed between a site’s incidence rate and its safety culture maturity level, results of the post hoc tests for the incidence rates and the maturity level scores were compared. This was to determine whether the sites that had statistically significant differences in their incidence rate also had statistically significant differences in their safety culture maturity scores. The results were further examined to determine whether, for the statistically significant sites, those that had lower incidence rates consistently had higher maturity scores and those that had higher incidence rates consistently had lower maturity scores. Finally, the five-year incidence rate for each of the sites was aggregated into a single score for the sites, likewise the safety culture maturity scores of the individual elements. Spearman’s correlation analysis was then conducted on the two aggregated variables to determine whether a statistically significant correlation existed between the incidence rate and the safety culture maturity scores and to identify where the relationship was weak and strong. There was a statistically significant difference between the incidence rates of the mines as determined by one-way ANOVA ( Consistent with the literature ( The remaining 30% of the completed questionnaires were subjected to confirmatory factor analysis to determine whether the data will fit the structure of the safety culture maturity framework determined in the exploratory factor analysis. This process is similar to those reported in other studies (  The percentage of answers for the 10 system elements for the sites is depicted in The result of the Kruskal-Wallis test showed that there were statistically significant differences in the means of all elements of safety culture maturity between the four sites and the mines have different levels of safety culture maturity as shown in Dunn’s pairwise test further showed strong evidence of differences between the safety culture maturity scores of some pairs of sites ( Comparing the results of the pairwise test of the incidence rate and that of the safety culture maturity elements indicated the existence of a relationship between the two variables for some mine pairs. For instance, as shown in To determine if this relationship was statistically significant, the means of the five-year incidence rates of the sites together with the mean score of their safety culture maturity score for the 13 elements were correlated. Result of the correlation is presented in A number of limitations should be noted regarding the present study. The first is that the safety culture maturity of the mines was assessed through self-report and not through field observations and site audits. The main advantage of self-report is that it gives a direct perspective of the participants rather than deducing from observations. Self-report measures have however been found to be susceptible to social desirability bias and thus threaten the validity of the study ( One-way ANOVA showed that the four mines had different incidence rate. Test result proved that these differences were significant at p < 0.05. Results of the pairwise comparison test further identified specific mine pairs that showed statistically significant differences in their mean incidence rate, distinguishing low accident mines from high accident mines. The incidence rate of mine A was consistently significantly lower than the remaining mines at p < 0.05. Also, mine D’s incidence rate was lower than that of C and B, indicating that mine A is the best performing site, followed by D, whereas C was the worst performing mine. Each of the participating mines is foreign owned, belonging to either a multinational or a national company with at least two sites in the country. Therefore, by effectively distinguishing low accident mines from high accident mines, the research findings shows that mines with similar hazards and risks can perform differently in terms of their safety output. These differences in safety performance could be attributed to a number of factors, one being the safety culture maturity of the mine, which was the focus of this research. The structure of the safety culture framework used for the study distinguished between person and system elements. Whereas the person dimension assessed the perceptions of norms, beliefs and tradition that are often intangible and difficult to document, the system dimension assessed the perceptions of well-document concrete elements, which are often reflected in a site’s safety management system. This structure of the framework was confirmed by results of the principal component analysis. The analysis extracted two components, explaining 51.09% of the variance. This separation of person and system component was useful in identifying specific problem areas to support the development of targeted solutions for improvement. Consistently throughout all the sites, the intangible person elements show more characteristics of the lower levels of maturity than the tangible system elements. This indicates that the study respondents perceived the more tangible and well-documented system elements to be performing better than the less tangible person elements. The mines should begin developing plans to ensure that person elements progress with the system elements to avoid the effects of a system-culture mismatch. The different levels of safety culture maturity found here is consistent with the concept of safety culture maturity. Safety culture develops at a different pace for different companies, dimensions and elements. There were significant differences in the maturity levels not only among the sites but also among the various elements of the framework. An important aspect of this study was to explore the relationship between safety culture maturity and safety performance using incidence rate. All the elements and the overall safety culture correlated negatively with the incidence rate, similar to the works of In the correlation, 3 items, namely, care and respect, performance measurements and learning from accidents, stood out, having the strongest relationship with a correlation coefficient of almost −1. These elements provide useful insights for future research and for mines seeking to improve their safety performance. The element SE1, performance measure, which measures how safety goals and target are set and measured at the mines had the strongest correlation with incidence rate. This indicates that accident can be reduced when safety goals are correctly set and effectively measured. In order to achieve such improvement, the setting and measuring of safety goals and targets should move from lagging indicator that focuses on previous accident rates. Attention must shift to a proactive approach with a focus on leading indicators such as risk controls activities that will prevent accidents from happening. Also, SE10, learning from incident was the second highest correlated elements. This element measured the existing process followed to collect and analyse accident to extract and disseminate useful lessons. This element notes that to ensure continuous improvement in safety, all incidents regardless of how small they all must be seen as learning opportunities. Small deviations ought to be analysed carefully to identify insightful lessons not only for the prevention of future accidents, but also the lessons must be used to identify general weaknesses in the risk management system so that existing deficiencies can be corrected. Finally, PE1, which measures the views of individual organisational members concerning the presence of risks and hazards at the sites was the third highest correlated element. The element recognises that the perception of employees about risks and hazards is a key determinant of their thoughts and actions. For instance, if workers perceive risk-taking to be part of the job, it will reflect in their action and ultimately, there will be minimal chance of reducing and eliminating accidents. Also, PE1 assesses care and recognition of worker. When workers are regarded as just resources, it impacts their commitment towards risk control activities with ultimately affects the optimal performance of the company. The findings of this study present broad insights and direction for future research and industrial application, specifically the strongly correlated elements of the framework. Further investigation into how learning from incidents and performance measurement occur in the industry would be valuable. The research was carried out to explore the association between safety culture and safety performance using the safety culture maturity concept. Over 800 respondents, across 4 different mines completed a paper-based survey questionnaire, indicating that although higher maturity levels existed in their current safety culture, improvements opportunities also exist. The study further recognises that, a mine site may have different maturity levels for different safety culture elements, suggesting that safety culture does not exert a consistent effect in all areas of a site's safety management system. It is therefore important that improvement strategies must first target the weak areas. Though a heterogeneous group used the framework used in this study, the results were aggregated for the sites and not analysed for the separate groups. The framework used was found valid and reliable, supporting the need to have a safety culture maturity framework that contains both person intangible and system tangible components. The study provides some evidence of the existence of a negative correlation between accident rate and safety culture maturity. Consistently, low accident mines had higher safety culture maturity scores, while high accident mines had lower safety culture maturity scores. Also, the study showed that the various elements of the framework correlated differently with the incidence rate. The strongly correlated elements that could be the focus for further improvement in safety were performance measurement, learning from accident and care and respect. Declarations of interest None. We acknowledge the assistance of the Inspectorate Division of the Minerals Commission of Ghana, the mine sites and survey respondents whose time, resources and information were vital to the research. Eric Stemn is a recipient of an Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 