Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging can be used to non-invasively probe the brain microstructure. In addition, recent advances have enabled the identification of complex fiber configurations present in most of the white matter. This has improved the investigation of structural connectivity with tractography methods. Whole-brain structural connectivity networks, or connectomes, are reconstructed by parcellating the gray matter and performing tractography to determine connectivity between these regions. These complex networks can be analyzed with graph theoretical methods, which measure their global and local properties. However, as these tools have only recently been applied to structural brain networks, there is little information about the reproducibility and intercorrelation of network properties, connectivity weights and fiber tractography reconstruction parameters in the brain. We studied the reproducibility and correlation in structural brain connectivity networks reconstructed with constrained spherical deconvolution based probabilistic streamlines tractography. Diffusion-weighted data from 19 subjects were acquired with b = 2800 s/mm2 and 75 gradient orientations. Intrasubject variability was computed with residual bootstrapping. Our findings indicate that the reproducibility of graph theoretical metrics is generally excellent with the exception of betweenness centrality. A reconstruction density of approximately one million streamlines is necessary for excellent reproducibility, but the reproducibility increases further with higher densities. The reproducibility decreases, but only slightly, when switching to a higher order in constrained spherical deconvolution. Moreover, in binary networks, using sufficiently high threshold values improves the reproducibility. We show that multiple network properties and connectivity weights are highly intercorrelated. The experiments were replicated by using a test-retest dataset of 44 healthy subjects provided by the Human Connectome Project. In conclusion, our results provide guidelines for reproducible investigation of structural brain networks.Diffusion-weighted (DW Whole-brain structural connectivity networks, or connectomes, are constructed by first parcellating the gray matter (GM) of the brain and then performing whole brain tractography to determine connectivity weights between each pair of regions ( The effects of various tractography algorithms on the network properties were investigated by To the authors’ knowledge, only six studies have analyzed the reproducibility of graph theoretical analysis in structural connectomes constructed with recent methods capable of identifying complex fiber configurations ( Apart from In this study, we investigated the reproducibility and intercorrelation of different global and local graph theoretical metrics, network weights and reconstruction parameters in structural brain networks by applying CSD-based probabilistic tractography to state-of-the-art DW data acquired from 19 healthy subjects using b = 2800 s/mm We acquired high angular resolution DW-MRI data from 19 healthy subjects with a 3T MRI Tim Trio Siemens system and a 32-channel head coil. The participants gave written informed consent to participate in this study under a protocol approved by the local ethics committee. A single-shot echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence was used with repetition time (TR) = 8100 ms, echo time (TE) = 116 ms and 2.5  ×  2.5  ×  2.5 mm The HCP test-retest dataset ( The DW data were corrected for subject motion, induced eddy current and EPI distortions using FMRIB Software Library’s (FSL) ( The HCP dataset was provided preprocessed, as described in We performed CSD to estimate the full fODF using SH orders from 4 to 12, by deconvolving the data with a response function describing a single coherently aligned WM fiber population ( Structural brain networks were constructed by assigning the reconstructed streamlines to the corresponding GM areas according to their endpoints as illustrated in Commonly used graph theoretical metrics were calculated for all of these networks using the Brain Connectivity Toolbox ( Residual bootstrapping with an 8th order SH representation of the DW signal was performed in each voxel to generate nine additional realizations of each subject’s data ( Our results show that the reproducibility of graph theoretical metrics was generally excellent, i.e. the ICC was higher than 0.75 for all metrics both in the residual bootstrapping sample and in the HCP test-retest data. The reproducibility results obtained using a SH order of eight and 10 million reconstructed streamlines, including the corresponding coefficients of variation, are presented in We found that the reproducibility decreased slightly and the variation in the ICCs increased for higher SH orders, i.e. higher model complexities, as shown in Increasing the reconstruction density gradually from 10,000 to 100,000,000 streamlines improved the reproducibility of both global and local metrics in the residual bootstrapping sample ( In the HCP test-retest data, the reproducibility was generally lower and the standard deviations were clearly higher than in the residual bootstrapping sample, as shown in In binary networks, reconstructed in the residual bootstrapping sample, the reproducibility of characteristic path length and global efficiency was significantly decreased for low threshold values of one (0.00001 %) or ten (0.0001 %) streamlines as shown in The reproducibility results for different network weights are presented in The reproducibility for the Destrieux atlas ( The reproducibility of the local network properties for individual nodes is presented in Spearman correlation coefficients between the different network metrics in the residual bootstrapping sample are presented in Correlations between network properties from differently weighted networks in the residual bootstrapping sample are presented in Our results show that the reproducibility of structural brain network properties is excellent both in the residual bootstrapping sample and in the HCP test-retest dataset. These results complement the previous results by Based on our results, we provide the following guidelines for the reconstruction and analysis of structural brain networks: The reconstruction density should be sufficiently high: the absolute lower limit for excellent reproducibility is between 500,000 and one million streamlines (see For reproducible analysis of binary networks, sufficiently high threshold values should be used. The absolute values for the most reproducible results range from 100 to 1000 streamlines in networks with a total number of 10 million streamlines, which equals 0.001 %–0.01 % of the streamlines (see The spherical harmonics order has only a small effect on the reproducibility; higher orders, i.e. more complex models, result in slightly lower reproducibility (see In addition, various network properties correlate strongly with each other, and therefore, it would often be sufficient to study either nCPL or SW, LE or nGE, and degree or strength (see We would like to remind that in addition to the above guidelines, which are directly based on our data, the acquisition and preprocessing of the data should be performed with great care. For instance, the reliable assignment of the streamlines to the corresponding cortical and subcortical GM regions requires proper EPI distortion correction ( Moreover, determining biologically accurate measures for structural connectivity based on diffusion MRI data is not unequivocal ( A limitation of this study was the lack of repeated data acquisition in the original residual bootstrapping sample. Therefore, we replicated the experiments related to the reconstruction density, spherical harmonics order, and the two cortical parcellations in the HCP test-retest dataset of 44 healthy subjects. These experiments produced results similar to the residual bootstrapping experiments, and thus, further strengthen the conclusions of the study. The main difference in the results was the lower reproducibility and higher variation in the HCP dataset (except for BC), possibly due to the long interval (4.9 ± 2.4 months) between the two intrasubject acquisitions and the repositioning of the subjects, which are effects that are not captured by design in residual bootstrapping. In the future, the non-WM partial volume effects ( We analyzed the reproducibility of structural brain network properties in a residual bootstrapping sample and in the HCP test-retest dataset. Networks were reconstructed with probabilistic CSD-based streamlines tractography while varying several reconstruction and network parameters. We showed that the reproducibility of structural brain networks reconstructed with CSD is generally excellent. However, streamline density should be sufficient and binarization of the networks should be performed with adequate threshold levels. In addition, certain network properties and connectivity weights correlated with each other, but several connectivity weights did not correlate, which indicates that they may measure different properties. Thus, appropriate connectivity weights should be selected carefully. These guidelines should be taken into account in future research concerning structural brain networks in order to enable reliable investigation of the network properties. This work was supported by the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders (FWO), and by the Interuniversity Attraction Poles Program (P7/11) initiated by the Belgian Science Policy Office. In addition, T.R. received support from the Instrumentarium Science Foundation (Finland), the Automation Foundation (Finland), the Finnish Foundation for Technology Promotion, and Emil Aaltonen Foundation (Finland). The research of A.L. is supported by VIDI Grant 639.072.411 from the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO). B.J. is a postdoctoral fellow supported by the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO Vlaanderen). We acknowledge the computational resources provided by the Aalto Science-IT project. The authors report no conflicts of interest. The replication data were provided by the Human Connectome Project, WU-Minn Consortium (Principal Investigators: David Van Essen and Kamil Ugurbil; 1U54MH091657) funded by the 16 NIH Institutes and Centers that support the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research; and by the McDonnell Center for Systems Neuroscience at Washington University. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:   