Introduction
                  Extra-articular distal tibia fractures include a tibial fracture line located partially or totally in the metaphyseal bone and a fibular fracture in variable areas or sometimes absent. There is no consensus in the literature on the conduct to address the fibula fracture. The main objective of this study was to assess its impact on tibial reduction and union.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Fibular fixation plays a positive role in reducing tibial displacement and improving mechanical stability of the entire lesion.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This study was based on the multicenter observational group of the 2009 SOFCOT symposium, i.e., 142 metaphyseal fractures of the tibia. The fibula was intact in 10 cases and fractured in 132. In the three main categories of surgical treatment for the tibia (nailing, plating, external fixation) (126 fractures), the fibular lesion was not treated in 79 cases (61%) in this series, nine were treated with intramedullary pinning, and 38 with plate and screw fixation.
               
                  Results
                  There was no statistical relation between the anatomic situation of the diaphysis and the anatomic type of the fibular fracture or between the anatomic type of the fibular fracture and its situation compared to the tibial fracture line. The intertubercular and neck fractures were type A1 or B1 (P
                     <0.001) and were combined to a tibia fracture with a torsional component; the medial-diaphyseal and subtubercular fractures were associated with tibial fracture lines with a simple transversal or comminution or metaphyseal-diaphyseal component (P
                     <0.032). The rate of pseudarthrosis of the fibular fracture was 4.7% at 1 year; in all these cases, fibular treatment had been conservative. All treatments combined, the tibial axes were statistically better corrected when the fibula was treated with fixation. In four of the 11 cases of axial tibial malunion, the primary fibular fixation caused or worsened them.
               
                  Discussion
                  The present clinical series provides results similar to the biomechanical studies. The consequences of fibular fixation perpetuating a tibia reduction abnormality or on the contrary the absence of fibular fixation appeared as probable factors of residual reduction defects, lack of stability of the tibiofibular complex, and tibia non-union.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV (prospective cohort study).Extra-articular fractures of the distal end part of the tibia, also called supramalleolar fractures, were characterized by Gerard and Evrard This study was based on a multicenter continuous observational series collected from 1/1/2008 to 31/12/2008 in the 2009 French Society of Orthopaedic and Traumatology Surgery (Société française de chirurgie orthopédique et traumatologique [SOFCOT]) symposium: 142 fractures of the distal quarter of the leg in the distal epiphyseal square according to the AO criteria The 142 tibial metaphyseal fractures were broken down into three main types summarized in The tibial fractures were treated in 51 cases by intramedullary nailing, in 51 cases with lateral cortex plates, and in 25 cases with external fixation; six tibias received diverse surgical treatments (three transplantar nailing, two tibial screw fixations, and one with isolated fibular pinning), and nine received conservative treatments. In the three main categories of surgical treatment (126 fractures), the fibular lesion was treated conservatively with various methods or with surgical fixation ( The leg axes were evaluated immediately after surgery and at the 6th and 12th months in frontal and sagittal views; an angle greater than or equal to 10° defined malunion. The same was true for a rotational abnormality assessed clinically or with CT. The length of the leg bones was compared to the healthy side: a discrepancy was retained if it was greater than 10 mm. The statistical analyses were carried out with SPSS 15.0 for Windows. Associations between qualitative variables were sought using the chi-square test or the Fisher exact test when the theoretical numbers were less than 5. No statistical relationship was demonstrated between the anatomic location on the diaphysis and the anatomic type of fibular fracture. Similarly, no relation was found between the anatomic type of the fibular fracture and its location in relation to the tibial fracture line. Thirty-six of the 41 intertubercular fractures of the neck were type A1 (spiral two-fragment) or B1 (spiral wedge) ( Of the 110 fibular fractures followed-up radiologically up to the 6th month, 98 showed union; of the 106 evaluated at the 12th month, 101 were considered stable. The rate of pseudarthrosis for the fibular fracture was, respectively, 12.7% and 4.7% at these two follow-up examinations. The five fibular fractures with pseudarthrosis at 1 year of follow-up were then treated with conservative treatment: for four of them, the tibial fracture was stable (one case was lost to follow-up after 12 months, with tibial and fibular pseudarthrosis). When the fibula was treated with fixation, all tibial fracture treatments combined, the overall postoperative tibial axis ( Eleven malunions greater than or equal to 10° were observed, six after tibial nailing (three valgus, three recurvatum), four after plate osteosynthesis (two valgus, one recurvatum), and one varus after external fixation ( The same procedure was followed for the five cases of length discrepancy greater than 10 Seventeen tibial fractures showed pseudarthrosis at 1 year: these union failures were reviewed in relation to the procedure performed on the fibular fracture. The fibula had been surgically fixated in two of the three nailed sites, in two of the four plated tibial fractures, and in six of the 10 tibial fractures treated with fixation. This observational series gathers the greatest number of distal tibial fractures reported in the literature, making it possible to detail the anatomic specificities of the fibular lesion: the fibula intact in only 7% of the cases, the frequency of the neck lesions (> In diaphyseal fractures of the leg, the fibular fixation provides a variable contribution to stability according to the experimental studies conducted by Gorszyca et al. The literature does not show consensus on the type of tibial fixation and even less on the importance of treating the fibular fracture Whereas the series reported in the literature make it impossible to conclude on the need for fibular repair, the biomechanical studies have demonstrated that fixation of the fibula was useful to increase the stability of the tibial fixation. The analysis of this group of patients confirmed the hypothesis postulated by emphasizing the importance of the fibular lesion within a single biomechanical and pathological entity of distal fractures of the tibia. In particular, it confirms the value of double surgical fixation, as a complement to stability but also as assistance to reduction when external fixation or nailing is indicated. In the first, the cutaneous lesions that generally impose this type of stabilization are rarely located laterally: the fibula fixated first returns the original length to the leg bones and a certain degree of frontal-sagittal reduction. In closed nailing procedures, reduction of both tibial and fibular lesions is even more difficult to obtain if treating a torsion injury resulting in a fracture with a rotational component, ensuring fibular osteosynthesis first anatomically reduces any horizontal displacement. These strategies now remain to be validated in a prospective study. None for all authors.