Upgrading of iron ore by jigging has been an emerging trend. Typically −10.0+0.15mm material is considered for jigging where the problem of separation of finer particles is inherent. A detailed investigation is carried out to understand the behavior of various size fractions of the feed material during jigging in order to improve the separation efficiency. It has been realized that the separation of particles is mostly influenced during the period when particles are fluidized. Fluidization of particles in jigs depends on the rate of change of water velocity that in turn is controlled by the maximum water velocity attained during the pulsion stroke of the jig cycle. Experimental results at different maximum water velocities show three important relations between the feed characteristic and the maximum water velocity. Firstly, coarser feed needs higher maximum water velocity for better jigging efficiency, secondly, maximum water velocity for a feed must be matched to the largest size of the particles present in the feed, and finally, even at optimal maximum water velocity different size fractions of a feed respond differently and as a result ideal separation is never achieved. These observations reinforce the need for sizing the feed and then optimizing the maximum water velocity for each feed. This study also brings into focus the concept of size ratio which is used to predict the segregation potential of binary particulate systems.Jigging is a density-separation process which is widely used to separate heavier particles from the lighter ones. It is used for beneficiation of ore minerals as well as washing of coal. In its class it is by far the simplest yet a robust mechanical device that can treat comparatively larger size feed materials at higher throughputs. Its popularity dwindled owing to the availability of newer technologies in the gravity separation field that showed higher separation efficiency. These include dense media cyclone and heavy media bath. However, the specific advantages of a jig of low operating cost and ease of operation still remain and it is for these reasons Indian industry is witnessing a recent trend of treating iron ore in jigs. Nevertheless, to keep jigging as a competitive and viable option, there has been a renewed research interest towards improving the separation efficiency. Separation efficiency of any process is intimately related to the inherent process mechanisms of the processing unit. A comparison of the process mechanisms of various gravity separation units leads one to believe that particle separation in jigging, unlike several other gravity separation processes, is a rate process. In other words, separation is achieved gradually and a final concentration product is realized after a certain time. Therefore, earlier research work on jigging was primarily focused on the kinetics of particle stratification. Later, from the process design standpoint key parameters in addition to the process kinetics was also investigated ( Particle segregation in jigs is primarily driven by the pulsated water where the amplitude and the frequency of pulsation control the fluid velocity. While in one extreme a combination of amplitude and frequency may create high turbulence, in another extreme, it may simply lead to lesser mobility of particles required for optimum stratification ( Particle stratification in response to a given fluid velocity has been traditionally analyzed in phases considering the inherent cyclic nature of the process (see Particle fluidization has been studied in detail in many areas of engineering applications. In the context of mineral particle separation, Rasul et al.’s work is noteworthy ( It is evident from the foregoing that the size ratio of particles and the water velocity are the two important parameters for improved segregation during fluidization. This concept can be exploited during jigging. Fluidization in jigging is characterized by its short duration and it is quite sensitive to rate of change of water velocity. Water velocity trends during jigging can be mapped by plotting the instantaneous water velocity against the cumulative time. The velocity profile reverses its path during the pulsion stroke and the point of reversal denotes the maximum water velocity in a jig cycle. It is easy to conceive then that the maximum water velocity during each jig cycle controls the rate of change of water velocity through the jig bed. Thus, during the fluidization state of a jig cycle it is not just any velocity but the maximum water velocity that should be controlled in conjunction with the size ratio of particles. The purpose of this paper is to show that the maximum water velocity and the size ratio between ore and gangue particles are the key factors for particle segregation during the fluidization state of jigging. Effect of maximum water velocity and size ratio on jigging was studied using iron ore particles of −10.0 A two-chamber jig (plunger type) fitted with a screen of 2.0 Separation efficiency based analysis is performed here to assess the role of the maximum water velocity and the size ratio of particles in jigging. This approach is adopted since the main objective of this research work was to reduce the alumina content in the iron ore concentrate. Therefore the separation efficiency was calculated based on alumina content in the feed and the product ( Effect of maximum water velocity on particle separation in jigs was studied by considering three feed samples of different size distributions. Size distributions of these three different feed types are shown in It is clear from the jigging tests that the separation efficiency is a function of the maximum water velocity and that the coarser size feed requires a higher maximum water velocity. However, it is also expected that different size fractions of the same feed should respond differently for the same maximum water velocity that may affect the separation efficiency. To study this aspect, size-wise separation efficiencies were calculated for each of the three feeds at their respective optimum jigging condition which correspond to different maximum water velocities. These data are presented in The role of the maximum water velocity can also be explained by considering the state of fluidization during the pulsion cycle. It is expected that at some stage during pulsion cycle all the particles in the jig bed must be fluidized. The maximum water velocity in this context should be such that it must provide sufficient drag to fluidize the coarsest and heaviest particles. In fact, in practical situations the maximum water velocity is set according to the coarsest and the heaviest particle present in the feed. If this is the case then all the particles in the bed are going to be fluidized. Although this happens for a very short period, it is most likely that the finer particles under this condition would mix. For example, as shown in The size ratio is defined as the ratio between the size of heavy and light particles. Size ratio controls particle segregation during fluidization and defluidization stages of a jig cycle. In the early part of the fluidization stage, voidage in the packed bed controls bed expansion ( The varied response of a given size fraction of particles as part of different jig feeds can also be explained by considering the size ratio between heavy and light particles. In the context of jigging the size ratio is difficult to establish as the feed material is typically composed of a wide variety of particles varying in density as well as size. To simplify the situation, the feed under consideration can be thought of as a mixture of several binary systems of particles based on their densities. Thus the particles present in the feed can be grouped into two density classes. These are (i) iron ore particles with specific gravity of 3.8 and above, and (ii) gangue particles with specific gravity less than 3.8. The density classification in this manner was arrived after allowing for 1.0% alumina in the iron ore concentrate. The feed material in these two density classes can be further classified according to size into 3–4 size classes where each size class is then represented by their mid size. Thus it becomes possible to constitute several density variant binary systems of particles by combining material from one size class of the iron ore with any other size class from the gangue. Based on the size ratio of the particle components, all the binary systems can be regrouped into two categories: segregation (size ratio Numerical simulation using the discrete element method (DEM) was carried out to study the effect of water velocity on the separation of particles during jigging. Numerical simulation of particle motion leading to stratification involves simultaneously modeling the solid and the water behavior. The force balance on a particle in a fluid medium is A particulate system comprising of 7000 particles was simulated in a 15-cm diameter cylindrical column. The particle properties and the simulation parameters are given in The bed of particles was pulsated at a maximum water velocity of 38 Thus the model predictions as well as the experimental findings clearly establish the role of the maximum water velocity and the size ratio in jigging. This study also shows while a favorable size ratio is the prerequisite for particle segregation, the optimum maximum water velocity is a necessary condition for the same. In fact, it is found here that particle segregation takes place in the coarser size range for which maximum water velocity is optimized so as to obtain the highest overall separation efficiency for a particular feed. The upgrading of iron ore by jigging has been a definite trend in recent years in several countries. For heavier minerals like iron ore, chromite, etc., jig is preferred over other density-separation techniques, due to their simplicity and low running costs. However careful control of the process is still required for acceptable separation efficiency. The control can be achieved by monitoring the maximum water velocity among other things. Since particle segregation during jigging is quite sensitive to maximum water velocity its adjustment through proper setting of amplitude and frequency is required for the optimization of the process. This can be explained with reference to the following pilot scale data. Identical iron ore feeds (with respect to size ratio and size distribution) of −10.0 Segregation profiles of the jig bed with respect to the alumina content are plotted against cumulative yield in The importance of water velocity for particle segregation in jigs is recognized when jigging is viewed as a repetitive process of fluidization (pulsion) and defluidization (suction). Water velocity controls the state of fluidization. In fact, the rate of change of water velocity and the maximum water velocity influence the state of fluidization. In this study, the influence of maximum water velocity on the separation efficiency of the process is analyzed by considering iron ore as the test material. Pilot scale jigging data showed the importance of the maximum water velocity inasmuch as coarser feed needed higher maximum water velocity for maximum separation. A detailed investigation into the influence of maximum water velocity on different size fractions of a feed under optimal jigging condition showed that the coarser fraction separates well compared to the other size fractions. Thus it was determined that optimization of maximum water velocity is dependent on the coarser size fraction of the feed and therefore jigging efficiency could be improved by sizing the feed and subsequently optimizing the maximum water velocity for each feed. The effect of size ratio in a binary system of feed particles was also analyzed. The size ratio favourable for density segregation depends on the density ratio of heavy and light particles. In case of the iron ore feed, size ratio of 0.44 and above was found to be favorable. In order to explain as to why different size particles segregate to different extent, the feed to the jig was viewed as a combination of many density variant binary systems. Analysis of the size ratio values of these binary systems of particles could explain separation efficiencies of different size classes. Therefore, sizing the feed for favourable size ratio and then optimizing maximum water velocity for each of these relatively narrow feeds should ensure better jigging efficiency.