Recently, the gas-phase organic ligand extraction of metals from low-grade sources using the fluidized bed reactor (FBR) technique has garnered significant attention owing to its simplicity and advantages in reducing energy costs. In this study, a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) coupled model including a three-phase Eulerian model, kinetic theory of granular flow model, and reaction kinetics model was proposed to investigate gas-phase extraction processes encountered in an FBR. The developed three-phase CFD coupled model was first validated by comparing the obtained simulation results with the experimental data of cumulative iron extraction at different reaction temperatures and the classical calculated data of the pressure drop. Subsequently, the effects of the inlet gas velocity and particle phase holdup on the extraction were studied. Accordingly, both particle fluidization behaviors and extractive reaction kinetics characteristics were obtained. The simulation results indicated that the mentioned operating conditions significantly affected the distribution of particle phase holdup and subsequently influenced the cumulative iron yield through an extractive reaction. Furthermore, the developed CFD coupled model is beneficial for optimizing gas-phase extractive reaction process in FBRs.Drag coefficient, (-) Friction coefficient, (-) Diameter of particles (m) Diffusion coefficient (m Restitution coefficient, (-) Interphase force (N m-3) Gravitational acceleration (m s Radial distribution function, (-) Specific enthalpy, (kJ kg Unit tensor, (-) reaction rate constant (s KTGF model parameter, (-) Gas-solid drag model parameter, (-) Interphase mass transfer, (kg m Gas-solid drag model parameter, (-) Courant number, (-) Pressure, (Pa) Reynolds number, (-) The source term of species i (kg m Time, (s) Temperature, (K) Slip velocity, (m s Velocity, (m s Mass fraction (-) Yield (-) Volume fraction, (-) Inter-phase drag force coefficient, (kg m Inter-phase drag force coefficient, (kg m Collisional dissipation energy, (kg m Density, (kg m Stress tensor, (Pa) Viscosity, (Pa s) Granular temperature, (m Solid bulk viscosity, (Pa s) Angle of internal friction, (deg) Thermal conductivity, (W m A large number of slags serving as by-products in metallurgy processes are produced annually worldwide ( In the last several decades, many types of conventional technologies, such as hydrometallurgy ( Generally, gas-phase extraction reactions are performed in fluidized bed reactors (FBRs) owing to their excellent mass and heat transfer performance. For gas-phase extraction in an FBR, oxide particles typically coexist with sand particles. When the gas velocity is higher than the minimum fluidization velocity, the particle mixture starts to flow (fluidization). Clearly, a gas-phase extraction system is a typical binary-mixture particle system (gas–solid-solid three-phase) in which the particle–particle mixing quality is critical in determining the gas-phase extraction reaction rate. Therefore, it is crucial to comprehensively understand the relationship between fluid flow and extraction reactions to optimize this process, which is characterized by multiphase flow and multiscale characteristics. As a supplement, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations can provide flow field information that can explain the experimental observations. Additionally, both the evolution of fluidization and the gas-phase extraction reaction in an FBR can be visualized by a CFD simulation. Gas–solid hydrodynamic characteristics in FBRs can be numerically investigated by many multiphase models, which include the multi fluid model (MFM), dense discrete particle model (DDPM) and CFD-discrete element model (CFD-DEM). A deep understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of these models is inherently required for reliable simulation results. In recent years, a considerable effort has been devoted to evaluating these different FBR modeling approaches ( In this study, a CFD-KTGF model coupled with a reaction kinetics model was proposed for the first time to study the multiphase flow reaction behaviors of the gas-phase extraction of iron from its oxide in an FBR. The particle fluidization characteristics and gas-phase extractive reaction kinetics behaviors were investigated. The developed model was validated by the experimental data of cumulative iron extraction and the classical calculated data of pressure drops. Subsequently, the CFD coupled model was employed to explore the effect of inlet gas velocity and particle phase holdup. The hydrodynamic characteristics of the gas–solid-solid three-phase flow reaction behaviors in an FBR were obtained. To present a comprehensive description of the process of gas-phase extraction in an FBR, a multiple model coupling approach is typically required. In this study, the developed coupled model is composed of a three-fluid CFD model (gas phase, oxide particle phase, and sand particle phase), a KTGF model, and a gas-phase extraction reaction kinetics model. As the three-fluid CFD and KTGF models are widely applied in simulating binary-mixture particle systems, herein, they are summarized in As shown, each phase (three phases in total) has a set of governing equations, which include the continuity equation, momentum equation, energy equation, and species equation. For the solid phase, the extra KTGF model is required to calculate solid phase properties, such as solid pressure, solid shear viscosity, and solid bulk viscosity. For the species equation, there are two independent equations in the gas phase. Additionally, the volume fraction of the oxide particles should be calculated. The interphase mass transfer (m It should be noted here that, for the interphase force, only the drag force is included in the momentum equation, and the proposed CFD coupled model may be only suitable for a laboratory scale FBR. When it is extended to industrial scale reactors, the drag model must be replaced by the filtered drag correlations recommended by Sundaresan's group ( At high temperatures, iron(III) oxide (Fe This gas–solid reaction can be characterized by a noncatalytic shrinking particle model, and no product layer is formed because the products are gasified briefly under high-temperature conditions. In general, the gas-phase extraction rate is determined by a chemical reaction, mass transport, or both. As shown in  All simulations were performed in a two-dimensional (2D) FBR with a diameter of 15 mm and a height of 500 mm. Acetylacetone was one of the reactants and also served as a fluidizing agent. A sand particle has an average size of approximately 64 μm, which is similar to that of an Fe The FBR was created and meshed by structured quadrilateral cells using the commercial software GAMBIT 2.3.16 (Ansys Inc.). The cell size was In addition, the developed 2D CFD coupled model was solved by the commercial code FLUENT (Ansys Inc.). The governing equations were discretized by the QUICK scheme and solved under unsteady conditions. The pressure-based solver with an absolute velocity formulation was used. The gradient was computed by a Least Squares Cell Based scheme. The pressure–velocity coupling was realized by the SIMPLE scheme. In this study, the fixed time stepping method was used (Δt = 0.001 s), and the convergence criterion was set at 1 × 10 To study the effect of reaction temperature on the gas-phase extraction reaction kinetics behavior, experiments have been performed in a FBR by From Additionally, the simulation results revealed the same trend as the experimental data. For binary-mixture particles in an FBR, bed pressure drop is an important parameter in evaluating hydrodynamic performance. Empirical equations are available to calculate the bed pressure drop ( In this study, the bed pressure drop calculated by the CFD model was compared with that obtained by an empirical equation ( In this section, the effects of some key operating parameters (i.e., inlet gas velocity and particle phase holdup) on the particle fluidization characteristics and reaction kinetics behaviors are investigated based on the validated model. The gas–solid drag force is an important interphase force determining particle fluidization behaviors that can subsequently and significantly affect the distributions of reaction rates and products. Therefore, the inlet gas velocity should be addressed carefully according to the established gas–solid drag force model (see In general, with an increase in the inlet gas velocity, the particle bed will pass through the fixed bed, critical fluidization, particulate expansion, bubbling fluidization, and fast fluidization, and so on. As shown, the bed expansion height increases from 0.25 to 0.378 m with an increase in inlet gas velocity from 0.01 to 0.06 m/s. From  According to the developed CFD coupled model, particle phase holdup is another important parameter determining the particle fluidization behaviors and reaction kinetics characteristics. In this section, three Fe As shown in   A CFD coupled model involving a three-phase Eulerian model, KTGF model, and reaction kinetics model was proposed to investigate gas-phase extraction processes occurring in an FBR. The developed CFD coupled model was validated by experimental data in terms of the cumulative iron extraction at different reaction temperatures and the classical calculated data of the pressure drop. Based on the validated model, the effects of inlet gas velocity and particle phase holdup on the extraction process were investigated. As the inlet gas velocity increased from 0.01 to 0.06 m/s, the particles bed underwent particulate expansion into bubbling fluidization and the bed expansion height increased from 0.25 to 0.378 m. Accordingly, both the particle fluidization behaviors and extractive reaction kinetics characteristics were obtained under three different Fe  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank the