Purpose
                  To assess the accuracy and reliability of using cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) compared to X-ray six weeks after injury for predicting scaphoid union.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Overall; 52 patients with scaphoid fractures between April 2018 and March 2019 were prospectively included in this study. The mean age was 34.52 (13–88) years, and the gender ratio male/female 43/9. Of the fractures, 26 had occurred on the right side, and 26 on the left side. In total, 28 % of patients were manual workers. All patients underwent X-ray and CBCT six weeks after injury. Four readers, two radiologists, and two hand surgeons analyzed the findings using double-blinded X-ray and CBCT and categorized fractures as consolidated based on a 50 % visibility threshold concerning trabecular bridges. Proximal pole sclerosis, communition, cyst formation, and humpback deformity were similarly analyzed for all cases. Agreement between readers was calculated using Kappa, and sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy using RStudio software. The gold standard was the radiologic and clinical follow-up for all patients at two months.
               
                  Results
                  Inter-reader agreement between the four readers was moderate concerning X-ray (0.543) but substantial concerning CBCT (0.641). It was almost perfect between seniors regarding CBCT (Kappa = 0.862). Sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy were 0.75–0.78, 0.4, and 0.61–0.64, respectively, for two readers regarding CBCT. The X-ray values were 0.65–0.71, 0.35–0.4, and 0.53–0.59, respectively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  CBCT proves more accurate and reliable than X-ray for diagnosing scaphoid union at an early follow-up and prevents longer immobilization and interruption of activity or work.Scaphoid fractures occur frequently in young, active patients [ Clinically, for diagnosing a scaphoid fracture, there are three main signs to consider: a tender anatomic snuffbox, painful palpation of the scaphoid tubercle, and positive piston (corresponding to pain with the axial compression of the thumb). Even in the acute stage, these three signs display low specificity. Nevertheless, a retrospective study has demonstrated that a scaphoid compression test (piston), which is the most reliable test (sensitivity [Sn] 100 %/ specificity [Sp] 80 %) in the acute stage [ Typically, radiological examinations are routinely performed based on X-ray (XR). The protocol includes antero–posterior (AP), lateral (LAT), and Schreck positions. However, there is controversy in the literature about the time of imaging assessment and reliable radiological signs of scaphoid healing [ This study sought to compare CBCT to XR in terms of scaphoid healing based on the expertise of junior and senior radiologists and hand surgeons, and to evaluate the accuracy of CBCT as an affective imaging modality at an early post-fracture stage. This prospective study involved patients who were diagnosed with a scaphoid fracture between April 2018 and March 2019, and its protocol was approved by the institutional ethical committee (CCR number 2017−01276). Overall, 52 patients with a scaphoid fracture who underwent XR and CBCT six weeks after injury were successively included in the study. The mean age was 34 (range: 13–77) years, and 43 patients were male (81 %). Fourteen patients were smokers, four were unemployed, 11 were students, 18 were manual workers, 16 were office workers, and three were retired. Ninety percent were right-handed (48). Twenty-six fractures were on the ride side, and 26 on the left side. At the initial physical examination, all patients presented painful scaphoid tubercle palpation and a positive piston sign. Patients were seen in the emergency department, and they all received XR the day of consultation. Fractures were described according to Schernberg classification [ Each patient underwent XR and CBCT the same day. CBCT (OnSight, Carestream Health, Rochester, New York) displays a gantry featuring a 58-cm patient aperture and movable table. The wrist was scanned with the patient in the sitting position, the arm extended, and the hand in the prone position. The acquisition parameters for the wrist are summarized in All images were anonymized, classified randomly for XR and CBCT, and analyzed separately in different sessions by four readers. Analysis was performed in Osirix session (Osirix The independent observers were two musculoskeletal radiologists (a junior with seven years of experience and a senior with 16 years of experience) and two hand surgeons (a junior with five years of experience and a senior with nine years of experience). The four readers analyzed XR and CBCT in a double-blinded manner and categorized the fractures as consolidated according to a 50 % visibility threshold concerning trabecular bridges. The gold standard was the radiologic and clinical follow-up for all patients at two months (next clinical and radiographic follow-up). The presence of proximal pole sclerosis, communition, cyst formation, and humpback deformity were similarly analyzed for all cases by all readers. For scaphoid consolidation, we first evaluated the agreement between readers using Kappa (between two readers) and Kappa Fleiss (among more than two readers) for XR and CBCT, respectively. Values ≤0 were considered to indicate no agreement, 0.01–0.20 none to slight, 0.21–0.40 fair, 0.41–0.60 moderate, 0.61–0.80 substantial, and 0.81–1.00 almost perfect agreement. Then, the accuracy of XR and CBCT was assessed through a clinical and radiographic follow-up at two months. Sensitivity, specificity, the positive predictive value (PPV), and the negative predictive value (NPV) were calculated. We used RStudio software (R 3.5.1) for these assessments. Afterwards, we compared XR and CBCT in terms of scaphoid proximal pole density, the presence of translation, the presence of humpback deformity, communition, and cyst formation, and all criteria together for the best treatment choice. After testing the data’s lognormality by considering a p-value of ≤0.05 value to signify statistical significance (alpha), we used the Wilcoxon test and Spearman’s rank correlation with a 95 % confidence interval. GraphPad Prism 8 (San Diego, California) was employed for these statistical analyses. Fractures were localized in 44 % cases in Schernberg’s zone IV, 33 % in zones II–III, and 23 % in zones V–VI. The difference between the two modalities of analysis was non-significant (p = 0.572). The correlation test revealed an r-value of 0.569 with p < 0.0001. The mean immobilization duration with a short arm cast without thumb was seven (range: 4–12) weeks. Twelve patients had an unstable fracture, according to Mayo criteria [ At clinical follow-up at two months, 79 % (41) patients had no pain, and 21 % (11) presented with pain. Of the 11 patients with pain, five had an associated fracture (one complex distal radius, one hamatum fracture, one radial head fracture, and two trans-scapho retro-lunar dislocations); two had a tenosynovitis (one de Quervain and one flexor carpi radialis synovitis); one presented with a complex regional pain syndrome. Moreover, three patients with pain had a previous scaphoid pseudarthrosis that was identified during this new trauma and treated by means of surgery. In terms of scaphoid consolidation, according to the four readers, agreement was moderate for XR (0.543) and substantial for CBCT (0.641). According to the radiologists, agreement for XR was fair (0.35) and almost perfect according to the hand surgeons (0.956). However, agreement was substantial among hand surgeons and radiologists (0.803) for CBCT. The agreement for XR was slight among juniors (0.176) and fair among seniors (0.354). Regarding CBCT, agreement was superior among juniors though still moderate (0.441) and almost perfect among seniors (0.862). Regarding the accuracy of CBCT ( Our study highlights the superior accuracy of CBCT compared to XR for predicting scaphoid healing at early follow-up (six weeks), thus enabling a faster mobilization of patients and return to daily activity and work. This study demonstrated the relevance of the doctor’s experience, regardless of speciality, when analyzing scaphoid consolidation when we compared senior and junior physicians, with an improved result when using CBCT. Until now, XR has been a well-known follow-up method designed to detect bone fracture consolidation [ The formation of trabecular bridges and cortical fusion are accepted signs of bone healing [ In this context, instead of XR, the CT scan was investigated and shown to document scaphoid union. This technology enables better spatial resolution and permits the image reconstruction in the scaphoid longitudinal axis. Buijze reported that the inter-observer reliability of the CT scan to document scaphoid waist union using any degree of bony bridging proved to be substantial (k = 0.660); Sn was 78 %, Sp was 96 %, and accuracy was 84 % [ We already demonstrated that CBCT displays a higher Sn and Sp for detecting scaphoid fracture [ Concerning fracture displacement, it is known that XR des not sufficiently detect scaphoid displacement [ Concerning the duration of immobilization due to a cast, the standard care is still 8–12 weeks in the literature, which is, however, mainly based on XR follow-up [ Our study displays several limitations. The small size of the population is due to the fact that we only included patients who underwent both XR and CBCT on the same day at six weeks and then immediately attended a consultation with a hand surgeon to confirm scaphoid healing. Complications such as humpback deformity and proximal pole sclerosis were rarely seen in this study, which can be explained by the stability of fractures and involvement of waist zones, respectively. Another limitation was that radiation doses in XR and CBCT were not compared. The radiation dose in CBCT is calculated based on the absorbed dose rather than the effective dose. A separate supplementary phantomic study should be conducted to estimate the effective radiation dose of CBCT for wrists. Finally, this study did not compare CBCT and MDCT as the latter is not recommended for scaphoid healing follow-up, though is only used in complicated cases with poor progression. Although the moment of follow-up regarding scaphoid healing remains a controversial topic, CBCT could shorten this period enabling the diagnosis of consolidation with higher confidence than XR. CBCT technology provides more reproducible results than XR regardless of the experience of the radiologist or hand surgeon. Finally, the lower radiation dose permits the technique’s repetition for following-up scaphoid healing. Six weeks appears to be a reasonable period after which the first imaging follow-ups should be performed. 1) The scientific guarantor of this publication is Dr Sana Boudabbous. 2) The authors of this manuscript declare no relationships with any companies, whose products or services may be related to the subject matter of the article. 3) The authors state that this work has not received any funding. 4) No complicated statistical analyses were performed in this study 5) Institutional Review Board approval was obtained. 6) Written informed consent was waived by the Institutional Review Board. 7) Only if the study is on animals: not applicable 8) Some study subjects or cohorts have been previously reported: no previous publication of this study. 9) Methodology: • Prospective • Diagnostic • Performed at one institution The whole manuscript was thoroughly reviewed by KA, an English-native-speaking professional working at Cremer Consulting SARL, a medical communication agency specializing in Medical Editing.