The paper describes a retrofit application of our computer-based mineral processing flowsheet design system. This system uses industry-accepted models together with economic objectives, to generate designs which can be realistically rated according to their financial returns. The system generates sets of economically ‘good’ flowsheets for a given task (production of a marketable concentrate from a specified ore) by an evolutionary, heuristic process. In its current form it is suitable for flotation-based processing, which may include comminution and size classification. Retrofit and process modification, as well as grass-roots designs, is possible and is specifically illustrated by a case study here. The results are shown to be competitive with those produced conventionally, and may increase the profits of large-scale operations by many millions of dollars annually.This computer-based design system for mineral processing, or beneficiation, which is based on froth flotation, size reduction and classification, combines an expert system for generating the flowsheet structure with numerical models for the physical processes and economics. We address the problem of creating, given a feed containing a valuable mineral species and gangue, separation circuits which will maximize the processing profit, or added value of the separated minerals less all costs, subject to any constraints, such as on product or waste stream grades. In this design system, the circuits which can be generated may consist of flotation units, grinding mills and classifiers. These may be of any number and size (within industry-set limits), and may be connected in any feasible way, including recycling streams to any previous unit, or mixing output streams. The flowsheets are built up unit by unit: an ‘evolutionary’ design strategy. The unassigned streams of an evolving flowsheet are examined one at a time, and decisions are made to recycle these streams to already existing process units, or to assign them to new units or as system outputs. After each flowsheet modification economic optimization routines specify the most profitable set of design parameters (here the sizes of the individual units). The synthesis finishes when further addition of units does not increase the profit. The program consists of a logic (Prolog) based system which makes the decisions to modify the flowsheet structure and a numeric (Fortran) module which carries out the material balances and optimizations. The logic module incorporates an expert system which makes the decisions for stream assignment. These decisions are based on heuristics, which codify relevant design and industry experience. For example, one rule is that we should only mix streams which are ‘close’ in composition — as otherwise we are undoing some previously achieved separation. Another rule is that a grinding mill should be used if that will increase the differences in floatabilities of the materials by a sufficiently useful amount, or, if necessary to satisfactorily liberate the valuable mineral. Each such heuristic is controlled by a number, a ‘heuristic parameter’, which is set by the system operator, the process designer. The choice of these numbers will affect the character of the resulting flowsheet. The designer may then choose these to meet industry practice requirements, such as frequency and placement of grinding stages; to attain better controllability; or to create ‘simpler’ circuits. Good values for the parameters are readily found after a few trials, and there is then within the system opportunity for the incorporation of choice, judgement and industry experience and preferences. Prince and Connolly Simulation of the flowsheets is by a sequential modular system developed as part of earlier work. A rigorous process optimization, which finds the most profitable sizes of all units (and can and will delete units when necessary) is carried out for each partially completed flowsheet, as well as for the final one. Optimization has been by ‘successive quadratic’ programming, although a number of simpler techniques are currently used, to allow more ready implementation of more complex models and logic. The widely used first-order rate model for flotation has been extended so that rate coefficients are a function of mineral species, particle size, and where necessary, recycle extent. These coefficients may be modified for specific operating conditions (e.g. in scavenger banks) or specific units. Liberation is modelled explicitly, for binary combinations of minerals, as a monotonic function of particle size only. Model parameters may be obtained from crushing test results, or from electron microscopy systems, such as the JKMRC/Philips MLA system For size reduction, the Whiten well-mixed ball mill model is used, which predicts the full product size distribution for a given feed and mill size. It requires both mill and ore specific parameters, which may readily be obtained through laboratory tests or a combination of testwork and operating mill data. Net profits or added value are calculated using current cost models for the equipment, covering both capital and operating costs. The profit term used in evaluating circuit designs is: The system is basically a design system, which will create processing flowsheets given specifications of the raw material, ore input and of the minimum saleable grade of concentrate. It is described in more detail in Connolly We describe here an application of the system to ‘retrofit’ mode, that is, identifying and evaluating profitable changes which may be made to an existing plant by: evaluating specific changes; optimizing unit sizes in the existing lay-out with respect to added value, thus indicating where additional capacity may be advantageous; creating comparable ‘grass-roots’ designs which indicate directions of potentially profitable change in lay-out, or in installation of, say, additional mills, by evaluating the benefits and costs of changes needed. A case study was undertaken involving a large, base metal concentrator in Australia. This facility had been continuously operated for over 20 years, with only relatively minor plant modifications over that period. The management undertook a significant review of this process, with the intention of enhancing the plant's performance; options such as changing the layout of the mineral processing circuit, commissioning new processing stages or extending existing process stages were to be assessed. This study involved both discussions with the company's metallurgists of a conventional path to retrofit options, and our parallel approach, using operating plant survey and process economic data within a coherent design synthesis strategy. The company supplied us with the following information: Full layout and plant specifications for the existing process circuit. Detailed plant survey data for the existing mineral processing circuit. These included measurements of mineral flows in each of the plant's streams on a size by size basis. The smelter marketing contract terms which gave us the dollar value of the concentrate. A list of retrofit options for improving the current process resulting from the internal discussions, and, in the absence of any input from our study, would probably have set a limit on any plant improvement strategies. Before the circuit design system could be used it was necessary to ‘balance’ the plant survey data, that is, to reconcile the measured mineral flows about the existing circuit, and to estimate the model parameters to be used in the design system. For the purpose of modelling the size reduction and flotation processes, the three most abundant minerals were chosen: an easily floated sulphide gangue (G1), a slow floating non-sulphide gangue (G2) and the valuable sulphide mineral (V); other minor and trace minerals were ignored. Of the three minerals, six distinct particle types were identified; pure G1, pure G2, pure V, and binary particles V–G1, V–G2 and G1–G2. The system model then involved six selected size fractions of these six distinct particle types. An Excel spreadsheet used the mass balanced data to back-calculate flotation rate coefficients for the particles identified in each of three flotation regimes, namely the roughing stage, the scavenging stage and the cleaning, stage. The size by size (i.e. particle size) mineral flows, with mineral liberation estimates, were used to derive model parameters for the size reduction/liberation processes occurring in the ball mill of the existing process. The mill model parameters are scaleable in respect to mill size, so that the circuit design system was free to vary the size of any incorporated ball mills. The flowsheet, and process unit specifications, of the existing process (   The design logic of our system may be used to further improve on this design; this logic reassigns the concentrate from the new flotation stage to the rougher stage (   The case study example here indicates that current design methodologies within the mineral processing industry may not always be sufficiently inclusive and systematic to achieve optimal performance. The circuit design system assists in improving methodologies, by drawing together all the available process and economic data in a coherent strategy. The illustrations here of the retrofit capacity of our design system show that it is an effective tool for identifying and evaluating potentially profitable changes and extensions to existing minerals separation or beneficiation circuits. It also shows, as for system employed in the design mode, that very substantial improvements may be found, amounting in cases to additional profits of many millions of dollars per year for typical large-scale operations. The performance and usefulness of the system may be attributed to: The system's trade-off between plant costs, and product recovery and grade, as economics have been built into the process creation. Control of the losses implicit in mixing streams of differing composition in recycling. Making all decisions explicit, transparent and objective, and subject to economic review. Additionally, in retrofit, substantial advances over conventional selection of options are possible because of a more systematic definition of the options and their optimization. This work has been supported by Australian (Federal Government) Research Grants, by Rio Tinto Australia and Mount Isa Mines (through the Australian Minerals Industry Research Association) and by collaboration with the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Center and with the Minerals Division of the CSIRO.