Alkaline glycine/glycinate solutions have been shown to have significant potential in the leaching of gold and copper from ores, concentrates, and wastes bearing these metals. An attempt was made to understand the adsorption behaviour of the gold glycinate complex onto activated carbon in the presence of copper for a pure alkaline glycine/glycinate system, after the gold has been dissolved using hydrogen peroxide as an oxidant and caustic soda as pH modifier. The adsorptive behaviour under various process conditions was evaluated using equilibrium loading isotherms. The linear regression (R2) values for the Freundlich isotherm for all tested parameters are close to unity, suggesting the model to be well suited for gold glycinate adsorption onto activated carbon. The maximum adsorption capacity of the gold complex on the activated carbon was determined as a function of free glycine concentration, solution pH, initial gold and copper concentration and calcium chloride salt concentration using synthetic solutions. The adsorption capacity increased with increasing free glycine, copper and calcium chloride concentrations, but decreased with increasing solution pH and initial gold concentration. This information can be used (with adsorption kinetics) to design and evaluate Carbon-in-Pulp (CIP), Carbon-in-Leach (CIL) and Carbon-in-Column (CIC) circuits for gold when copper may be present.The increased interest in non-cyanide technology for gold ore processing can be attributed to a number of reasons. From an environmental perspective, cyanide is toxic, and the adverse environmental impacts resulting from its discharge have led to stringent jurisdiction regarding its usage ( The alkaline glycine system is characterised by simple chemistry (i.e. not prone to the side reactions as cyanide). Glycine, also known as aminoethanoic/aminoacetic acid, is the simplest neutral amino acid made up of one amine ( Using hydrogen peroxide as oxidant Using oxygen as oxidant The leaching behaviour of various copper oxide minerals in alkaline glycine systems has also been studied and is reasonably well understood. Results from studies indicate that, at optimum conditions (pH 11, glycine to copper molar ratio of 8:1), the copper extraction was over 80.0% for azurite, malachite and cuprite and <20.0% for chrysocolla in 24 h. The copper complexing mechanism is shown in Eq. Methods for gold recovery from resultant polymetallic leachates include precipitation, ion exchange, solvent extraction and adsorption. Preliminary studies have confirmed that activated carbon adsorb gold glycinate complexes extremely well, possibly better compared to gold cyanide ( The interaction between an adsorbate and an adsorbent for any new system is best understood through the use of adsorption equilibrium information. Adsorption isotherms, their proper understanding and interpretation, are critical in the effective design and optimisation of any adsorption system. The Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption isotherms have been used to describe gold cyanide adsorption onto activated carbon from synthetic solutions with the former giving a much more accurate description of the equilibrium gold adsorption behaviour ( The main objective of the current study was to model the adsorption behaviour of metals onto activated carbon from a pure glycine system by generating isotherm parameters. The effects of pH, glycine concentration,ionic strength, initial gold and copper concentrations on the competitive loading of gold and copper glycinate complexes onto activated carbon are evaluated below. The adsorbent used in this work was fresh activated carbon: PICAGOLD® G210AS produced by Jacobi Carbons. The sorbent was manufactured from raw high grade coconut shell as per specifications from the manufacturer. Prior to use, the activated carbon was pulverised, mechanically sieved to −45 μm, oven dried at 70 °C for 16 h and preserved at ambient temperature in a desiccator. The surface area of the carbon as determined by the N All experiments were carried out using synthetic solutions prepared from Millipore water and analytical grade reagents. The gold glycinate solution was prepared by leaching a 24 ct (99.99%) gold sheet (10 cm × 2.5 cm × 0.03 cm) supplied by A&E Metals in an alkaline glycine solution. Gold dissolution was done in a glass beaker which contained 15 mL hydrogen peroxide (30% The traditional bottle-on-rolls method was employed for the metal glycine complexes adsorption onto activated carbon. The experimental runs were carried out in sealed 2.5 L Winchester bottles (OD 44 cm and L 30 cm) at room temperature (approx. 23 °C). The development of equilibrium isotherms was effected by contacting weighted samples of 0.040, 0.128, 0.256, 0.404 and 0.640 g/L powdered activated carbon with 250 mL of gold and copper synthetic solution. The initial pH of the solutions was adjusted to 11 and controlled during the experiments by using NaOH or H The experimental adsorption data on activated carbon for gold at temperature range from 22 °C to 25 °C and equilibrium pH 11 was fitted to the Freundlich model which is defined by Eq. The carbon adsorption capacity of the gold glycinate complex at different free glycine concentrations but otherwise identical conditions was explored and the resultant isotherms are shown in The pH range for alkaline glycine leaching which results in practical significance is 9–12 with gold leaching maximised at pH 11 (  Cu Salts of calcium are known to enhance adsorptive capacity of adsorbents, including that of activated carbon ( Interaction of the cation and functional groups on the adsorbent surface resulting in the neutralisation of repulsive forces between adsorbate and adsorbent and possible creation of new and or favourable active adsorption sites. Interaction of the cation with the already adsorbed species possibly resulting in the rearrangement of the packing and alignment of the adsorbed species. Interaction of the cation salt with the adsorbate prior to adsorption likely resulting in the alteration of the solubility of the adsorbate. The adsorption isotherms of gold complexes onto activated carbon from alkaline glycine solutions containing copper were studied and modelled using the Freundlich isotherm model. A summary of the results is given below: Increasing the glycine concentration up to 10 g/L increases the carbon loading significantly. Above 10 g/L free glycine concentration, the carbon loading capacity is not greatly affected by glycine concentration in solution. Increasing the pH from 10 through 11 to 12 decreased the carbon loading capacity due to increased hydroxide ions which compete with gold complexes for active sites on the carbon. pH value that gave the highest gold loading is 10. High initial gold concentration lowered the carbon's adsorption capacity. Increasing the initial gold concentration from 2 to 16 ppm reduced the adsorption capacity of the carbon by over 50%. Surprisingly, the gold loading capacity of the carbon increased with increasing copper concentration in solution, up to a maximum after which a small decrease was noted. Instead of copper competing for adsorption sites with gold on the carbon, it somehow enhances gold adsorption. A higher ionic strength increased the carbons loading capacity for gold glycinate complexes. The financial support by