Cupric sulfide, CuS, was ground by a planetary ball mill under various experimental conditions, including variations in rotation speed and grinding time. The changes in crystal structure, lattice parameter, particle size, pore structure, and specific surface area in the ground powders were determined. With regard to the CuS ground at 700rpm, the changes of the crystal structure were more remarkable than those of the CuS ground at 300rpm. The crystallite size decreased (from 18.5 to 8.4nm) and the lattice strain increased (from 1.60% to 3.09%) in the CuS ground at 700rpm. Moreover, the lattice parameter a increased, while the lattice parameter c decreased. Grinding at 300rpm is favorable for inducing changes of the physical properties, such as the growth of pore volume and specific surface area.Generally, mechanical activation (MA) is a pretreatment process prior to hydrometallurgical processes. MA caused by intensive grinding is attributed to the macro- and micro-scale changes, such as particle size, specific surface area, crystallographic structure, disorder, and so on. These changes affect not only the properties of the material, but also the chemical reactivity in the subsequent processes. MA can greatly affect intensively the hydrometallurgical processes for predominantly sulfide ores, which are difficult to leach. For these reasons, much effort has been made to quantify mechanical activation in the past decade, and many studies have been reported on this topic To estimate and calculate the grinding energy, various modeling and simulation tools have been developed. Among them, the discrete element method (DEM) has been adopted by many researchers as a tool for simulating and understanding comminution devices. DEM simulation has been demonstrated as an effective way to link microscopic information with the macroscopic behaviors of particle flow. This method describes the motion of particles, such as the particle position, translational velocity, and rotational velocity, at every time step. In our previous report, the grinding energy was calculated by using the DEM method, and its correlation to the extraction ratio in the proceeded leaching process was explained The main purpose of this research is to provide information on the quantitative effects of MA on cupric sulfide by the correlation analysis of the grinding energy calculated with the surface and bulk properties of the ground sample. Copper sulfide with a purity of over 99.0% (CuS, −100 mesh, Aldrich, USA) was used as a starting material in this research. Mechanical activated samples were prepared as follows: 4 The three-dimensional motion of each ball during the mill was simulated in a previous work by using the discrete element method (DEM), which takes into account the effect of the presence of the powder sample. Physical properties, such as the Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the ball, and the time step in the simulation are summarized in The colliding velocity of a ball against another ball or the wall of the pot can be calculated in the simulation. The specific impact energy of the balls, The samples were characterized by high-resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) analysis (X’pert-pro MPD, PNAalytical, Netherlands) using Cu Kα radiation ( The results of the DEM simulation are summarized in The structural changes and the characterization of the micro-structural characters were investigated using XRD analysis. The XRD patterns of CuS are shown in The data for the quantitative comparison of the microstructures, to analyze factors such as the crystallite size, lattice distortion, line positions, intensities, and broadening of diffraction angles were obtained from the XRD spectra. The crystallite size and lattice distortion were determined by Eqs. When grinding at 300 To analyze the structural changes more precisely, the lattice parameters were refined in a hexagonal system by Rietveld analysis using TOPAS software  The surface properties, such as pore volume and specific surface area (SSA), are shown in Intensive grinding by a planetary mill resulted in structural and physical changes of CuS due to changes in the grinding conditions, such as rotation speed and milling time. The mechanical activation caused a decrease in the XRD intensity and crystallite size of CuS. With regard to the grinding at 700 The CuS ground at 700 This work was supported by