Despite improvements in implants and surgical techniques, osteoporotic fractures remain challenging to treat. Among other major risk factors, decreased expression of morphogenetic proteins has been identified for impaired fracture healing in osteoporosis. Bone grafts or bone graft substitutes are often used for stabilizing the implant and for providing a scaffold for ingrowth of new bone. Both synthetic and naturally occurring biomaterials are available. Products generally contain hydroxyapatite, tricalcium phosphate, dicalcium phosphate, calcium phosphate cement, calcium sulfate (plaster of Paris), or combinations of the above. Products have been used for the treatment of osteoporotic fractures of the proximal humerus, distal radius, vertebra, hip, and tibia plateau. Although there is generally consensus that screw augmentation increased the biomechanical properties and implant stability, the results of using these products for void filling are not unequivocal. In osteoporotic patients, Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) have the potential impact to improve fracture healing by augmenting the impaired molecular and cellular mechanisms. However, the clinical evidence on the use of BMPs in patients with osteoporotic fractures is poor as there are no published clinical trials, case series or case studies. Even pre-clinical literature on in vitro and in vivo data is weak as most articles focus on the beneficial role for BMPs for restoration of the underlying pathophysiological factors of osteoporosis but do not look at the specific effects on osteoporotic fracture healing. Limited data on animal experiments suggest stimulation of fracture healing in ovariectomized rats by the use of BMPs. In conclusion, there is only limited data on the clinical relevance and optimal indications for the use of bone graft substitute materials and BMPs on the treatment of osteoporotic fractures despite the clinical benefits of these materials in other clinical indications. Given the general compromised outcome in osteoporotic fractures and limited alternatives for enhancement of fracture healing, clinicians and researchers should focus on this important topic and provide more data in this field in order to enable a sound clinical use of these materials in osteoporotic fractures.Despite improvements in the treatment of osteoporosis, osteoporotic fractures remain challenging to treat. Osteoporotic fractures have an impaired ability to heal [ Bone grafts can be used to stabilize the implants and provide a scaffold for ingrowth of new bone. BMPS have the potential of de novo new bone formation due to their osteoinductive capabilities [ So, these materials are suitable as bone grafts fill voids, provide support, and may enhance the biological repair of the fracture or the fracture defect. This paper is aimed at providing an overview of available evidence for the use of bone graft substitutes and BMPs for the treatment of osteoporotic fractures. The limitations of autografts and allografts led to the development of bone graft substitutes. Both synthetic and naturally occurring products are available. Each has its specific composition, which determines its biological and biomechanical behavior [ Bone graft substitute materials provide an osteoconductive matrix, but do not contain osteogenic cells or osteoinductive growth factors. Sufficient porosity, especially the presence of interconnected pores determine the ability of bone graft materials to foster ingrowth and osteointegration. Pore sizes of at least 100 μm are sufficient for osteoid formation and osseous ingrowth [ Calcium sulfate is a self-setting, biologically inert, moldable, and osteoinductive material that provides a scaffold for osteoblasts. It rapidly dissolves (without cellular influence) in 6–8 weeks. This may be advantageous in some cases, but if it dissolves too quickly, the augmenting effect may be lost too early, causing implant loosening. Calcium phosphate materials include synthetic tricalcium phosphate, beta tricalcium phosphate, and coralline hydroxyapatite. The osteoconductive matrix allows osteogenic cells to create new bone under the influence of host osteoinductive factors. Calcium phosphate materials degrade at a slower rate than calcium sulfate materials, with hydroxyapatite being relatively inert. Calcium phosphate materials are available as block, granules, or cement. Blocks and granules are highly porous. They provide less initial biomechanical strength, but strength will increase upon ingrowth of new bone. Calcium phosphate cement is injected as a paste and hardens in vivo. They can be injected or molded into small bone defects and provide structural support with low porosity but good initial compressive strength. Calcium sulfate and calcium phosphate cement have clear benefits when used for screw augmentation, as described in detail elsewhere [ Both calcium sulphate and phosphate cements show promising results in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures. Minimally invasive plate fixation (internal locking system (PHILOS) augmented with calcium sulfate cement (MIIG X3; Wright Medical Technology, Arlington, TN, USA) resulted in fewer complications, less reduction loss, and better joint function than plating alone [ Clinical benefit of bone graft substitute material use in osteoporotic distal humerus fractures is undecided, as studies show contradicting results. A biomechanical study showed that cement augmentation increased the biomechanical properties in volar plating. This included significant increase in cycles and load to failure, and construct stiffness at loads >325 N as well as less fracture gap movement and screw cutting distance at the holes of the ulnar column [ Two studies showed increased screw hold in spine after augmentation [ Two studies reported that cement augmentation can increase the rotational stability and screw pull-out force in osteoporotic femoral heads [ Current evidence does not unequivocally support the need to use bone graft substitutes in the treatment of osteoporotic tibia plateau fractures. A meta-analysis showed that for tibia plateau augmentation, hydroxyapatite granules, tricalcium phosphate, demineralized bone matrix, allografts, and autografts all resulted in uneventful healing in >90% of cases [ After the key discovery of the osteoinductive potential of BMPs to form ectopic bone reported by M. Urist in 1965 [ Several studies were carried out to look at the therapeutical effect of BMPs to reverse bone loss in osteoporosis. Phillips et al. (2006) [ The preclinical literature on the effects of BMPs on osteoporotic fracture healing is poor. One animal study evaluated the effects of BMP-2 in a segmental tibia defect of ovariectomized vs. sham-operated rats. The BMP-2 treated animal exhibited higher biomechanical failure loads and histology revealed a higher fracture healing score, including callus formation, bone union, marrow changes and cortex remodeling compared to the sham group after 8 weeks [ Only BMP-2 and BMP-7 have been licensed for the clinical use in patients. Open tibia fractures and lumbar spinal interbody fusion are official indications for BMP-2 (InductOs Given the generally compromised outcome in osteoporotic fractures and limited alternatives for enhancement of fracture healing, it should be assumed that bone graft substitute materials BMPs have been extensively studied for this entity. Therefore, it is more than disappointing that there is only very limited clinical data available on this indication that do not allow for an evidence-based algorithm. With a growing elderly population and limited treatment alternatives, the tremendous challenge of treating patients with osteoporotic fractures will become increasingly important and both bone graft materials and BMPs are still a viable option. Researchers and clinicians should grasp the opportunity to contribute towards this important topic and seriously evaluate the potential benefits and harms of these materials in osteoporotic fractures. Volker Alt serves as a research member of the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation, which is supported by the Stryker Corporation. He is a paid consultant for Medtronic and has been involved in speakers bureau/paid presentations for aap Implantate and Heraeus. Esther Van Lieshout has no conflict of interest.