Extraction of osmium, ruthenium and iridium with Cyanex 921 from aqueous hydrochloric acid media has been examined in the absence and in the presence of tin(II) chloride. In order to facilitate the separation of these individual metal ions, the extraction of each metal ion was studied separately under the influence of variables such as: hydrochloric acid concentration, reagent concentration, tin(II)chloride concentration, equilibration time, diverse ions and stripping agents. The method developed was applied to the recovery of these metal ions from some catalyst samples.The wide use of organometallic compounds of platinum group metals in catalytic reactions has increased their demand in the industrial world Cyanex 921 (tri-octyl phosphine oxide, TOPO) is a solid with 99.9% as active component A GBC 911A/UV visible spectrophotometer was used for absorption measurements. The extractant, Cyanex 921, supplied by Cytec Canada Industries, Canada, was used without further purification. The stock solutions of Os(VIII) and Ir(III) were prepared by dissolving analytical reagent grade OsO Ten milliliters of aqueous phase containing 1 mmol/L of osmium(VIII)/ruthenium(IV)/iridium(III) ion, in presence or absence of tin(II) chloride, was shaken (10 min in absence and 1 min in presence of tin(II) chloride) with an equal volume of Cyanex 921 in toluene using a mechanical shaker immersed in a water bath at 30 °C. The use of a labilising agent The dependence of the extraction of osmium(VIII), ruthenium(IV) and iridium(III) metal ions with the hydrochloric acid concentration is shown in The dependence of the extraction of these metal ions on hydrochloric acid concentration was examined at constant tin(II) chloride concentration (100 mmol/L) in the aqueous phase, at a temperature of 30 °C The chloride complexes of both the rhodium and iridium react very slowly to form extractable anionic complexes. The more extractable Ir(III) complexes are formed only by heating before extraction These platinum metals were extracted with varying reagent concentration from 0.5 to 100 mmol/L Cyanex 921 in toluene. Quantitative extraction for Os(VIII) and Ru(IV) was found to take place above 7.5 and 100 mmol/L Cyanex 921 at aqueous acidity of 0.025 and 4.0 M HCl, respectively. However, for Ir(III) it was quantitative with 25 mmol/L Cyanex 921 in the presence of 100 mmol/L tin(II) chloride The equilibration period of 5 min was found to be sufficient for quantitative extraction of Os(VIII) and Ru(IV), while for Ir(III) quantitative extraction takes place within 1 min. Increasing shaking period up to 30 min had no adverse effect on extraction. The extraction of each metal ion was carried out in the presence of a large number of foreign metal ions at the optimum extraction condition for the platinum group metal. The tolerance limit was set so that the foreign ion interference caused not more than ±1% difference on extraction of Os(VIII)/Ru(IV)/Ir(III) The metal-loaded organic phase containing platinum group metals was treated with various stripping agents such as HCl, H Separation of Os(VIII), Ru(IV) and Ir(III) metal ions from their mixture was carried out by taking advantage of differences in their extraction and stripping conditions towards Cyanex 921. For their separation, the aqueous solution containing a mixture of 1 mmol/l Os(VIII)/Ru(IV)/Ir(III) at 0.025 M HCl was first equilibrated for 5 min with 7.5 mmol/L Cyanex 921. It was found that only Os(VIII) was extracted in the organic phase while Ru(IV) and Ir(III) remained unextracted. The extracted Os(VIII) from the organic phase was stripped with 2.0 M thiourea. The mixture of unextracted Ru(IV) and Ir(III) was maintained at 90 °C for 15 min before extraction and equilibrated for 1 min at aqueous acidity 1.0 M HCl in the presence of 100 mmol/L tin(II) chloride using 25 mmol/L Cyanex 921. Only Ir(III) was extracted, while Ru(IV) remained unextracted. The extracted Ir(III) from the organic phase was stripped with 6.0 M HNO The suitability of the present methods was examined by applying them for extraction and recovery of these metal ions from organometallic (cyclopentadienyl complexes) catalyst samples Os(cp) The proposed method is simple and rapid for extraction of Os(VIII), Ru(IV) and Ir(III) in the presence of various foreign ions. The separation of each platinum metal ion was found to be possible by using a single extractant in one step and their easy recovery from real samples was demonstrated. The authors are thankful to Cytec Canada Industries, Canada for supplying Cyanex 921 as a gift sample.