Negative interactions between earthworms may arise from high earthworm population densities. Under high populations in the field, niche separation or migration away from competitive pressure may help to regulate a multi-species population to a given level. This may not be possible in laboratory experiments, leading to an increase in competitive interactions which may alter earthworm growth rates and affect decomposition and nutrient mineralization processes. The objective of this experiment was to determine how growth rates of the endogeic earthworm Aporrectodea caliginosa Sav. and the anecic earthworm Lumbricus terrestris L. are affected by increasing population density and container size in both single- and multi-species cultures. Earthworm growth responses were compared in 1-L cylindrical pots containing disturbed soil and in 2.3-L PVC cores containing undisturbed soil. The relationship describing intra- and inter-specific competition was not affected by container type for both species. Nonetheless, decreasing the container size restricted the growth of L. terrestris in both single- and multi-species cultures, but only restricted the growth of A. caliginosa in multi-species cultures. For both species, a population density greater than one individual per litre reduced earthworm growth rates significantly, while weight loss in monocultures occurred when there were more than 10 A. caliginosa, and more than three L. terrestris per litre. Growth rates of both species were restricted in all population density treatments including the lowest of 0.9 individuals per litre. Further work is needed to find the population density at which growth rates are not affected and which may be used as an appropriate population in laboratory pot experiments to measure the effects of earthworms on soil processes and plant growth.It has been well established that there is a positive correlation between earthworm numbers and soil fertility in many agricultural ecosystems Competitive interactions occur as earthworm population density increases in single- and multi-species cultures or as container size decreases, since greater niche overlap occurs when more individuals are present. Earthworm growth rates decline when there is more competition between earthworms The objective of this study was to determine how inter- and intra-specific competition between Earthworms were collected in the autumn of 2005 from neighbouring fields under alfalfa ( The soil was a sandy-loam mixed of the Chicot series, classified as a frigid Typic Endoquent. It had a pH (H Two separate experiments were conducted to evaluate intra-specific competition in single-species cultures and inter-specific competition in multi-species cultures. In each experiment two different shaped containers were used. Small plastic pots with disturbed soil were used as standard laboratory cultures, and larger PVC cylinders with an undisturbed soil core were used to simulate more realistic field soil conditions. The 1-L cylindrical plastic pots (11 The single-species experiment was a factorial randomised incomplete design with two earthworm species ( The multi-species experiment was designed as a factorial randomised complete design with two container types (pots and cores), and four population treatments with different ratios of Earthworm growth rates are commonly reported as either absolute growth rates or relative growth rates, and while these measurements may be useful for laboratory experiments in which the growth of an age-specific cohort is followed to maturity, they assume that earthworm growth through time is a continuous linear function In the single-species experiment, the relationship between the dependent growth rate (IGR) of each species and the earthworm population density in two container types were evaluated using regression analysis. In the multi-species experiment, the effects of container type, the number of Earthworm mortality in both experiments was low (<2%) for both species. The initial body weights of earthworms of both species were not statistically different between containers. Also, no cocoons hatched in the cores, suggesting that freezing the cores at −4 In single-species cultures, the IGR of In the multi-species experiment, Since there was no difference between the slopes and intercepts of the regression lines for The single-species experiment demonstrated that increasing the number of earthworms of the same species in a fixed soil volume reduced growth rates. The regression lines obtained for The regression slopes of the relationship between earthworm density and growth rates of The difference in population thresholds between Pots and cores were considered to be inappropriate containers for Our results indicate that heavier earthworms reduce growth rates more than smaller earthworms, at equal population densities. Slower growth rates have been observed for We found that the slopes of the lines describing earthworm growth for The differences in soil disturbance between containers did not affect earthworm growth rates. This supports results from a previous experiment where we established that soil disturbance did not affect the growth rates of It was expected that at low population densities growth rates would remain level and they would decrease more rapidly with increasing population density. Surprisingly, our logistic regression curves show the opposite relationship as growth rates decreased rapidly at low population densities (1–4 individuals per litre) and levelled out at high population densities. The regression curves show that maximum growth rates were not achieved at the lowest population densities tested in this experiment. We expect an inflection point in the regression curve to occur at population densities lower than those tested in this experiment (<1 individual per litre). At these low population densities the growth rates should remain level and should approach the maximum potential growth rate of each species. The relationship between biomass production of The interactions between earthworms that lead to slower growth and weight loss in some individuals are probably due to experimental conditions that increase competition for space. Although The relationship describing intra- and inter-specific competition was not affected by container type for both species. However, decreasing the container size restricted the growth of We would like to thank Jonathan Perreault, Barbara Sawicki, Simon Lacombe, Valérie Campeau and Frédéric Leduc for assistance in the lab and field collection of earthworms. Further thanks to the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions that improved an earlier version of this manuscript. Financial assistance was from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), and the Fonds Québécois de la Recherche sur la Nature et les Technologies (FQRNT).