Purpose
                  To evaluate the functional and radiological outcome of comminuted radial head fractures, which were not amenable for classical open reduction with internal fixation, treated by on-table reconstruction and fixation using low profile plates.
               
                  Methods
                  We reviewed 6 patients of Mason type III radial head fractures treated by on-table reconstruction technique between 2011 and 2013. There were 5 men and 1 woman with a mean age of 35 years (range 25–46 years). All surgeries were carried out at our tertiary care level 1 trauma centre within a mean of 3 days (range 1–8 days) from date of injury using on-table reconstruction technique. The functional outcome was measured using elbow functional rating index described by Broberg and Morrey and the patient-based Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) outcome measure.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up period was 25 months. The average elbow flexion was 135° (range 125°–140°) and the average flexion contracture was 5° (range 0–10°). The average supination and pronation was 75° (range 70°–80°) and 70° (range 65°–82°) respectively. According to Broberg and Morrey scoring system, the average score was 90 points (range 75–100). The mean DASH score was 2.49 points.
               
                  Conclusion
                  On-table reconstruction and fixation of comminuted radial head fractures using low profile plates is a reasonable option. The reconstructed radial head acts as spacer and provides reasonably good results and no surgical intervention is required for asymptomatic nonunion of these fractures regardless of the radiological findings.Fractures of the radial head are common, Internal fixation techniques are highly demanding and time consuming due to the presence of comminuted fragments. Here we reported the functional and radiological outcome of comminuted radial head fractures which were not amenable for classical open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF) and treated by on-table reconstruction and fixation using low profile plates. Between 2011 and 2013, 6 comminuted radial head fractures were treated at our level 1 trauma centre by on-table reconstruction technique. There were 5 men and 1 woman with a mean age of 35 years (range 25–46 years) and 4 cases involved the dominant extremity. Two cases were the results of fall on outstretched hand from standing height (low-energy injury), rest occurred because of motor vehicle accidents. Radiographs (anteroposterior and lateral) of the involved elbow ( All surgeries were performed with the patient placed in supine position under brachial plexus block, through Kocher (posterolateral) approach to the elbow between the extensor carpi ulnaris and anconeus muscles. The lateral collateral ligament was exposed and incised longitudinally in its anterior part, extending from lateral condyle of the humerus to just distal to radial neck. Fracture fragments were exposed after incising annular ligament and capsule ( Anteroposterior and lateral views of the elbow were taken immediately ( At the final follow-up, all patients were free of pain. The average elbow flexion was 135° (range 125°–140°) and the average flexion contracture was 5° (range 0–10°). The average supination and pronation was 75° (range 70°–80°) and 70° (range 65°–82°) respectively. There was no objective evidence of elbow instability noted at the final follow-up. According to Broberg and Morrey scoring system, the average score was 90 points (range 75–100). The results rated as excellent in two patients, good in three and fair in one patient. The mean DASH score was 2.49 points (range 0–5.83). Bony union was obtained in 3 patients ( The radial head is considered to be an important stabilizer of the elbow and forearm articulations. Ikeda et al Our series included 6 patients with Mason type III fractures. According to Broberg and Morrey scoring system, the average score was 90 points (range 75–100). The results rated as excellent in 2 patients, good in 3 and fair in 1 patient. The mean DASH score was 2.49 points. The mean arc of movements at the elbow joint was calculated as 135°. The mean pronation and supination for all patients were 70° and 75°, respectively. There were 3 cases of nonunion. None developed pain, crepitus or implant breakage at the latest follow-up. No additional surgical interventions were conducted in these patients. Ring et al Our study has limitations with respect to sample size and follow-up. Our study group comprised of 6 patients as we included only Mason type III fractures. On-table reconstruction and fixation of comminuted radial head fractures using low profile plates is a reasonable option. The reconstructed radial head will act as spacer and provides reasonably good results and no surgical intervention is required for asymptomatic nonunion of these fractures regardless of the radiological findings.