Soil–bentonite vertical cutoff walls, consisting of a sandy soil mixed with Na-bentonite as backfill, are used extensively as engineered barriers for contaminant containment. However, suitable sandy soil and Na-bentonite may not be available at some sites. Consequently, locally available clayey soil and Ca-bentonite may be considered as an alternative backfill. The use of clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfill may be advantageous to achieve relatively low hydraulic conductivity, which has equivalent performance as that of conventional sandy soil/Na-bentonite backfills. However, studies on the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity of these clayey soil–bentonite backfills are very limited. This paper presents a comprehensive laboratory investigation on the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity of clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfill through a series of oedometer tests. Kaolin is used as the control clayey soil and it is amended with different contents of Ca-bentonite, 0 (kaolin alone), 5, 10, and 15% (by dry weight basis), to prepare the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills. The initial water contents for the backfills are selected to be 0.75, 1.0, 1.25, and 1.50 times their corresponding liquid limits. The results reveal that the backfills exhibit a noticeable inverse ‘S’ shaped e-log(σ′) compression curves attributed to the existence of the remolded yield stress (σ′yr). The compressibility, in terms of σ′yr and the compression index (C
                     c), is significantly affected by the initial water content and bentonite content. The void ratio at an effective vertical compression stress of 1kPa (denoted as e
                     1) is a useful characteristic parameter to uniquely correlate with C
                     c for the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills in this study as well as for sandy soil/Na-bentonite and sandy soil–clay backfills that are reported in previous published studies. Unique relationships are also found between the σ′yr, initial void ratio (e
                     0), e
                     1, and the void ratio at liquid limit (e
                     L). The hydraulic conductivity of the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills is significantly reduced by the bentonite content; generally to less than 10−9
                     m/s. An empirical method based on the framework of Kozeny–Carman equation is proposed to predict the hydraulic conductivity of the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills, and the predicted hydraulic conductivity values using these methods are found to fall in the range of 1/3 to 3 times those obtained from the oedometer tests. The proposed method is shown to estimate the hydraulic conductivity for both the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills in this study and the sandy soil–bentonite backfills from published study with reasonable accuracy. Additional research is warranted to prepare the backfills to simulate typical field practice (e.g., use of tap water) and at workable initial water contents (based on the slump testing).Improper past disposal practices and accidental spills at numerous sites worldwide have resulted in the contamination of the subsurface soils and groundwater with high amounts of heavy metals and organic pollutants ( The effects of the fines content ( Soil–bentonite backfills generally consist of Na-bentonite, on-site sandy soils, and amendments such as zeolite and activated carbon to provide low hydraulic conductivity and high contaminant sorption capacity ( Many previous studies often set the initial water content ( In this study, a laboratory investigation is undertaken to: (1) investigate the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity of clayey SB backfills via a series of oedometer tests; (2) evaluate how the initial water content and bentonite content affect the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity of the clayey SB backfills; and, (3) examine empirical relationship to predict hydraulic conductivity value for the clayey SB backfills based on the framework of Kozeny–Carman equation. The clayey SB backfills are comprised of kaolin and Ca-bentonite which are provided by MUFENF mineral processing plant in Zhenjiang City, China. The kaolin is used to simulate a clayey soil because: (1) it is one of the most common minerals found in natural clays (  The bentonite content of the clayey SB backfills was selected to be 5, 10 and 15% (dry weight basis). The bentonite content ( The backfills were prepared by thoroughly mixing a predetermined mass of air-dried kaolin and bentonite clays with a predetermined volume of distilled water for 10 A predetermined mass of the kaolin or clayey SB backfill with predetermined initial water content was placed in a conventional consolidation ring that was 61.8 In each case, two identical specimens were prepared under the same conditions for the clayey SB backfills and one specimen was prepared for the kaolin alone. The symbol “B The oedometer tests were conducted as per ASTM D 2435 ( At a given average effective vertical compression stress ( The results of the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity for the clayey SB backfills and, where possible, the comparison of the results in this study with those for the sandy SB and SC backfills reported in previous studies (  Previous studies suggest that the initial water content and liquid limit are two major factors that control the compressibility of remolded clays ( The high values of correlation coefficient ( The The existence of the    Eq.   Several methods have been reported in published literature for predicting hydraulic conductivity of clays, and most of them are originated from Kozeny–Carman (KC) equation, Initially it is attempted to linearly fit log( Since Eqs. The predicted hydraulic conductivity ( Further study is needed to investigate a better approach that will accurately predict hydraulic conductivity of not only the clayey SB backfills and kaolin specimens presented in this study, but also the sandy SB backfills reported in previous studies. In this study, the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills were prepared with initial water contents at 0.75, 1.00, 1.25, and 1.50 times their corresponding liquid limits using distilled water and then they were subjected to the oedometer tests. Based on the slump tests conducted subsequently, the selected initial water contents are found unsuitable to yield the target slump (− Soil backfills that consist of sandy soil and Na-bentonite are commonly used for vertical cut-off walls to control seepage and contaminant migration. However, such materials may not be easily available in some areas. This study investigates the soil backfills that are prepared using clayey soil and Ca-bentonite (materials that are commonly available in certain areas, especially in developing countries such as China and India). The clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills were prepared using kaolin as clayey soil and Ca-bentonite as bentonite, and they were evaluated for the compressibility based on a series of oedometer tests and also hydraulic conductivity based on its estimation estimated using the Terzaghi's one-dimensional consolidation theory. The test results were compared with those for the sandy soil/Na-bentonite and also limited sand/clay backfills reported in previous studies. The following conclusions can be drawn: The compression curves of the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills and kaolin specimens exhibited a noticeable inverse ‘S’ shape that is attributed to the existence of the remolded yield stress ( The compressibility of the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills was significantly affected by the initial water content and bentonite content. The compression index ( The hydraulic conductivity values for the clayey soil/Ca-bentonite backfills were significantly affected by the bentonite content in the range of 5 to 15%. Most of the hydraulic conductivity values for the backfills presented in this study are lower than 10 Two empirical equations, namely the The authors are grateful for the financial support of the