Simultaneous bilateral avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity is a rare injury. Since it was first described in 1955, there have been eight similar cases. We have reviewed each of these reports and describe an additional case of a 13-year-old boy, who sustained simultaneous bilateral avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity from jumping while playing soccer. Like the previous reports, our patient had a satisfactory result from open reduction and internal fixation of both fractures. Despite being bilateral, these injuries have a low complication rate and good outcome comparable with that of unilateral avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity.Unilateral avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity are uncommon. They account for less than 1% of all physeal injuries, with an estimated incidence ranging from 0.25 to 2.7 cases per year Tibial tubercle avulsion fractures typically occur in muscular athletic males who are approaching skeletal maturity. The majority occur during jumping activities. They can occur either at the point of take-off or the landing phase of the jump, suggesting two mechanisms of injury. The first is a powerful quadriceps contraction during knee extension. The second is a rapid passive flexion of the knee against the contracting quadriceps. Osgood-Sclatter disease has been indicated as a predisposing factor for this type of fracture The classification for these fractures has evolved since 1976, when Watson-Jones first introduced his system describing three types The objectives of treatment are to restore the extensor mechanism and congruency of the tibial articular surface. Minimally displaced fractures can be treated with closed reduction and cast immobilisation. Open reduction and internal fixation is recommended for more displaced fractures and types II to IV. The outcome in the majority of cases is good with a low complication rate. Whilst running a 13-year-old boy jumped to head a football. On landing, he felt pain in both knees and heard a ‘crack’. He was unable to weight bear and taken to the Accident and Emergency Department where it was clear on examination that there was disruption of the extensor mechanisms of both knees. He denied any knee pain prior to his injury. Radiographs showed that he had bilateral avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosities. A Watson-Jones type I on the right and type II on the left ( This case adds to the small number of simultaneous bilateral avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity described over the past 50 As with the majority, our case report subject sustained his injury during a jump. In the other nine cases with bilateral avulsion fractures, five occurred during jumping activities The anatomical position, mode of development and forces applied from the rapidly developing quadriceps muscles leave the adolescent tibial tubercle susceptible to injury Avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity have been associated with collateral ligament injuries, anterior cruciate ligament tears and meniscal tears Reported complications from avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity are rare. Genu recurvatum has been postulated but never described. Loss of flexion, malunion, non-union, patella infera and compartment syndrome have all been seen In the published series to date, the overall outcome of unilateral avulsion fractures treated by open reduction and internal fixation is excellent. Most patients achieve bony union and full restoration of function Despite being bilateral, these injuries appear to do as well as unilateral avulsion fractures that have been treated by open reduction and internal fixation.