The polarization process during LCD manufacturing generates wastewater containing significant amounts of valuable elements such as iodine and boron. The present paper outlines a process to recover iodine value from wastewater using oxidative precipitation followed by a solvent extraction (SX) technique. With H2O2 as an oxidant, 95% of iodine was precipitated out at a pH of 0.9 from a wastewater bearing 10.2 g/L of iodide and 0.82 g/L of boron. The remaining iodine, which could not be precipitated due to its low concentration, was recovered by SX using xylene as an organic solvent diluted in kerosene. Quantitative extraction and stripping were achieved using 0.05 M xylene and 0.1 M ascorbic acid at O:A ratios of 1:3 and 6:1, respectively. The purity rates of the iodine produced by the precipitation and SX routes were 99.3% and 99.8%, respectively. The highest separation factor achieved by the iodine‑boron system was 28,900 at an equilibrium pH value of 0.5. The present process is economically and environmentally friendly and therefore, can be used as an alternative industrial technique to recover iodine from wastewater.Due to the wide applicability of iodine for different purposes, such as, in catalysts, stabilizers (as a nylon precursor), animal feed, pharmaceutical, sanitary products, industrial disinfectants and inks, there is high global demand for iodine ( Iodine is usually recovered by a chlorination process popularly known as the blowing-out process. This patented technology is widely used in Japan to recover iodine from brine ( Considering the importance of the development of a feasible iodine recovery process, the present communication considers the treatment of wastewater arising from different LCD industries located in Korea. Due to the rapid growth of the LCD manufacturing industry in Korea, amounts in the millions of tons of wastewater are generated annually. More specifically, the LCD polarization process generates wastewater that contains significant amounts of iodine and boron. A strict environmental regulation by the Korean Government restricts the disposal of such wastewater to wastewater treatment facilities ( The wastewater used for this investigation was obtained from a LCD manufacturing industry in South Korea. The physico/chemical composition of the wastewater is presented in The commercial extractant, xylene, C where X and Y are respective elements. It is well known that the iodide anion is a moderately weak reducing agent that will react with oxidizing analytes to produce iodine. The oxidizing agent employed in the reaction mixture may be of any suitable type, preferably hydrogen peroxide. The reaction rate is comparatively slow, but increases as the acidity is increased ( At the beginning of the reaction, when an excess of iodide ion is present in the reaction medium, the liberated iodine reacts with the iodide to form a tri-iodide ion which has properties similar to that of iodine, as iodine is readily soluble in the presence of iodide. As the reaction proceeds, most of the iodide becomes oxidized to iodine and there is no iodide available in the reaction system to keep the iodine in a soluble form given that iodine is barely soluble in water. As a result, the iodine, present as the deep dark brown tri-iodide, was precipitated out as elemental iodine. We observed that operational parameters such as, the total iodide concentration, acidity, H The effects of pH and H To study the effect of the temperature on the iodine precipitation, experiments were carried out in a thermostat with mechanical shaking. Temperature was varied in the range of 22 to 60 °C. These results are presented in The effect of the iodide concentration was studied by diluting the wastewater to obtaining the desired concentration of iodide after which the precipitation was studied. The results are presented in Using the optimized precipitation conditions (pH 0.9, H From the iodine precipitation study it was concluded that the quantitative separation of iodine from the aqueous phase was difficult to achieve. To recover the boron values from the aforementioned wastewater, it is necessary to separate iodine to the maximum extent possible to secure the desired purity of the boron product. The wastewater after iodine recovery by oxidative precipitation contained 0.5 g/L of iodine and 0.81 g/L of boron at pH 0.9. Using xylene as an organic solvent diluted in kerosene, studies were performed to separate and recover the residual iodine values from the above solution. The extraction of iodine was studied in the equilibrium pH range of 0.5–5.0 while holding other parameters constant such as the O:A phase ratio of 1:1, xylene concentration at 0.05 M, extraction temperature at 22 °C and stirring time at 10 min. As shown in the The kinetics study to determine the extractability of iodine and boron was conducted by mixing the organic and aqueous phases in an open beaker placed on a magnetic stirrer, where the solution was continuously stirred at an ambient temperature. The operational conditions were as follows: an O:A phase ratio of 1:1, xylene 0.05 M, equilibrium pH 1.0. The effects of the xylene concentration on the extraction efficiency of iodine were studied in the range of 0.01–0.15 M. The following conditions were held constant: an O:A ratio of 1:1 and equilibrium pH 1.0. The percentage extraction vs. xylene concentration is shown in It is important to calculate the staging requirements, as they are directly related to the operational cost and maintenance. Therefore the extraction isotherm ( Stripping is the reverse of the extraction and thus should be promoted by these factors that affect extraction negatively, such as the use of acidic, basic and salt media. Initial experiments conducted to determine the effect of time showed that over approximately one min, the time did not influence the amount of iodine stripped. Therefore, mixing time of was used in the subsequent experiments to assure the independence of this variable. Iodine stripping from the LO containing 1.5 g/L of iodine was investigated using ascorbic acid as a stripping agent within the range of 0.025 to 0.15 M. A plot of the percentage stripping vs. the ascorbic acid concentration is shown in The stripping of iodine with 0.1 M ascorbic acid was 94.5%. Therefore, the stripping isotherm ( Using an oxidative precipitation-SX technique, the quantitative recovery of iodine could be achieved. In the initial step, iodine was precipitated from wastewater using H This work was supported by the