Background
                  The purpose of this study was to report a new surgical technique for the treatment of unstable distal clavicle fracture with modified tension band fixation (MTBF) and coracoclavicular (CC) stabilisation, and evaluate the radiologic and clinical outcome of these patients.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Thirteen patients who had a fracture of the distal clavicle (Neer classification type IIb) were treated with MTBF and CC stabilisation. After the CC stabilisation was performed with a suture anchor or flip button, internal fixation using MTBF was carried out. Each patient was followed up for a minimum of 12 months and their clinical and radiological results were analysed.
               
                  Results
                  The mean period required for fracture union was 12.6 (range, 8–24) weeks and union was successfully completed in all cases. The mean Constant score at the final follow-up was 94.7 (88–100); the modified University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) shoulder rating scale was 31.3 points (range, 22–35). All patients returned to normal daily activities at an average of 3.7 months postoperatively (range, 3–5 months). One patient had a new fracture around drilled holes for CC stabilisation by inappropriate tunnelling.
               
                  Conclusion
                  MTBF and CC stabilisation is a useful technique for treating an unstable distal clavicle fracture. This procedure provides minimal incision and stable fixation without causing any further acromioclavicular joint injury to those with distal clavicle fractures.Clavicle fractures are common injuries. They have been estimated to make up to 5–10% of all fractures, and distal clavicle fractures account for 15% of clavicle fractures The purpose of this study was to introduce a new surgical technique that involves CC stabilisation followed by internal fixation with modified tension band fixation (MTBF) and to determine the clinical and radiological results obtained in patients with type II distal clavicle fractures. Between June 2008 and May 2012, 13 consecutive patients treated with MTBF and CC stabilisation were eligible to participate in this study. The inclusion criterion was an unstable lateral clavicle fracture type IIb according to Neer. Other types of distal clavicle fractures were not considered for this study. Patients were excluded when concomitant lesions were on the affected arm or if they refused to be operated upon. The patients included eight men and five women with a mean age of 40.1 years (range, 22–73 years). A right shoulder injury was involved in four cases (31%) and a left shoulder injury in nine cases (69%). Trauma was associated with falls in eight cases (62%), traffic accidents in three cases (23%), and sports injuries in two cases (15%). All thirteen cases (100%) had type IIb fractures according to the Neer classification Radiological evaluations that included shoulder anteroposterior (AP), axillary, and clavicle lordotic views were performed routinely every 4 weeks postoperatively until union was observed. Radiographic union was defined as bony bridging on these views and was confirmed by clinical examination. We determined bony union of the fracture by bridging of three of the four cortices on radiologic evaluation. Patients were followed up at intervals of 3 months after the diagnosis of the fracture. They were evaluated on CC distance, Constant score, modified University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) shoulder rating scale, and any complications. The distances between the coracoid process and the clavicle were measured in AP views of both shoulders. The difference of the CC distance (Δ With the patient in the beach chair position, two folded sheets were positioned behind the scapula to bring the shoulder girdle forward and facilitate access to the superior portion of the joint, and the entire upper extremity was prepared and draped to allow full and unrestricted arm positioning during the procedure. The skin incision was designed based on anatomic landmarks (i.e., the acromion, distal clavicle, and coracoid process). The incision was started medially to the acromioclavicular (AC) joint, extended 4–5 In cases where a suture anchor was used, under guidance of an image amplifier (9800 MOBILE C-ARM, OEC Medical Systems, Inc, Salt Lake City, UT, USA), a Kirschner wire (K-wire) was used as a guide pin and placed at the base of the coracoid process. The suture anchor was placed into the base of the coracoid process following the previously placed guide pins. The suture anchor was connected to two strands of No. 2 nonabsorbable braided suture (FiberWire In cases where the flip button was used, the medial fragment was reduced and a guide pin was inserted through the clavicle and the base of the coracoid process. The insertion site of the medial fragment was located within a range of the CC attachment site and located >1 Once the CC stabilisation was performed, it was easier to reduce the fractured fragments because the fracture site was less displaced. With the fracture fragments held in the reduced position, two K-wires (0.062″) were drilled though the far cortex and perpendicular to the fracture site that did not contain the AC joint. In this procedure, we tried to place the K-wire to the far cortex of the medial segment of the fractured clavicle. This is thought to prevent the risk of loosening of the K-wire. The joint capsule and periosteum were preserved without dissection. A 20-gauge stainless steel wire was passed through the drilled holes in the clavicle medial to the fracture. The tension band wire was placed in a figure-eight configuration over the clavicle. The K-wires were bent beneath the skin. The earlier CC ligament sutures were tied ( Postoperatively, all patients were prescribed the use of a shoulder-immobilizing sling with an abduction pillow (Shoulder Abduction A suture anchor (5-mm Corkscrew All patients were evaluated by clinical and radiologic follow-up, such as the status of fracture union, Constant score, modified UCLA shoulder rating scale, and any complications occurring at the final follow-up ( The purpose of this study was to report a new surgical technique for the treatment of unstable distal clavicle fracture with MTBF and CC stabilisation, and to evaluate the radiologic and clinical outcome. We obtained successful fracture union in an anatomic position by CC reconstruction using one suture anchor or one flip button and MTBF with acute displaced distal clavicle fractures with CC ligament disruption. The surgical technique restored the anatomical reduction and provided sufficient strength to securely hold the distal clavicle to the coracoid process. This CC stabilisation was enough to achieve CC ligament and fracture healing. We consider that the fracture mechanism of a distal clavicle fracture (Neer classification type IIb) is the same as that of AC joint dislocation (Rockwood classification type V). Therefore, we felt it to be important to perform CC ligament stabilisation for the treatment of unstable distal clavicle fracture. Choi et al. A variety of fixation techniques have been used, including K-wire, tension band wiring, plate, or CC stabilisation In unstable distal clavicle fractures, the equilibrium of tensile force is broken due to nonfunctional CC ligaments, which allow upward displacement of the medial fragment by the trapezius muscles and downward displacement of the lateral fragment by the weight of the arm. Goldberg et al. To restore this disequilibrium (described above), authors have applied CC stabilisation using a suture anchor or flip button. Biomechanical studies suggest that CC ligament repair using a suture anchor or flip button repair technique should be enough to allow CC stabilisation Although transverse patterned fractures with small inferior fragments of the distal clavicle ( Despite good results, our study also has some limitations. First, our study is a small-sized observational study. Our data were minimised by focusing on unstable distal clavicular fractures (Neer type IIb); however, the outcomes were evaluated in a prospective manner. Second, the follow-up periods between patients are different and some patients have a short follow-up (within 1 year). It is difficult to make reliable conclusions on certain outcomes, such as posttraumatic arthritis or clavicle erosion. However, as demonstrated by the clinical scores, all patients had minimal disabilities during the follow-up period. Further changes in functional outcome would not be expected even with a longer follow-up. The number of patients within 1 year of follow-up was two and therefore was a relatively low proportion of this study. Third, our study has a lack of control group treated with a different surgical procedure or even non-operatively. Although our study did not observe the problems associated with implants, we intend to address complications such as loosening, infection, erosion, or refracture if the patient population is larger. Further study should be performed to determine problems associated with the complications. So far, there is no established optimal surgical technique, and we introduce a surgical technique for the treatment of unstable distal clavicular fracture. This technique is worthy of further study because of its high union rate and good functional outcome. There are some advantages of this operative method. First, the method provides stability to the fracture site, which leads to early rehabilitation and good clinical results. Second, there is relatively little soft tissue damage, which leads to a higher rate of bony union. Third, it is easy to operate without injury to the acromion involving the AC joint, thus reducing complications. To recover a CC imbalance, which is the principal cause for displacement, and to provide fixation to the fracture site, this operative method is more than capable of being a therapeutic option for an unstable distal clavicle fracture with comminution. All five authors declare that they have no financial interest or personal relationship with organisations or institutes other than their mentioned affiliations. This work was supported by a research grant from the