Fracture of the metatarsal head is uncommon, and reports of isolated osteochondral fracture of the metatarsal head are rare. Because of the distal location of the fracture, it is difficult to achieve and maintain reduction, and potential complications include avascular necrosis and subchondral fatigue fracture. The authors present a case of an osteochondral fracture in a 40-year-old man, which was treated by open reduction and internal fixation with a single twist-off screw, with good results 12 months postoperatively.A 40-year-old man presented with a history of injury to the right foot when he was kicked on the top of the foot while playing football. His symptoms were pain and difficulty in weight bearing on the right foot. On examination, swelling was noted predominantly over the dorsum of the foot. He was tender over the fourth metatarsophalangeal joint. Movements in the joint were painful and restricted. Circulation and sensation were normal in the foot. Plain radiographs of the right foot revealed a simple osteochondral fracture of the fourth metatarsal head with dorsal and medial displacement of the fracture fragment ( The viability of the osteochondral fragment was taken into consideration, and the procedure was performed within 8 hours. An attempt to reduce the fracture by closed method while the patient was under general anesthesia was unsuccessful because of the small size of the displaced fracture fragment. Hence, open reduction and internal fixation of the osteochondral fracture were performed with the patient under general anesthesia and ankle block (15 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine). Under tourniquet control and antibiotic coverage, the fourth metatarsophalangeal joint was exposed with a dorsal approach. The dorsomedial fragment comprised 30% of the articular surface and was reduced under direct vision while maintaining dorsal capsular attachment and predrilled by 1-mm Kirschner wire. A 12-mm twist-off screw (DePuy France S.A., Saint Priest, France) was used to stabilize the fracture. Good reduction and screw position were confirmed with image intensifier and direct vision. The wound was closed in layers with 2-0 monocryl (poliglecaprone 25) sutures for the capsule and subcutaneous tissues. The skin was closed with 4-0 monosof (monofilament non-absorbable nylon) sutures. Mepore (Molnlycke Health Care, Bedfordshire, UK), wool, and crepe were used for dressing the wound. The patient was followed up at regular intervals, and the postoperative course was uneventful. He was mobilized and partially weight bearing, and a stiff-soled shoe was allowed for the first 2 weeks, gradually letting the patient move on to full weight bearing over the next 4 weeks. Initial stiffness in the fourth metatarsophalangeal joint improved with active and passive range-of-movement exercises. Serial radiographs performed during follow-up visits demonstrated good screw position and progress of fracture healing ( Osteochondral fracture involves the articular cartilage, and it creates bone or cartilage fragments that can range in size and depth. This fracture can occur in weight-bearing joints such as the knee and ankle ( Tanaka et al reported the first surgically treated case of isolated osteochondral fracture of the metatarsal head. The mechanism of injury in this case was a result of shear force to the metatarsal head. The osteochondral fragment was rolled back and interposed in the second metatarsophalangeal joint. Congenital absence of the middle phalanx of the second toe was a predisposing factor in this case, and the fracture required open reduction because closed reduction failed ( In the current case, the fracture was a result of direct injury and was an isolated fracture of the fourth metatarsal head. There was no abnormality in the foot before the injury. The inability to restore the alignment of the osteochondral fragment by closed reduction should be treated by open reduction and internal fixation. During open reduction, capsular stripping should be avoided to preserve the extra osseous blood supply. In this case, because there was soft tissue attachment as well as a healthy bony surface to the osteochondral fragment, the decision was taken to use open reduction with internal fixation. Because of the large size (around 30%) and the fact that there was a reasonable depth of bony margin present, it is likely that microfracture would not have given a healthy congruent joint surface to the prerequisite height. Because the osteochondral fragment appeared to be viable, the osteochondral autograft transfer system was not considered as the first-line treatment option. In this case, the twist-off screw was used to fix the small osteochondral fragment and achieve compression. The twist-off screw is a self-drilling and self-tapping compression bone screw with a predetermined breaking point for the quick fixation of osteotomies and bone fragments. To the best of our knowledge, this is the second surgically treated case of osteochondral fracture of the metatarsal head. Open reduction and internal fixation allow restoration of anatomy, and thus the best chance of achieving normal function.