In this study, Aspergillus niger (A. niger) as an environmentally friendly agent for fungal bioleaching of waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) was employed. D-optimal response surface methodology (RSM) was utilized for optimization of the bioleaching parameters including bioleaching method (one step, two step and spent medium) and pulp densities (0.5 g L−1 to 20 g L−1) to maximize the recovery of Zn, Ni and Cu from WPCBs. According to the high performance liquid chromatography analysis, citric, oxalic, malic and gluconic acids were the most abundant organic acids produced by A.niger in 21 days experiments. Maximum recoveries of 98.57% of Zn, 43.95% of Ni and 64.03% of Cu were achieved based on acidolysis and complexolysis dissolution mechanisms of organic acids. Based on the kinetic studies, the rate controlling mechanism for Zn dissolution at one step approach was found to be diffusion through liquid film, while it was found to be mixed control for both two step and spent medium. Furthermore, rate of Cu dissolution which is controlled by diffusion in one step and two step approaches, detected to be controlled by chemical reaction at spent medium. It was shown that for Ni, the rate is controlled by chemical reaction for all the methods studied. Eventually, it was understood that A. niger is capable of leaching 100% of Zn, 80.39% of Ni and 85.88% of Cu in 30 days.Increase in population, the prompt technological improvements and developments in living standards have proliferated the demand for electrical and electronic equipment such as personal computers (PCs), TVs, MP3 players and cell phones ( Waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) consist of valuable metals with purity of more than that of minerals; i.e., 30% (w.w Bio-hydrometallurgy as an eco-friendly, inexpensive and feasible method has been used to eliminate the WPCBs and dissolve the metal contents of them by producing various organic acids resulting in formation of metal complexes at ambient temperature and pressure ( Despite the fact that extensive efforts have been devoted to investigate the effect of different bacteria in recovery of different metal species from WPCBs ( Considering aforementioned discussion and based on the lack of sufficient data about fungal bioleaching of WPCBs, a widespread study on the bioleaching of WPCBs using In this study, recoveries of zinc (Zn), nickel (Ni) and copper (Cu) from WPCBs using In this study, effect of two parameters (bioleaching approach and pulp density) on the fungal bioleaching of Zn, Ni and Cu from WPCBs was surveyed. After primary investigations, a set of experiments was designed by means of design expert 7 software, which led to determination of optimum conditions for recoveries of Zn, Ni and Cu. Then, based on the optimum conditions obtained in the previous step, kinetics of fungal bioleaching of Zn, Ni and Cu from WPCBs for all the bioleaching approaches (one step, two step, spent medium) was evaluated. The WPCBs of PCs from different manufacturers were used for this investigation. Primarily, they were cut into small pieces of approximately 5 × 5 cm To determine the composition of the initial sample, x-ray fluorescence (XRF, ARL 8420) was employed. Type and concentration of the organic acids produced by For measuring pH and Eh of the samples, a digital multi meter (Sartorius, PB-11, Germany) was employed. The initial sample and the bioleaching residues were qualitatively characterized using x-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips-3040/60 PW) to characterize the existing phases. In order to investigate the surface morphology of the initial sample and that of the bioleaching residues, high resolution scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM, Camscan, MV2300, Czech Republic) equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Bruker, XFlash6l10, Germany) was used. Furthermore, to compare the particle size of the sample prior to and following bioleaching experiments, laser particle size analysis (LPSA, CILAS 1064) was utilized.  There are certain approaches in bioleaching of metals using fungi; one step, two step and spent medium are the main procedures which are reported by several researchers ( Design of experiments (DOE) is a suitable way for scientific investigations, which provides the advantages of declining the number of runs with a high accuracy, including interactions between the parameters which is neglected in the conventional methods; also creating numerical relationships between different parameters ( The designation depicted in All experiments were carried out in 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mL autoclaved standard sucrose medium and 10       As shown in Malic acid is another organic acid that is present in the system studied, based on the HPLC results. Investigation around the production of malic acid by fungi is not widely undertaken. It is reported that this acid is an intermediate product of citric acid and any incomplete metabolic cycle will lead to its presence in the medium ( It should be noted that excretion of organic acids produces protons which can change pH and Eh of the solution ( It should be mentioned that, changes in pH and Eh are attributed to the leaching progression; i.e., it represents metal oxidation ( In case of spent medium approach ( In fungal bioleaching, metal dissolution is based on two main mechanisms; first, hydrogen ions which are replaced with metal ions (acidolysis) and second complex formation (complexolysis) ( Oxalic acid dissociation and complexation reactions are: Glocunic acid dissociation and complexation reactions are: Malic acid dissociation and complexation reactions are: All of the aforementioned organic acids play a key role in metal dissolution which have different impacts on dissolution of each metal. Based on the previous researches, oxalic acid is the least effective agent for dissolution of Ni and Cu, regarding to its tendency to produce insoluble oxalates (  In order to optimize the leaching parameters, 20 experiments were designed by D-optimal RSM (  According to As shown in As shown in According to All in all, it can be concluded that the two step approach is the most influential approach in Zn and Cu bioleaching and spent medium approach is the most suitable bioleaching system in Ni recovery. Furthermore, in this research, recoveries of Zn and Ni are the highest and the lowest; respectively, which are in agreement with other studies ( According to The optimum conditions predicted for maximum recovery of each of the metals, Zn, Ni and Cu showed that 98.57% of the Zn, 43.95% of the Ni and 64.03% of the Cu can be recovered in the condition of PD of 0.92 g L To investigate the kinetics of the metal dissolution, three kinetic experiments were carried out at optimum bioleaching condition for 30 days. By using the experimental data at optimization step and by means of design expert 7, three possible optimum conditions for simultaneous recovery of Zn, Ni and Cu were achieved as shown in    It is clear that the metal dissolution is mainly progressed by excreting organic acids during fungal bioleaching process. Nonetheless, Ni and Cu tend to precipitate as oxalates ( In leaching of solids (WPCBs in the present research) with organic acids, the organic ligands penetrate through the liquid film surrounding the waste particles and react with the metal species on the surface, forming complexes. These complexes diffuse through the film back to the solution. Based on the results obtained from particle size analysis ( The fraction of reacted metal at any time t in the film diffusion control mechanism is given by ( It is worth mentioning that based on the experimental data it was found that diffusion through the liquid film can be better described by the Stokes regime (Eq. In these equations, C is the concentration of acids, D is the diffusion coefficient of acids (m The rate controlling mechanism is usually determined by plotting the right side of either Eq. In order to determine the contribution of each mechanism, model parameters are calculated by fitting the experimental data to Eq. Minimize  The rate controlling mechanism for Cu dissolution in one step and two step approaches is diffusion through the liquid film, while it is controlled by chemical reaction in the spent medium approach. Based on In all approaches, Ni leaching is controlled by chemical reaction. Presence of oxalic acid inhibits Ni dissolution because of the tendency of this metal to precipitate in the form of oxalate; thus, the chemical reaction in terms of Ni is slow and as a result, Ni dissolution is controlled by chemical reaction ( In this study, To facilitate data interpretation, CCD design which is a subdivision of RSM design of experiments was applied. Under optimum conditions, for Zn dissolution: PD of 0.92 g L One step and two step approaches which produce greater amounts of oxalic acid results in lower recoveries of Ni and Cu because of their tendencies to precipitate as oxalates in presence of oxalic acid. In contrary to Ni and Cu, presence of oxalic acid leads to better recovery of Zn. Considering acidolysis playing the main role in leaching of Zn, its dissolution is better than Ni and Cu (recovery of 100% of Zn is achievable in all approaches while none of the Ni and Cu could be leached more than 86%). Based on the shrinking core model, using one step method, the rate of Zn dissolution is controlled by diffusion while in two step and spent medium approaches both chemical reaction and diffusion through the liquid film are influential. In case of Cu, the bioleaching reaction is controlled by diffusion through the liquid film in one step and two step approaches and by chemical reaction in spent medium. Ni dissolution in all the approaches studied is controlled by chemical reaction. Using different approaches,