The critical oil (or gas) rate to avoid coning of unwanted fluids into production wells is an important design parameter. Simulation methods are typically used to predict critical rates in reservoirs with complex heterogeneities and boundaries, but they are manpower intensive and prone to errors when large grid blocks are used. Current analytical methods are useful to provide benchmark solutions for simulation, but their assumptions are too restrictive for more general use. Thus, there is a need for improved analytical methods to account for well patterns and more complex boundaries that can serve as additional benchmarks for simulation, and in some cases to predict critical rates.
                  This paper makes analytical solutions more realistic by extending existing single-well analytical solutions to account for multiple wells and common no-flow and constant pressure boundary conditions. A potential function is derived to superimpose existing single well coning solutions for simultaneous two-phase flow. Capillary pressure and relative permeability effects on coning are included in the new potential function. Vertical equilibrium (VE) and steady-state flow are assumed.
                  Comparisons with finely-gridded simulation show good agreement in predicted critical oil rates when steady state and VE are approached. VE and steady-state are approximately achieved when aspect ratios are greater than about 10. The predicted critical rates are conservative for aspect ratios less than 10. The new solutions demonstrate for several examples how the critical rates from one well are affected by reservoir boundaries, and the two-phase production rates of other wells.total thickness of reservoir, m permeability, m relative permeability, dimensionless Brooks–Corey parameter, dimensionless relative permeability exponent, dimensionless Bond number, dimensionless capillary entry pressure, Pa pressure, Pa flow potential, Pa Darcy volumetric flow rate, m hydraulic radius of influence, m aspect ratio, dimensionless density, kg/m acceleration due to gravity, m/s radial distance or coordinate, m linear distance along the linear distance along the Darcy volumetric flux, m/s viscosity, Pa elevation from the bottom of the formation, m mobility, m relative mobility, 1/Pa transmissibility, m potential function, m gravity number, dimensionless mobility ratio, dimensionless constant dimensionless variable location outside the zone of influence phase (1 – wetting, 2 – nonwetting) end-point value radial direction location at wellbore vertical direction well index total (for both phases) Water or gas coning can adversely affect oil production in oil reservoirs and gas production in gas reservoirs. In oil reservoirs, a large oil rate can cause upward coning of water or downward coning of gas into the well perforations. Once gas or water is produced, the oil rate decreases and the cost of water and/or gas handling is increased. It is a common industry practice to reduce water coning in oil reservoirs by perforating vertical wells as far above the oil–water contact (OWC) as possible and to produce the wells at or below the critical oil rate. Similarly, wells are often perforated low in the oil column away from the gas–oil contact (GOC) in gas–oil reservoirs. The benefits of this practice are mixed in that limited perforations may increase the pressure gradient (the drawdown) near the well, which can exacerbate coning. There has also been success in reducing coning with polymers and gels (   Numerical simulation is typically used to estimate critical rates to avoid coning for complex reservoir properties and boundaries (  This paper presents a significant extension of the solutions by We consider a horizontal two-phase reservoir of constant thickness The free wetting-phase level (FWL) in We make the following additional assumptions ( The aspect ratio for phase The radial mass balance equation for each phase integrated over the reservoir thickness is The parameter The vertically averaged mobility is a function of the fluid column thickness and relative permeability. We now define a potential function The general solution to the Laplace equation for a single well producing at a constant volumetric rate For a single well, the constant The new mathematical insight in this paper is to determine an expression for the potential function for the two-phase coning problem. The potential function can be written in terms of the FWL. For single-phase flow, the flow potential of phase Substitution of Eq. The Laplace equation is a linear differential equation that satisfies the principles of superposition. Using superposition, the solution for the potential function for a multi-well system containing The subscript Eqs. These definitions transform Eqs. We demonstrate superposition of the potential function by considering a simple example of one or two vertical production wells in a one-quarter infinite acting reservoir containing oil and water. The reservoir is 50 Simulations using CMG's black-oil simulator IMEX Initially, we assume only oil production and zero capillary pressure so that the phases are always segregated. Thus, the FWL corresponds exactly with the oil–water contact. For the segregated case, the relative permeabilities are straight lines with a water residual saturation of 0.25 and zero residual oil saturation, and end-point relative permeabilities of 1.0.   The three different curves in   We now consider simultaneous flow of both oil and water similar to what occurs using DWS completion technology (   We consider next diffuse flow, where capillary pressure is present so that there is no sharp boundary between the water and oil, and relative permeability varies vertically. The well is again located 100 Last, we consider an example of a simple pattern with two wells bounded by the same no flow boundaries as in The critical rates for each well are functions of the rate of the other well. The proposed analytical solutions provide, for the first time, coning solutions for multi-well problems and reservoir boundaries using the concept of superposition. The key to finding these solutions was to develop a new potential function. These solutions are fast and easy to calculate compared with simulation, and can be used to model reservoirs with any number of wells and simple boundaries. The paper demonstrates that superposition can be done even for the case of simultaneous two-phase flow. The examples given illustrate that the numerical simulation and analytical results are approximately the same for large aspect ratios. The two principal limitations of the analytical solutions are the requirement of vertical equilibrium and the restriction to steady-state flow (although the solutions can be used in a succession of steady-state fashion as illustrated here). The VE assumption means that the pressure gradient is vertically balanced between capillary and buoyancy forces. Such is likely to be true for reservoirs with reasonable vertical permeability and relatively thin oil columns. Even when VE is not strictly satisfied (as indicated by the aspect ratio), the estimated critical oil rates from the analytical solution are conservative and thus provide good quick results. The solutions are also useful to check the results of numerical simulations, which are time consuming to perform and can sometimes be erroneous. Finally, as we discussed, the solutions may be useful in determining the water rate required to maximize oil production using downhole water sink (DWS) technology. The solutions do not replace the use of numerical simulation for complex reservoir heterogeneity and reservoir boundaries, but they are useful as benchmarks for simulation. The analytical solutions are also useful for initial estimates of critical rates, especially for small reservoirs where reservoir simulation may not be done. We have developed new steady-state analytical coning solutions to model any number of wells and simple reservoir boundaries. These solutions can also be used when capillary pressure and relative permeabilities are important. The main conclusions of this research are as follows: (1) Superposition of single-well coning solutions is possible for single phase or dual-phase flow using a new potential function. This new function can be used to model multiple wells or simple reservoir boundaries such as those that occur with standard well patterns. (2) The proposed solutions are derived assuming the fluids are in steady state and vertical equilibrium. The results from the simulations and VE solution agree well for aspect ratios greater than about 10. The critical oil rates estimated from the VE solution are conservative for aspect ratios less than 10. (3) The critical rate for a well can change significantly depending on the production rates from neighboring wells, and the distance from reservoir boundaries. Rafay Z. Ansari obtained a master′s degree in petroleum engineering at the University of Texas at Austin in 2006. He is now employed at BP as a Petrophysicist. Dr. Russell T. Johns holds the Beghini fellowship at the Pennsylvania State University at University Park, PA. He is also a member of the Earth and Mineral Sciences Energy Institute at Penn State. The flow potential for phase The volumetric flow rate of phase  From Eq. Brooks–Corey formulations are used to represent capillary pressure: