The Falcon concentrator is an enhanced-gravity separator used for the concentration of fine and ultra-fine minerals. This study was conducted to evaluate the effects of different process variables on the performance of the Falcon SB-40 concentrator for beneficiation of tailings to recover ultra-fine coal. Various operating and design conditions such as bowl speed (G force), water pressure, pulp solid ratio and pulp feed rate were investigated. A hydrocyclone was used for pre-enrichment with the Falcon concentrator. Operation parameters of the hydrocyclone, namely feed solids, inlet pressure, vortex finder and apex diameters were investigated. In order to produce fine coal concentrates, regression equations were derived by applying the least squares method using Minitab 15 software. Response functions were produced for the ash content and the recovery of the clean coal concentrates for the performance of the hydrocyclone and Falcon concentrator under different operating conditions. Predicted values were found with the experimental values giving R
                     2 values of between 0.73 and 0.58 for ash content and between 0.65 and 0.39 for recovery of the clean coal. It was shown that under optimized conditions the Falcon concentrator can produce a clean coal with an ash value of 36% from a feed coal of about 66% ash.The basic goal of gravity separation is to produce a clean concentrate (usually the heavy, valuable fraction of a mineral) and a tailing (usually the light fraction with less value). As a general rule, the separation efficiency decreases as the particle size of the processed mineral becomes finer. Fine coal cleaning has been advanced by the introduction of devices such as column flotation, enhanced-gravity separators (Falcon concentrator, Multi-Gravity Separator, Altar jig, Kelsey jig and Knelson concentrator) and dense-medium devices during the last decade The objective of this study was to determine whether coal beneficiation from Tunçbilek tailings ponds is economically possible. Hence, pre-enrichment was carried out using a hydrocyclone followed by coal recovery with the Falcon concentrator. Furthermore, it aims at optimization of four operational variables of a hydrocyclone (solid rate, inlet pressure, diameter of vortex finder, diameter of apex) and four operational variables of a Falcon SB-40 (gravity force, solids rate, flow rate, water pressure). Additionally, optimization of these operational variables of the hydrocyclone and Falcon concentrator for minimum ash value and maximum recovery of the clean coal could be determined using regression analysis with a mathematical software package (Minitab 15). Centrifugal concentrators have been in operation for more than 60 The original sample of ultra-fine coal tailings was taken from Tunçbilek Coal Preparation Plant of G.L.I of Turkish Coal Enterprises (Kütahya-Turkey). As seen in Types of minerals phases were identified by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique (Rigaku-Giger Flex). X-ray fluorescence (XRF) Spectro IQ was used for chemical analysis. The particle size distribution of the sample was measured using Mastersizer 2000. The ash and sulfur values were analyzed according to ISO 1171 and ISO 351, respectively. The calorific value was determined based on ISO 1928. The coal tailings containing clay minerals were pre-concentrated with a 44 Chemical compositions of the samples were determined by XRF. XRD analysis of the plant tailings indicated that the main minerals are kaolinite, smectite-type clay minerals, mica/illite, quartz, siderite, dolomite and feldspar besides organic matter, which was presumed to be coal. Qualitative and quantitative analysis results were used to identify the properties of the plant tailings as illustrated in A 44 The optimum result was achieved at 5% solids. This hydrocyclone had an apex diameter of 2.2 The calculated values of combustible recovery, ash rejection and separation efficiency from the Falcon concentrator are shown in Regression analysis was chosen to determine the relationship between the response functions (ash value and recovery of the clean coal) and operating conditions for the hydrocyclone (feed solid, inlet pressure, vortex and apex diameter). The experimental results are listed in For the ash content of the clean coal: For the recovery of the clean coal: Eqs. Similar regression analysis was applied to the tests results obtained from the Falcon concentrator. The experimental results are listed in For the ash content of the clean coal: For the recovery of the clean coal: Millions tons of coal refuse accumulates in the tailing ponds of Tunçbilek. These tailings could be cleaned efficiently by advanced gravity method such as Falcon concentrator following a two-stages desliming process using a 44 It is known that all design and operating variables of the Falcon concentrator affect the metallurgical results to a considerable extent. Within the study range, the Falcon concentrator model concentrator was found to be inefficient in reducing the ash contents of ultra-fine coal tailings. Since about 82% of the original sample was less than 20 The model investigated in this study were: feed solid (%), inlet pressure (bar), diameter of apex (mm) and diameter of vortex (mm) for the hydrocyclone and gravity force (g’s), percentage solids in feed (%), feed flow rate (l/min) and wash water pressure (psi) for the Falcon concentrator. The mathematical model equations were derived for both ash content and recovery of clean coal by using sets of experimental data and a mathematical software package (Minitab 15). The predicted values match the experimental values reasonably well, with