The processing of lunar regolith for the production of oxygen is a key component of the In-Situ Resource Utilization plans currently being developed by NASA. In the carbothermal process, a portion of the surface of the regolith in a container is heated by exposure to a heat source so that a small zone of molten regolith is established. A continuous flow of methane is maintained over the molten regolith zone. In this paper, we discuss the development of a chemical conversion model of the carbothermal process to predict the rate of production of carbon monoxide. Our model is based on a mechanism where methane pyrolyzes when it comes in contact with the surface of the hot molten regolith to form solid carbon and hydrogen gas. Carbon is deposited on the surface of the melt, and hydrogen is released into the gas stream above the melt surface. We assume that the deposited carbon mixes in the molten regolith and reacts with metal oxides in a reduction reaction by which gaseous carbon monoxide is liberated. Carbon monoxide bubbles through the melt and is released into the gas stream. It is further processed downstream to ultimately produce oxygen.NASA's plans for lunar exploration involves the production of oxygen for life support and use as a propellant. Oxygen is available in the lunar regolith as oxides of various materials. The extraction of gaseous oxygen from the oxides by reduction using hydrogen ( Carbothermal processing refers to the use of carbon in some form, together with high processing temperature, to reduce the oxides. Examples of carbothermal processes on Earth are the production of silicon from silica using wood, charcoal or coal (a standard process), and the production of titanium-rich materials by refining low-grade ilmenites using graphite ( The carbothermal processing of lunar regolith using methane as the source for carbon was first performed by Rosenberg and co-workers at Aerojet in the 1960's (  We assume that carbon deposition occurs on the hot molten surface via a surface reaction. This surface reaction is regarded as first order with respect to a gaseous carbon-containing species and produces solid carbon and gaseous hydrogen. This carbon-containing species need not necessarily be methane; it can be some other carboneous species which may be produced by the gas-phase pyrolysis of methane. In reality, depending on the operating pressure, flow conditions and temperature profiles above the hot molten surface, there would be a distribution of carbon-containing species (e.g., methane, ethylene, acetylene, methyl radical, etc.,) and each of them would react on the surface to deposit carbon at their own rates. Our model, however, “lumps” all of these possibilities into a “single” species and describes the deposition process by a first-order surface reaction of this “predominant” species. For sake of simplicity, we call this “lumped” species methane throughout the paper. Thus, the flux of carbon deposited on the surface of the melt is assumed to be proportional to the concentration of methane in the gas phase adjacent to the melt surface. We assume that the rate of transport of gaseous species from the bulk flow to the melt surface is not limiting the surface reaction rate. This is expected to be valid in the practical application, where the goal would be to maximize the carbon deposition rate so that the CO production rate is maximized. This can be accomplished by an ample and continuous supply of methane in the bulk flow so that its rate of diffusion through the boundary layer above the melt surface is sufficiently fast to replenish its consumption at the surface. Under these conditions, the concentration of methane at the surface can be assumed to be constant and approximated by its value at the flow inlet. The surface reaction rate constant needs to be extracted by direct comparison of model predictions with experimental data. The analysis can easily be extended to situations where gas-phase transport effects are significant. The deposited carbon is assumed to be ‘well-mixed’ in the melt such that there are no spatial gradients of the concentration of carbon or the metal oxide within the melt. This would be the case when the zone is sufficiently small such that diffusion of carbon within the melt is rapid relative to the time of its reaction with the metal oxide. Mixing is more likely caused by temperature gradients in the melt that generate a flow due to natural convection and thermocapillary forces. Besides, the reaction in the melt liberates gaseous carbon monoxide in it, and the gravity-induced bubble motion is likely to render the melt to be well-mixed. The melt viscosity is expected to play a significant role in determining the relative rates of carbon advection and diffusion. The carbon in the melt is assumed to undergo a single-step, first-order chemical reaction with the metal oxide present in the molten regolith. This reaction rate constant also needs to be determined by comparison of the model predictions with experimental data. We assume that the deposited carbon does not form a crust on the surface of the melt, shielding the melt surface from the heat flux and the methane flow. While crusting has been observed under some conditions ( We assume that the molten zone is established and maintained by heating the regolith by suitable means, in a batch-processing mode. The heat transfer aspects of the problem are not analyzed here. The processes of chemical conversion and heat transfer within the molten regolith are assumed to be uncoupled. Let The analysis is organized as follows. We first consider Let The stoichiometric coefficient of the oxide term in the above reaction is The instantaneous rate of production of carbon monoxide is We assume that the melt area and volume are constant. The methane concentration The scaled equations and boundary conditions are Eq. Thus the instantaneous rate of production of carbon monoxide is proportional to the product of The following expression is an asymptotic expansion for Plots of the scaled concentrations of carbon (  As the metal oxide is depleted, the reaction finally slows down and stops. Since the amount of carbon in the melt increases with time, there is unreacted carbon that is left behind in the melt after the reaction is completed. A useful strategy to minimize the amount of unreacted carbon is to turn the supply of methane off at an appropriate time before the reaction is completed, such that the residual amount of carbon present in the melt at that time is sufficient to react with the remaining amount of the metal oxide. This scenario is addressed below. It can be seen from One strategy to minimize the carbon loss is by turning the flow of methane off at some point in time before the end of the conversion process. The idea is that the amount of carbon present in the melt at the time the methane flow is turned off is sufficient to react with the residual metal oxide in the melt. Since there is no fresh carbon that is deposited to the melt after the flow of methane is turned off, the steep increase in the amount of carbon in the melt depicted in By turning the methane flow off, we mean that the concentration of methane in the inlet gas stream is zero. Since there are other sub-systems present downstream of the carbothermal reactor to process the carbon monoxide produced, there must still be gases flowing through the entire system. We anticipate that even with the concentration of methane in the inlet stream to the carbothermal reactor being zero, the gas flow rate through the entire system is maintained by employing other ‘sweep’ gases (such as hydrogen, carbon monoxide, inert gas, etc.). We assume that the methane flow is turned off at Note that When It can be shown that as Therefore, when Plots of the scaled concentrations of carbon, metal oxide, and the rate of production of carbon monoxide are shown by the solid curves in We now analyze a case where the melt volume increases with time. Specifically, we will permit the volume to increase as the square root of time. This would be the case when the regolith (of unbounded extent), initially at a constant temperature below its melting temperature, is heated so that its surface temperature is instantaneously raised and maintained above the melting temperature. The rate of growth of the melt volume will depend on the latent heat and other thermal properties of the regolith. In our analysis, we will assume that the melt volume The conservation of mass yields the following equations for the molar concentration of carbon and metal oxide in the melt. We will permit a time delay between the start of melt growth ( The governing equations in terms of these variables are Eqs. The instantaneous CO production rate is Thus, the CO production rate is proportional to When We explored the effect of delaying the initiation of methane flow, and the results are shown in In the models that we have described above for both constant and growing melt volume, the rate constants We have developed a model which describes the chemical conversion of lunar regolith in a carbothermal reactor to produce carbon monoxide, and eventually oxygen. Methane flows over a molten regolith zone in the reactor continuously at a fixed temperature and pressure to maintain its concentration. Our model assumes a two-step process for the chemical conversion. First, methane is pyrolyzed as it comes in contact with the hot, molten regolith surface. The solid carbon formed after pyrolysis is deposited on the melt, and mixes with it uniformly. The second step is the reaction which takes place between carbon and the metal oxide in the melt to yield carbon monoxide that bubbles out of the melt. We considered both constant volume and growing melt cases. For a constant volume melt, our model shows that a single parameter captures the effects of melt size relative to its surface area, reaction rate constant, pyrolysis rate constant, and the concentrations of methane and metal oxide on the rate at which chemical conversion takes place in the reactor. For a growing melt, the ratio of the time scale for melt growth to the chemical time scale also appears in the dimensionless parameter. Simple strategies to control the amount of unreacted carbon in the melt by turning the flow of methane off at a suitably chosen time, and to control the buildup of carbon at the beginning of the process when the melt is growing are discussed. Rigorous validation of the model predictions with experimental results needs to be performed.  stoichiometric coefficient in chemical reaction in Eq. melt surface area concentration of methane (mole/m reaction rate constant (m variable proportional to the square root of time, value of flux of carbon from pyrolysis (mole/(m scaled and physical (s) time, respectively scaled time at which CO production rate is a maximum time when methane flow is initiated (s) scaled time beyond which methane flow rate is turned off reference time for a growing melt (s) melt volume (m reference melt volume for a growing melt (m number of moles of carbon monoxide (mole) scaled and physical (mole/m scaled and physical (mole/m initial concentration of metal oxide in the melt (mole/m rate constant for the pyrolysis of methane (m/s) scaled excess moles of carbon in the melt, dimensionless parameter, dimensionless parameter, The authors would like to thank K. Sacksteder and D. Linne of NASA Glenn Research Center and R. Gustafson and B. White of Orbitec, Madison, Wisconsin, for discussions and comments during the course of the investigation. Support for this work was obtained from the In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) project which is a part of the