Flotation is an efficient pretreatment technology for oily water. In this paper, the attachment process between gas bubbles and oil droplets was investigated both experimentally and theoretically. The attachment process of the oil droplet onto the gas bubble was described in detail. The results show that the spreading of an oil film on the bubble surface precedes the spreading of the entire oil droplet during the spread phase. In the film drainage phase, the induction time increases with decreasing oil spreading coefficient and increasing bubble size and oil viscosity, among which the effect of the oil droplet viscosity is most significant. Moreover, during the spread phase, the oil droplet spreads rapidly on the gas bubble, and the spreading time also increases with decreasing oil spreading coefficient and increasing bubble/droplet size and oil viscosity.Oily water with high concentrations exist in various fields, such as the petroleum exploitation and refining, textile, and food processing industries. The effluents must be treated, and the oil content of treated wastewater must be lower than the discharge standards, as they could cause health and environmental issues. For instance, the objectives of the Oslo-Paris Convention (OSPAR) stipulate that the oil content of the wastewater of oil and gas production plants in the North East Atlantic must be lower than 30 mg L In gas flotation systems, an oil droplet attached to a gas bubble will generate a larger density difference between oil-bubble aggregate and water ( In flotation, the most important factor affecting the attachment of oil droplets upon bubbles is the induction time ( Overall, it is concluded that the attachment mechanism of oil droplets on gas bubbles is complicated in flotation. To reduce the complexity of the research, it is useful to study the attachment process of gas bubbles-oil droplets. To understand the attachment process, a high-speed camera experiment system was utilized to study the effect upon the attachment of different oil droplet and gas bubble parameters. With this approach, the dynamic behavior of the attachment process and the induction time can be observed. In the present study, we have elaborated the experimental results of the morphological changes of oil droplets and bubbles in the attachment process. We also offer a theoretical explanation of the observed behavior in the experiment. Finally, we have studied the effects of oil droplet properties in the liquid film drainage phase and oil droplet spread phase. To investigate the attachment process between an oil droplet and a gas bubble in a quiescent deionized water medium, an experiment was designed to record the topological changes occurring during the whole attachment process. As described in In the present experiment, the topological changes in the attachment process were recorded by a high-speed digital video camera 1 (Photron, FASTCAM SA-X2, Japan) coupled with a microscope lens (magnification 5 times), with a recording speed of 4000 frames per second and a resolution of 1024 × 1024 pixels. Additionally, high-speed digital video camera 2 (IDT, MotionXtra NX5, USA) was not utilized to record the attachment process, but was accessible for maintaining the droplet and the bubble in the same vertical line. The material of the gas bubble was dry air, and the physical properties (density, dynamic viscosity, interfacial tension) of the oil droplet used are listed in The attachment process between the oil droplet and the gas bubble takes place very rapidly. In this experiment, the measurement of attachment time consisted of five operations: (1) preparing the droplet and bubble materials, (2) forming the droplet and the bubble, (3) contacting the oil droplet and the gas bubble, (4) measuring the attachment time, and (5) cleaning of the capillaries. To prevent the influence of external factors on the liquid film between the oil droplet and the gas bubble, the vibration of the test bench was reduced by isolating the glass tank from the experiment system. After the experiment, the capillaries were rinsed with deionized water to keep the capillaries free of oil droplets. According to the full coalescence process of a drop approaching the plane surface of a semi-infinite liquid ( After a head-on collision event, both the bubble and the oil droplet are at rest, and their interface is flattened ( Here, In this study, the water medium does not contain ions. If a surfactant is added, then ions will exist in the water, which will change the entire experimental system. Not only will the film between the oil droplets and the bubbles form a double ionospheric force, but the decay length of the hydrophobic disjoining pressure will also decrease. Therefore, the effect of Laplace pressure, van der Waals dispersion force and hydrophobic force on the attachment process are mainly studied. It is assumed that the initial thickness of the film between the gas bubble and the oil droplet is 5 μm. Then, Eq.    From In the attachment process, the gas bubble size affects the efficiency of flotation ( The disjoining pressure curve between the bubble and the isooctane droplet plane are plotted in To investigate the effect of the oil property on the attachment process between an oil droplet and a gas bubble, isooctane, heptane, and cyclohexane were selected as the experimental materials for the oil droplets. The spreading coefficients of isooctane, heptane and cyclohexane are 7.4 mN·m For bubbles of the same diameter, oil droplets with the same diameter ratio have the same Laplace pressure according to Eq. In the present work, the attachment process between gas bubbles and oil droplets was investigated with different bubble sizes and different oil properties both experimentally and theoretically. The study reveals that during the initial stage of film drainage, the main driving force for film drainage is the Laplace pressure. With decreasing bubble size, the Laplace pressure increases, which can increase the film discharge velocity and shorten the drainage time. In the hydrophobic disjoining pressure stage of film drainage, the film drainage process with a high thermodynamic spreading coefficient is more rapid due to the large hydrophobic disjoining pressure. Moreover, the Stefan-Reynolds model did not consider the effects of oil viscosity; this is an obvious deviation from the experimental data. From the experimental results, the duration of the period of the cyclohexane oil droplets with high viscosity can range from 2 to 6 times that of the heptane oil droplets with low viscosity at the same diameter ratio. Therefore, the effect of the oil droplet viscosity on the film drainage process cannot be ignored. In the spread phase, the oil droplet spreads very rapidly on the gas bubble, and the spreading time also increases with decreasing oil spreading coefficient and increasing bubble/droplet size and oil viscosity. After the film rupture event, the topological changes in the attachment process between the oil droplet and gas bubble were studied. In the spread phase, with image and theoretical analysis, it can be found that the spreading of the oil film precedes the spreading of the entire oil droplet. During the spreading process of the oil film, the original water film on the gas bubble is replaced with the oil film. This pressure difference, which is generated by material change on the bubble, causes bubble deformation at the replacement position.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: