The particle breakage kinetics, product size and size distribution, as well as grinding limit for quartz suspensions in a horizontal stirred mill are investigated. Results of grinding studies on quartz suspensions in a horizontal stirred mill confirm “first-order” particle breakage rates. A comparison of equation fits reveal that the product size distribution from stirred mill is best represented by the Rosin–Rammler equation when compared to the Gaudin–Shuhmann equation, but results fit poorly as particle size below 5 μm.
                  A method of determining breakage rates versus particle size is demonstrated which shows that the 10% top size fraction is most appropriate for the determination of specific breakage rates. The method is used to demonstrate the relationship between particle breakage rate and particle size. As the feed particle size becomes smaller, the size reduction ratio decreases and approaches a grinding limit which depends on the effective stresses created in the mill.Stirred bead mills have been applied increasingly to ultra-fine grinding of minerals. However, since stirred mills have only recently been introduced to large-scale metal mines, models have not been developed to the same degree as for tumbling mills. The most popular mathematical model used for tumbling mills is the “population balance model”, which was introduced by Thus, The primary breakage distribution function describes the weight fraction of the products that occur in the size interval  Studies were conducted with a pilot scale horizontal stirred mill to characterize the particle breakage kinetics. The results were analyzed to provide evidence of the types and relative magnitudes particle breakage mechanisms. The study is part of a larger student that investigates rheological aspect of grinding in horizontal stirred mills. Pilot scale tests were conducted using a continuous Netzsch LME 4 horizontal stirred bead mill. The mill is rubber lined and has an effective volume of 2.4 l. The agitator shaft for the mill has eight polyurethylene discs. The grinding medium used was 1 mm steel beads and the loading charge was 80% of the total mill volume, which corresponded to 5125 g.  The tests were conducted at three solid contents of 30%, 35%, and 40% by weight. For each test, a sample was fed to the mill and the product was collected, sampled and re-fed to the mill. This cycle was repeated up to five times. Between each cycle, the mill was flushed with water before starting the next grinding cycle. Plug-flow was assumed to simplify the calculation of mean resident time Test 1 was conducted to determine the sampling time at which equilibrium conditions is achieved in the mill. Equilibrium refers to stable operation with respect to mill power, temperature and product size (% passing 10 μm). The Gaudin–Schuhmann (Eq. The model fits were compared using the correlation coefficient The correlation coefficient In order to assess the suitability of the Rosin–Rammler equation over the range of particle sizes and size distributions, the correlation coefficient   The “one size fraction technique” ( The breakage rates were determined for two size fractions, the +97 μm fraction and the +64 μm fraction. The tests were conducted at three solid contents of 30%, 35% and 40%.  The results confirm “first-order” breakage rates for stirred mill grinding and support the use of the population balance model. As described by  For determination of specific breakage rate based on As shown in  The size reduction ratio was also determined from the five cycle grinding tests. The size reduction ratio refers to the ratio of feed size to product size for each cycle (   Attrition and abrasion (no impact) were once believed the primary breakage mechanisms in stirred bead mills. Recent observations (  The breakage kinetics of quartz suspensions with different solid content were investigated for a horizontal stirred bead mill. The results confirm the “first-order” breakage rate for tested slurries in the mill. The relationship of specific breakage rate and particle size for stirred mill is similar to those for tumbling mill and therefore the population balance model can be applied. A comparison of equation fits reveal that the product size distribution from stirred mill is best represented by the Rosin–Rammler equation. The Rosin–Rammler fit improves for products with a narrower size distribution and coarser particle size but is poor for particle sizes below five microns. A method of determining breakage rates versus particle size is demonstrated which shows that the 10% top size fraction is most appropriate for the determination of specific breakage rates in a stirred mill. The size reduction ratio decreases with the feed size and approaches 1.0, indicating that a grinding limit exists. It is proposed that this limit depends on the effective stresses created in the mill which are determined by bead size, agitator speed and pulp density. Based on size distribution results, the primary breakage mechanism in the horizontal stirred mills is massive fracture. However, near the grinding limit attrition is dominant. The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for providing funding to conduct the research and the Canada Foundation for Innovation for the equipment grant to acquire the testing facilities.