The performance of underground excavations is inevitably influenced by rock mass characteristics, presence of joints and their geometrical properties, depth below surface and state of in-situ stress field. The objective of this paper is to investigate the behaviour of deep underground tunnel opening existed between two bedding planes. Such planes weaken the strength of rock mass and may cause rock slippage/rotation along them. Therefore, the state of stress-displacement, after tunnel opening has been introduced, is examined using two-dimensional elasto-plastic finite-elements code, RS2D. The results indicate that, there is significant drop in the normal stress along joints over tunnel opening; slip occurs due to reversal in the direction of shear stress (e.g., inward shear displacement is produced) and there is discontinuity in the strength contours of rock surrounding tunnel after they have been intersected by bedding planes.Creation of underground excavations results in disruption of equilibrium state of in-situ stress field (e.g., pre-existed stress) in the rock mass. Thus, the stability of deep underground openings is utmost important during their service/entire life The mechanism of rock deformation and state of stress are the most important design parameters for the construction of underground openings. The magnitude of stress plays a vital role in the development of brittle fractures and degradation of rock strength In mining and tunnelling fields, the stability of underground excavations is intrinsically influenced by rock mass properties. Therefore, the method of excavation; sequences/stages and primary rock support or reinforcement system are accordingly selected. Whereas, in underground hydroelectric power generation, the interaction mechanism between multiple caverns significantly affects the behaviour of rock mass Analytical methods are used to determine stresses and deformation fields around simple excavation shapes (e.g., circular, elliptical) and under highly simplifying mechanical assumptions (e.g., perfect elasticity and homogeneity) In this analysis, RS The strength of rock mass basically depends on the characteristics of associated joints. The following section will present a brief discussion about the major joints properties that have significant impact on the quality of rock mass, as shown in  Traceability of joint length defines its continuity into rock mass, as shown in The strength of rock mass is inversely proportional to the length of rock joints. Thereby, the strength of rock mass will highly be deteriorated if it is dominated by longer weaker joints/bedding planes rather than shorter (discontinuous joints) ones The rock failure mechanism is ruled by the orientation of pre-existed discontinuities. The crucial impact of joint orientation, on the strength of rock mass, occurs when joint dip angle ( However, the strength of rock mas won’t be affected if the joints are vertically oriented (e.g., The surface of joints becomes rough when they fail/damage. In addition, the applied normal stress has direct relationship with the roughness of rock joints. Moreover, under tensile failure, joints exhibit shear behaviour. Eq. Eq. Several researchers developed shear strength models that describe the roughness behaviour of joints without including the effect of change of water pressure along these joints on their shear strength. Joints intersect others when they are very dense (e.g., exist in immense numbers). The way of their intersection relies on their orientation. There are two types of joint interconnectivity: symmetric and skewed. The symmetric interconnectivity occurs, when the intersected joints have the same dip angle, from horizontal, regardless their dip direction. The skewed interconnectivity occurs when the dip of the intersected joints is not the same (e.g., neglecting the dip direction), as depicted in   Creating an excavation into rock mass disrupts the pre-existed state of equilibrium (e.g., in-situ stresses). Thus, the induced-stress regime around such opening has to be readjusted until new state of equilibrium is attained. Two-dimensional elasto-plastic finite-element (e.g., Rock-soil, RS Yielding is the most popular built-in function used in elasto-plastic numerical analysis. It reaches when the rock is loaded beyond its elastic limit. Therefore, this function is used to assess the serviceability of underground openings. In this analysis, Mohr-Coulomb yield function is employed and elasto-plastic behaviour of rock mass is monitored. Yielding will be considered a cause for unsatisfactory performance of tunnel opening, if it extends beyond the anchorage length of primary rock support installed in tunnel back, walls and floor. A rule of thumb is adopted herein, whereby the resin grouted rebar can sustain 1-ton of axial load per 1-in. (e.g., 3.86   The strength of rock mass around tunnel opening is monitored using strength factor ( It can be shown that, the strength of rock mass around tunnel boundary and between the joints is less than unity (e.g.,  The normal stress along rock joints is depicted in The shear stress along rock joints is shown in The total rock mass displacement around tunnel opening is depicted in After rock joints pass over and below tunnel opening, the direction of shear stress is reversed. Consequently, inward shear displacement of rock, on the underside of the bedding planes, results in due to slip occurrence, as shown in Discontinuities (e.g., fractures, joints, faults, shear zones, dykes, etc.) are unfavorable geological structures to the stability of rock mass around underground openings. This paper aims to investigate the behaviour of deep underground tunnel opening created between two inclined bedding planes (e.g., rock joints). Two-dimensional elasto-plastic finite-elements model has been constructed using rock-soil software, RS The results indicate that, there is high stress concentration zones existed between joints and tunnel opening (e.g., particularly tunnel back and floor); strength of rock mass around tunnel boundary deteriorates after tunnel opening has been created (e.g., strength factor, In addition, rock joints only failed/yielded when they pass over and below tunnel opening; there is discontinuity in the strength contours of rock mass and the distribution of induced-stresses in the rock mass around tunnel opening is not persistent as a result of interception with rock joints. Moreover, the normal stresses along rock joints are sharply dropped after joints pass over and below tunnel opening; the direction of shear stresses along rock joint is reversed over and below tunnel opening (e.g., reversal of shear stress direction is an evidence of slip occurrence) and inward shear displacement is produced in the underside of rock joints (e.g., maximum shear displacement occurs along rock joints above and below tunnel opening as a result of rock slip occurrence). Sensitivity analysis should be conducted to investigate the effect of geometrical properties of rock joints (e.g., stiffness, roughness, friction, dip direction, interconnectivity, joint spacing, distance between joints and excavation, etc.) and rock mass properties (e.g., friction, cohesion, deformation modulus) on the stability of underground openings and also to estimate the most critical parameter(s). Also, opening geometry (e.g., shape and size), state of in-situ stress and depth below surface may be considered in the parametric analysis.