Sedzimir, in his comments, has rightly indicated that the deviation from linear cementation kinetics could be due to the concentration of gold approaching an equilibrium value. The ‘equilibrium’ model presented is fundamentally sound and the calculated equilibrium gold concentration, 0.65 mg/L, is reasonable. The experimental evidence and the thermodynamic data employed by the authors, however, lend more support to their previous conclusion — that deviation from linear kinetics is due, primarily, to progressive passivation of the copper surface. The authors are well aware of, and in agreement with, the arguments put forth by Sedzimir as to why the progress of gold cementation should not negatively affect the rate of cementation. However, the authors did not wish to imply that the passivation of the copper surface was due to deposition of gold. It is, although perhaps unclear, purported that the observed negative deviation from linear kinetics is due, in most part, to the progressive formation of some other, ill-characterized precipitate on the copper metal surface. The observed progressive color change of copper metal, exposed to ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions in the absence of gold, indicated that the copper surface undergoes changes independent of the progress of gold cementation. The consistent and widespread appearance of sulphur on the residues, identified using an SEM equipped with an X-ray dispersive spectrometer, in addition to the relatively large negative effect of sulphite on cementation performance, imply that sulphite, and perhaps thiosulphate, are reduced on the copper surface, forming sulfur-bearing precipitates. Although X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses of cementation residues could only identify the presence of cuprite, Cu Although the ‘passivation’ model used to represent the experimental results is, admittedly, limited and breaks down as time increases, it is not, however, an entirely empirical model as suggested. The derivation of the ‘passivation’ model follows the general first-order expression for a cementation process which appears below: It is not our intention, however, to question the validity of Sedzimir's calculation or thermodynamic data. The ‘equilibrium’ model he presents, admittedly, offers a better fit to the data than the ‘passivation’ model. It is simply that, based on the thermodynamic and experimental information we gathered, coupled with the uncertainty of the stability of these complexes at elevated temperature, there was insufficient reason to consider the ‘equilibrium‘ model to represent this system.