The extraction of metals from waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) in H2SO4–CuSO4–NaCl leaching system was studied. The effect of initial concentration of cupric (0.5–7.5g/L Cu2+), chloride (4.7–46.6g/LCl−) and temperature (20–80°C) on the leaching of copper was investigated using response surface methodology, i.e., three-level Box–Behnken design. Extraction of other metals including Fe, Ni, Ag, Pd and Au was also determined. The importance of the main effects of the leaching parameters on the extraction of copper was found to be in the decreasing order of temperature, the initial concentration of Cu2+ and Cl−. The findings have shown that the initial Cl−/Cu2+ molar ratio should be maintained sufficiently high to maximise extraction of copper. However, an excessively high Cl−/Cu2+ ratio can exert a detrimental effect on the process due to a decrease in the activity of Cu2+ as oxidant. It was found that the highest levels of all the parameters should be selected to achieve high leaching recoveries (≥91%) for Cu, Fe, Ni and Ag. Under these conditions, the dissolution of palladium was limited to 58%. The effect of solids ratio (1–15% w/v) and air/oxygen (2–4L/min) on the rate and extent of leaching were also tested. Increasing the solids ratio (1–15w/v) was observed to adversely affect the leaching of metals with no copper extraction at ≥10w/v in the absence of air/oxygen. Air/oxygen was confirmed to be a suitable oxidant to regenerate Cu2+ and hence, maintain high Cu2+/Cu+ ratios, i.e., redox potentials during the leaching process. The presence of air/oxygen led to a significant improvement in the leaching of metals, e.g., %14 Cu (no air/oxygen) cf. complete copper extraction at ≥2L/min air/oxygen over 120min. The current findings suggested that, particularly at high solids ratios (≥5% w/v), the regeneration of Cu2+ by the introduction of air/oxygen is essential for high extraction of metals, Pd in particular.In recent years, the production/consumption of electrical and electronic equipments (EEE) has substantially increased with the concurrent decrease in their lifespan, e.g., the lifespan of a personal computer (PC) and a central processing unit (CPU) decreased from 4.5 to 2–3 The disposal of WEEE with municipal wastes in landfills is environmentally detrimental due to the organic (e.g., chlorinated/brominated flame retardants) and inorganic (e.g., Hg, Pb, Cd) hazardous materials included in WEEE ( On the other hand, WEEE can be deemed to be an important secondary resource of base (particularly Cu) and precious metals (Au, Ag, Pd) ( Various treatment options based on conventional physical, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes are available for the treatment of WEEE for the recovery of contained metals ( Hydrometallurgical processes offer high metal recoveries with a flexible mode of operation and suitability for small scale applications. These advantages make hydrometallurgical methods economically viable alternatives for a wide range of WEEE including low grade wastes, in particular. However, there has been no process solely based on hydrometallurgical methods at the industrial scale, although recently an EU-supported project has been completed for the treatment of WEEE including waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) in a small mobile plant ( In the literature, different lixiviant systems (e.g., sulphate, chloride, nitrate, iodide, ammonia, cyanide, thiourea and thiosulphate) were tested to recover metals from WPCBs ( Chloride solutions offer several advantages such as higher solubility and activity of metals than in sulphate media ( Cupric ion (Cu Although the standard reduction potential of the Cu For the extraction of metals from WEEE, some researchers tested chloride-based solutions in the presence of various oxidants, e.g., HNO In this study, leaching of copper as well as other metals (Fe, Ni, Ag, Pd and Au) from WPCBs in H WPCBs were collected from end-of-life computers of various brands. After the manual separation of PCB components (e.g., capacitors, resistors, transistors, cables). WPCBs were subjected to size reduction down to − Leaching tests were performed in flat-bottomed and baffled jacketed glass reactor vessels with a nominal capacity of 750 Sulphuric acid solution (96%), reagent grade copper sulphate pentahydrate (CuSO Response surface methodology (RSM) is a powerful tool in the evaluation of the effects of several independent parameters (variables) on a response. In this study, Box–Behnken design (BBD), essentially a type of RSM, was used in the design of leaching tests. In this design, there are three levels [i.e., low (− The relationship between the coded and actual values was obtained by the formula: In the current study, the effect of the parameters (i.e., initial concentration of cupric ion, chloride and temperature) on the extraction of metals was evaluated.   A second order regression model (Eq. The analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the regression model and linear/square/interaction contributions is presented in The linear and quadratic terms for the initial concentration of Cu Response surface plots derived from regression equations allow simultaneous observation of the effects of dual parameters on a response.   In addition to the concentration of Cl In No dissolution for palladium and gold were observed under the conditions tested. This suggests that under suitable conditions (e.g., as in Exp. 12), Cu, Fe, Ni and Ag can be selectively extracted from WPCBs with Pd and Au remaining in the residue.  In the current study, extraction of Fe and Ni also decreased from 91% Fe and 93% Ni extractions at 1 During the leaching process, cupric ion (Cu  In the presence of air/oxygen, iron and nickel extractions increased from 85% and 32%, respectively to ≥  As illustrated in It is pertinent to note that the extraction of iron was determined to be only 1% in the presence of O The extraction of metals (i.e., Cu, Fe, Ni, Ag and Pd) from waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) in H The authors would like to express their sincere thanks and appreciations to