In this paper the adequacy and the benefit of incorporating glass fibre reinforced polymer (GFRP) waste materials into polyester based mortars, as sand aggregates and filler replacements, are assessed. Different weight contents of mechanically recycled GFRP wastes with two particle size grades are included in the formulation of new materials. In all formulations, a polyester resin matrix was modified with a silane coupling agent in order to improve binder-aggregates interfaces. The added value of the recycling solution was assessed by means of both flexural and compressive strengths of GFRP admixed mortars with regard to those of the unmodified polymer mortars. Planning of experiments and data treatment were performed by means of full factorial design and through appropriate statistical tools based on analyses of variance (ANOVA).
                  Results show that the partial replacement of sand aggregates by either type of GFRP recyclates improves the mechanical performance of resultant polymer mortars. In the case of trial formulations modified with the coarser waste mix, the best results are achieved with 8% waste weight content, while for fine waste based polymer mortars, 4% in weight of waste content leads to the higher increases on mechanical strengths.
                  This study clearly identifies a promising waste management solution for GFRP waste materials by developing a cost-effective end-use application for the recyclates, thus contributing to a more sustainable fibre-reinforced polymer composites industry.Glass fibre reinforced polymer (GFRP) composite materials are widely used in the construction, automobile and aeronautic industries, mostly due to their excellent strength to weight ratio, corrosion resistance and the possibility of being tailored or designed according to specific end-use applications Until now, the amounts of GFRP wastes generated by manufacturing processes and at building sites have correlated to the overall production and consumption of GFRP based products. However, it is foreseen that with the contribution of construction and demolition debris from GFRP based products approaching the end of their useful life, the waste-to-production ratio will increase. In view of the present and antecipated Waste Management legislations (e.g., EU 1999/31/EC; EU 2000/53/EC; EU 2000/76/EC; EU 2006/12/EC), with increasingly limitative policies on landfill and incineration, the GFRP industry, manufacturers and suppliers, must tackle the situation by identifying possible recycling solutions in order to maintain the sustainability of their products for the construction sector However, two different but interdependent issues must be solved prior to embracing the recycling approach. The first issue relies on the recycling process itself (- With regard to the first issue, a complete review of current recycling technologies for thermoset FRP composites can be found in Pickering Mechanical recycling presents significant environmental and economic advantages over the other proposed recycling processes. In fact, mechanical size reduction does not produce atmospheric pollution by gas emissions or water pollution from chemical solvent effluents, nor does it demand the use of sophisticated and undoubtedly expensive equipment such the ones required by the other processes. As far as drawbacks are concerned, two issues may be raised: safety hazards (risk of ignition during the gridding process due to the presence of initiator plus promoter that are not consumed during polymerisation reaction), and the lower value of final product (a mix of powdered and fibrous material, which must compete with virgin reinforcing fibres and filler materials) On the other hand, assuming that feasible market outlets exist for the recyclates, mechanical recycling can be considered as the most cost-effective recycling technique, as far as clean GFRP waste materials proceeding from promoter-free manufacturing processes are concerned, for which the reinforcing fibres have relatively low economic value Regarding the second issue, the end-use applications for the recyclates, several promising applications for ground FRP wastes have been investigated over the last years. Filler or reinforcement material for artificial wood With the above in mind, this study aimed at developing a new waste management solution for mechanically recycled GFRP wastes in order to meet main criteria for cost-effectiveness. Previous studies carried out by the present research group Compared to related end-use applications of ground GFRP wastes in cementicious based concrete materials, the proposed solution overcomes some of the problems that have been found, namely: (a) incompatibilities arisen from alkalis-silica reaction The main purpose of this study consists in incorporating different contents of mechanically recycled GFRP waste (powdered and fibrous mixtures) into polyester polymer mortars (PM) as partial replacement for sand aggregates and filler. In order to improve the adhesion between organic and inorganic constituents, a silane coupling agent was used in all formulations as an additive introduced in the polymer resin matrix. The added value of recycling solution was assessed by means of both flexural and compressive loading capacities of GFRP admixed mortars with regard to unmodified PMs. Planning of experiments and data treatment were performed by means of full factorial design and through appropriate statistical tools based on analyses of variance (ANOVA). These methodologies have shown to be powerful tools in the optimisation processes of mixtures, mix designs and processing parameters PM specimens were prepared by mixing an unsaturated polyester resin (20% w/w) with different sand aggregates/GFRP waste ratios. Processed GFRP waste, with two different size grades, was used as partial substitute for sand aggregates in the proportion of 4%, 8% and 12% of total mass weight. Plain polymer mortar specimens were also casted and tested in order to compare mechanical and functional properties with those of GFRP waste admixed mortars. The composition of plain formulation was developed in previous studies on statistical significance of synergetic effects between material components The GFRP waste material used in this investigation was supplied by a local pultrusion manufacturing company. It was the result of shredding leftovers from the cutting and assembly processes of pultrusion profiles at building sites. Once shredded, the GFRP waste was further processed by milling on a heavy-duty Cutting Mill laboratory unit (Retsch, model SM2000). Two different size grades of milled GFRP waste were obtained using bottom sieves inside the grinding chamber with differently-sized meshes. The obtained recycled products, shown in The GFRP recyclates were characterised with respect to organic and inorganic fraction contents and particle size distribution. The results of burning tests carried out on five random samples showed a composition with an average inorganic material content of 71% (w/w) corresponding to glass (55% w/w) and calcium carbonate (16% w/w), and an average resin content of 29% (w/w). The particle size distributions of both types of recycled wastes, obtained by sieving and laser diffraction techniques, showed a range of particle sizes ranging from 1.5 An unsaturated polyester resin (AROPOL FS3992, Ashland®) with a styrene content of 42% (w/w), was used as polymer binder. The polymerisation process of the resin system was activated by cobalt octoate (0.5 An organofunctional silane chemical solution (Dow Corning® Z-6032), with 40% (w/w) of active silane in methanol, was used as an adhesion promoter of resin binder to both inorganic aggregates and GFRP recyclates. The Z-6032 silane contains a vinylbenzyl and amine organic groups and a trimethoxysilyl inorganic group. It can be used as a coupling agent either as a polymer additive or as surface pre-treatment of inorganic materials. In this study, the Z-6032 silane solution was applied as an additive to the polyester resin binder in the proportion of 1% of active silane by weight of resin. Six different GFRP waste admixed mortar formulations were manufactured by varying the type (CW or FW) and content (4%, 8% or 12%) of GFRP waste and subsequently characterised. The following notation was adopted: CW or FW accounts for the type of GFRP waste and the subsequent number for the content of waste admixture. Waste-free polyester PMs (W0), were also investigated for comparative analysis purposes. The manufacturing process of PM formulations followed RILEM recommendation CPT PC-2:1995 Prismatic PM specimens were tested in three-point bending up to failure as specified by RILEM CPT PCM-8 test method Results were statistically analysed using the Matlab 7.6.0 (R2008a) software. Analyses of variance were performed according to a two-factor full factorial design of experiments. ‘GFRP waste type’ and ‘GFRP waste content’ were considered as factors, with two (CW and FW) and four (0%, 4%, 8% and 12%) variation levels, respectively. A 2 Initially, parametric analyses of variance (ANOVA) were considered. However, the analyses of residues previously performed according to Shapiro–Wilk’s and Levene’s tests showed that ANOVA’s assumptions related to the normality and homoscedasticity were not met ( In all performed analyses, factors effects with a significance level of 5% or lower (  The obtained results show that the average compressive strengths achieved in all but one of the modified formulations with GFRP waste admixtures improved when compared to those obtained for the reference formulation (FW0/CW0). The exception was found for FW12 trial formulation in which a decrease on compressive loading capacity was observed with regard to waste-free formulation. The results also show that CW based formulations present, in general, an improved compressive behaviour than compared to homologous formulations modified with FW recyclates. Basic descriptors are supported by the results of nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) by ranks presented in From the two-way nonparametric ANOVA results, it is clear that both factors, ‘GFRP Waste Content’ ( Two-way ANOVA results also lead to the identification of the most influential factor on compressive strength response as being the ‘GFRP Waste Content’, followed to by the ́GFRP Waste Type’ with minor relevance. The respective percent contributions to global variation (P), computed as the ratio of the pure sum of squares of the factor to the total sum of squares, as expressed by Eq.  As was the case for compressive strength response, the partial replacement of sand aggregates by GFRP waste admixtures has a strong influence on flexural strength response of modified formulations However, different trends were observed for the effect of GFRP waste admixtures: whereas increases on bending strength were observed for all CW admixed mortar formulations; in the FW test series, only the trial formulation with 4% in weight of FW admixture showed improved flexural behaviour over the control formulation. Once again, the nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis analysis of variance by ranks was applied and the obtained results are presented in According to the two-way nonparametric ANOVA test results presented in The percent contributions to global variation (P) of ‘GFRP Waste Content’ and ‘GFRP Waste Type’ factors and correspondent interaction are 38%, 17% and 16%, respectively. In order to get a better understanding of the influence of the incorporation of GFRP waste on mechanical behaviour of modified PMs, the main effects of each factor and the interaction effect across them are plotted and highlighted in response graphics in ‘GFRP Waste Content’ is the most influential factor on compressive and flexural strength responses of modified mortars, contributing with 61% and 38%, respectively, to global variation. As stressed by response graphs of the main effect of ‘Waste content’ plotted in Up to 8% waste content, compressive loading capacities of PMs increase with increasing addition of GFRP recyclates. Average compressive strength increases of 12.1% and 16.4% corresponding to the addition of 4% and 8% in weight of GFRP waste, respectively, were observed with regard to unmodified PMs. The increase in compressive strength with GFRP waste content may be attributed to a more continuous particle size distribution of the sand/waste particles mix. Relevant to this feature is the input of the powder fraction of GFRP waste to the sand aggregate filler, which contributes to a dry-packed overall aggregate with lower void volume. Generally, aggregate mixtures with higher bulk densities lead to higher compressive strengths, due to improved aggregate compaction. Regarding the flexural strength response, the trend of increasing load capacity with increasing addition of GFRP waste up to 8% content is not verified. Average increases on bending capacity of 12.2% and 7.3% were found for 4% and 8% in weight of GFRP waste additions, respectively. It was expected that fibrous fraction of GFRP recyclates would have a significant reinforcing effect and lead to a higher improvement on flexural behaviour. Flexural strength did actually improve for the CW test series up to 8% waste content, where progressive increases of 12.1% and 15.8% were observed for CW4 and CW8 trial formulations, respectively. However a strong decrease on flexural strength was observed for FW homologous test series when FW waste content was increased from 4% to 8%. This decreasing tendency became even more marked with further addition of fine waste (FW12). A possible explanation for observed behaviour is suggested: CW admixture presents larger contents of fibrous material with higher lengths, providing a superior bending reinforcing effect than FW admixture. This subject should be clarified in a future study that will focus on the microstructure analysis of mortar specimens. Above 8% content in waste addition, decreases on both flexural and compressive strength responses occur with regard to PM formulations with lower contents of GFRP waste (for 12% content in waste addition, average decreases of 1.8% and 4.3% were observed on compressive and flexural strengths, respectively, of GFRP waste modified PMs over unmodified PMs). As larger amounts of sand are replaced by GFRP waste throughout both CW and FW test series (from 0% to 12%), the overall specific surface area of aggregates increases, while resin content is kept constant at 20% in weight in all formulations. The higher specific surface area of GFRP waste particles compared to sand particles, especially in the case of FW admixture, requires higher contents of binder matrix for a proper wetting and cohesive bonding of aggregates. This feature is believed to be the main reason for the observed inflexion points in the behaviour trend of the mortar materials (at approximately 8% in waste content for compression and 4% for bending). Although not shown in this paper, a less brittle failure was observed for GFRP admixed mortars, both in bending and in compression. Improved ductility with increasing GFRP waste content was more pronounced in compression than in bending, with higher retention of load capacity after peak load. ‘GFRP Waste Type’ factor also has a significant influence on mechanical strength of modified PMs, contributing with 12% and 17% to the global variation of compressive and flexural strength responses, respectively. As shown in response graphs of Magnified images of GFRP recyclates obtained by a high-resolution metallographic microscope ( The results highlight the importance of sieving and sorting operations during and after recycling of process FRP wastes. Relevant properties of the recyclates that will affect the performance of final composite are dictated by these key operations. In the research studies carried out by Rikards et al. The interaction effect between the two factors was only considered significant on flexural behaviour of modified PMs. According to response graph of The viability of the incorporation of mechanically recycled GFRP wastes into polymer based mortars was investigated and assessed. Four different levels of GFRP waste content with two different size grades were considered, and their influences on flexural and compressive strengths of modified PMs were statistically analysed. Considering the results of the trial formulations analysed in this study, the following conclusions may be drawn: The partial replacement of sand aggregates by GFRP waste materials, up to 8% in total weight content, has an incremental effect on both flexural and compressive strengths of resultant PMs, regardless of the GFRP waste size grade. Increasing the amount of GFRP recyclates leads to progressive decrease in mechanical properties of admixed PMs, and above 12% waste content, loading capacities tend to drop below those of unmodified PMs. The influence of GFRP waste content is more pronounced in compression than in bending, with turning points in the behaviour trends of these materials at 8% and 4% waste content, respectively. PMs modified with coarse waste (CW) show improved mechanical behaviour over those with fine waste (FW), both in bending and in compression. Waste content of 4% and 8% constitute the turning points in the behaviour trends of mortar materials for FW and CW based formulations, respectively. The best combination of factors’ levels that maximise both flexural and compressive strengths of modified PMs is achieved for 8% weight of sand replacement by CW recyclates. The observed dissimilar behaviour of trial formulations, depending on the mechanical strength response (bending or compression) and size grade of GFRP recyclates (CW or FW), can be attributed to intrinsic differences between the geometric characteristics of FW and CW admixtures; whereas FW acts more like a filler extension for sand aggregates of modified mortars, CW acts as an effective reinforcing material. The findings of this study showed that a viable technological solution for GFRP waste management can be achieved, thus opening the door to selective recycling of GFRP waste and its (re)use in a cost-effective end-use application, as reinforcing material for polymer based mortars. The financial support of ‘AdI, Agência de Inovação’, under ‘QREN – Quadro de Referência de Estratégia Nacional (ON.2)’ Program, is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also thank Dr. Anthony Steven Danko and Dr. Paulo Nóvoa for their critical review and scientific editing on the manuscript.