The comminution of composites for liberation of valuable components is a costly and energy-intensive process within the recycling of spent products. It therefore is continuously studied and optimized. In addition to conventional mechanical comminution innovative new principles for size reduction have been developed. One is the use of high voltage (HV) pulses, which is known to be a technology selectively liberating along phase boundaries. This technology offers the advantage of targeted liberation, preventing overgrinding of the material and thus improving the overall processing as well as product quality.
                  In this study, the high voltage fragmentation of three different non-brittle composites (galvanized plastics, carbon fibre composites, electrode foils from Li-ion batteries) was investigated. The influence of pulse rate, number of pulses and filling level on the liberation and efficiency of comminution is discussed. Using the guideline VDI 2225 HV, fragmentation is compared to conventional mechanical comminution with respect to numerous criteria such as cost, throughput, energy consumption, availability and scalability. It was found that at current state of development, HV fragmentation cannot compete with mechanical comminution beyond laboratory scale.specific heat capacity [kJ/kgK] degree of liberation [%] energy [J = Ws] frequency, pulse rate [Hz = s phase angle [°] amperage [A] torque [Nm] mass [g] number of revolutions per second [s efficiency [%] power [W] heat [J = Ws] temperature [K] time [s] voltage [V] specific energy input [J/g = 1/3.6 kWh/t] particle size [mm] Higher demand, technological progress and the decreasing lifespan of consumer products lead to challenges for the recycling industry worldwide. Attractive and functional design has to meet price-efficient specifications. The structural elements which need to be recycled are getting more complex and smaller in size. Raw materials tend to become more expensive due to increasing worldwide demand, while compound materials are becoming more and more technologically sophisticated. At their end of life (EOL), further handling of these products is governed by various legislation, e.g. European Union directive 2008/98/EG concerning waste in general and 2000/53/EG addressing the end of life for automotive products. Apart from the environmental impact, EOL products often contain sufficient valuable matter, which legitimizes even complex technologies for recovery. As a result, the cost of recycling correlates with the complexity of composites ( In most applications mechanical processes will constitute the first step of recycling, as materials are not yet suitable for metallurgical or chemical processing ( Besides liberation, energy input, throughput and the robustness of the technology are of importance for its use within a processing plant. Processing cost is mainly driven by energy cost ( In mechanical processing of secondary raw materials particle shape dominates separation ( In comminution, mechanical or thermal energy input leads to the breakdown of bonding forces inside a material. Various physical principles can be used to introduce energy into the material, which have been implemented in machines of different design. The classification of machines given in Taking into account the different working principles and stresses causing fracture, the optimum machinery for the comminution of a non-brittle material can be chosen using the above given classification. The dominating stress in a rotary shear as well as in a translatory shear will be shearing, while in a rotary cutter it is cutting. In rotary shredders the mode of stressing is more complex. It is a combination of tensile stress combined with bending and tearing ( As described in the previous section, the energy needed to cause cracking of materials can be introduced with or without the help of comminution tools. The latter one can for example be achieved using high voltage pulsed power. The HV electrical pulse, generated between the electrodes of the machine, moves through the material in the process chamber. Dependent on the rise-time of the electrical discharge, two main principles can be distinguished: when the pulse rise-time is slow, electrical breakdown will happen in the process water (electrohydraulic crushing, EHC); when the pulse rise-time is fast (<10 Distinct to conventional comminution, where the energy is introduced pointwise or linearly by the comminution tool ( Over the last decades much work was done on studying the potential of HV fragmentation for the processing of primary raw materials, especially ores ( One critical factor limiting the applicability of HV fragmentation to the processing of primary and secondary raw materials is the consumption of energy ( Although positive effects of EDF over conventional comminution have been proven for some materials, its application in recycling will be questionable due to energy consumption and overall processing costs ( An assessment of the technical feasibility needs to take into account the whole processing chain as described above. Nevertheless, an assessment can also be done for a single process within the processing plant. To improve the performance of a recycling plant, comminution needs to be optimized with respect to downstream separation processes. This includes the particle size distribution, liberation and separability of the material, throughput, and other features of the material affecting separation. The process under investigation additionally needs to be evaluated with regard to efficiency, energy consumption, robustness, availability and cost for investment, operation and maintenance. Using standardised methods, such as the guideline VDI 2225 ( Various authors have shown the positive effect of HV fragmentation on liberation of composite materials ( In order to get an impartial assessment of the applicability of HV fragmentation as an alternative technology to conventional mechanical comminution, both technologies are compared based on the guideline VDI 2225 ( To meet the specifications required by modern consumer products, composites are widely used which possess specific mechanical or physical properties as well as features related to surface appearance. These composites usually combine two or more metallic, organic or inorganic materials. Galvanized plastics or coated materials in general are multilayer materials. They are characterized by at least two materials bonded together. Coating technology has become more and more important, especially coating of plastics with metals. Advantages can be: refining without any effects on functionality, protection of the base material from extraneous influences and improved functionality or surface appearance. Today galvanized plastics are widely used in everyday life. They can be found in cars, as frames of electronic devices and parts of sanitary equipment. The recycling of surface-coated plastics is a challenging task as the coating just accounts for a small fraction of mass. A high liberation from the base material is needed to meet the requirements for purity in the recycling of the plastics. The galvanized plastics investigated in this study were provided by Saxonia Galvanik GmbH (Halsbrücke/Saxony). The matrix material is made up of thermoplastics. The surface coating consists of a 20 µm copper layer, a 10 µm nickel layer and a 1 µm cover layer of chromium. All pieces which do not comply with the specifications are rejected. The rejected material accounts for 5% of the daily production. Examples of different pieces of galvanized plastics as well as a mechanically pre-crushed sample can be seen in Due to the increasing number of electric vehicles, a large quantity of lithium-ion batteries will need to be recycled at their end of life. Lithium-ion battery cells are composed of anode and cathode foils, separator foils, electrolyte and housing material. The electrodes are made of metal foils coated with substrates bearing the Li-ions. In case of the cathode, the base metal is aluminium; a typical coating is nickel manganese cobalt oxide (NMC) with a binding agent. In case of the anode, the base metal is copper coated with graphite. Anode and cathode are separated by a 15 µm thin polyethylene foil ( For the study of HV fragmentation cathode material from production waste was used. In contrast to the electrode foils from spent Li-ion batteries, these foils from production waste lack organic solvents. Cathode foils contain high-value components such as cobalt and nickel. They will be of economic interest if manufacturers of Li-Ion batteries use the recycled materials. Currently, foils from production waste can be mechanically pre-processed by a two-step comminution and sieving ( Reinforcing materials with fibres leads to an increase in strength and stiffness and therefore bears the potential of reducing the dimensions of structures. All material groups (ceramics, metals, plastics) can be reinforced with fibres. The most prominent examples are composites of plastics with fibres made of carbon, glass or natural materials used in lightweight construction. The production of fibre composites has been strongly increasing over the past decades and will increase further in the future, e.g. in aircraft and automotive industry. The recycling of fibre composites is a challenging task. This is due to their mechanical properties and the requirements of length and purity of recycled fibres. However, the recycling of fibre composites is interesting from an economical as well as ecological perspective. This is due to their energy-intensive production, high price and costs for disposal ( The CFCs used in this study originate from the automotive industry. They have been pre-crushed by a rotary shear and sieved to 12.5–16 mm, appropriate for HV fragmentation. The HV fragmentation device used in this study is manufactured by ImpulsTec (Germany). It is made up of a vessel that serves as process chamber, a power generating unit and a control panel. It is suitable to generate HV pulses of 25 (to) 40 kV at frequencies of 1–4 Hz. The active working distance (electrode spacing) can be varied between 17.5 and 27 cm; the total number of pulses can be varied between 1 and 1000. Two thirds of the process chamber were filled with tap water, which is within the recommendations of the manufacturer. A typical workflow for the HV fragmentation test is as follows: Start-up of (initializing) the machine, including filling the vessel, positioning of the electrodes and adjustment of process parameters, Comminution and simultaneous recording of energy consumption as well as heat losses, Emptying the machine, sampling and data collection (measurement of sample weight and conductivity of the process water). For mechanical comminution a UG 300 from Andritz MeWa was used. This machine can be classified as a rotary shear belonging to the group of high-speed single-shaft shredders (cf. The power The electric power of the EHC machine is measured monophasically using a PCE-PA 8000 electrical tester from the PCE instruments company. Every two seconds the voltage and amperage is recorded. To calculate the total electric power input, the monophasic signal was converted using Eq. In case of the mechanical power of the UG 300 shredder, the torque In order to receive values for the comminution energy An example of a typical recorded power versus time function can be seen in Due to inefficiencies in comminution, a part of the energy is dissipated into heat. The amount of heat generated during a batch HV fragmentation test will cause a temperature increase in the components For the calculation, the mass The amount of energy which causes fracture is named effective comminution energy The dependence on throughput can be expressed by the specific energy input Knowing the heat losses during HV fragmentation tests, the efficiency of comminution can be calculated using Eq. This efficiency relates the heat losses to the energy introduced into the material and gives the percentage of energy causing fracture. Note, however, that it does not give the efficiency related to overall consumed electrical energy. After comminution, all samples were dried and sieved. For sieve analyses sieving machines by Haver & Boecker (EML 400 T) and FRITSCH (ANALYSETTE 3) have been used. Sieving time was set to 10 min for the electrode foils and 7 min for the other materials. For evaluation of the comminution result it is mandatory to determine the success of liberation next to the actual size reduction. By manual sorting of representative subsamples of the size fractions, the amount of liberated materials as well as composites can be classified. Based on this manual determination of the composition, the size distributions of the liberated material and the composites can be calculated. An example of such an analysis can be seen in The degree of liberation of the different materials was determined using various approaches. As there is no semi-automated method for liberation analysis of secondary raw materials available, like there is for minerals, the methods described below have been used. Galvanized plastics were sieved and manually sorted into liberation classes. Size classes of the electrode foils were analysed by ICP-OES (inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry) (iCAP6300, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and density measurement (AccuPyc II 1340, Micromeritics) to determine their composition. Size classes below 1 mm lack metal foils and are therefore classified as liberated material. In case of the CFCs, the determination of the fibre liberation was done based on the observation that liberated fibres will swim on top of the process water. Note that although the true density of carbon fibres is around 1.8 g/cm This equation slightly differs from the typical definition of a liberation degree, as it gives the total liberation of the material without distinction between the components. For calculation, the mass of composite particles was determined. This method tends to slightly overestimate the degree of liberation due to overlooked composite particles rated as liberated. The following sections will give an overview of the results from the high voltage fragmentations tests. Additionally, results from conventional comminution will be given and briefly set into context to HV comminution. The influence of frequency of HV pulses on the comminution product was exemplarily studied using galvanized plastics as feed material. The pre-crushed material of 1.1 kg was tested at a total of 500 pulses, using four different pulse rates from 1 to 4 Hz. In Due to different pulse rates but equal number of pulses the residence time and throughput differ between the tests. The higher the pulse rate the shorter is the residence time and the higher is the throughput of batch operation HV fragmentation. Regarding energy consumption, the test performed at a pulse rate of 1 Hz seems to differ from the other tests. The overall electrical energy input and the no-load energy is higher and thus the calculated stress energy is higher, too. An equal amount of energy is lost to thermal dissipation in all 4 experiments. This is due to the equal number of pulses applied to the process chamber heating up the sample, the vessel and–most importantly–the process water, which has a much higher thermal capacity than all other components. Both energetic efficiency and degree of liberation of the galvanized plastics seem to have no correlation to the frequency of HV pulses. As the overall applied energy for comminution is equal in all experiments, there is no difference in fracture events. With respect to the achieved liberation and throughput, the machine should be operated using a high frequency of pulses. The data published by To determine the influence of the number of pulses on the efficiency of comminution with respect to heat losses, samples of carbon fibre composites were tested. The batch-wise tests were performed using 625 g samples at a frequency of 2 Hz. The number of pulses was varied from 250 to 1000 in steps of 250. As the machine is working batch wise, the overall efficiency increases with increasing number of pulses due to the decreasing influence of energy needed to initialize the machine. However, energies for start-up and idle conditions are subtracted according to Eq. As described above, the amount of material within the vessel (filling) affects the efficiency of comminution. If the filling level is too high, untreated material will need to be recycled in the comminution circuit. On the other hand, low filling levels lead to increased wear inside the vessel. To investigate the influence of filling on the comminuted product, repeated experiments of batch-wise HV fragmentation have been performed. The tests were done on electrode foils with varying feed mass, using a frequency of 2 Hz and a total number of 500 pulses.  Based on the results shown in The results of HV fragmentation presented in the previous sections will now be compared to conventional comminution. This enables the assessment of the applicability of HV fragmentation replacing conventional liberation comminution in existing recycling plants. The evaluation is based on the guideline VDI-2225 described in the introduction section. The criteria for assessment used here are as follows: Investment costs, Operating costs, Maintenance costs, Availability, Throughput, Energy demand for a sufficient degree of liberation, Up-scaling.  Investment costs for HV fragmentation technology are very high compared to standard technology for mechanical comminution that has been used and optimized for decades. Due to high investment costs the tier for HV fragmentation was set to 0. This may change in future with ongoing optimization of the technology. Operating costs can hardly be forecasted for HV fragmentation as there are no pilot plants in operation which can provide the required data. The tier was therefore set to 0. Operating costs for mechanical comminution using a high-speed shredder can be estimated to 60…100 Making the assumption of a stable operation of electronics of a HV fragmentation device, maintenance costs have been set to 10% of the investment costs for both machines. Both machine concepts contain replaceable components, e.g. shredder tools or the electrodes and capacitors. Availability can be considered an important factor influencing the whole (comminution) process. To prevent a shutdown of the whole plant, storage options are typically planned. Thus, the weighting factor was set to 0.05. Because of the novelty of HV fragmentation, its availability in processing plants can hardly be forecasted and is therefore be set to 1. Throughput of both machines used in this study can be classified as relatively low. The optimum was set to >500 kg/h, which is the typical size of recycling plants. Dependent on the material, even small-size equipment can be economical, e.g. for high-value materials. Regarding energy demand for a sufficient liberation, the conventional mechanical comminution draws power of 5–50 kWh/t. This value has also been proven by previous studies ( Due to the fixed dimensions of vessel and machine used in this study, there are no options to up-scale the HV fragmentation. At present there are two vessels of different size available from the manufacturer. In this study the largest available vessel was used. The weighting factor for up-scaling was therefore set to 0. Machines for conventional comminution are available in various sizes. A small machine can therefore easily be replaced by a bigger one. In case of the UG 300 rotary shear used here, up-scaling by a factor of 7 is feasible. Overall mechanical comminution using the UG 300 machine achieves 67.5% of the defined optimum, whereas HV fragmentation just reaches 15%. This is no surprising result when comparing an established technology to a novel and less optimized one. Most of the studies mentioned above, including this one, have in common that they were performed using a pure fraction of material with defined characteristics. This is generally a requirement for the study of material breakage behaviour like selective fragmentation or liberation along phase boundaries. Nevertheless, it is pointless to compare these results to operation of existing recycling plants. A technical and economic feasibility study cannot be done based on most of these studies. In practice, such pure waste will only occur in the case of in-house recycling. Realistic input material for a recycling plant will be composed of fractions different in size, composition and mechanical properties. They will also comprise small amounts of hazardous or risky compounds that will put high requirements on operational safety. This is why larger quantities need to be analysed, taking into account the continuous development of consumer goods which will change the properties of input material. Due to the selective nature of fracture caused by HV pulses, liberation of structures occurs at a coarser grind than in conventional mechanical comminution and keeps integrity of the shape of components. For example, foils and flat pieces of ductile material cannot be reshaped to spherical particles by multiple bending, as is the case in grinding with comminution tools ( It needs to be stressed here that breakage, and thus liberation, occurs in accordance to the strength of cohesion of the material and the strength of bonds between the components of a composite. When the adhesion strength exceeds the cohesion, the component of lower strength will be fractured. This is a basic principle in comminution and will be true for HV fragmentation as well as conventional mechanical comminution. The shock waves generated by the HV pulses travel through the particles, similar to shock waves generated by comminution tools, and break bonds and solid phases based on this principle. Improved fracture along phase boundaries positively affects the quality of recycled materials, which has been proven by various authors ( The evaluation of the efficiency of a comminution machine is related to the throughput, the energy consumption, the product fineness (reduction ratio) and the degree of liberation. Product fineness will not be of interest here, as the HV fragmentation–by definition–will liberate structures rather than reduce particle sizes. Especially in case of secondary raw materials, liberation does not need to be linked to size reduction, as is the case for ores. A prominent example are laminated structures. They can be liberated without significantly reducing the size of the individual materials. Having a look on energy consumption, i.e. the total electrical energy input in Eq. About 75–85% of the energy are introduced into the process chamber by the HV discharges. The major part of this energy is transferred to latent heat, warming up the machine parts, feed material as well as the process water. Just 15–25% of the overall consumed energy is causing fragmentation as effective comminution energy (Eq. The mass-specific energy consumption has to be considered as an important factor for process scale-up. The specific energy required to grind material in rotary shears is related to the materials toughness and thickness. It typically is in the range of 5–50 kWh/t. Except for the data published on concrete, which can be classified as brittle material, energy demand of HV fragmentation is at least one order of magnitude higher than that for mechanical comminution (c.f. When different options for a process are compared, not only the main process, but also the supporting processes and the flow sheet need to be considered. Conventional plants for mechanical recycling of scrap and WEEEs are mostly based on dry processing technology. Changing the working principle of the comminution will therefore require additional investment in water treatment technology as well as costs for staff training. The water treatment consists of solid-liquid separation for the recovery of fines and a step to reduce the amount of dissolved ions to control the electric conductivity of the recycled process water. The more material is fractured the more ions affecting its conductivity are dissolved in water. Compared to tap water (176 µS/cm), the average conductivity of the process water increased considerably after 4 batch trials, by a factor of 5 in HV fragmentation of galvanized plastics (873 µS/cm). To ensure the pulses move through the material instead of the process water, the conductivity needs to be controlled by removing dissolved ions, e.g. by dilution or membrane filtration. As of now, high voltage fragmentation machines–except those used for pre-weakening–generally work in batch operation. Thus, staff is needed to fill and empty the vessel. Furthermore, storage of material before and after HV fragmentation must be planned accordingly, to receive output of the continuous primary crushing and to feed the downstream processing technology. Besides costs for water treatment and energy, this drives the overall costs of a processing including HV fragmentation up and makes it difficult to incorporate into existing recycling plants. At least one additional product, namely wet fines from solid-liquid separation, has to be managed by the recycling company. This product will not contain any valuables and therefore will cause additional costs for its disposal. Taking into account all the aspects discussed above, it would not be feasible to replace conventional mechanical comminution by HV fragmentation in an existing recycling plant, even if there was a machine of appropriate size. It is also not reasonable to design a small-scale recycling plant using HV fragmentation technology. Costs would be much higher compared to conventional mechanical comminution, lacking an evident increase of product quality. Based on the results of this study, HV fragmentation and conventional mechanical comminution are compared from a technical as well as an economical perspective. It is shown that HV fragmentation is technology which is capable of liberating complex structures. However, the results are not superior to conventional shredder technology. Pulse rate, number of pulses and the degree of filling were found to influence the result of fragmentation and the overall performance. These parameters need to be optimized with respect to the processed material. Interestingly, the results on energy efficiency have shown that a large percentage of the consumed energy is transferred into heat. The efficiency There are criteria which actually limit its application to lab-scale. The most important ones are throughput, energy consumption and investment costs. HV fragmentation will be a useful alternative to conventional comminution at industrial scale, if a machine is developed that works continuously at a scale of around 1 t/h. Such a machine is actually used for the pre-weakening of brittle material ( The authors gratefully like to acknowledge Lars Walch GmbH & Co. KG (Baudenbach/Germany) for giving access to their HV fragmentation laboratory and providing the electrode foils. The authors also like to acknowledge SAXONIA Galvanik GmbH (Halsbrücke/Germany) for providing the galvanized plastics and SRW metalfloat GmbH (Espenhain/Germany) for providing the CFCs used in this study. The assistance of Martha Gellner providing SEM images and of Thomas Buchwald doing proof-reading is gratefully acknowledged. D.H., L.W. and H.-G. J. designed and carried out the experiments. D.H., L.W. and T. L prepared the manuscript and analysed the data. H.-G.J. and U.P. conceived the research and reviewed the work. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.