The vertebrate skull vault forms almost entirely by the direct mineralisation of mesenchyme, without the formation of a cartilaginous template, a mechanism called membranous ossification. Dlx5 gene mutation leads to cranial dismorphogenesis which differs from the previously studied craniosynostosis syndromes [Development 126 (1999), 3795; Development 126 (1999), 3831]. In avians, little is known about the genetic regulation of cranial vault development. In this study, we analyze Dlx5 expression and regulation during skull formation in the chick embryo. We compare Dlx5 expression pattern with that of several genes involved in mouse cranial suture regulation. This provides an initial description of the expression in the developing skull of the genes encoding the secreted molecules BMP 2, BMP 4, BMP 7, the transmembrane FGF receptors FGFR 1, FGFR 2, FGFR 4, the transcription factors Msx1, Msx2, and Twist, as well as Goosecoid and the early membranous bone differentiation marker osteopontin. We show that Dlx5 is activated in proliferating osteoblast precursors, before osteoblast differentiation. High levels of Dlx5 transcripts are observed at the osteogenic fronts (OFs) and at the edges of the suture mesenchyme, but not in the suture itself. Dlx5 expression is initiated in areas where Bmp4 and Bmp7 genes become coexpressed. In a calvarial explant culture system, Dlx5 transcription is upregulated by BMPs and inhibited by the BMP-antagonist Noggin. In addition, FGF4 activates Bmp4 but not Bmp7 gene transcription and is not sufficient to induce ectopic Dlx5 expression in the immature calvarial mesenchyme. From these data, we propose a model for the regulatory network implicated in early steps of chick calvarial development.The vertebrate skull is formed by the precise assembly of bony and cartilaginous elements which protect the brain, its associated sensory organs, and the oral and nasal cavities, while expanding to allow and follow brain growth during embryonic and postnatal life. Close interactions between the developing skull and its underlying tissues, such as the dura mater, control the formation and differentiation state of the edges of the bony plates, at the level of the cranial sutures Recent studies in the mouse have identified gene activities implicated in the late stages of calvarial development, i.e., suture formation, maintenance, and obliteration (for a review, see  While the formation of the facial and hypobranchial skeleton has been extensively studied in avians, gene activities during skull vault development remain to be documented. In this study, we detail Chick ( For in toto analysis, the dorsal part of the skull was dissected from its ectoderm and treated as indicated in E8–E16 embryos were subjected to intracardiac injection of 1 mg/ml bromo-deoxy-uridine (BrdU) solution and incubated further for 2 h. Proliferating cells were detected by using an HRP-anti-BrdU monoclonal antibody detection kit (Amersham Life Sciences). E9 heads were collected into cold PBS. The lower jaw and the brain were removed but not the dura mater and the ectoderm. Cell aggregates were implanted into the mesenchyme of the presumptive calvaria as drawn in Recombinant human BMP2 was secreted by a quail cell line containing the defective retrovirus pCRNCM- The progress of differentiation of the skull was analysed in entire heads ( By in toto hybridisation on E9–E12 heads, the nasal and frontal bones were strongly We next analysed transverse sections from the E6–E16 nasal–frontal area ( We then compared The observation that In order to understand We focused first on BMP signalling and analysed the expression of the Looking for FGF expression during skull development, we did not detect We analysed the regulation of The requirement for BMP signalling for Since several FGF receptors were found in the areas where The DLX5 protein was shown to interact with MSX1 and MSX2 factors and to modulate target gene activity. We analysed Msx gene expression in the chick nasal–frontal area from E7 to E16. Our results provide a scheme of the gene expression changes during progressive osteoblast development ( Several signalling cascades have been described at the level of the mouse osteogenic fronts. We show here that BMP and FGF pathways activate a common target, BMP and FGF signalling have been implicated separately in suture development in the mouse. Here, we have shown that at earlier stages, in the yet undifferentiated head mesoderm, FGF4 was able to activate This study has focused on We thank T. Grammer, K. Liu, and J. Wallingford for their critical reading of the manuscript. We also thank Drs. Brickell, Castagnola, Delphini, Duprez, Harland, Houston, Kessel, Marcelle, Mahmood, and Richman for the generous gift of probes and other materials. We thank also C. Vincent for sharing