Toppling is a mode of slope instability that may occur in a wide range of layered or blocky rock masses. If this instability is caused by some natural or man-made external factors, it is termed a secondary toppling failure. One of the important modes of toppling instability is the slide-head-toppling failure. When a layer of soil or weak rock is overlaid by a blocky or layered rock mass, the combination of a toppling failure in the rock at the top and a circular sliding in the soil or weak rock in the bottom leads to this hybrid failure. The mechanism of this hybrid failure is extremely complicated and it may occur in some special geological conditions in civil engineering and mining projects. In this paper, the mechanisms of toppling failures, in general, and the mechanism of slide-head-toppling failure, in particular, are presented and described. Then, the outcomes of seven physical models, which were constructed with base friction materials and conducted under static loading conditions by a tilting table apparatus, are summarized to investigate this hybrid failure mechanism. Subsequently, a new step by step theoretical approach is proposed for assessment of this failure mode and a typical example is analyzed to better demonstrate the results. Finally, the results of the physical modeling are compared with the outcomes of the proposed theoretical method and an existing analytical approach. This comparison shows that there are acceptable agreements between the physical and analytical results. Hence, both proposed and existing analytical approaches can be used for the analysis of the slide-head-toppling slope failure.Toppling failure is one of the structurally controlled slope failure modes that is commonly observed in natural and excavated rock slopes. Some of the first reports about toppling of rock blocks were prepared by Müller. Different analytical and physical modeling approaches have been developed to study the toppling failure mechanisms so far. In 1976, Goodman and Bray categorized toppling failures into four principal types including flexural, blocky, blocky-flexural and secondary, and they presented an analytical method to analyze block toppling mode for the first time. Based on Goodman and Bray's classification, if any of these toppling failures is caused by some external factors, the result will be a secondary toppling failure. Secondary toppling failures have diverse and complex mechanisms and in the literature, many papers and technical reports present physical, numerical, and analytical examinations of these failures. A slide-head-toppling failure is a complex failure that occurs when the upper part of a slope topples and pushes the underlying soil mass or weak rock in the toe of the slope and causes a circular sliding failure. Alejano et al. studied a real case study of slide-head-toppling slope failure in an open pit mine in Spain (see In this paper, the slide-head-toppling failure mechanism is evaluated with some physical modeling and a new analytical solution proposed for its stability analysis. When a slope is composed of both weak and competent rock masses, the failure mechanism can be a combination of structurally-controlled and strength-controlled failures. Depending on the location of the weak and competent rocks occurring in the slope, the failure mechanism can be different. In cases where a weak rock or soil in the lower part of the slope (including the toe) is overlaid by a competent and steeply layered rock in the upper part, the slope is prone to a combined instability, which is referred to as slide-head-toppling failure. This hybrid failure mode includes a circular slide failure in the toe of the slope and a toppling failure in the upper part of the slope. In the present study, the slide-head-toppling failure is examined through both physical and analytical modeling and the outcomes of these models are compared to those based on existing analytical techniques. Physical modeling is a reliable approach to validate the outcomes of analytical and numerical modeling and to determine the mechanisms of complex failures in geotechnical engineering. A tilting table, centrifuge apparatus, base friction table and temporary support are conventional devices that are usually used for physical modeling in geotechnical engineering. When using a tilting table and temporary support, no external extra force is inserted to the physical model and it must fail just under gravity load. Hence, the model should be large enough to fail under its own weight. In comparison, in the centrifuge and base friction approaches, weight is modeled with centrifugal and friction forces. As a result the model may be relatively small. As mentioned in the introduction section, only main toppling failures and a few secondary toppling modes have been physically modeled in laboratories so far In physical modeling when using a tilting table and temporary support the model must fail under its natural weight, therefore selecting suitable raw materials to construct the models is crucial. In this research, base friction material, which mainly consisted of BaSo After measuring the engineering properties of raw materials, the slide-head-toppling failure model was built on an existing tilting table apparatus ( To build the models, the first step was to construct the upper part of the slope with solid blocks. Since this part may have potential of blocky, flexural or block-flexure failures, each mode was investigated separately by some special prototypes. For the flexural toppling mode, the rock mass was built with continuous solid blocks. In comparison, blocky models were constructed with solid blocks that had a set of artificial cross-joints placed in a way that overall toppling failure plane would be at an angle of 20° to the tilting table. For block-flexure toppling mode, continuous blocks and those with cross-joints were used interchangeably. The dip of overall toppling failure plane was selected to be 20° in this model as well. The maximum height of the blocks in this research was restricted to 26 cm due to some movement and handling limitations. Furthermore, initial numerical modeling proved that models that were smaller than 15 cm would be stable against flexural toppling mode even under 90° (dip of slope face). Hence, the heights of all models were selected to be between 20 cm and 30 cm. In addition, the thickness of all solid blocks was designated to be 5 cm as they were able to be built with one mold. After building the upper part of the prototype, a uniform layer of powder was poured at the toe of the slope with a feeder that was filled with the powder and fixed at the height of 10 cm from the box's floor. Then, the powder was compressed and shaped layer by layer to form the toe of the slope. Once the slope was built, the table was titled at a constant rate of 1° per minute. At this rate, the failure mechanism can be observed and recorded easily. In all of the experiments, as the dip of the tilting plane increased, some tension cracks appeared between the rock columns in the upper part of the model. Then, some blocks separated from others completely and pushed the underneath continuous mass, at the toe of the model. In the next stages, some horizontal shear displacements occurred on the face of slope. Finally, a roughly circular sliding occurred in the continuous mass around the toe of the slope that was followed by the sudden toppling of the upper blocks. In all tests, the tilting table was stopped after the instability and geometric parameters of models were measured and recorded after the tests. The research shows that the sliding surface in the toes of the slope is semi-circular and starts from final solid block, which has a potential of toppling failure to the tip of the slope. Furthermore, measurements prove that basal planes of blocky and block-flexure models match the surface of the cross-joints. Hence, in these failure modes, the angle between the plane and the normal to discontinuities was about 20°. In comparison, the basal planes of the flexural toppling modes are not constant and must be measured in every test. A diagram of the geometric parameters during the tests for all physical models is shown in In slide-head-toppling failure, both rock and soil masses are affected by the stability of the slope. Therefore, the reaction force between these elements must be determined and transferred to the toe of the slope for further calculations. In this study, the step by step approaches, which were initially presented by Goodman-Bray Depending on the sign of this force, one of the following states may occur: If the interaction force is zero or negative, the upper part of the rock mass will be at the point of equilibrium or will be stable against toppling failures, respectively, and the soil mass at the toe of the slope must be analyzed under its own weight. Hence, the slope does not have a potential for slide-head-toppling failure. If the interaction force is positive, the upper part of the rock mass motivates the lower part soil mass and slope, which has a potential for slide-head-toppling failure. Hence, the reaction force must be transferred to the lower part, weak material, and contributes to the circular sliding failure. In this circumstances, the magnitude and point of application of the interaction force must be computed using the step by step scheme. Since the force is a distributed load, it should be spread over the surface of the contact interface between weak and competent rock. Even though the exact profile of the distributed load is not clear, research shows that a triangular pressure distribution may be an appropriate approach. For the analysis of the sliding mass, the failure zone is divided into one approximately triangular slice and several vertical slices as shown in A free body diagram and geometry of this slice is presented in Provided that this slice is in the limit equilibrium condition, the following relation can be written between the normal and shear forces acting on the slice bottom according to the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion: If In addition, based on the equation of moment equilibrium with respect to the middle point of the base of this slice, the following relation can be found: Therefore, the point application of The limit equilibrium equations of forces for this slice also can be written according to the free body diagram presented in If we assume that these slices are in the limit equilibrium condition and follow the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, for this slice Furthermore, according to limit equilibrium equation of moment, application point of determined as follows: To compute the inter-slice forces in the sliding mass, firstly, a clipped half-sine function is assumed for The proposed theoretical method uses a step by step scheme to calculate the inter-slice and inter-column forces and to analyze a slope for slide-head-toppling failure. Since this process is very time consuming if it is performed manually, the method was therefore coded into a computer program to simplify the stability analysis of rock slopes against failure. This program receives the specifications of the slope from the user, performs all the calculations associated with the proposed method, it also finds the optimum sliding surface and displays all geometric information and forces acting on the rock blocks and soil slices. To assess the performance of the proposed theoretical method and the computer program, a typical example was analyzed with this code ( Results of analyses of the example against slide-head-toppling failure by the proposed method are presented on the right side of To find the optimum sliding surface in the soil mass, several surfaces had to be analyzed. Measurements and observations of physical modeling showed that the surface has a semi-circular shape which passes through the toe of the slope. Therefore, this code analyzes some surfaces that start from the last rock column and finish at the toe of slope as shown in To validate the proposed theoretical method, its outcomes were compared with the results of physical models described in Alejano et al. presented a combined method to evaluate a slide-head-toppling failure which had occurred in a weak clay and a layered sandstone rock mass in Spain ( In previous sections, geometric specifications of the physical models were determined with both the proposed and Alejano et al.’s theoretical methods. Hence, the errors of these approaches can be computed by comparing these parameters (in Among these parameters, since tilting table of the physical models had a varying inclination, the angle of inclination at the moment of failure was selected for more evaluation and is examined in this section. In In this paper, slide-head-toppling failure was studied through both physical and analytical modeling. This hybride slope failure may occur when a toppling failure at the upper part of the slope leads to a semi-circular sliding failure at the toe of the slope. Based on this failure mechanism a new analytical model was presented for the analysis of slope instability. In the proposed model the force acting to the soil mass from rock blocks is first computed by limit equilibrium method. Then, the force is applied to the soil slices at the toe of the slope to determine its stability against sliding failure. The final outcomes of this research can be summarized as follows. Base friction powder is a suitable material for physical modeling of hybrid slope failures. The experiments showed that a blocky or layered rock mass can motivate a continuous soil mass and leads to a slide-head-toppling failure. An analytical solution is one of the most appropriate methods for analysis of the slide-head-toppling failure. Comparison between outcomes of the developed analytical method in this paper, Alejano et al.’s analytical solution, and physical modeling indicates that there are reasonable errors (less than 10%) between analytical and physical modeling. Both existing and presented analytical methods can be used for analysis of slide-head toppling failure. The authors express their sincere thanks to Professor Ömer Aydan from Ryukyu University, Ryukyu, Japan for his invaluable help and guidance throughout this research. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 