A special approach to evaluation of separation performance is necessary for scattered response data caused by fluctuation of the composition of the feed α and operation variables. The fluctuations resulting from variation of α can be significantly reduced by using selected, insensitive to changes of α, separation plots and correlation lines aiming at the start and finish points of the upgrading plot. When data of two experimental series are scattered but not overlapped, parameters of the correlation lines can be used for their comparison. When the data are scattered and overlapped, the use of appropriate confidence levels lines is recommended for comparison purpose. Then, the superiority of one series of data over another can be judged from the difference between their correlation and confidence lines. The correlation lines and non-overlapping confidence level lines should be plotted for different feed compositions in insensitive-to-α plots since the result of comparison may depend on parameters, that is criterion, of the comparison.Typical separation experiments provide several data points. The results, when presented in a graphical form, tend to form either smooth straight lines ( Typical evaluation of scattered data relies on plotting regression lines. When two scattered series of data form overlapping clouds, their comparison becomes difficult. There is no a widely accepted method presently available for such a case and the result of comparison may depend on the procedure used for it. The goal of this paper is to describe a procedure of evaluation and comparison of data for scattered results due to the feed quality and operation parameters variation. A procedure of comparing separation results when experimental points are scattered will be discussed using the data of The data of Mekherjee and Chandra, approximated with straight lines, provided the following relations ( The approach used by The experimental data form a curve having a slope entirely different from that predicted from the Henry plot ( A much better way to analyze the separation results is using upgrading curves, which axes are insensitive to variation of The separation data for coal published by The shape of the cloud of points for each plot is different because the graph not only relies on different parameters but also differently takes into account the variation of The linear correlation coefficients Other one-adjustable parameter type equations, for instance, The use of the Fuerstenau plot for the coal flotation data of To solve this problem, we have to sacrifice some accuracy of the comparison by adopting the same equation, having one adjustable constant, for both considered here series of experiments. To keep the accuracy of comparison at a reasonable level, we will use an additional statistical parameter called the confidence level. The position of the separation line (value of the adjustable constant), correlation coefficient and the confidence level should provide the means for a simplified comparison of performance potentials of frothers A and B. The lines should be approximated with the best fitting curves. Unfortunately, most of the commercial mathematical programs calculate the confidence levels only for linear approximations of scattered data. Therefore, we will use the linear approach instead of using a curve. The Fuerstenau curve is very useful for the considered here separation results apparently because it has axes insensitive to feed quality variation and somehow is able to compensate the variation of It was demonstrated in the paper that a special approach is needed for analysis of separation results when the composition of the feed and operation variables fluctuate, causing scattering of the separation response. The fluctuations, caused by a variation of For comparison of two series of data, when the data points are scattered but do not overlap, the parameters of correlation lines can be used. One adjustable parameter type correlation is recommend because then the comparison is simple. When the data points are scattered and overlap, additional statistical parameters are needed. It was proposed here to use the confidence level. The superiority of one series of data oven another can be judged from the difference between their correlation and confidence lines (parameters). The correlation lines and confidence level lines should be plotted in different In conclusion, it can be said that to evaluate and compare two or more sets of experimental data, when the data are scattered due to variation of the feed quality and changes in operation variables, the following steps should be followed: Choose a separation parameter (recovery, yield, content, etc.) that is important to you, which will play a role of the criterion of comparison. Select a feed-quality-insensitive separation plot based on two separation parameters including the chosen parameter. Plot the separation data for the two (or more) sets of data using values based on measured separation parameters applying appropriate mass balance equations. Approximate the data points (each set separately) with carefully chosen mathematical equation providing a high correlation coefficient. The lines should originate from the common point for no and ideal separation. Plot the confidence level lines for the compared two data sets in such a way that they do not overlap. The parameters of the applied equation, correlation coefficients and confidence level values tell, in a statistical manner, how much one set of data is better than another.