In this study four irons were casted with different chromium and vanadium contents: 2.66% Cr, 5.01% Cr, 2.51% V and 5.19% V. Their microstructure is composed of: ledeburite, graphite and M3C carbides (cementite). Pin-abrasion tests were carried out using fixed alumina abrasive grains at different loads: 1, 2, 4.6 and 10N. The wear surface and the abrasive paper were examined by scanning electron microscopy for identifying the wear micromechanism. The results reveal that the mass loss increased with the load increase, and the effect of the percentage of chromium on mass loss is inverted when the load is increased from 4.6 to 10N; for 4.6N the mass loss decreased when the chromium percentage was increased from 2.66% to 5.01%. Nevertheless, for 10N the mass loss increased when the chromium percentage was increased. The worn surfaces of the materials tested at 1N show microcutting caused by the abrasive tip that produces continuous microchips. The worn surfaces and the abrasive paper tested at 10N show continuous microchips and brittle debris. The results show that high pressures produce a brittle wear mechanism and low pressures produce a more ductile wear micromechanism, for this, the applied pressure defines the dependence between the wear resistance and wear micromechanism.Abrasive wear is a problem present extensively in mining and mineral processing, metal working industries among other applications. In cast iron with cementite and graphite the microstructural areas of white solidification and grey solidification result from different solidification rates. Graphite is more easily nucleated than cementite and forms directly from the melt In previous works bulk cementite was fabricated combining mechanical alloying with spark plasma sintering, in order to measure its mechanical properties and abrasive resistance The microstructure of the cast irons was examined by optical microscopy. Microstructural investigations were carried out on the cross-sections of the cylindrical samples, after polishing and etching with Villela's reagent. The wear samples of 20  The volume fraction of cementite was measured by optical microscopy at a magnification of 100× using Leica software ( Abrasive wear tests were carried out using the equipment PLINT TE79 of type pin (3 Four cast irons with different chromium and vanadium contents were casted: 2.66% Cr, 5.01% Cr, 2.51% V and 5.19% V. The cementite was analyzed by microchemical analysis (EDS), presenting respectively: 5.1% Cr, 9.2% Cr, 4.0% V and 4.5% V.   The results demonstrate that the effect of the percentage of chromium on mass loss is inverted when the load increases from 4.6 to 10 The fracture toughness of the carbides was determined using an indentation technique. A load of 2.9 The wear surface and the abrasive paper were examined by scanning electron microscopy for identifying the wear micromechanism.  These results show that at lower applied pressures the wear micromechanism for the cast iron was ductile, by which continuous microchips are formed. In this situation the hardest cast iron has better wear performance. Yet, at a higher pressure, the wear mechanism for the cast iron was brittle, by which debris is formed, in this situation the hardest cast iron has poorer wear performance. According to Sasaki et al. An increase of the alloy element (Cr and V) produced variations of the microstructure, mainly an increase in size and volume fraction of the cementite, in detriment of ledeburite phase. Additionally, the hardness increase, which is due to the high quantity of primary cementite, produced a less tough material, because cementite is a brittle phase (see This behavior in the abrasion test has parallels with the indentation test used for fracture toughness measurement. Hardness tests with 1  In the pin-abrasion test at 1 and 2 The worn surfaces at 1 Carbide cracking is associated to its orientation in respect to the wear direction. For cast iron with 5.01% Cr, when the long axis of the carbide is perpendicular to the wear direction, no evidence of cracks was found. Yet, when the long axis of the carbide is parallel or inclined to the wear direction it presents cracks. The authors acknowledge to the CNPq - The Brazilian Research and Development Council through Project no. CT-FVA/CNPq 01/2003 and no. 141176/2006-7.