Cuboid dislocations are rare midfoot injuries that usually occur in the setting of high-energy trauma. Diagnosis can be challenging and optimal treatment remains unknown. This case report and review aims to summarize the recent literature on this topic.Cuboid dislocations are exceedingly rare injuries seen in isolation or associated with other midfoot trauma such as Lisfranc injuries. They are often a result of high-energy or crush injuries. With only case reports cited in the literature, the optimal surgical treatment of pancuboid dislocation is unclear ( A 47-year-old healthy female was taken to a local emergency department after a motor vehicle collision in which she was a restrained driver. She sustained an isolated crush injury to the right foot with immediate pain and swelling throughout her midfoot. Physical examination demonstrated a diffusely swollen midfoot with intact skin and significant dorsal and plantar ecchymosis. Sensation was intact to light touch throughout the foot, and vascular examination demonstrated palpable dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses. Initial standard 3-view plain-film imaging of the foot demonstrated subtle diastasis between the first and second tarsometatarsal (TMT) joints consistent with a Lisfranc injury, fracture at the base of the second and third metatarsal bases, and a possible fracture of the cuboid seen on the anteroposterior view ( After consultation, the patient underwent surgical fixation 7 days postinjury. The first and second TMT joints underwent open reduction and internal fixation using a bridge-plate technique via a dorsomedial approach to address the Lisfranc injury with concomitant intercuneiform instability noted intraoperatively and addressed with a intercunieform screw. Subsequently, a dorsolateral longitudinal incision centered over the cuboid was performed to allow exposure to ( Postoperatively, the patient was non-weightbearing in a splint and transitioned to a protective boot at her 2-week postoperative visit. At the 6-week postoperative visit, pins were removed, new radiographs were taken, and she was progressed to touchdown weightbearing ( Given the cuboid's strong surrounding ligamentous attachments and saddle-shaped articulations, dislocation and fracture dislocations of the cuboid are rare traumatic midfoot injuries described infrequently in the literature ( The mechanism of cuboid dislocation was proposed by Drummond and Hastings ( The optimal method of open surgical treatment remains unknown because of the paucity of reported cases and absence of comparative studies in the literature. Some authors prefer rigid internal fixation with plates and screws, whereas others have used temporary percutaneous pin fixation after open reduction to minimize joint damage and stiffness ( In conclusion, cuboid dislocations may be seen in isolation or in the setting of other midfoot injury. They can often be overlooked on initial plain radiographs of the injured foot, leading to a delay in diagnosis and treatment and considerable morbidity. There is currently no consensus in the literature regarding the optimum type of fixation (rigid internal or temporary percutaneous) of cuboid dislocation and fracture dislocations. Further biomechanical and clinical outcome studies are needed to determine how to maximize functional outcomes after these significant midfoot injuries.