An investigation was made into functionalized cellulose microfibers produced from wood chemical pulp with a new method that combines both mechanical and chemical modifications. Dialdehyde cellulose (DAC) microfibers were obtained by reactive milling, i.e. simultaneous cellulose pulp micronization with a wet stirred media mill and oxidation by sodium periodate. Milling significantly enhanced the pulp reactivity towards the periodate oxidation by reducing crystallinity and increasing the specific surface area of cellulose. DAC microfibers with a high aspect ratio and aldehyde content of 0.26mmol/g were obtained already after the first 15min of milling. This new way to simultaneously modify cellulose material mechanically and chemically offers an effective route to produce highly functionalized cellulose microfibers within short reaction times and with mild conditions. High temperature and use of metal salt as cellulose activator further enhanced the efficiency of oxidation during milling.Cellulose is one of the most potential raw material to replace current oil-based and non-renewable products and for developing novel biomass-based materials. In particular, cellulose micro- and nanofibers, which cover a variety of particles from microfibers and microfibrils to nano-sized whiskers, are considered to be amongst the most promising materials for this purpose ( The feasibility of these cellulose particles for various applications can be further improved by various chemical derivatizations such as esterification ( Periodate is able to oxidize vicinal hydroxyl groups of cellulose at positions 2 and 3 to aldehyde groups, simultaneously breaking the corresponding carbon–carbon bond of the glucopyranose ring in order to obtain 2,3-dialdehyde cellulose (DAC). The aldehyde groups of DAC in turn have high reactivity towards further modification such as Schiff base reaction ( The low reactivity of cellulose is one of the key-problems in periodate oxidation reaction ( We have earlier shown that both chemical and mechanical activations can be used to increase the reactivity of cellulose pulp fibers in the periodate oxidation reaction. The use of metal salts and high temperature (>55 Bleached birch ( All the chemicals used for oxidation (NaIO Reactive milling, i.e. simultaneous oxidation and micronization of wood pulp fibers, was conducted with a horizontal agitated laboratory pearl mill (Hosokawa Alpine AHM 90). The mill consisted of a polyurethane-covered milling chamber (1.1 Metal salt (LiCl and CaCl Reference periodate oxidations were performed in a beaker (non-milled conditions) in a similar way as reported previously ( The dialdehyde content of the oxidized celluloses was determined by an oxime reaction ( FESEM (Zeiss ULTRA plus) images were taken from the freeze-dried and sputter coated (Pd) sample drops placed on a glass microscope slide. The accelerating voltage during imaging was 5 The average particle sizes of the dialdehyde microfibers were determined with a laser diffractometer (Beckman Coulter LS 13 320) using a measuring range of 0.04–2000 The specific surface areas were measured using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method based on N The average degree of polymerization (DP) of cellulose in the milled samples (without oxidation) was evaluated from the limiting viscosity, measured in cupriethylenediamine (CED) solution according to the ISO 5351 standard. The limiting viscosity values were converted to DP using Eq. The crystallinity of the cellulose after oxidation and milling was analyzed by wide angle X-ray diffractometry (WAXD). Measurements were conducted with a Siemens D5000 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation ( FTIR spectra of the DAC and oxime derivate of DAC were recorded using a Bruker FTIR spectrometer. The sample of DAC was prepared by weighing out 2 Simultaneous periodate oxidation and wet stirred media milling was used to convert the wood cellulose pulp to dialdehyde cellulose. Pulp fibers were subjected to a large number of stress events and high stress intensity during pearl milling by the stirring function of the grinding media, which collided randomly with the pulp material. The original hypothesis was that this mechanochemical modification of wood pulp would create new cellulose surfaces, a loose cellulose crystal structure and disintegrate the hierarchical structure of fibers resulting in increased reactivity of cellulose, which is hindered by the rigid hydrogen bond network of cellulose. The morphology of samples obtained by milling-induced oxidation was studied using FESEM. Typical FESEM micrographs of the original pulp fiber and sample obtained by milling-induced oxidation are shown in The frayed surface structure of the DAC microfibers is probably related to the attachment of minuscule particles to the surfaces during sample pretreatment, use of dried cellulose pulp ( The average volume statistical particle sizes, in terms of the equivalent sphere diameter of microfibers measured by a laser diffractometer, are presented in The particle size results as well as FESEM images clearly show that the periodate oxidation promoted micronization of pulp as the size of reference pulp that was milled without oxidants was larger than samples from the milling-induced oxidation. Previously  The DPs of the cellulose were measured only from the microfibers that were generated without oxidation, because dialdehyde cellulose degrades in cupriethylenediamine (CED) solution used in the DP analysis ( The crystal structure of microfibers was evaluated by WAXD (  At higher temperatures, the aldehyde content was also significantly improved by milling-induced oxidation compared to corresponding non-milled oxidations, but not as dramatically as at room temperature. The improvements obtained by milling were in the range of 11–41%. Up to 15% cellulose AGUs were oxidized to corresponding dialdehyde units after 3 With long reaction times (>0.5 One of the main reasons for the promoting effect of milling on cellulose reactivity is most likely the notable decrease in the crystallinity of cellulose during micronization, as seen in Our previous studies have shown that metal salts, such as CaCl Therefore, we also conducted milling-induced periodate oxidations using CaCl Highly functionalized DAC microfibers were effectively produced by wet stirred media reactive milling, i.e. simultaneous micronization and periodate oxidation of cellulose wood pulp in a pearl mill. Reactive milling notably improved pulp reactivity towards oxidation and resulted in dialdehyde microfibers with a high aspect ratio. The high reactivity of cellulose in the milling-induced oxidations was attributed to the accessibility of free hydroxyl groups due to reduction of cellulose crystallinity, decreases in DP, and the increase in specific surface area of cellulose pulp due to particle size reduction. High temperature and the use of metal salts can further promoted oxidation reaction. This work was carried out as part of the Future Biorefinery Program of Forestcluster Ltd. We would like to thank VTT Espoo for their pulp analysis. Kaija Aura-Miettilä is gratefully acknowledged for her kind assistance in elemental analyses.