The present study investigates the working principle upon the accelerating-retarding effect of triethanolamine dosage on the initial setting time of hydrated cement. We have conducted atomistic simulation to probe the molecular interactions between triethanolamine and dissolved ions of hydrated cement and have performed experiment to examine the effect of triethanolamine upon cement hydration. It is found that the accelerating-retarding effect of triethanolamine on the initial setting time is caused by the different intensity of formed ettringite, which is governed by the triethanolamine dosage. This finding provides the piece of insight information on the roles of triethanolamine and ettringite formation upon the initial setting time.In applications of cement based materials, initial setting time is the main parameter governing the operation schedule for transporting, placing, consolidating and finishing processes of concrete Triethanolamine (TEA) is the main chemical used as cement additive with multi functions as grinding aid during cement comminution process and setting time regulator for cement hydrations. This couple function is the main advantage from using TEA in addition to the relatively small dosage as well as the alkali and chloride free features. A unique characteristic of TEA is that it can either accelerate or retard cement hydration toward initial setting time depending on the dosage used Research studies have been performed to examine the effects of TEA on hydration of cement. Strong accelerating effect on initial setting time caused by relatively high dosages of TEA has been discussed and ascribed to ettringite formation during accelerated tricalcium aluminate (C The aim of present study is to gain a comprehensive insight of TEA in regulating the initial setting time of hydrated cement. In particular, this study provides the working principle for the accelerating-retarding effects toward the initial setting time of cement hydration in the presence of TEA. Noteworthy, the found working principle provides the information on the technique to control the cement hydration toward the initial setting time. The scope of the present study is the examination of cement hydration with respect to the effect of TEA with different dosages on initial setting time. Herein, we involve both experiments and atomistic simulation. On one hand, we firstly performed the tests to find accelerating and retarding effects of TEA dosages on initial setting time of hydrated cement. Subsequently, exothermic temperature of hydrated cement was monitored to examine the variation in cement hydration with different dosages of TEA. Next, examination on the change in dissolution and precipitation of hydrated cement with TEA was investigated through Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). On the other hand, atomistic simulation is conducted to probe the interactions between TEA molecules with dissolved ions of hydrated cement. Finally, based on the results from experiments and atomistic simulation, we discover the working principle for the effects of TEA dosages on the initial setting time. Materials used in this study were ASTM Mixing of cement paste followed the procedure of ASTM Test on initial setting time followed the procedure in ASTM Throughout the present study, the nomenclature for specimen of cement paste is in the form of abbreviation of cement paste (CP) and the respective TEA dosage in ppm by weight of cement, Atomistic simulation techniques are powerful to probe cement hydration at the nanoscale At the beginning of cement hydration, complex chemical reactions occur, mainly involving C It is inferred that the Al(OH) The feasibility for spontaneous reaction of Eq. Firstly, accelerated C The DFT calculations reveal the electron structures of the reactants and compute the energy difference for evaluating the spontaneity of the chemical reaction in Eq. The total energy of each component in chemical reaction in Eq. Eq. The same trend for the effects of TEA dosages on initial setting time are found from previous studies In accordance to the objective of present study, five specimens CP-0, CP-50, CP-1000, CP-2000 and CP-4000 were selected for further examination on their cement hydration. Specimen CP-0 was regarded as control. The other four specimens were used to study the effects of TEA dosages on cement hydration where initial setting time is lightly accelerated ( Measurement on exothermic temperature on specimens CP-0, CP-50, CP-200, CP-2000 and CP-4000 was performed to examine the change in reaction of cement hydration with TEA. The results are shown in In ordinary cement represented by specimen CP-0, the initial setting time occurs at early acceleration period which the start of it is defined by the length of induction period (period of slow reaction) TEA changes the cement hydration as can be observed from the curves of exothermic temperatures in The intense first peak in exothermic temperature curves and the fast initial settings of specimens CP-2000 and CP-4000 are similar to the concept of “flash setting”. Flash setting refers to a special setting behavior in which aluminate hydrates are formed rapidly and silicate phase hydration is retarded FTIR was utilized to investigate the insight changes in the precipitation of cement hydration process with TEA. FTIR spectrums of non-hydrated cement particles, distilled water and TEA solutions with 10% and 85% concentrations are shown in In the spectrum of hydrated specimens, the band 660 The intensity of early age C-S-H band at 660 TGA was performed to obtain more quantitative information on the precipitates formed at the time of initial setting time. Thermogravimetric (TG) curves are shown in Atomistic simulation suggests the spontaneous reaction between TEA and Al(OH) Because of the relatively small dosage of TEA (only up to 4000 The TEA dosage governs the quantity of TEA-ettringite being formed, which subsequently influences the following cement hydration process (up to the time of initial setting) including the C The time of initial setting of specimen CP-0 (ordinary hydrated cement) is the moment when the growths of hydration products surrounding cement particles start colliding Specimen CP-50 represents cement paste where TEA lightly accelerates the initial setting time. This lightly accelerating effect of TEA can be explained from the shorter induction period in specimen CP-50 than that in specimen CP-0. The shorter induction period in specimen CP-50 can be interpreted as the effect from the formation of TEA-ettringite on the surface of C Specimen CP-200 corresponds the cement paste where TEA retards the initial setting time. Similar to the case of specimen CP-50, the retardation in initial setting time of specimen CP-200 can be explained from the length of induction period. Induction period in specimen CP-200 is longer. The more quantity of TEA-ettringite in specimen CP-200 than in specimen CP-50 can explain such longer induction period. The quantity of TEA-ettringite in specimen CP-200 is adequate to grow not only over C Strong acceleration effect of TEA on initial setting time occurs in specimens CP-2000 and CP-4000. Exothermic temperature curves of specimens CP-2000 and CP-4000 are largely deviate from those of specimens CP-0, CP-50 and CP-200. Noticeable changes are in terms of significant higher intensities of the first peaks, long induction periods and prolonged starts of acceleration periods. Initial setting time of specimens CP-2000 and CP-4000 coincides the period of the first peak, which correspond to C In this study, we have performed experiments and molecular simulation for the discovery of working principle to explain the accelerating-retarding effects of TEA dosage on initial setting time of hydrated cement. TEA initially influences C Acceleration of initial setting time of hydrated cement with considered low dosage of TEA has the acceleration period that starts earlier and with lower quantity of ettringite. These observations suggest the relatively small quantity of TEA-ettringite rapidly grows on C The working principle discovered in this study regarding the accelerating-retarding effects on initial setting time is not merely applicable to TEA but also in general to others chemical accelerating the hydration of C All the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest in this research. This research is supported by Strategic Research Grants (project# 7000540 and 7004364) and the internal matching grant (project# 9678100) by