Comminution ‘08, the 5th MEI Conference on comminution was the best attended, with 157 delegates representing 31 countries gathering at the picturesque Falmouth Beach Resort Hotel, in Cornwall, UK, June 17–20, 2008. A couple of warm sunny days showed off the beautiful scenery at its best. The social events took advantage of the coastal path, the stunning Trebah gardens, and a final visit to the old tin mines (for the rain-coated hardy ones!). The single session in a smallish venue, with extended breaks promoted a lot of interaction, and this received favourable comment from the delegates. Comminution ‘08 was held over 4 Fundamental breakage understanding and modelling received a lot of coverage, which is a good sign for long-term development in the industry. This was balanced by the empirical modelling and industrial case studies, which showed the applied nature of many in the audience. The importance of media selection influencing grinding efficiency and wear was highlighted in the fine grinding theme, and it is good to see some methodical testing processes being applied and fundamental correlations being developed. This becomes ever-more critical as large fine grinding mills are moved to coarser main stream grinding, and suffer high gross wear rates. Viscosity/rheology issues were raised a number of times, especially in relation to fine grinding, and clearly this is an area that should be addressed in future conferences. The incorporation of HPGR into circuits to replace SAG milling received a lot of coverage, and it was good to see the total cost being addressed, and issues relating to simplifying their inclusion in circuits, to reduce dry screening and excessive conveying along with the associated dust issues, energy costs, and maintenance costs and reliability. Selected papers from the event have been peer-reviewed for this special Comminution ‘08 issue of Seven major companies provided corporate support for the event: JKTech Magotteaux Pangea International PMT-Jetmill Saint-Gobain Zirpro Sigmund Lindner Xstrata Technology Details of the programme, photographs, and the delegate list can be obtained at The 6th Comminution conference is scheduled for April 2010 in Cape Town, and judging by the buzz at this event and the positive feedback, promises to be unmissable!