In this simulation model, three dimensional temperature fields for the wide-band laser cladding are performed by means of the finite element analysis in heat conduction, operating conditions and technical parameters. Some hypotheses and simplifications are reasonably made using commercial finite element analysis software in this paper. The results show that it is helpful to form a bioceramic coating that includes hydroxyapatite in the process of laser cladding with technical parameters optimized.A high-energy laser beam is used to clad bioceramic powder preset on or fed synchronously into the surface of the base metal in the technology of cladding bioceramics. This technology creates a ceramic composite coating with medical bioactivity. By using the wide-band laser cladding, an advanced processing technology, and the method of gradient design, a ceramic composite coating with bioactivity can be prepared gradiently on the surface of titanium alloy. Hence the interfacial bonding strength between the ceramic coating and metallic substrate heightens, and the biocompatibility of medical metallic materials also improves. Giving this process great potential in medical and clinical applications. The width of the cladding band is increased in the wide-band mode. The maximum surface temperature of the molten bath changes quickly due to fast scanning of the laser beam. This brings a reduction of the temperature gradient in the central area of the molten bath and reduced sensitivity to cracking. Therefore, apparent quality is improved. At the same time, the surface-tension field formed by the temperature gradient at the molten bath rim can play the role of stirring the molten mass to bring about a homogeneous distribution of the alloy elements A Ti The device used for the laser cladding includes a TJ-HL-5000 5KWCO Taking the results obtained from the investigation for thermodynamics and dynamics of cladding gradient bioceramic coating by the wide-band laser as a guide, the technical parameters for wide-band laser cladding optimized through the orthogonal test are: output power A commercial finite element analysis software was used to establish a mathematical model for 3-D temperature fields on a titanium alloy substrate, as shown in Because laser cladding is a thermal current output mode for small areas with high-speed heating and uneven distribution, the preset coating powder is heat-conducted as a porous and unsubstantial material. Therefore, the mathematical simulation for the temperature field in the experiment makes the following hypotheses The size of the coating powder material is small (0.5 The classical theory of heat conduction is applicable to the interaction between the laser and the material. It is isotropic within each layer of the material, so the change in density caused by temperature can be ignored. Gaseous substances do not exert an influence on the thermal transmission of the incident laser. The surface of the whole object studied is regarded as a plane. In laser radiation, the time taken for the laser to pass over the focus is negligible. Because the time for the laser to act is very short, the effect on the temperature field, when liquid flows inside is not taken into account. Based on the hypothetical conditions above, the following mathematical model has been established:  The laser beam is input as an external thermal current on the surface. The laser beam’s continuous scanning is described through a user subprogram, which makes the thermal load of the laser as a form of thermal current density exerted to the appropriate unit. With an even rectangular laser beam bombing facula distribution, its energy density distribution is  The bottom surface (∣ For other surfaces, the boundary condition is  When the laser beam comes into contact with the coating surface, the temperature across the whole coating is a constant (25  According to the thoughts  Thermal capacity, thermal conductivity and density are functions of the temperature. If the parameters of the thermal properties are known for a range of temperatures Instantaneous conduction is assumed in calculations. Because the scanning velocity is  A distribution of the temperature field has been given based on the simulation for an instantaneous temperature field in wide-band laser cladding. The results show that even at the final stage of cladding, when