Nb–Al intermetallic nanoparticles were directly synthesized via sodiothermic reduction process in molten salts using NbCl5 and AlCl3 as the raw materials. The as-prepared samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. The NbCl5 and AlCl3 were dissolved in LiCl–KCl–CaCl2 or LiCl–KCl–NaCl–CaCl2 molten salts forming a homogeneous system. It was found that a series of intermetallic nanoparticles, such as Nb3Al, Nb2Al, NbAl3 and Nb2Al/NbAl3, were successfully synthesized at low temperature of 350–500 °C using the homogeneous molten salt systems. The phase transformations of Nb3Al, Nb2Al and NbAl3, were achieved via the controllable variation of molar ratio of Nb to Al. Furthermore, the influence of the reaction temperature on the particle size of the intermetallic nanoparticles was also investigated.Intermetallic compounds are considered as prospective materials for various high-temperature and structural applications. Among these intermetallic compounds, niobium aluminides have received much attention as high-temperature structural materials Over recent years, different methods of synthesis of Nb–Al intermetallic compounds such as conventional melting and solidification The Armstrong method is a representative technique of producing nanoparticles In this work, Nb–Al intermetallic nanoparticles were directly synthesized via sodiothermic reduction process in molten salts using NbCl It makes no difference in obtained products using the two different molten salts (LiCl–KCl–CaCl The raw materials used in this study were pure aluminum chloride (AlCl NbCl Subsequently, the LKC and LKNC blank molten salts were put into a corundum crucible which was placed inside a resistance furnace contains a gas supply/exhaust/vacuum system. The salts were melted at 450 °C for 1 h under an argon atmosphere. And then the pre-melted precursor and the sodium particles (20% excess) were fed into the molten salts. The mixture was constantly stirred at a rate of 50 rpm. After the reaction, the resistance furnace was cooled down at room temperature overnight. The mixture of products and solidified salts were taken out and washed by purified water. After washing, filtering and drying in vacuum, the as-prepared products were obtained. The phases of as-prepared products were determined using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, M21X, MAC Science Co. Ltd., Japan.) with Cu Kα radiation. In addition, the morphology and element analysis of as-prepared products were characterized using a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Z1ISS, ULTRA55, Germany.) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS, X-MAX50, England). The crystalline shape of the grains of as-prepared products was examined using a transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2010, JEOL Co., Japan). The XRD patterns and FESEM images of the as-prepared products by sodiothermic reduction of AlCl  In addition, as shown in Further information is obtained by TEM analysis for the as-prepared Nb After each experiment, the collection ratio of products is investigated. Take synthesis of Nb According to the theoretical binary phase diagram of Nb–Al system, composites of Nb In order to further confirm that whether these two phases of Nb The effect of the reaction temperatures on the particle size of the as-prepared Nb–Al intermetallic nanoparticle was investigated. LiCl–24.0mol%KCl–5.0mol%NaCl–18.0mol%CaCl Nb–Al intermetallic nanoparticles were directly synthesized via sodiothermic reduction process in molten salts using NbCl This work was supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at