Inhibition of bubble coalescence is of fundamental importance in a flotation process because it determines the size of bubbles and foam stability. For this work commercial frothers have been selected, MIBC, DF-250, DF-400 and DF-1012; and NaCl as inorganic electrolyte. Surface tension measurements used to characterize the tested frothers revealed that these frothers have quite different properties. Polypropylene glycols are much more surface active than MIBC. The differences between these two are further augmented in concentrated NaCl electrolyte solutions. The concept of the surface tension switch point (s.t.s.p.) is introduced to characterize the effect of electrolyte concentration on frother properties. The s.t.s.p. values for MIBC and DF-250 were determined to be around 120ppm and 1.2ppm, respectively. The effect of MIBC and DF-250 frothers on bubble coalescence was not very different, although finer bubbles were generated in the presence of MIBC than of DF-250 in seawater. Only dynamics foamability measurements (DFI) confirmed the differences, the foams produced in the presence of DF-250 were much more stable, also in electrolyte solutions. This fact confirms the importance of dynamic effects in foam formation and stabilization.The sizes of bubbles, which are determined by bubble coalescence, play a very important role in the flotation process. Flotation frothers – weakly surface active compounds – are employed to facilitate air dispersion into fine bubbles and to stabilize the froth. Bubble coalescence is a particularly complex phenomenon especially when it takes place in saline water or seawater, since both surface active compound (frother) and surface-inactive compound (inorganic salt) are able to stabilize bubbles against coalescence and thus reduce bubble size. The mechanism of bubble coalescence in solutions of frothers has been extensively studied. The coalescence of bubbles can be completely prevented at frother concentration exceeding a particular concentration, referred to as critical coalescence concentration (CCC) ( Inorganic electrolytes also inhibit bubble coalescence ( Most of common inorganic electrolytes show positive coalescence inhibition, some salts do not affect it suggesting that specific-ion effects and ion–water interactions play a role ( In a number of applications, e.g., froth flotation in brines and in seawater, frothers are used in concentrated electrolyte solutions. Flotation of potash ores is carried out in a NaCl–KCl saturated brine, which is a solution of 6–7 The aim of the present work is to study bubble coalescence in the presence of common flotation frothers in electrolyte solutions and in seawater. A better understanding of the mechanism of bubble coalescence in flotation cells, when seawater or saline water is used, is needed if seawater flotation is to be commercialized. The bubble coalescence in this work is studied using bubble size measuring technique and dynamic foamability tests. MIBC (methyl isobutyl carbinol) was provided by Cytec-Chile, and the polyglycol frothers DF-200, DF-250, DF-400 and DF-1012 were commercial products obtained from Moly-Cop Chile S.A. Sodium chloride used in this study was of reagent grade (Merck). A local sample of seawater from Concepcion city (Bellavista-Tome) with a salinity of 33.5‰ was employed. KSV Sigma 700 tensiometer, with a Pt Du Noüy ring, was used in the surface tension measurements. Bi-distilled water was used for preparation of solutions. The Wilhelmy plate method was used in a few cases to cross-check results. No differences were found. Low frother concentration solutions were prepared by successive dilution of a 5 The bubble size analyzer (BSA) developed by the Cape Town University (UCT) was employed. This comprises a glass capillary and two pairs of photo-transistor-LED detectors. Bubbles are drawn up through the capillary tube under vacuum and collected in a modified burette. The suction rate is controlled by a peristaltic pump. The bubbles are transformed into cylinders inside of the glass capillary, and their velocities and length measured using the optical detectors. The total volume of gas collected in the burette is utilized in order to estimate the absolute size of the bubbles. A detailed description of the instrument has been published by The size of bubbles was measured in a 4.5 The DFI method ( The equations used to express the DFI as a function of gas flow rate and frother concentration are: is the retention time is the total gas volume in the system (solution is the volumetric gas flow rate. Then, the dynamic foamability index (DFI) is calculated from: Finally, it can be graphically determined from the slope of the initial part of the As This behavior is contrasted with another commercial frother, DF-250. As The results when re-plotted ( As these results show the two selected frothers are characterized by the properties which are quite different, especially in electrolyte solutions. Since MIBC is not very surface-active, below its s.t.s.p. any increase in ionic strength leads to a domination of the effect of surface-inactive compound. This is very different for a much more surface active DF-250 which presence in electrolyte solutions is not masked by the effect of surface-inactive compound.  Inorganic salts (NaCl) inhibit bubble coalescence as is shown in The concept of the critical coalescence concentration, originally defined to evaluate surface-active agents, was extended in this work to inorganic electrolytes. The values of CCC for electrolytes are considerably higher (around two orders of magnitude higher) than those for frothers (see Effect of the frothers (MIBC and DF-250) and NaCl, on bubble size is showed in If it is assumed that the size of bubbles generated by a sparging mechanism in a flotation cell is identical to the size of bubbles at c  Seawater contains around 0.55–0.60 Comparison of In this paper we also used the dynamic foamability index (DFI) as a method of characterizing bubble coalescence. As concluded by Our bubble size measurements took place in a column in which bubbles were generated by passing nitrogen under pressure through a glass frit. Since a stream of bubbles is generated in such a device the bubbles collide with each other and their size is preserved only if they do not coalesce. As As the results published a few years ago show ( Surface elasticity forces are induced and operate only under dynamic conditions. It is a “self-healing” capacity of the film against external disturbances. The elasticity effects are possible only if a layer with different properties is formed at the interface, the layer in which there is a gradient of concentration. In the case of a surface-active agent this is very easy to visualize: such molecules accumulate at the liquid/gas interface (adsorption) and the gradient of concentrations at the interface is clearly established. The movement or any other dynamic disturbance that affects this gradient will immediately initiate the action of the “self-healing” forces. These are Marangoni dynamic elasticity effects. In the case of aqueous solutions of inorganic electrolytes the concentration of ions is lower in the surface layer than in the bulk (increasing surface tension), and the concentration gradient within this surface layer is also established. The elasticity effects should then also be possible. But it is also known, that in the presence of electrolytes the foam becomes drier, the bubbles carry less water with them and it was reported that the foaming is reduced under such conditions ( As Samples of commercial frothers were utilized in this project. Nominal chemical formulas of the tested frothers can be written as: CH The dynamic surface tension measurements ( Finally, these results are relevant to flotation practice in highly concentrated saline solutions and in seawater. Inorganic electrolyte is able to reduce bubble size in a similar way to frothing agents, explaining why in the salt flotation process of natural hydrophobic minerals the addition of a frother is not necessary ( Two frothers (MIBC and DF-250), selected for the studies on bubble coalescence in flotation systems, were shown to exhibit different surface activities as characterized by surface tension measurements. These differences were further augmented in aqueous solutions at a high ionic strength. The concept of the The bubble coalescence was studied through the measurements of bubble size and foamability. The bubble size measurements revealed that inorganic salts similar to frothers, are able to prevent bubble coalescence, but at a concentration several orders of magnitude greater. If electrolytes are compared with frothers, the finer bubbles are generated in electrolyte solutions than in the presence of frothers. In the bubble size measurements carried out in NaCl solutions, the addition of MIBC or DF-250 does not decrease the size of bubbles beyond the values observed in the electrolyte solution alone. This is very different from seawater. In seawater with the addition of frother the bubble generation/coalescence produces finer bubbles. In this system, MIBC seems to be more efficient in preventing bubble coalescence if compared with a polyglycol type frother. While characterization of bubble coalescence in NaCl solutions through bubble size measurements turned out not to be very sensitive to differences between two tested frothers, the dynamic foamability tests showed much higher foamability of the DF-250 solutions in comparison with MIBC. These differences were especially visible at high electrolyte concentrations (and in seawater). The differences observed when different experimental techniques are utilized indicate that bubble stability against coalescence strongly depends on the dynamic nature of the tests which are selected for such studies. Funding for this project was provided by the