Femoral shaft fractures present high morbidity and important complications and consequences, being spiral fractures the most complicated from a biomechanical point of view, being unstable and without possibility of getting a good contact between nail and femoral endosteum. Femoral diaphyseal fractures are treated, usually, by means of intramedullary nailing. So, it is necessary to know the osteosynthesis stability and which locking screws combination is optimal.
                  This work studies the use of reamed locked intramedullary nails in spiral femoral fractures located along zones 2 and 4 of wiss, depending on the spire length, corresponding to 32-A spiral type in AO/OTA classification, which represent a percentage of 23% within the total of diaphyseal fractures. A three-dimensional finite element model of the femur was developed, modeling a spiral fracture with different spiral lengths and gaps. A femoral nail was used, considering two transversal screws both at the proximal and the distal parts. The study was focused on the immediately post-operative stage, verifying the appropriate stability of the osteosynthesis.
                  Reamed intramedullary blocked nails provide appropriate stability of femoral spiral fractures, considering global mobility of femoral head with respect to femoral condyles, relative displacements between fragments at fracture site, stresses at nail and locking screws, and stresses at cortical bone.
                  The obtained results show that the use of blocked reamed nails in spiral femoral fractures can be considered as an appropriate surgical technique, providing sufficient stability in order to obtain an adequate fracture healing.Femoral shaft fractures range from 9.9 to12.0 for every 100.000 inhabitants/year Femoral fractures can be classified depending on their anatomical location at one of the six Wiss’ zones Since the introduction of intramedullary nailing (IM) by G. Küntscher At present locked intramedullary nailing could be said to be the gold standard for the treatment of femoral fractures. This is a close technique preserving the hematoma at the fracture site, which is a key factor in fracture healing, so intramedullary nailing has a high rate of consolidation (99%) and a low percentage of infection (1%) [ Currently controversy about reamed or non-reamed nails is clearly pointed towards reamed and locked nails Among the different types of femoral fractures, spiral fractures are the most complicated from a biomechanical point of view, because they are unstable and it is not possible getting a good contact between nail and femoral endosteum, being therefore important to know the osteosynthesis stability and which locking screws combination is optimal. The great diversity of diaphyseal fracture types and size, according to their anatomical location and degree of comminution, makes it difficult the appropriate choice of nailing and locking to ensure stability and to achieve fracture consolidation. In VIVO animal experimentation has been used to assess the biomechanical behavior of intramedullary femoral nails. So, in VIVO studies in animal models have been published As in vivo animal experimentation and in vitro studies on cadaveric bone or plastic bone models can hardly be applied to humans, due to the differences between in VIVO humans and in VIVO animals or in vitro behavior. Those difficulties have led to the development of simulation models using the Finite Element Method (FE). Analysis of osteosynthesis by means of FE models enables the assessment of all critical parameters (global stability, local movements at the fracture site and stresses in bone, nail and locking screws). Different FE studies have been published concerning biomechanical behavior of intramedullary nailing in transverse femoral fractures In this context, the objective of the present work is the study of reamed locked intramedullary nails in spiral femoral fractures located along zones 2 and 4 of Wiss, depending on the spire length, corresponding to 32 A spiral type in AO/OTA classification, simulating also a greater or lesser fracture fragmentation depending on the gap size. These kinds of fractures represent a percentage of 23% within the total of diaphyseal fractures A three dimensional (3D) finite element model of the femur from 55-year-old male donor was developed (the project “Estudio biomecánico y clínico del enclavamiento centromedular en el tratamiento de las fracturas diafisarias de fémur”, in which is included the present work, was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Health Sciences of Aragón; protocol number C.P. -C.I. PI 15/0214). The outer geometry of the femur was obtained by means of 3D scanner Roland3D Roland® PICZA (Irvine, California), whereas a set of computed tomography (CT) of the donor's femur were treated using Mimics® Software (Materialise, Leuven). The CT scans were obtained by means of a TOSHIBA Aquilion 64 scanner (Toshiba Medical Systems, Zoetermeer, Netherlands) (512 × 512 acquisition matrix, field of view (FOV) = 240 mm, slice thickness = 0.5 mm, in plane resolution). Once the inner interface between cortical and trabecular bone was delimited by means of an in-house algorithm material properties were assigned to the FE model in I–Deas software Nail surgery was reproduced in I–Deas in a virtual way, inserting the nail into the femur with the corresponding screws. Subsequently the assembly of the computer aided design (CAD) model was performed under surgeon supervision. Bone, nail and screws were meshed with linear tetrahedra. They were assumed for the bone linear elastic isotropic properties (E A sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the minimal size mesh required for an accurate simulation. For this purpose, a mesh refinement was executed in order to achieve a convergence towards a minimum of the potential energy, both for the whole model and for each of its components, with a tolerance of 1% between consecutive meshes. The final models had an average mesh size about 1.5 mm, with about of 2,20,000 nodes and 1.000,000 elements on average. All the considered fractures were modeled as spiral by means of an irregular surface developed to represent a closer geometry to the actual fracture. Considering that irregular fracture pattern, two different fracture gaps have been studied: 1.0 mm (considered as a non-comminuted fracture) and 3 mm (as the most referenced value found in literature, representing a mid-value between comminuted and non-comminuted fractures). Three lengths of fractures were considered: 120, 150 and 180 mm, respectively ( The study was focused on the immediately post-operative stage. Thus, the interaction at the fracture site does not take into account any biological healing process. Contact interaction was assumed between the outer surface of the nail and the inner cortex of the intramedullary channel of the femur. Interaction between screws and cortical bone was considered to be bonded, whereas contact between screws a femoral nail was simulated. The selected friction values of bone/nail and nail/screws were 0.1 and 0.15, respectively, in accordance with literature This study considered fully constrained conditions at the condyles and a load case associated with an accidental support of the leg at early post-operative (PO) stage ( The studied femoral nail corresponds to the Stryker S2/T2™ design (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ, USA), considering a length of 380 mm, with a wall thickness of 2 mm and an outer diameter of 13 mm. This nail uses locking screws of 5 mm of outer diameter, which were modeled as cylinders of the same diameter. Two transversal screws (anterior/posterior) were considered at the proximal part and two transversal screws (lateral/medial) at the distal part. The different osteosyntheses included in The FE simulations allowed obtaining the mobility and stress results for the different cases analyzed. The different resulting trends are detailed hereafter.  Relative movements at fracture site are processed considering working groups of corresponding nodes located in opposite positions at the fracture focus (  As can be seen in    In cortical bone no clear trend appears concerning stresses, except for the case of nail material, producing higher stress values in cortical bone titanium nails. Values of stresses are very similar for spiral lengths of 150 and 180 mm, increasing in the case of spiral length of 120 mm. This could be because for a shorter spiral length the contact area between nail and femoral endosteum is larger, allowing a greater overload on bone. The stresses are about 36% higher for titanium nail in every case. The obtained values are sufficiently low to avoid additional fractures. From our knowledge none of the few published works using FE simulation has studied the biomechanical behavior of different types of spiral femur fractures, using rigid blocked nails. We have used blocked reamed nails in our study because it is widely demonstrated in the bibliography the superiority of these over nonreamed nails [ The obtained results show that the biomechanical behavior of reamed intramedullary blocked nails is suited for stability of femoral spiral fractures. So, the global mobility of femoral head with respect to femoral condyles is kept within safe values, being lower for stainless steel nails compared to titanium nails, according to their respective stiffness. In the same way, the relative displacements between fragments at fracture site, for the different osteosynthesis considered in the study, falls within the range that can be considered as appropriate for fracture stabilization, with values that provides the adequate mechanical stimulus for fracture healing. On the other hand, stresses at nail and locking screws are well below those corresponding to the yield strength of materials, taking into account that only a fraction of the physiological load was considered. Finally, stresses at cortical bone are sufficiently low to avoid additional fractures. In 1958, prior to the introduction of blocked nails, the Swiss AO proposed the concept of Open Reduction Internal Fixation (ORIF) whit plating for the treatment of fractures, which was the very opposite to the closed reduction and intramedullary nailing, preserving the fracture haematoma, the periosteum and the perifractural soft tissues. Since then design of plates and the basic concepts have evolved Accurate fracture reduction is essential in long-range spiral fractures, to avoid shortening and rotational malalignment before placing the distal locking screws We are not agreeing with Our clinical experience shows that even in the case of spiral comminute complex fractures, including fragmentation, the use of reamed intramedullary blocked nails can be fully effective ( As main limitation of the present study, it should be noted that the applied loads correspond to a fraction of physiological load, considering an accidental foot support at postoperative stage, in which loading is not permitted, but without taking account of possible rotational loads which could compromise the stability. The use of blocked reamed nails in spiral femoral fractures can be considered as an appropriate surgical technique, providing sufficient stability in order to obtain an adequate fracture healing. Moreover, as the fracture length is increasing stainless steel nails are recommended because of the greater stiffness, providing better stability. Any case, locking screws must be static, preventing any movement at the locking zone. The authors have no professional or financial conflicts of interest to disclose. This research has been partially financed by