NbOx is added in Ni-Ce0.8Sm0.2O1.9 by impregnation as an anode material for solid oxide fuel cells fed with methanol. Nb (IV) and Nb (V) exist in the reduced anode. The addition of Nb reduces the binding energy of Ni. The catalytic activity of the anode and the performance of the single cell both increase with the increase of Nb. At 700 °C, the cell with 5NbOx-Ni-Ce0.8Sm0.2O1.9 anode and Ce0.8Sm0.2O1.9-carbonate electrolyte shows a output power density of 687 mW cm−2. Meanwhile, water produced in the anode is absorbed by NbOx and forms surface hydroxyl groups, which facilitates the removal of carbon. The addition of NbOx decreases the amount of deposited carbon in the humidified methanol atmosphere significantly, and an improved stability of the single cell is achieved.Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are promising energy converting devices with a high efficiency Ni-based cermet anodes are not suitable for SOFCs fed with hydrocarbons due to serious carbon deposition. As an early attempt to replace Ni, Park et al. Though novel anode materials for SOFCs fed with hydrocarbons have been extensively explored, few of them are comparable with Ni in terms of electronic conductivity, catalytic activity and price. Therefore, much attention has been focused on improving the resistance to carbon deposition of Ni-based anodes. Nikolla et al. NiO-SDC composite powder with a mole ratio of 7:3 was synthesized through a hydrothermal method, which is described in detail in a previous work The composite electrolyte was prepared by mixing SDC powder and binary eutectic carbonate (Li The crystal structure of the anode powders were studied using an X-ray diffractometer (D8-S4, Bruker AXS). The surface properties of the reduced powders were investigated with an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS, PHI 600). The functional groups on the surface of the anode powders were examined with a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR, Nicolet Nexus). In order to investigate the influence of NbO The 0.6 mm-thick electrolyte and 0.3 mm-thick cathode bilayer was fabricated through a co-pressing approach and subsequently sintered at 700 °C for 1 h. A slurry consisting of the NbO For the test of the single cells, the anodes were treated in H XRD results of the powders before the reduction are illustrated in In order to investigate the form of Nb species in the anode material, the raw material C The unmixed Nb species shows a pure NbO The FTIR spectra of Ni-SDC and 3NbO The TGA results of various anodes after coking are exhibited in  The EIS results are presented in  The SEM images of the surface of the anodes after the stability test are exhibited in NbO Financial supports from