A simple model for the prediction of the principal growth direction of a solid–liquid interface during solidification of pure metals of different crystal structures is developed. The existing interface controlled growth model for the growth of a solid in a liquid is suitably modified with the incorporation of density change during solidification. The idea of conjugate planes is introduced to construct virtually a unit cell of a solid and, finally, the growth of the conjugate planes is presented with respect to the plane normal. A very good match is shown between the calculated directions of highest growth rate and the experimentally found directions of the primary dendrites of a number of crystal structures. It is also shown that the differential growth of a solid in a liquid along different crystallographic directions is inherently associated with the density change and spatial distribution of atoms on the facing liquid and solid planes on solidification.Crystal growth during the solidification of undercooled pure metals or alloys plays a major role in determining the microstructure and properties of the final product. It can be planar solidification, or solidification can proceed with preferential growth of solid in a certain specific crystallographic direction forming dendrites. The preferred growth direction will be different for different metals and alloys, and it has a strong correlation with several factors such as crystal and interface structure The present work tries to model the preferred orientation of the growing solid–liquid interface of different pure metals of different crystal structures by considering the effect of interface structure and difference in surface atomic density of different crystallographic planes. The existing model of interface controlled growth Interface controlled growth of a solid in the adjacent liquid is controlled by the transfer of atoms across the solid–liquid interface Now the viscosity of liquid can be correlated Now combining Eqs. In the present work, the growth rate equation has been treated without the above assumptions. In fact, while liquid atoms are joining the solid surface, they get detached from the more open liquid structure and become members of a more close packed solid. Hence, liquid and solid atoms will occupy a different spatial volume even if a hard sphere model for both liquid and solid atoms is considered. That means that, though the radius of sphere-shaped atoms is constant, the effective volumes of liquid and solid atoms ( On undercooling, before solidification, the randomly oriented liquid atoms start rearranging themselves similarly to the crystal arrangement of solid. A short-range order arrangement of atoms takes place in liquid adjacent to the solid nucleus, forming unit cells of a similar nature to that of the solid just before solidification takes place. The only difference between the liquid and solid unit cells is in their lattice parameters. The liquid unit cell has a higher lattice parameter because, on solidification, there is, in general, a decrease in molar volume for most metals. However, the size of the atoms is the same, as shown in The process of growth continues by the addition of one atomic plane at a time, and the growth takes place perpendicular to the plane. The addition has to be such that one addition gives rise to advancement of the growth front by one unit cell. If one plane does not form a complete unit cell, the parallel planes of the same family running inside a unit cell that can give rise to the advancement of one unit cell are considered to be the plane conjugate, and all the parameters will be calculated taking all the planes in that conjugate into account. Only the part of a plane or plane conjugate that is confined within the unit cell will be considered. In addition, the projection of a plane is to be taken along the direction of growth. Therefore, only the number of atoms which fall inside the projection of the part of the plane which is confined within the unit cell along the growth direction has to be considered. Parallel planes other than the planes which go through the center of the atoms can also be considered. However, if the plane does not go through the center of the atoms, the atomic density is going to be much lower than that of the plane going through the atoms. An even greater number of parallel planes are to be considered in order to add a unit cell on top of the growing front. For the liquid unit cell, the lattice parameter ( Now, the interplanar spacing of the solid–liquid planes as shown in    The fcc crystal system is also evaluated analogously to bcc. Conjugate planes are chosen in such a way that, every time, the next layer of atoms in the regular positions of any crystal system will join to those of the previous layer. Growth will happen by the addition of a conjugate plane on top of the advancing plane, so that the growth will be by one unit cell. From the above, the area of the (1     In the case of hcp, both the rules are followed in order to consider the conjugate plane.  The growth rates of different conjugate planes or different major directions (〈1 It is well understood that the anisotropy related to surface energy, surface kinetics, thermal conductivity and elastic modulus leads to the development of dendrites along some specific crystallographic directions for different metals with different crystal system It is interesting to note that the interface is at thermal and stress equilibrium. An even number of differential conductivities of different directions are taken into account. The preferred directions of the solid during the course of solidification are a strong function of spatial distribution and apparent volumes of atoms in the liquid and solid phase, as the atoms are joining the solid interface from the liquid. For example, the (1 The present model uses a modified interface controlled growth model to predict the primary growth direction of the solid in the liquid during solidification. Differential rate theory for the attachment of atoms from liquid to solid and vice versa has been associated with the atomic diffusion process. The energy barrier corresponds to the activation energy for atomic diffusion (Δ It is assumed that the atoms of liquid just adjacent to the solid interface arrange in a near regular crystal arrangement like that of the solid crystal. Mondal et al. The preferred growth directions of the advancing solid–liquid interface into the melt were determined for a number of pure metals, using the modified interface controlled growth equation (Eq. Only three major crystallographic directions for different metals have been considered here. Two important factors which decide the growth rate of different crystallographic planes, apart from other assumptions, are conjugate planes and apparent atomic numbers on the conjugate planes ( All the metals were considered in their pure form, and the preferred directions for the advancing solid–liquid interface were determined. Moreover, the model (without the complexity of measurement of anisotropy parameters as mentioned by Boettinger et al. A simple model was constructed to find the reason for preferential growth of a solid in a liquid along some particular crystallographic directions during solidification. A simple interface controlled growth equation was modified by taking the density change on solidification and the atomic anisotropy between the advancing solid interface and the plane of the liquid facing the solid interface. The modified growth model can account for the different growth rates of different planes; in other words, the growth rate of the solid along different plane normals will differ. The direction which gives the highest rate of growth is considered to be the preferred direction for the primary dendrite. Surprisingly, the directions found using the model for highest growth in all the major crystal systems (bcc, fcc, bct and hcp) match quite well with the experimentally observed primary growth direction of dendrite. It can be concluded that the possibility of formation of dendrite lies primarily in the spatial difference in the atomic distribution and apparent volume of the atom in the solid and liquid phase. The model can explain why dendrite appears even if the solid–liquid interface is at thermal and stress equilibrium. The authors greatly appreciate the useful comments and critical discussion of Prof. B.S. Murty of IIT Madras during the preparation stage of this work.