Coal in North Korean (NKC) is one of the most important products; however, based on various strategic policies its detail properties remain opaque even for general researchers. Since there are some signs for opening of the North Korea economy, this investigation as a modest effort is going to explore principle relationships among some essential parameters of NKCs such as gross calorific value (GCV), valuable elements and conventional properties by different statistical methods. Correlations indicated that ultimate parameters (carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen) are the best GCV predictors for NKCs in comparison with proximate parameters (ash, moisture and volatile matter). Multivariable regression demonstrated that predicted GCV based on ultimate properties has a quite accuracy when correlation of determination was 0.99. Descriptive statistics processes showed that on average, the contents of valuable elements such as Ga and V for NKCs are higher than the world coal ranges and they can be considered as byproducts of combustion of NKCs. Pearson correlations indicated that Y may have a mixed organic-inorganic affinity while Ga and V mainly occur in the inorganic part (mineral matter) of NKCs. High inter-correlations between Ga-V and Al showed that aluminosilicates can be considered as their main bring minerals.In the North Korea (NK), energy as a key element lies at the heart of all important decisions. Much has been published about the North Korean nuclear crisis; however, there is approximately no publication (at least in English-language) considering properties of North Korean coal (NKC) On one hand, gross calorific value (GCV) as one of the main standards for evaluation of coal stored energy has been applied for the assessment of coal value, and typically used as a basis for the determination of coal prices For an accurate assessment of correlations among conventional coal properties (proximate and ultimate analyses), GCV and VEs, a robust dataset (wide variation of properties) of NKCs was considered. The dataset used to examine possible relationships was obtained from World Coal Quality (WCQ) Inventory from various areas of NK ( Pearson’s correlation “r” which can provide accurate correlations between variables and determine their magnitude was used to explore relationships through the considered parameters. The “r” value can range from −1 to +1, where values close to +1 show significant positive relationships, values close to −1 translate to high negative correlations, and 0 means there is no interaction. Generally, “r” over absolute 0.6 means there is a considerable correlation between two variables The GCV of analyzed samples varied from 10.11 to 30.52 MJ/kg (on average: 23.29 MJ/kg) ( SMR models (Eqs. The mean value of Y concentration in NKCs is around 7.57 × 10 Pearson correlation assessments between major ash elements and Y ( The mean concentration of V for NKCs changes from 7.24 × 10 The Ga concentration on average of NKCs is 6.62 × 10 Coal is a strategic resource for North Korea and approximately there is no published investigation has developed a robust exploration through the North Korean coals (NKCs). Modeling of GCV (gross calorific value) as the most important coal combustion variables based on coal properties can be a key for predicting the volume of coal consumption for various power plants. Exploring correlations between coal properties and GCV for NKCs indicated that carbon has the highest positive relationship with GCV and parameters of ultimate analysis can be used as the best reliable variable for the GCV prediction. Since NKCs have a low rank, extraction of valuable elements (VEs) such as Y, V and Ga from coal ashes may be a promising opportunity to increase the lifetime of NKC mines, especially when potentially they have just one customer (China). Thus, study affinities of VEs can be significant for the selection of their extraction methods from coal products. Assessments of Ga and V concentrations for NKCs indicated that on average their contents are higher than the reported world coal. While the Y concentration is lower than the documented world coal content. Pearson correlation between these VEs (Y, V and Ga) and coal conventional properties relived that Y has a mixed inorganic-organic occurrence although Ga and V have an inorganic affinity. High interactions between Ga–V and Al demonstrated that aluminosilicates can be their main sources.