The effect of temperature on manganese recovery by solvent extraction was studied for the production of high purity MnSO4 from hydrometallurgical tailings solutions. Two commercially available organophosphorus cation exchange reagents, di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (CYANEX 272) as the active main components, were chosen. Among these regents, CYANEX 272 is selective for Mn over Ca while D2EHPA is selective for Ca over Mn. CYANEX 272 would therefore be the choice if the aim is to have good Mn/Ca selectivity. It was found, however, that at subambient temperatures the Ca–Mn selectivity of D2EHPA improves remarkably although the extraction order (Ca before Mn) still remains unchanged. As a cheaper reagent D2EHPA would be attractive, but lowering the temperature causes also an increase in viscosity and slower phase separation. The choice in the current case was therefore CYANEX 272 and a temperature of 40°C. A three-stage Mn extraction followed by two-stage scrubbing and a two-stage sulfuric acid stripping led to a very pure MnSO4 solution.Increased demand for stainless steel and greater use of batteries in electrical devices and vehicles have lead to increased consumption of manganese. The role of Mn in steel production and in batteries is to improve product properties or partly replace more expensive metals. The amount of Mn in stainless steels is typically 1–2% but in austenic manganese steels it can be as high as 12% ( Solvent extraction (SX) is a separation method with the necessary selectivity and flexibility to recover and concentrate different metals as pure from multi-metal solutions and also from solutions with low concentrations of the targeted elements. All reaction steps can be done in closed circuits and mechanical separations are not needed. Metal loading and stripping are effective in modern mixer-settler equipment. Solvent extraction can also be applied in combination with precipitation, such that the base metals are recovered first. This is then followed by an SX process to treat the tailings, which typically contain several grams of Mn, Mg and Na, minor amounts of Ca and K, and some other impurity metals at trace concentrations ( Separation of manganese from calcium and other alkali or alkaline earth metals has been done using, for example, bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (the active compound in CYANEX 272), a tertiary carboxylic acid (Versatic 10) or a synergistic system of Versatic 10 and α-hydroxyoxime reagents ( CYANEX 272 was originally designed for Co/Ni separation. D2EHPA is applied for many metals, e.g., Zn, U, Mo, and Fe, and is cheaper than CYANEX 272. D2EHPA has been used for manganese separation from cobalt ( The aim of this study is the separation and refining of manganese as pure MnSO Separation of metals by SX is based on the principle of using organic complexing agents to make hydrophilic metal ions hydrophobic. Metals in an aqueous phase are therefore in extraction preferentially partitioned to the organic phase. Cations in the aqueous phase are surrounded by water molecules which are more or less coordinated to the central cation. Due to the polar nature of the aqua molecule, the lipophilic character of the metal-aqua complex is affected by its coordination number. In addition to different polarities, large metal-aqua complexes are unfavorable for diffusion in the organic phase due to the steric hindrance of the branched carbon chains of the extractant. The extraction affinity depends also on the polar nature of the functional group. The polarities of different phosphorus acid derivatives have differing effects on the stabilities of metal complexes in the organic phase ( It is known that temperature has an influence on the structure of metal complexes formed. For instance cobalt separation from nickel with CYANEX 272 and especially with D2EHPA is affected by temperature due to the different coordination chemistries between the metal ions and organic ligands. Cobalt forms both octahedral and tetrahedral complexes with two dimerised phosphorus acid molecules. The stability of the more hydrophilic octahedral Co complex decreases at temperatures above 40 The role of hydration water in SX, especially the complex chemistry between the metal ion and organic ligand, has not been widely discussed. Cations and anions are classified based on their ability to form complexes and the majority of complex formation follows the Eigen mechanism ( The kinetics of ligand exchange and the geometry of the coordinated complex are affected by the ion charge and radius ( Prior to the experiments, both reagents (D2EHPA from Lanxess and CYANEX 272 from Cytec Industries Inc.) were washed with a 1 The proton capacity of the washed and diluted extractant was measured by titration with a 1 The viscosities were measured at 5, 25, 30, and 40 Extraction isotherms of the metals were determined by equilibrium experiments in a jacketed 1 In order to find the appropriate phase ratio and pH values for multi-step manganese recovery with CYANEX 272, several extraction McCabe-Thiele isotherms were determined for Mn at solution pH 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, and 5.0. A counter-current extraction process was simulated by batch experiments with an authentic metal solution using 25 In addition to extraction, two different scrubbing solutions for impurity removal from the organic phase were investigated. Scrubbing was carried out in two steps, using loaded extractant from Step 1 (E1) with pure DI water in Case 1, and 1 Elemental analyses of the metal solutions were done with plasma emission spectrometry (Iris Intrepid II XDL ICP-AES). In order to evaluate their accuracy, some duplicate samples were analyzed. The error was estimated to be smaller than 5%. The precision of the method used is generally high enough (< NH Extraction of manganese and the selectivity of the two commonly used organophosphorus acid reagents over Ca and Mg were studied at different temperatures in order to find optimal conditions for the production of a MnSO The extraction equilibria of metals with D2EHPA and CYANEX 272 were determined as a function of solution pH with multi-metal solutions at different temperatures ( Temperature has a significant effect on metal extraction with D2EHPA. The pH In case of CYANEX 272, the effect of temperature on the manganese pH isotherm was similar to that of D2EHPA. The ∆pH The results show that 25 Calcium can be extracted prior to manganese with D2EHPA, but the difference in ∆pH The viscosities of D2EHPA and CYANEX 272 in an aliphatic kerosene diluent at temperatures between 5 and 40 A decrease in temperature below room temperature in order to improve the selectivity of D2EHPA causes a considerable increase in viscosity. Consequently, the increased energy costs from mixing and pumping, as well as longer settling times, make operations less attractive. In view of the effect of temperature on Mn uptake selectivity and solution viscosity, CYANEX 272 at 40 The results show that manganese can be extracted at purity from multi-metal solutions with high concentrations of (NH Temperature has a significant effect on the extraction of manganese and calcium with D2EHPA and CYANEX 272. Extraction Mn–Ca selectivity was found to increase with both reagents at low temperatures. The extraction order with D2EHPA remains unchanged (Ca before Mn) at low temperatures. The favourable extraction order of CYANEX 272 (Mn before Ca) and the operation of the SX above room temperature with lower solution viscosity and faster kinetics, are the advantages that make CYANEX 272 as the better choice, despite the fact that D2EHPA is economically the more viable extractant. In order to test the chosen method for process applications, experiments were carried out with 25 The financial support and cooperation of