Potash, the common name for potassium compounds, is also used frequently to indicate potassium oxide (K2O) equivalent of a compound, even though the compound may contain no oxide. For example, the chief compound of potassium in most potash ores is potassium chloride (KCl), while concentrates are sold on the basis of equivalent K2O content (about 60% for muriate). The potash minerals occurring in these deposits are all soluble in water and it is easy to concentrate their solutions to a high percentage of potassium oxides. This chapter deals with the beneficiation of the potash ores from solid deposits.Introduction Potash deposits and minerals Beneficiation of potash-containing ores General Flotation properties of sylvite and halite Treatment of potash ore in the presence of insoluble slimes Other potash ore processing methods Electrostatic separation method Heavy liquid separation Commercial operation References Potash, the common name for potassium compounds, is also used frequently to indicate potassium oxide (K The potassium salts may be obtained from the following sources: Solid deposits of soluble potassium minerals such as sylvite, carnalite, kainite, etc. Seawater and salt lake deposits or brines Vegetable substances such as wood, ashes, sugar, beet residue, etc. Animal material such as wool washings. Insoluble potash-bearing minerals such as alunite, feldspar, leucite, muscovite, etc. The greater part of the world supply of potash is obtained from solid deposits of soluble potassium minerals from Group 1. The potash minerals occurring in these deposits are all soluble in water and it is easy to concentrate their solutions to a high percentage of potassium oxides. This chapter deals with the beneficiation of the potash ores from solid deposits. Potash solid deposits are wide spread around the world. Major deposits are located in Germany, France, Spain, Russia, and Canada. Canadian deposits are the world’s largest deposits and are located in the province of Saskatchewan, New Brunswick, Quebec, and Ontario. The main minerals present in the solid deposits are listed in The potash salts in most of the major world deposits are closely associated with beds of halite (sodium chlorite ore, common salts). Some of the deposits found in Ontario belong to the middle Jurassic and include deltaic sandstones shale (including the well-known alum shale and jet rocks). In the other ore body potash deposits occur in the open portion of evaporite formation. Nevertheless, the most important potash ore is sylvinite, a mixture of sylvite (KCl) and halite (NaCl) with minor amounts of clay and other potassium minerals. Nowadays, the majority of the sylvinite ores in the world are concentrated by froth flotation involving brines. A number of features Studies were carried out on sylvite and halite flotation using dodecylamine hydrochloride and sodium louvate collectors It is shown that KCl floats well with amine (R It was postulated that NaCl did not float due to the fact that the positively charged R It should be noted that in the use of ultrasonic collector dispersion techniques, the flotation recovery of NaCl or KCl increases significantly. The flotation results for KCl and NaCl clearly indicated that dispersion of collector colloids and subsequent flotation of these salts are related to the surface charge of the collector colloid and the surface charge of the alkali halide particles. There are a number of amine and sulfonate collectors used for potash salt flotation. From the experimental testwork conducted with these collectors Dodecyl and tetradecyl chloride float KCl well at a concentration of 10 Octylamine floats KCl well at a concentration above 10 Sulfonate collectors float KCl at a relatively high concentration. Caprylic acid floats NaCl well while KCl is depressed. The presence of insoluble slimes in potash ores is a processing problem of some significance to the potash industries. These insolubles must be removed prior to potash flotation due to their high adsorptive capacity for amines, which are used as potash flotation collectors. Sylvinites may contain up to 15% insoluble gangue minerals. Usually these are sulfates, carbonates, iron oxides, and clay minerals. There are several methods used for slimes removal. These include: Mechanical desliming Flocculation flotation and desliming Flocculation flotation followed by sylvite flotation.  Another method reported in the literature Flocculation–flotation and desliming method involves scrubbing, sizing, and desliming. The slimes are conditioned with flocculent and collector followed by slime flotation. The slime tailing and coarse fraction are subjected to potash flotation. The flow sheet using this process is presented in It should be pointed out that during potash flotation from slime tailing, depressants such as dextrin or guar gum are used.  Flocculation–flotation is followed by sylvite flotation method, scrubbing, conditioning, sizing, and sylvite flotation. A generalized flow sheet using this method is presented in Another method for slimes removal involves the use of magnetite and flocculation A number of studies were carried out to examine beneficiation of potash ores using alternative methods. These include: Electrostatic separation Heavy media separation This method involves preheating of the ore to about 400–500 This method has been tested in the pilot plant scale but has never been introduced to the plant scale. Heavy liquid separation although extensively examined, has limited commercial application. Heavy media density used in the studies is in the range of 2.02–2.12. One heavy liquid used is acetylene tetrabromide diluted to the above density with a miscible solvent. Another suitable media can be made from finely ground magnetite, which is added to brine saturated with potassium and sodium chloride. If clay is present in the ore, it must be removed by using magnetite as a heavy media. High grade of 50% K There are a fairly large number of operations around the world, especially in North America, which produce potash mainly from solids deposits. Virtually all plants use the flotation method on sized feed. In the presence of insoluble slimes, the slime is removed using one of the methods described in this chapter. The actual flow sheet varies from plant to plant and the flow sheet configuration depends on the ore. Some of the plants use the flow sheet shown in Clay minerals present in the ore are removed before flotation. Simplified flow sheet that treats clay-containing ore is shown in Standard practice in operating plants involves separate treatment of coarse and fine fractions.