Spontaneous heating of sulphides can occur under certain ambient conditions, including moisture content. Hypothesizing that reducing moisture would mitigate self-heating hygroscopic reagents were tested on a strongly self-heating pyrrhotite-rich sample. A self-heating test was used to assess the impact of three inorganic chemicals, sodium hydroxide, sodium chloride and drierite, and two polymers, silica gel and poly (acrylic acid sodium salt). Silica gel and poly (acrylic acid sodium salt) were the most successful, attributed to holding the water firmly inside the structure. However, the amounts required argue against this as a practical approach.Numerous substances can heat spontaneously or self-heat, ranging from wood chips and powdered milk to coal and sulphide minerals ( Self-heating poses potential hazards in mining, processing and transporting sulphide materials ( Initiation of the self-heating reactions at ambient conditions is not fully understood and possible reactions are discussed by 4FeS + 3O While simplified ( Methods to identify the potential for self-heating of sulphides have been proposed ( Knowing some triggers (i.e., presence of Po, moisture and oxygen) various mitigation measures have been taken including ( Most approaches endeavour to remove one (or more) of the reactants. Equation (1) shows the significance of moisture in promoting self-heating, the hazardous range being ca. 3–8% w/w ( Tailings from Glencore′s Strathcona mill (Sudbury, Ontario, Canada) with ca. 75% w/w Po content was used as it is known to strongly self-heat ( Five hygroscopic reagents were selected ( A test was devised to establish water retention capacity of the additives. De-ionized water was sprayed on a known weight of reagent which was evenly distributed in a Petri-dish. Spraying continued until free water was visible. The reagent was then re-weighed and the water retention capacity (g water/kg reagent) determined. A commercial test ( In the standard FR test, Stage A temperature is controlled at 70 °C and air is injected for 15 min at 100 mL/min every 5 h. One air injection and the five-hour wait period comprises “one cycle” and is repeated for 10 cycles to complete Stage A. For Stage B, the temperature is raised to 140 °C and cycles comprising 250 mL/min air injection for 15 min every 5 h are repeated until no more heating is observed. The sample temperature versus time response (thermogram) was recorded for both stages. From the rising portion of each peak on the thermogram accompanying an air injection (for a reactive sample) self-heating rates (   The most effective reagents are the two polymers, silica gel and poly (acrylic acid sodium salt), which correspond to their high measured water retention. Silica gel comprises a network of branched chains formed by polymerization of silicic acid (Si(OH) Poly (acrylic acid sodium salt) particles consist of crosslinked coiled chains ( Drierite, calcium sulphate anhydrite III, comprises a framework of repeating chains forming continuous channels where the water molecules are held bonded to Ca ions. This water uptake drives the structure to hemihydrate ( With the two sodium salts desiccation is by retention of water in solution, effective, for example, in drying humid air ( The important feature that distinguishes the two polymers from the other reagents is that absorbed water is held firm inside the structure. Silica gel’s impact was significantly improved when applied as a layer, suggesting that isolating the sample from humid air is also important. This approach achieved zone 2, which means at least the key Stage A reactions that initiate self-heating were suppressed. In comparison, the poly (acrylic acid sodium salt) also suppressed Stage B reactions. Stage B reactions are ‘dry’, and, accepting that this is attributable to oxidation of elemental sulphur, raises two possibilities: there was enough S While the findings do support the moisture-control hypothesis, the high additions, up to 100 g per 500 g sample, appear to make the approach impractical. Lower dosages of the most promising additive, poly (acrylic acid sodium salt), were considered but the sharp decline in effect from 100 g to 50 g argued against. Layering proved effective, and may be worth following up, perhaps covers already in use could be impregnated with hygroscopic reagents to effect. Moisture plays a key role in self-heating of sulphides under ambient conditions which prompted testing mitigation using hygroscopic reagents. There is support for the approach with two polymers, silica gel and poly (acrylic acid sodium salt), suppressing self-heating. Their success is attributed to firmly holding water internally, different from the other additives tested. However, the amount of additive required appears to render the approach impractical.  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The work was conducted under the Chair in Mineral Processing funded through the NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) CRD (Collaborative Research and Development) program sponsored by Vale, Teck, Xstrata Process Support, Barrick Gold, Shell Canada, Corem, SGS Lakefield Research and Flottec. Provision of the test samples and discussions with Glencore personnel are gratefully acknowledged.