Many industries produce pellets, powders, and granules as finished or intermediate products. The strength of these products is important to their marketability, as dusting and breakdown from weak product is undesirable and results in poor handling properties. Measurement of “strength” usually takes the form of some empirical test involving crushing or attrition. The possibility of using sound velocity measurements to replace these techniques (especially for composite materials such as pellets or agglomerates) is investigated by performing measurements on glass sphere powders and test industrial materials. The ultrasonic velocity measurements in glass spheres were shown to be described by effective medium theories of sound propagation and can be used to probe the packing structure of the powder. For coarser powders sensible values of the co-ordination number Z could be calculated during compaction of the material. For powders finer than 0.2mm the sound velocity measurements are no longer repeatable and rapid changes of the configuration may occur though the packing density only changes slowly. Two industrially important materials, iron ore pellets and calcined alumina powders were studied. It was found that reproducible measurements can be made in these materials that correlate to standard industrial “strength” measurements. In the case of iron ore pellets the correlation coefficient was 0.94 and the variability of the sound velocity based “strength” measurement was a factor of five smaller than the particle breakage method. For alumina powders the standard attrition index measurements could be correlated with the ultrasonic velocity and bulk density for both hydrated and calcined alumina powders with correlation coefficients of up to 0.95. The sound velocity strength measurement technique has significant advantages in repeatability, sample size and provides direct measurement of a physical parameter related to strength.Ultrasonic velocity measurements are relatively simple to make in bulk solids and can be related to the various elastic moduli, especially for isotropic solids. For these bulk solids the sound speed may be weakly related to the crush or abrasion strength of the material. In agglomerates, as apart from single crystals, where the material is held together through contacts there is reason to relate “strength” to the sound speed. A well described example is in sinters where the inter-particle contact areas increase over time as the material is heated leading to an increase in sound velocity and strength during sintering Many industries produce pellets, powders, and granules as finished or intermediate products that are either grown directly by processes like crystallisation and spray drying, or agglomerated by pelletisation. As a rule the strength of these particles is important to their marketability, as dusting and breakdown from weak product is undesirable and results in poor handling properties. Often particle size is closely monitored but particle “strength”, which is harder to define and measure, is less closely monitored. The “strength” of these products is generally defined by the type of wear mechanism expected during the particle's life. For some products impact and crushing are the most important comminution mechanism, for others attrition may be more important. Where the wear due to impact and crushing is the important mechanism, strength is measured on a pellet by pellet basis from a small sub-sample; for example, pellets of iron ore are generally destroyed by crushing to test their strength It is proposed in this work that the mean “strength” of the particles or pellets, in some cases, can be estimated ultrasonically by measuring the sound speed of a sample of powder or pellets placed under pressure. These measurements then can be compared to the standard “strength” measurements in use to determine whether in those particular cases the sound speed measurement is a feasible alternative. The sound measurement, if demonstrated to be feasible, may well have extensive practical advantages over the old techniques in terms of repeatability, ease of use, sample size, and having a direct relationship with a well known physical parameter. The two example materials chosen, iron ore pellets and alumina powder, are agglomerates. In this case the Young's Modulus and hence the sound speed of individual particles may be expected to be related to the strength, as is the case in sinters For some larger particles, such as iron ore pellets, measurements of a single layer of particles may be sufficient. This is not the case for finer particles when measurements of sound velocity must take place over a significant distance and hence many layers of particles. In this case the sound velocity in powders is related to the packing of the particles as well as their intrinsic material properties. The theoretical framework of an effective medium theory (EMT) As the sound transmission depends on both the properties of the particles and their configuration, care must be taken to understand the preparation of the sample for measurement. This includes shaking steps to consolidate the powder and prepare as uniform as possible configuration of the powders at measurement. Many investigations of the densification of glass balls have been carried out Density does not constitute a full description of the state of the granular material and the evolution of the packing. Other experiments have observed the behaviour of the packing in more detail for example X-Ray tomography of particle arrays at various stages of compaction has also been undertaken The approach taken in this paper is to use the EMT framework to examine experimental results from our apparatus for in the first instance uniformly sized glass spheres, then glass spheres with broader size distributions and finally the alumina powders. This will allow us to assess the importance of the various factors such as size distribution and shape to the behaviour of the industrial particles of interest and help devise a repeatable measurement procedure. Conversely the measurements of sound velocity will also provide insight to the compaction behaviour of the standard particles. The apparatus for the sound velocity measurement is shown in The internal diameter of the sample holder is 60 Longitudinal ultrasonic measurements were made with Krautkramer Steinkamp transducers of nominal 50 The received ultrasonic signal was digitised by an A/D card at stored in the computer. A typical received pulse is shown in The measurement procedure for a single powder sample was standardised on a range of materials to enable comparison of results. Pressures of 0.15, 0.3 or 0.6 In the first consolidation measurement scheme a program triggers horizontal tapping at 100 The second type of experiment is used for single measurements from a sample. As will be demonstrated later simple compression is insufficient to create a reproducible state and cycling of the pressure to remove hysteresis is also required The measurement system determines time of flight (TOF) as the time elapsed to the first positive pressure peak above half the maximum amplitude of the signal (see Glass ballotini and glass spheres were used as the standard materials to perform tests of the EMT in this experimental apparatus. The glass ballotini has different size grades, with relatively broad size distributions for each grade. Some of the AC glass ballotini was sieved to produce a narrow distribution and called SAC glass. The values of the physical parameters used in the rest of the paper for the glass spheres and ballotini are shear modulus μ The transmission of an ultrasonic burst through granular material produces a ballistic pulse with a scattering induced coda following in its aftermath For long wavelength conditions Effective Medium Theories (EMTs) The longitudinal sound speed (P-wave speed) V in an isotropic solid is given by The two elastic moduli K the bulk modulus and μ the shear modulus can be calculated with an EMT theory when uniform pressure is applied. Using the formulation of Makse et al. where Z is the average number of contacts per particle, ϕ is the packing fraction of solids, In the case of our experiment however the force is applied uni-axially in the direction that the sound is propagating. Under these conditions the powder is not isotropic so the bulk and shear moduli cannot be defined. The EMT framework can still be used to calculate the longitudinal sound velocity parallel to the applied force using the formulation of Walton where ε is a function of the glass elastic moduli given by The experimental program had three phases. In the first the ultrasonic velocity of iron ore pellets were measured. These pellets are approximately 1 The first industrial material measured was iron ore pellets. Three sets of iron ore pellets were produced so they would have different strengths. These strengths were then measured by standard crush tests The first experiment conducted on the standard particles was to measure the variation of velocity with pressure using the second experimental method described in 30 For the two coarsest materials the compaction scheme produced no significant change in the measured velocity, excluding the measurement made with no tapping at all. In the 0.181 All the grades of ballotini also showed the variability in velocity along with the steady densification and the P A set of uncalcined (hydrate) and calcined alumina samples was obtained for sound velocity measurements. The crystallisation process that forms the powders involves a great deal of agglomeration of individual crystal seeds as well as direct crystal growth. The calcined alumina samples were produced by calcining (heating) a portion of each of the uncalcined samples. This process drives off water from the particles and leads to more porous and friable particles. Each of these samples had the attrition index (AI) measured in another laboratory with the fraction less than 45 As a preliminary step one alumina sample had the velocity measured as a function of pressure. This gave a value for the pressure index of 0.161 with a standard error of 0.016, again consistent with the value of 1/6th. The repeatability of velocity measurement by the second scheme was also investigated. Several of the test materials were measured 5 times and the results reported in Measurements of ultrasonic velocity V, and bulk density D were made according to scheme 2 for the total set of 12 alumina samples. These two values were then correlated with the A.I. measurements to determine whether there was any relationship in the simple linear relation shown in Eq. where a and b are unknown co-efficients determined by the correlation procedure. The results are shown in The goal of the experimental work described in this paper was to provide an initial assessment of the feasibility of sound measurement in aggregates, evaluate the relevance of published theory, and develop criteria by which to judge the feasibility of any potential application, especially in alumina powders. Sound measurement was achieved in aggregates and powders for ratios of pressure to Young's modulus of 10 The simplest theory that can be developed to describe sound propagation in powders under pressure is the EMT. It applies in principle to uniformly sized spheres where the sound wavelength is much greater than the particle size and the particles have a Hertzian contact force. In both Eqs. The validity of the EMT formulation was tested first by checking materials for the P Next the values of Z can be calculated from ultrasonic measurements in packings of glass spheres with known physical properties. For 1 For smaller particles, both glass spheres of uniform size, broadly size distributed glass spheres, and broadly distributed blocky material, the velocity did not remain uniform under tapping. For the 0.181 What is clear is that simply tapping the powder for a fixed period of time and measuring the packing density is unable to produce stable velocity measurements and hence measurements of particle properties. For this reason the second measurement scheme was developed that involved tapping then cycling of the pressure ten times. This produced much improved repeatabilities in the velocity measurement of 3.0% for the 0.181 Having established a measurement procedure with acceptable repeatability the next step is to relate the velocity and bulk density measurements to the properties of the particles as measured by standard strength tests. The first demonstration in iron ore pellets was with a single layer of particles. This demonstrated that the measurement of ultrasonic velocity could be related to strength, as measured in a crush test, at least for this class of agglomerated particles. For powders where many layers of particles the bulk density and the ultrasonic velocity were used to correlate with the attrition index strength measurement. At least for alumina powders, which are irregular in shape unlike the glass spheres, the direct correction by theory for bulk density was insufficient to produce satisfactory results and correlation had to be used. The most interesting feature of these correlations was that the sign of the velocity term changes from before to after calcining for both particle size measurement techniques. The more cracked and porous calcined alumina being stronger with faster ultrasonic velocity, matching the iron ore pellets. This suggests that the uncalcined alumina is not able to be modelled as an agglomerate, but the calcined alumina, where the structure has been weakened maybe able to be modelled in this way. In all cases the bulk density only acts as a minor correction to the velocity term in the correlation. Ultrasonic velocity measurement is shown to be a feasible technique for assessing particle the strength in a class of industrially useful materials. These include iron ore pellets and alumina powders. To perform these measurements in powders careful attention must be paid to the packing state of the particles, especially for powders where the diameter was less than 0.2 ultrasonic longitudinal velocity bulk modulus pressure average number of contacts per particle elastic constants of convenience bulk density elastic constant defined by calibration coefficients shear modulus Poisson's ratio density packing fraction second Lame parameter elastic constant of convenience maximum acceleration caused by tapping The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of M Schibeci for preparing the alumina samples and measuring their attrition indexes.