In a recent work, Wang et al. [Wang G, Tang K, Tai CH. Parametric representation of a surface pencil with common spatial geodesic. Computer-Aided Design 2004;36(5): 447–59] discuss a constrained design problem appearing in the textile and shoe industry for garment design. Given a model and size, the characteristic curve called girth is usually fixed, and preferably should be a geodesic for manufacturing reasons. The designer must preserve this girth, being allowed to modify other areas according to aesthetic criteria. We present a practical method to construct polynomial surfaces from a polynomial geodesic or a family of geodesics, by prescribing tangent ribbons. Differently from previous procedures, we identify the existing degrees of freedom in terms of control points, and our method yields parametric polynomial surfaces that can be incorporated into commercial CAD programs. The extension to rational geodesics is also outlined.The Here we focus our attention on a problem related to geodesics that arises in garment design. Given a model and size, the characteristic curve called We have thus identified our constrained design problem: how to construct surfaces from a given curve (or several curves), such that the curve becomes a geodesic in the surface. This problem, for the simple case of one curve, was tackled by Wang et al. The paper is arranged as follows. In Section To solve our constrained design problem, rather than employing the metric definition of a geodesic in terms of length minimization, we resort to the alternative characterization using local properties. A geodesic Some textbooks on differential geometry We have just concluded that the geodesic condition basically constrains the orientation of the tangent plane to the surface along the prescribed geodesic Obtain the pencil of ruled surfaces ( Identify the construction of Given an arbitrary parametric curve Expression The remarkable case of an integral Bézier isogeodesic Consider a degree- We hence conclude that   For the common case of a cubic isogeodesic ( In some cases, surfaces are constructed from planar sections, simpler to draw for a CAD user. A planar isogeodesic In the polynomial case, if we want a ruled surface of degree ( In this planar case the construction extends in a straightforward manner from a single Bézier geodesic to a B-spline curve. Given a B-spline curve    Once we have solved the construction of ruled surfaces from a polynomial isogeodesic, the extension to the real case of designing an arbitrary surface is immediate. We are to define a rectangular Bézier surface  Clearly, reproducing the construction above at both sides of a given isogeodesic To achieve parametric Our method extends easily to the constrained construction of a surface from two isogeodesics. Consider first the case of a Bézier surface  Suppose now that we are given a one-parameter family of isogeodesics, and we want to construct a skinning surface that interpolates all those curves. By repeating the construction of the preceding section between each pair of curves, we get a In this section, we outline the case when the prescribed isogeodesic is a rational Bézier curve Regarding the tangent Let us compute now the binormal to the isogeodesic. Given a 3D Bézier curve We are now ready to define the directrix For a cubic geodesic In the approximate flattening of surfaces, we can devise a mapping that avoids distortion along a geodesic on the surface, transforming it into a straight line and preserving its length. Such a property is highly convenient in the shoe and garment industry, where the designer must preserve certain curves. This restriction leads to a constrained design problem: how to construct a surface from one or several geodesics. The geodesic condition constrains the orientation of the tangent plane to the surface along the prescribed geodesic. The key idea is first to generate the pencil of ruled surfaces ( The basic building block is thus the ruled surface that has as boundary the prescribed geodesic. In Bézier form, whereas one line of control points is inherited from the geodesic, in the other line some control points are partially or totally constrained from the geodesic condition. This tangent ribbon furnishes two lines of control points in the sought Bézier or B-spline surface. The remaining control points can be freely chosen. The extension to the construction of a surface interpolating several isogeodesics is a straightforward problem. Finally, the case of a rational geodesic is easily tackled in homogeneous space. This work is supported by the Spanish