Background
                  The purpose of this study is to introduce and review the clinical outcomes of a new technique for harvesting autogenous cancellous bone grafts in association with tibial intramedullary (IM) nailing.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed 21 patients who received autogenous cancellous bone grafts obtained from the entry portal of a tibial IM nail for fracture gaps, malalignment or nonunion in the lower extremities. All patients were scheduled to receive IM nailing or had already received IM nailing for the fixation of an ipsilateral tibia shaft fracture. A total of 33 patients who received only tibial IM nailing were selected as a control group. Through the follow-up, postoperative complications related to the bone harvest were monitored. Further by taking serial X-rays, radiographic changes of the donor site and the knee joint were closely observed. Knee pain (visual analogue scale (VAS)) and function (Lysholm knee score) were compared between the study group and the control group.
               
                  Results
                  At the last follow-up, the average VAS in the study group was 1.28 (0–5), which was not significantly different from the control group (VAS: 1.36, range 0–7) (P
                     =0.985). The range of motion of the knee joint was similar in both groups, averaging 130.23° (range: 115–135°) and 131.36° (range: 115–135°), respectively. There was no significant difference in the Lysholm knee score between the study and control groups (P
                     =0.610). All patients exhibited complete fracture healing at an average of 6months and no complications associated with the bone donor site were observed.
               
                  Conclusions
                  By using the new technique, autogenous cancellous bone grafting can be performed conveniently and safely to treat fracture gaps, malalignment or nonunion in the lower extremities without additional morbidity at the donor site.Although several bone substitutes have been introduced and commercialised, autogenous bone grafting is still preferred due to its effectiveness. Besides the iliac crest, the distal femur, proximal tibia, distal tibia, fibula and calcaneus are possible lower extremity bone graft donor sites. This study was approved by our institutional review board. From August 1998 to January 2009, patients who met the following conditions were selected to receive autogenous bone grafts using the new technique: a patient who was scheduled to receive tibial IM nailing, a patient who had already received IM nailing for the fixation of an ipsilateral tibia shaft fracture and was scheduled to remove or exchange the nail, accompanying concomitant problems at the same leg, which needed a cancellous bone graft and normal proximal tibial anatomy with intact knee joint, which was confirmed by preoperative X-rays. Further, the exclusion criteria were specified as follows: patients who had any joint lesions due to systemic disease (rheumatoid arthritis, gout or other connective tissue disease), a history of a fracture at the same leg or previous operation involving the knee joint (menisectomy, anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction or other soft-tissue surgeries) and patients who needed structural bone graft. Twenty-one patients met the inclusion criteria and were eligible for the study group. Using the patients’ medical records, we reviewed age at time of presentation, gender, history of trauma, initial symptoms and durations, as well as the number of previous operations. All the patients underwent autogenous bone grafting from the proximal tibial metaphysis due to a bone defect after fracture or its complications, such as malalignment or nonunion, all of which occurred in the tibia, fibula or foot on the same limb. The patients consisted of 16 men and five women with an average age of 40 A total of eight cases of nonunion were treated with proximal tibia bone grafting (tibia: five and distal fibula: three). If bone union was not achieved within 9 In four cases, malalignment of more than 10 Four patients received temporary external fixators for open tibial fractures that were later converted into IM nailing ( Four cases presented moderate bone defects over 1 One patient sustained tibial fractures and fracture dislocation of the ipsilateral Lisfranc joint. Both fractures were treated with IM nailing and multiple pinning after reduction. After 16 A total of 33 patients (men: 25 and women: 8) were selected for the control group. The control group exhibited the same inclusion and exclusion criteria as the study group, except that they only had tibia shaft fracture without concomitant injuries. The average age of the control group was 39 Each patient was placed on an ordinary operating table in the supine position with a tourniquet at the proximal thigh. An image intensifier was placed on the contralateral side of the operation field. For the 13 patients who already had an IM nail from the initial operation, a skin incision was made along the previous operation scar. All prior scars were located on the anterior aspect of the patella tendon. For the eight patients who were planned to receive IM nailing, a midline skin incision was also made on the anterior aspect of the patella tendon starting at the inferior pole of the patella and extending 3 Postoperative follow-up was performed on a regular basis at 1 Two-sample nonparametric Mann–Whitney tests were used to compare VAS, range of motion and Lysholm knee scores between the study and control groups using SAS software version 9.1 (SAS Inc., Cary, NC, USA). To determine potential age and gender differences between the two groups, In total, 21 cases of the study group were followed up for more than 2 Each patient's serial X-rays were reviewed by three authors. There were no significant changes such as knee joint space narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral cyst formation, newly developed fracture line, depression around tibial plateau or alteration of radio opacity at the donor site. There were no infections, dysesthesias, fractures or haematomas around the donor sites, or other specific complications immediately after the operation or during the follow-up period. Complete bony union was achieved at the grafted site after a mean duration of 5.7 The first autogenous cancellous bone graft was documented by van Meekeren Including the largest study (230 patients) by O’Keeffe et al., Despite all of the advantages, harvesting bone from the proximal tibia using the previous technique bears sensory-related complications, likely, due to injury to the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve or the lateral sural cutaneous nerve from the common peroneal nerve. Gerdy's tubercle was used as an anatomic landmark, and a separate incision was made around the antero-lateral aspect of the proximal tibia. Using the entry of the IM nail as an access point for harvesting bone has numerous advantages. Unlike the ilium, a tourniquet can be applied proximal to the operation field, which can lessen unnecessary bleeding. Surgeons also have more options for anaesthesia; this may prevent inadequate anaesthesia. The limitations of the current study include the small patient sample and its retrospective nature. In addition, since the bone was harvested only in the needed amounts, it was difficult to assess the maximum amount of grafted bone in clinical situation. Despite these limitations, the current study suggests that it is possible to obtain a sufficient amount bone for grafting using the entry site of the tibial nail, without complications at the donor site. This technique was especially useful for nail conversion from external fixation and exchange IM nailing with a persistent fracture gap. During the follow-up period, knee function and pain in the experimental group did not differ from those of the control group. These findings demonstrate that this technique is a potentially useful approach for bone harvesting, at least in similar contexts. The authors confirm that no benefits in any form have been received or will be received from other people or a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. The authors thank D.S. Jang for his excellent support with medical illustrations.