In order to investigate the difference in flotation kinetics of various size fractions of bituminous coal between rougher and cleaner flotation processes, clean coal was collected as a function of time in both rougher and cleaner flotation processes. The size composition of clean coal was then analyzed. Six flotation kinetic models were applied to the modeling of data from the flotation tests by using MATrix LABoratory software. The relationship between flotation rate constant, maximum combustible recovery and particle size was also studied. The results show that the maximum flotation combustible recovery and flotation rate are obtained with an intermediate particle size both in the rougher and cleaner flotation processes. The combustible recovery and flotation rate are higher in the cleaner flotation process than that in the rougher flotation process. Except the classical first-order flotation kinetic model, the other five kinetic models gave an excellent fit to the flotation data. The rougher flotation process can be described using the first-order and second-order models while the cleaner flotation process can only be described using the first-order model. It is found that the first-order model with rectangular distribution of floatability provides the best fit of the experimental data obtained from both the rougher and cleaner flotation processes among the tested models.Flotation is a physico-chemical separation process based on the difference in surface properties between valuable minerals and gangues. Flotation kinetics can be described using the mathematical models which incorporate both a recovery and a rate function, since the flotation process is theoretically considered as a time-rate recovery process The first flotation model was proposed in the 1930s A single-stage circuit is commonly applied in coal flotation, i.e., rougher flotation process In this study, the particle size distribution of collected clean coal in various flotation stages both in rougher and cleaner processes was analyzed, and six kinetic flotation models were selected to test their applicability for various size fractions of coal both in rougher and cleaner flotation stages. In addition, a major attempt of the paper was to discuss the differences in the flotation kinetics of various size fractions between rougher and cleaner flotation process. A bituminous coal sample obtained from Yunhe Mine of Shangdong province, China, was used in this investigation. The sample was screened to pass 500 In the flotation experiments, kerosene and DL-2-Octanol (DLO) were used as the collector and frother, respectively. The flotation water used in the experiments was tap water, and the chemical composition was shown in The flotation tests were divided into two parts: (1) rougher flotation tests; and (2) cleaner flotation tests. The rougher flotation tests were performed in a 1.5-L Denver flotation cell. In each test, 150 The cleaner flotation tests were also performed in a 1.5-L Denver flotation cell, and the feed of which was the froth product of rougher flotation. The operating parameters of cleaner flotation tests were the same to those of rougher flotation tests. In each cleaner flotation test, the rougher flotation concentrate was poured into the cell and was agitated for 1 The final froth products from the rougher flotation tests and the cleaner flotation tests were both divided to 5 products according to the collection periods: 0–20 In this investigation, six flotation kinetic models were selected to study the flotation performance of various size fractions in rougher flotation and cleaner flotation processes, as shown in The flotation time-combustible recovery of various size fractions in rougher flotation process are shown in Flotation is a physic-chemical separation process, in which hydrophobic particles are captured by air bubbles and eventually reported to the froth product. This process is determined by three most critical steps including the particle–bubble collision, attachment, and detachment The cumulative combustible recovery at 20, 40, 80, 120, and 200 As shown in As shown in  Non-linear regression results for six models fitting to the cleaner flotation results are given in It can be observed from the results in In the cleaner flotation tests, the feed owned a good floatability, and a high combustible recovery can be obtained after a short flotation time. As shown in It also can be seen in As shown in In this investigation, the difference in flotation rates of various size fractions of bituminous coal between rougher and cleaner flotation processes was studied. Six flotation kinetic models were applied in the fitting process of the flotation data from the rougher and cleaner flotation tests. The MATLAB software was used to estimate the relationship between the flotation rate constant (K), the maximum combustible recovery (ε Both in the rougher and cleaner flotation processes, the maximum flotation combustible recoveries and flotation rates were obtained with an intermediate particle size. Besides, the combustible recoveries and flotation rates of various size fractions were improved in the cleaner flotation process. In this investigation, the maximum recovery of 87.15% was obtained with the − Compared with the rougher flotation process, the flotation rates of various size fractions were increased in the cleaner flotation process, and the increases of coarse and fine particle size fractions were especially more obvious than those of the intermediate particle size fractions. The flotation kinetic of the rougher flotation process can be described using the first-order and second-order models while that of the cleaner flotation process can only be described using the first-order models. The first-order model with rectangular distribution of floatability was considered to be the most reasonable to fit the results from both rougher and cleaner flotation processes among the tested models. This work was supported by the