The best way to control respirable coal dust in mines is not to generate it. The chapter analyzes the respirable dust generation mathematically and relates it to various chemical and physical properties of coal. Next, an experimental method to measure the production of respirable dust is presented. Eighteen samples of coal are subjected to the same comminution process, and the resulting fraction of respirable dust is called the respirable dust index (RDI) of that coal. It ranges from 6.4 to 28.5, indicating that some coal will produce four to five times more respirable dust when mined by the same machine. RDI is significantly dependent on moisture, fixed carbon (D.A.F.), ash (dry), and fusain content of coal. Similar studies conducted later on reconfirmed the original findings by Thakur. Sharpness of the cutting bit also impacts respirable dust generation. A blunt bit may product 25% more respirable dust compared to that produced by a new, sharp bit.A Mathematical Model for Respirable Dust Generation Sample Preparation and Experimental Details Bleuler Rotary Mill Procedure for Grinding Yield of Respirable Dust Dependence of Respirable Dust Index on the Properties of Coal Effect of Moisture Effect of Volatile Content or Carbon Content Effect of Ash Content Effect of Fusain Content Statistical Analysis of Data Correlation Between the Logarithm of Variables Regression Analysis Results of Similar, Subsequent Studies Srikanth's Studies Jha's Studies Impact of Cutting Bit Wear on Respirable Dust Production References It has been well established that the amount of respirable dust produced in the mining process is a function of two groups of variables Material-dependent variables, such as moisture content, hardness, etc. Breaking mechanism–dependent variables, e.g., type of machine, size of cutting tool, depth of cut, etc. Studies on size distribution of broken coal have indicated that the breaking mechanism (except for bit sharpness) has a significant impact only in the coarser range (above 100 On the other hand, physical properties of coal have considerable influence on the production of respirable dust particles Panov  The physical properties of coal that affect the production of dust, namely, resistance to comminution, microstrength Moisture content of coal (as received). Ash content (dry). Volatile matter content (dry ash free [DAF]). Fixed carbon content (DAF). Fixed carbon/volatile matter (DAF). Fusain content. The various coal types or even coal seams can, thus, be indexed with respect to their proneness to respirable dust production based on their proximate and petrological analyses. Because these coal constituents are easily measurable, such indexing will help the mining engineers in preplanning their dust control programs. To eliminate the effect of the breaking mechanism, all the samples were subjected to the same comminution process in Thakur's experiment Thakur Moisture was not included in Eighteen coal samples studied represented the various ranks of coal from anthracite to lignite. Details of locations from which the samples have been drawn, type of coal, and  A schematic view of the Bleuler rotary mill is shown in A Bleuler mill provides an efficient and rapid means for grinding samples and meets the requirements of reproducibility of particle size distribution for optical and X-ray fluorescence spectrographic studies. The time of grinding can be preset and is controlled electrically. Twenty grams of the closely sized material was ground for 1 The observations made and the calculated data obtained for all 18 coal samples are shown in The maximum respirable size is taken as 10 This maximum respirable size was calculated for each coal type. This is shown in From sample number 1: Average yield of −37 Maximum respirable size for sample number 1 Referring to the mass distribution curve for sample number 1, shown in Total percent yield Different ranks of coal appear to yield different amounts of respirable dust (6.4%–28.5%) for the same energy input yielding different RDIs ( Variation of RDI with moisture is shown in The fixed carbon content (DAF) is equal to 100-volatile percentage (DAF). Both of these measure the degree of metamorphosis the coal has undergone. The variation of RDI with ash content is shown in  Because the data presented and discussed earlier show great scatter, a statistical analysis was done to determine the correlation coefficients and regression coefficients of RDI with respect to the various properties of coal. Standard library programs were used for this purpose. It was shown earlier To obtain such a relationship in this case, the logarithm of the variables were used as input to the statistical analysis program. RDI was the dependent variable, and the moisture content, ash content, volatile content, fixed carbon content, ratio of fixed carbon/volatile and fusain content were used as the independent variables. This was obtained using library program “PPMCR” (Pearson product moment correlation coefficient). The results are given in Moisture appears to be well correlated with fixed carbon with a correlation coefficient of 0.4224. It was, therefore, not used in the subsequent regression analysis. The data from the PPMCR analysis were used as input into another library program called “UPREG,” which carried out a regression analysis. The fixed carbon content, Hence, log RDI Taking antilog on both sides: The standard error of estimate is 13.6%. Nearly 25 Srikanth Higher rank coals produced more total dust (<15 The Rosin–Rammler graph distribution parameter, n, was also rank dependent. The value for n was 0.68, 0.84, 0.90, and 0.95 for semianthracite, low-volatile coal, high-volatile bituminous coal, and subbituminous coals, respectively. This is similar to findings by Thakur (refer to High-rank coals produce a higher proportion of submicron dust particles. Jha Data in Although it is generally true that the breaking machinery does not have much influence on respirable dust production, the cutting bit design and consequent specific energy of producing a ton of coal has a direct impact. New, sharp bits have a lower specific energy consumption (Kwh/ton) compared with older, damaged bits. Khair