The influence of dry-wet change process on rock thermal conductivity is the key to many geological and engineering issues, especially for rocks with high clay mineral content. In this study, sandstone with different clay mineral contents were subjected to different treatment processes, namely drying, wetting and drying II, and their thermal conductivity were measured through the hot wire method. The results indicate that the thermal conductivity of the samples subjected to the drying II treatment was significantly lower than that of the samples subjected to the drying treatment, and the magnitude of the decrease was related to the clay mineral content in the samples. Moreover, using the effective thermal conductivity calculation model that considers microcracks, it is found that the main reason for the decrease in the thermal conductivity of sample is the large number of secondary cracks generated in sample during the wetting-drying process. According to the pore structure and the microstructure of the samples under different state, it is speculated that the dissolution of soluble minerals, disintegration of minerals, swelling and shrinking of clay minerals are the possible causes of cracks in the sample during the wetting-drying process.The understanding of heat transfer in rock is critical for underground engineering and geological science ( An abundance of papers have been published in recent years addressing the subject of rock thermal conductivity using theoretical, experimental or numerical methods ( Many experiments and models mentioned above focus on the effect of water in pore on the thermal conductivity. Nagaraju and Roy (2014) conducted an experimental study on igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks, and found that the effect of water saturation on thermal conductivity increases with growth of porosity. The thermal conductivity of dry, different fluid-saturated (gas, oil and water) rocks (sandstone, limestone etc.) at different temperature was measured using a steady-state guarded parallel-plate apparatus, and a model of effective thermal conductivity for saturated rocks that takes into account the structure of porous media was proposed by In general, the effective thermal conductivity of rock is determined by the thermal conductivity of the matrix, the porosity, and the fluid in the pores. The thermal conductivity of the matrix, either in saturated or dry state, should be an intrinsic value that is independent of the fluid in pore. However, there is a significant deviation in the calculation of matrix thermal conductivity in saturated and dry state ( As shown in After all the samples were ready, as shown in Samples in natural state. In this state, the sample did not undergo any drying or wetting treatment after processing. Samples in drying state. Samples were dried in a vacuum oven at 70 °C for 24 h and then cooled down to room temperature (25 ± 1 °C). Samples in wetting state. It is challenging to obtain a fully saturated sample, especially for sandstone that contains clay. In this investigation, samples were first dried and vacuumed, then immersed in distilled water for 72 h to achieve the wetting state. The water content of specimen during the soaking process can be calculated by Eq. ( Sample in wetting-drying state. The sample in this state is dried again based on step (3) (We call this process drying II for convenience). In other words, the rock in this state goes through a process from natural state to drying and to wetting and then to drying again. We call it the wetting-drying state. In this study, the thermal conductivity of the sample was measured through the hot wire method suggested by ISRM ( After measuring the thermal conductivity, the porous characteristics of the samples under different conditions were measured by Mercury intrusion porosimeter (MIP) (Auto Pore IV 9500 V1.09 mercury porosimeter). In recent years, this method has been applied to study the Pore characteristics of rock and soil ( A large amount of published literatures ( (1) Mean of arithmetic and harmonic (2) Mean of Hashin & Shtrikman (3) Geometric mean In addition, the thermal conductivity of rock matrix is calculated by The measured effective thermal conductivity of three groups samples in different state were shown in Regarding the group II of samples with the second highest clay mineral content (40.81 %), the measured thermal conductivity in different states was shown in Regarding the group III of samples with the lowest clay mineral content (19.61 %), the measured thermal conductivity in different states was shown in   Moreover, the porosity, specific surface area and average pore size of the three groups of samples in different states were shown in In order to analyze the variation of thermal conductivity under state of drying and wetting-drying, we proposed the change rate of thermal conductivity under two different drying states, which can be defined as: According to the previous analysis, the drying process caused a slight change in the pore structure of samples, while the process of wetting and drying II had a great influence on the pore structure of the three groups of sandstone, such as the increase of porosity, the increase of pore size and the redistribution of pores. In order to further quantitatively analyze the effect of pore structure changes on thermal conductivity, we used the three models introduced in the previous section to calculate the thermal conductivity of the sample in different states and compare it with the measured value. Moreover, the thermal conductivity of the rock matrix under drying and wetting-drying state is analyzed in According to the above analysis, it can be seen that the thermal conductivity of the samples decreases significantly under the wetting-drying state, but the model used above is not enough to explain the dramatic change. The study of In this study, the microstructure of samples under different states was observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM). As shown in Further analyze of the causes of microcracks: (1) During the wetting treatment, due to the high clay content in the sandstone samples, the clay minerals in the primary pores float after contacting water, while some clay minerals in the rocks are dissolved, which is proved by the slight turbidity of the water observed in some of our containers. These two phenomena lead to an increase in the pore diameter of the primary pores of the sandstone and the generation of secondary pores. In the process of drying II treatment, clay particles floating in wetting begin to precipitate in the process of water evaporation, which leads to the redistribution of mineral particles, and if clay particles precipitate on the mineral surface with high thermal conductivity (such as quartz), the effective thermal conductivity of rock will also be reduced. Due to the uncertainty of the water-bearing state in the natural state, this phenomenon may also exist in the process of drying treatment, but it is not obvious. With the further development and connection of primary pores and secondary pores, microcracks will occur in the rock structure. (2) We suppose that the cause of these microcracks is the repeated drying-wetting-drying treatment process leading to the disintegration of some rock fragments and reducing the cementation between the loose minerals ( This work focused on the effect of drying, wetting and drying II processes on thermal conductivity of clay-bearing sandstone. The thermal conductivity, porous characteristics and microstructure of sandstone with different clay content under natural, wetting, drying and wetting-drying state were tested and analyzed respectively. Based on the current experimental results, main conclusions were obtained as follows. The experimental results show that the wetting-drying process has a significant influence on the thermal conductivity of clay-bearing sandstone. Compared with the thermal conductivity in the drying state, the thermal conductivity in the wetting-drying state is significantly reduced, and the decrease is positively related to the clay content of the sandstone. The analysis results of the model considering microcracks indicate that, in addition to the changes in the original pore structure during the wetting-drying process, the main reason for the significant decrease in thermal conductivity is the large number of secondary microcracks generated in the clay-bearing sandstone during the wetting-drying process. Furthermore, the cause for the presence of microcracks is speculated. Possible reasons include the dissolution of soluble minerals, disintegration of some rock fragments, the swelling and the shrinking of clay minerals during the wetting-drying process, etc. I have made substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; AND I have drafted the work or revised it critically for important intellectual content; AND I have approved the final version to be published; AND I agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. All persons who have made substantial contributions to the work reported in the manuscript, including those who provided editing and writing assistance but who are not authors, are named in the Acknowledgments section of the manuscript and have given their written permission to be named. If the manuscript does not include Acknowledgments, it is because the authors have not received substantial contributions from nonauthors. We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled, “Experimental investigation on thermal conductivity of clay-bearing sandstone subjected to different treatment processes: wetting, drying and drying II” Funding for this work was provided by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: