High pressure homogenization can be employed to produce drug nanocrystals with a number of advantages, like improved solubility behaviors, better drug targeting or even increased mucoadhesiveness. To obtain a controlled drug delivery system it is necessary to transform the resulting nanosuspension into a solid dosage form. The present study shows the feasibility to use a mucoadhesive nanosuspension of poorly soluble hydrocortisone acetate produced by high pressure homogenization as layering dispersion in a fluidized bed process, followed by the application of an enteric coating to achieve a controlled drug release. To point out the advantages of drug nanocrystals the new fomulation was compared with a formulation containing micronized drug. Both formulations were characterized with regard to their particle size and crystallinity by using laser diffractometry, photon correlation spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction. The pellet morphology was characterized by using the environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM). In the in vitro dissolution tests an accelerated dissolution velocity and an increased drug release could be shown for the pellets containing drug nanocrystals.In order to improve the drug targeting and to enhance the oral bioavailability of problematic drugs, for instance peptides, proteins and poorly soluble drugs, new drug delivery systems have to be developed. Chitosan, a natural polymer obtained by the alkaline deacetylation of chitin, has many interesting properties for oral drug delivery. Chitosan based dosage forms are able to adhere to mucosal surfaces, the decreased absorption distance increases the local drug concentration without dilution or degradation in luminal fluids (an important factor for better drug absorption or local treatment). The direct mucosa contact prevents labile drugs, such as proteins, from degradation and chitosan is able to open tight junctions which leads to a better absorption of proteins Multiparticulate drug delivery systems, particularly coated pellet systems, possess many advantages in comparison to single-unit dosage forms, such as more predictable gastric emptying The combination of the advantages of the mucoadhesion principle and nanonization of the drug consequently leads to dosage forms with increased efficiency To date only few data are available on the incorporation of drug nanocrystals into solid dosage forms, although one multiparticulate dosage form containing drug nanocrystals has already entered the market (Emend The new approach in this study was to formulate the poorly soluble model drug hydrocortisone acetate (1.41 Micronized hydrocortisone acetate (HCA) was purchased from Synopharm (Barsbüttel, Germany). Poloxamer 188 from BASF (Ludwigshafen, Germany), chitosan chloride (Protasan The nanonized layering dispersion (formulation A) was prepared by using the high pressure homogenization as described as follow: Poloxamer 188 and chitosan chloride were dissolved in Millipore water. The micronized drug was dispersed in the aqueous phase using an Ultra Turrax T25 (Jahnke & Kunkel, Staufen, Germany) for 1 The particle size was analyzed by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) using a Zetasizer 4 (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, United Kingdom) yielding the PCS mean diameter as a light intensity weighted size of the bulk population ( Dispersions A and B were layered onto sugar spheres (non-parails) with a diameter of 710–850 Subsequently a top-coating with enteric polymer (Eudragit For the layering and coating conditions see X-ray diffraction was used to study the crystallinity of the pure micronized drug powder, the dispersion medium and resulting formulations A and B. Locust bean gum was added as thickening agent to the suspensions and the pure dispersion medium in order to make the liquids accessible to the measurement without a drying step. Diffraction patterns were measured using a Philips X-ray generator PW 1830 equipped with a copper cathode ( The morphology of the uncoated and coated pellet formulations as well as the thickness of the different layers was investigated by using a XL30 ESEM (FEI-Phillips; Kassel, Germany) with a low vac LFD (large field detector) in the ESEM-modus. A Pharmatest PTW SIII (Pharma Test, Hainburg, Germany) dissolution tester, Apparatus 2 was used for all dissolution studies. The dissolution medium for the first 2 The drug content of the dissolution tests samples was investigated by using high performance liquid chromatography. A Nucleosil 100 column, 5 The preparation of drug nanocrystals by high pressure homogenization, established by Mueller et al., is a well known technique to increase the solubility and dissolution velocity of poorly soluble drugs, either in aqueous or in non-aqueous media In the present study the minimum particle size was reached after 20 homogenization cycles. The bottom of The size of the micronized suspension was assayed only with laser diffractrometry (because of the larger particle size PCS was not suitable). The mean diameter (d 50%) was 8.677 In conclusion, the requirements for increasing saturation solubility and increased dissolution velocity of poorly soluble drugs can be easily achieved by using the high pressure homogenization. Twenty homogenization cycles were necessary to produce a suspension with a particle size in the nanometer range (nanosuspension) and a narrow range of the particle size distribution. Another factor influencing the dissolution behavior of drugs is their crystalline structure. With decreasing crystallinity and a more amorphous state of the drug the saturation solubility and the dissolution velocity increases. The high power density in the piston-gap homogenizer leads to a high energy input during the homogenization process. In some cases it can causes a more amorphous state of the drug after homogenization. This effect can lead to increased saturation solubility and accelerated dissolution velocity of the poorly soluble drugs A change in crystallinity can be sometimes useful, for instance to increase the stability of amorphous starting material. But with respect to long-term storage stability a change in crystallinity is often not desired, especially in case of crystalline starting material. An increased amorphous state of the drug is only useful if it can be maintained over the storage time. Therefore the influence of the high pressure homogenization on the crystallinity of hydrocortisone acetate was investigated by X-ray diffraction. In order to achieve a controlled drug release and a better drug targeting, as well as a stable product of labile compounds, the nanosuspension has to be transferred into a solid dosage form. One approach is the preparation of matrix-pellets using an extrusion-spheronization process followed by fluidized bed coating to achieve an enteric coated product  This system has at least two major benefits in comparison to the matrix system. First, the layering process is fast and simple and uses the same equipment necessary for the coating process. Secondly, the drug loading is almost not limited, with increasing layering level the drug loading increases, either. The main part of this study was to confirm the results anticipated in 3.1–3.3 by performing in-vitro dissolution studies. A 10% coating level of the enteric polymer was not sufficiently effective in both cases, neither for formulation A nor formulation B. The drug release was about 40% in the 0.1 Pellets containing drug nanocrystals were successfully produced by layering the freshly prepared nanosuspension directly onto sugar spheres using a fluidized bed coater. Afterwards an enteric coating was applied to achieve a pH-dependent drug release by using the same equipment. The used chitosan chloride works as a binder in the layering process as a physical stabilizer for the nanosuspension, as well as a mucoadhesive excipient, to increase the drug bioavailability. The comparison between nanonized and micronized drug formulation has clearly proven the advantages of using drug nanocrystals to achieve a fast and complete drug release of poorly soluble drugs. Nanosuspensions produced by high pressure homogenization can be directly used as layering dispersions and in this way they can be transferred into a multiparticulate solid dosage, which can be modified by applying a coating. JM and RHM wish to thank the Berliner Nachwuchsförderung for financial support (grant No. 038087). JM would like to acknowledge the valuable support of Katja Bringe (University of Bonn) and the support with materials by Röhm Pharma.