The concentration and viscosity of the slurry are related to each other, and they have a unique importance in the case of industrial application of the slurry. It is well known that the fluidity of a coal–water slurry with a high coal concentration is largely affected by the nature of the dispersing agent. Therefore, there are good reasons for seeking an understanding of the adsorption behavior of the dispersants on the coal particle surfaces. The aim of this investigation is to determine the adsorption behavior of a non-ionic dispersant, polyoxyethlene sorbitan monooleate, on Turkish lignite samples. The effects of the dispersant concentration, temperature, time and pH on dispersant adsorption were investigated systematically. The results are also analyzed by a two level factorial design matrix to explain the effects of the parameters on the adsorption, and multilinear mathematical models representing the adsorption behavior of the dispersant used within the experimental conditions are proposed for each coal sample used.Lignite is the primary energy source of Turkey. Large amounts of fine lignite particles form during the cleaning and mining processes in Turkey because of the soft characteristics of Turkish lignites. These fine lignite particles cannot be easily handled, stored and transported. These particles can also cause some environmental problems due to their low calorific values The concentration and viscosity of the slurry are related to each other, and they have a unique importance in the case of industrial application of the slurry. The CWS viscosity is closely related to a number of physical and chemical variables such as parent coal properties, particle size and distribution, type of dispersing agent, solid volume fraction, temperature etc. It is well known that the fluidity of a CWS with a high coal concentration is largely affected by the nature of the dispersing agent The chemical agents used in the preparation of a CWS need to be economical and provide the desired property at reasonably low concentrations. Because of the high cost of dispersants, it is indispensable to reduce the dispersant requirements for preparation of the CWS. Reduction of the amount of dispersants usually impairs the flow property and the static stability of the CWS. Therefore, it is very important to examine the adsorption properties of the dispersant and the amount of dispersant which is really necessary to make the coal particles disperse in water. The aim of this investigation is to determine the adsorption behavior of a non-ionic dispersant, polyoxyethlene sorbitan monooleate, on Turkish lignite samples, in the presence of a wetting agent. The effects of the dispersant concentration, temperature, time and pH on dispersant adsorption were investigated systematically. The results are also analyzed by a two level factorial design matrix to explain the effects of the parameters on adsorption, and multilinear mathematical models representing the adsorption behavior of the dispersant used within the experimental conditions are proposed for each coal sample used. Kütahya-Gediz (KG), Yozgat-Sorgun (YS) and Çayirhan-Ankara (CA) lignite samples taken from different parts of Turkey were used in this investigation. Proximate analyses and calorific values of the lignite samples were determined according to ASTM standards The dispersant used in this investigation is a non-ionic type dispersant, whose commercial name is Tween-80, a commercial mixture of polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate, supplied by Fluka. The chemical structure of the dispersant is given in Adsorption experiments were performed as follows: A slurry with a concentration of 20% lignite by weight was used in the experiments. “Distilled water” containing 0.75% wetting agent on the basis of weight of coal was used in the preparation of the slurry. A given amount of dispersant weight percentage upon coal was mixed with a given amount of “distilled water” thoroughly. Then, a certain amount of coal powder was added to the solution. This slurry was stirred at 500 rpm for a given time at a constant temperature. The slurry was then centrifuged, and the supernatant was analyzed to determine the dispersant concentration by using a Hewlett Packard 8452 A Diode Array UV spectrophotometer. The concentration of the dispersant was determined from the absorbance at 234 nm using predetermined calibration curves. Adsorption was calculated by using the initial and final dispersant concentrations. The adsorption behavior of polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate on lignite particle surfaces is investigated, and the results are discussed with respect to the effects of the amount of dispersant, temperature, time and pH on the adsorption. Since the cost of dispersant is high and an excess amount of dispersant causes some problems in the preparation and/or storage of the lignite–water slurry (LWS), it is essential to use the appropriate amount of dispersant in the preparation of the slurry. The amount of dispersant used in the preparation of the slurry should be minimized as much as possible. Therefore, the adsorption behaviour of a non-ionic type dispersant was investigated at different dispersant concentrations for the lignite samples studied. Since stirring time is one of the important parameters affecting the cost of the CWS, it must be kept as small as possible. Dispersant adsorption of 70–80% was chosen as a target for stirring time, and this was achieved within 1 h of stirring time. Therefore, stirring time was kept constant at 1 h in all experiments that are performed to obtain the effect of dispersant concentration on adsorption. As can be seen from Since the surface of coal is very complex in nature, the dispersant adsorption behavior changes from one sample to another, and it is difficult to explain the differences observed in dispersant adsorption behavior entirely. Our studies on dispersant adsorption behavior showed that a dispersant adsorption above 80% was not possible to reach for the KG lignite sample at its natural pH even after 10 h stirring time, whereas the dispersant adsorption was almost completed for the YS and CA lignite samples within 4 h. As far as the surface areas of the lignite samples studied are compared, it is seen that the surface areas of the KG and CA lignite samples are almost the same but that of YS is slightly higher. Therefore, this does not seem to be the reason for the dispersant adsorption limitation observed for the KG lignite sample. FTIR spectra of the lignite samples were compared to show whether functional groups of the lignite samples are responsible for the differences in dispersant adsorption behavior observed for each lignite sample. Aliphatic hydrocarbon contents of the YS and CA lignite samples seem to be almost the same, whereas that of the KG sample is higher. Aromatic CC content of the lignite samples follows the order: CA>YS>KG. With regard to carbonyl and carboxyl groups, there is a band at 1710 cm The hydrophilic areas of the coal contain carboxylic acid groups, with which the poly(oxyethylene) chains are known to form stable interpolymer complexes. The complexes form through hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl portion of carboxylic acid groups and the other oxygens of the poly(oxyethylene) chain. The hydrophobe of the surfactant would tend to absorb on the hydrophobic regions by a hydrophobic bonding mechanism As far as aliphatic hydrocarbon and aromatic CC contents of the KG lignite sample are considered, the former is higher and the latter is lower than that of the other lignite samples used. Hydrophilic sites on the lignite surface, resulting from the aliphatic hydrocarbon content of the lignite may also adversely affect the adsorption behavior of the Tween-80 dispersant, polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate.  The results revealed that the adsorption of the Tween-80 dispersant exhibited drastic changes with increased temperature from 278 to 303 K. It is known that non-ionics tend to have maximum surface activity near the cloud point. Drastic changes with increased temperature can be explained by the effect of temperature on the solubilization of the non-ionic dispersant molecules. When the temperature is increased, non-ionic molecules become more insoluble due to the dehydration of the polyoxyethylene chain, and thus, they become more surface active.  The results showed that the highest adsorption for the KG lignite was achieved at the pH value of 7, but the highest adsorptions for the YS and CA lignites were achieved at low pH values. The lower the pH value of the slurry, the higher is the adsorption of the Tween-80 dispersant. Adsorption of the non-ionic dispersant is most favored in acidic and neutral solutions, decreasing steadily with increasing pH in alkaline solutions. For the case of coal, the decrease in adsorption at alkaline pH may be attributed to the decreasing hydrophobicity of the coal The natural pH of the slurries prepared from the lignite samples was measured to be below 4.0. Preparing the slurry at its natural pH, i.e. with no addition of 1 M NH The effects of stirring time on the dispersant adsorption of lignite samples are shown in In this study, a statistical design technique described in detail elsewhere A full two level factorial design of experiments has been used to investigate the effect of process variables like temperature, time and pH on the dispersant adsorption of the lignite samples. The actual and coded values of the variables of the experiments are shown in The results given in The variance test of the parameters for the three samples showed that some of the variables are not statistically significant. Therefore, their respective terms can be rejected in the following proposed models. For YS lignite For CA lignite For KG lignite The correlation coefficients for The relationship between the coded values ( The regression equations, It may also be concluded from the regression models ( In the investigation of the adsorption of Tween-80 dispersant, a non-ionic type dispersant, polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate, on Turkish lignite samples in the presence of sodium lauryl ether sulfate as a wetting agent, the following results were obtained: The dispersant adsorption was found to be different for the used lignite samples. Dispersant adsorption above 80% was not possible to achieve for the KG lignite sample. The KG lignite sample does not contain carbonyl groups. This might have played a major role in the dispersant adsorption limitation. Hydrophilic sites on the lignite surface resulting from the aliphatic hydrocarbon content of the lignite adversely affected the adsorption behavior of Tween-80 dispersant. Adsorption of the Tween-80 dispersant was most favored in acidic and neutral solutions, decreasing steadily with increasing pH in alkaline solutions. The results showed that increasing the adsorption temperature from 278 to 303 K effectively changed the adsorption of Tween 80 dispersant. Multilinear mathematical models developed to predict the dispersant adsorption of lignite samples were found to be successful with coefficients of determination above 0.991, 0.999 and 0.994.