Explosive Compaction (EC) or Blast Densification (BD) has been commonly used as one of the deep soil improvement techniques to densify loose, saturated granular soils. Soil is compacted due to huge compression force of explosion in several depths and the corresponding liquefaction. Among soil characteristics, settlement is important since it is a fast and easy indicator of layer compaction degree. To measure settlement instrumentation can be used but they are expensive and susceptible to damage due to explosion. Predicting settlement using empirical equations is also another method, however, they cannot consider soil complex behavior and are consequently inaccurate. In this study, numerical approach has been used to evaluate settlement and excess pore water pressure (PWP) during and after explosion, using finite element software PLAXIS3D, in which the UBCSAND soil model has been employed to represent saturated sand. This model is capable of calculating PWP buildup due to dynamic loads such as earthquake and explosion. This method was calibrated and compared, using well-known case histories in the literature. Results of settlement from these cases, were compared with both empirical equations and measured site values. Pulses of PWP due to shock wave were also calculated by the model as well as PWP buildup until reaching liquefaction zone. Predictions from this approach were more accurate than empirical equations. Moreover, it was revealed that the rate of settlement and PWP dissipation is proportionate to soil's permeability. Thus, numerical approach can be confidently implemented to evaluate soil characteristics.Soil improvement involves modification of soil characteristics by increasing density, reducing volume change variations, and controlling water action Explosive Compaction or Blast Densification is a deep soil improvement method to densify loose saturated sands EC performance is most effective in soils with low relative density (R Evaluation of EC effectiveness is done by using various methods. Usually, after explosion, CPT results, excess PWP and settlement is reported. Results from excess PWP is used to assess the extent of soil liquefaction. CPT is used to determine how much strength is achieved by EC. Moreover, settlement provides useful data about the achieved density of the soil. According to case histories, the achieved settlement is 2–10% of the treated soil layer thickness In this study, settlement and excess PWP due to blast densification in sand deposits has been studied through the numerical approach. The Finite Element software, PLAXIS3D 2016 was used in this study. It is capable of calculating deformation under dynamic and static loading. Since EC involves both dynamic (explosion load) and quasi-static (excess PWP dissipation) phases, this software is suitable. UBCSAND soil model has been chosen to model soil complex behavior. This model has been commonly used for soils under dynamic loadings. The results are calibrated and compared with several well-known case history records. In 1936, the first EC project was performed to densify soil in Soviet Union. Despite the 440 EC is primarily used for soil densification, however, it has also been used for other purposes, such as inducing artificial earthquake for soil response assessment The energy released from explosion is consisted of two different types of energies: energy due to shock wave and energy due to gas expansion. Shock wave is an instant load with high pressure which, destroys soil structure. It expands radially in the soil medium. As the shock expands, the corresponding pressure decreases. The energy due to gas expansion is the result of chemical reactions in explosives. It exerts a series of compression and dilation loads with lower stress ratio in comparison to shock wave. This cyclic load induce shear loads and increases PWP, most of the times, until liquefaction Settlement and PWP, are two main characteristics that are evaluated in EC. Generally, evaluation of EC is done by using empirical approach and site instrumentation. In empirical approaches, empirical equations are used to predict soil response after EC. These equations are obtained by fitting a curve through the results of several case records. Empirical equations are easy to use and require less input, but they provide rough estimation and don’t give accurate results. Another method of EC evaluation is site monitoring via instrumentation. The shortcoming of instrumentation is its cost and susceptibility to damage. Moreover, evaluation of some characteristics varies over a significant period of time (Rollins, K.M., and Anderson, 2008). For example, Eslami On the other hand, numerical approach is another method that has not been entirely studied in the literature. Until now, there are few works of using numerical approach in EC evaluation. Lee An (2010) also wrote a subroutine to predict volumetric strain in saturated sand due to explosion. In this model, saturated sand during liquefaction was considered as fluid, thus an equation of state was written for the soil. The results were compared with data obtained from single blast experiment in saturated sand. The model predicted the volume change correctly. The shortcoming of this model was lack of PWP calculation. Moreover, the model was incapable of PWP dissipation and its corresponding settlement. Despite the lack of numerical analysis of explosion in soil, there are some researches regarding the effect of buried explosion on structures. Jayasinghe et al. Numerical modelling approach has been proven to be a precise and economical method to evaluate soil behavior in geotechnical problems. With limitation of current evaluation methods, numerical approach can be an essential method to evaluate EC. In order to calibrate, validate, and compare the approach used in this study, more than 30 cases of successful EC projects were compiled. The purpose of case histories were whether soil densification or liquefaction inducement. The typical soil layer for densification was loose saturated sand. Water table was reported to be near or at the ground surface. The data for each site includes, target layer thickness, Number of blast phases, Explosive weight, depth and arrangement (Triangular, Rectanglular or Circular), and the resulting settlement. Most of the settlements were in range of 2–10% of the treated layer thickness. As an example, numerical results of an EC project in South Carolina, which was conducted by Narsilio et al. Detonation delays were assigned between rows, which has been proven to increase the effectiveness of EC In order to obtain data before, during and after each blast, instruments were placed inside and outside the blast area. Surface and subsurface settlement, PWP, and peak particle velocity were measured during EC. Ground penetrating radar (GPR) was also used to monitor subsurface changes. Additionally, CPTu was used to evaluate soil strength gain after the blast events. Empirical equations are used to predict soil characteristics changes such as changes in PWP, settlement and etc. These equations are derived empirically from experimental data. Using empirical equations for designing EC has been probably first introduced by Lyman In Literature, there are some basic parameters used to define explosives' characteristics. Normally, parameters related to energy attenuation of explosives is used in empirical equations including Hopkinson Number (HN), Normalized Weight (NW) and Powder Factor (PF) The most common parameter is Hopkinson number which is as follows: The normalized weight is another parameter which considers layer thickness, which is written as: Powder factor which is also used in mining engineering for estimating the imposed energy on the rocks, is defined as: Settlement due to blast, indicates the level of densification in soil. Kok In order to get more familiar with using empirical equations, settlement has been predicted by empirical equations for the EC experiment in South Carolina Eqs. The error of empirical equation presented by Narin van Court Explosion induces significant load to the soil in a short time. On the other hand, settlement is a relatively slow process. Thus, a software should be chosen that is able to anlayze both dynamic and static problems. Moreover, it should contain material models that can handle dynamic loads. Consequently, PLAXIS3D was chosen. Experiments and findings from literature was used to evaluate the process of studying soil characteristic difference in soil. Tsegaye UBCSAND material model was generally developed for sandy soils with the potential of liquefaction. the model is able to calculate PWP buildup during dynamic loads   Calibration of the UBCSAND model in previous section was done in 2D. For EC, however, a 3D model had to be employed since the effect of each explosion is significant in both direction. The asymmetric configuration (and detonation) of explosives was also another reason for choosing a 3D model. Numerical Analysis is consisted of two major phases: dynamic phase and dissipation phase. In dynamic phase, blast load was imported to the model and soil characteristics change was calculated. The duration of this phase was 0.4 The explosion force is not defined in PLAXIS3D. Therefore, a method has been employed to simulate explosion force. PLAXIS3D has an option to add acceleration history to any loads including point loads. Thus, point loads were defined in explosives' location and the corresponding acceleration history were added to the load. Explosion loads were defined in all principal directions: 2 in Z direction (depth), and 2 in each X and Y direction (total 4 in horizontal plane). The dissipation phase (called consolidation phase in software), had been used to evaluate the post-blast changes in soil parameters. Completion of this phase was reached whether due to complete dissipation of excess PWP or the initialization of the next blast phase. In PLAXIS mesh is generated in a semi-auto manner. Some difficulties were experienced with reference points for obtaining results, since there were no nodes exactly in the instrumentations' place, however, with mesh refinement near the instruments' location (as shown in Two dynamic boundary conditions can be used in analysis: free field and viscous boundary conditions. During the first run, viscous boundary provided erroneous results and calculated excess PWP in the boundary, thus, free field was used alternatively. The acceleration history for the explosive material used in case history has been generated using the famous hydrocode for explosion modelling, LS-DYNA. To model explosion in LS-DYNA air and explosive should be defined Explosives in LS-DYNA are modelled by defining an equation of state (EOS) in addition to typical material characteristics. JWL (Jones-Wilkin-Lee) is one of the EOSs which is used frequently in the literature. It relates pressure to initial energy per volume, E, and relative volume, V, such that:  It is also required to define air so that explosive is modelled acurately. Like explosive, air is defined by typical material properties and an EOS. A linear polynomial EOS as suggested in literature was used in this study which is shown below   The acceleration results were obtained from the first node near the explosive at an approximate distance of 50 millimeters from the explosives. Considering the magnitude of pressure released by explosion, the error caused by this approximation can be neglected. In this section evaluation results are presented. As an example, evaluation results of the South Carolina EC experiment are reported here. These results are consisted of PWP and settlement values. The duration of computer analysis of this case study was one day using a high performance computer with 3 The instrumentation configuration of site has been shown in Results of PWP prediction at two stations for a single blast is shown in There are some differences between measured values and calculated results which can be attributed to soil complex behavior and uncertainty in input data, especially hydraulic permeability. In case studies compiled, huge test areas both in length and depth where under study. This, increases the possibility of having variety of soil groups in the site. However, few in-situ tests were performed and the values of soil properties were approximated. For example, in this case study the permeability of the sand was reported in the range of 4×10 Moreover, explosive installment involves digging a borehole, installing explosives and filling the borehole with heavy materials so that explosion force would not be wasted by free top surface. These boreholes can change the drainage condition of the soil. These conditions were not seen in the model since there were no detail regarding borehole installment. There were also some approximation in the model regarding choosing the instrumentation point, since nodes were not exactly placed on the instrumentation location. Settlement results of the numerical approach are in a good range of site measured values and mostly underestimated. Results were also checked against empirical equations. Numerical approach has been proven to provide better predictions in comparison to empirical equation.  In order to assess the model sensitivity to change in hydraulic conductivity value, the fourth blast experiment was performed using maximum and minimum value of hydraulic conductivity which was reported in the case study. As shown in This numerical approach also allows assessing several explosion phases altogether. Results obtained from this approach has been compared with the predictions of empirical equations to determine its level of accuracy. Four empirical equations including three equations proposed by Narin Van Court  Sudden increases in PWP value alongside with gradual increase and subsequent dissipation has also been calculated with this approach which is essential for liquefaction assessment. These sudden increases are important since they represent shock wave arrival. The difference in measured and calculated values of PWP can be attributed to several reasons such as uncertainties in soil hydraulic permeability. Nevertheless, the difference between measured and calculated value is in a satisfactory range. Despite the increased accuracy achieved using numerical approach, some inaccuracies were observed between the predicted and actual settlement results. It is recognized that the difference in results are hard to avoid for large scale modelling, because soil tends to exhibit different behavior through both depth and length. In case histories, soil profiles were comprised of variety of layers with different characteristics over a large area. Hence, considering all variations was impossible, otherwise the calculation would have been costly. These variations include initial condition of soil such as over consolidation ratio, water table and etc which cannot be seen due to limitations in site analysis costs. However, the results from numerical approach showed reasonable agreement with measured values. Thus, it is argued that this approach can be used for estimation of achieved settlment, and therefore achieved compaction. EC has been practiced as a deep soil treatment method to densify loose, saturated sands. Evaluating effectiveness of EC is done by assessing geotechnical parameters. Settlement is one of the major characteristics used to assess compaction and strength gain in treated soil. In this study, due to lack of accuracy of conventional approaches, settlement due to EC has been evaluated using numerical approach. This approach involves obtaining acceleration history of blast using LS-DYNA and applying it as a prescribed displacement in PLAXIS3D. UBCSAND soil material model has been employed which is a well known material model in dynamic modelling and liquefaction analysis. A series of case histories were gathered for the purpose of validation and verification. They were consisted of multiple phases of blasting with different configuration. Excess PWP and settlement from the numerical model were checked against the experimental data and common empirical equations. The numerical approach was proven to be more accurate than the conventional empirical equations and was capable of considering more aspects of soil characteristics including, multiple layers, complex blast configuration, detonation delays and etc. The model predicted PWP pulses and buildup with acceptable accuracy. However, PWP dissipation was predicted faster in numerical model in comparison to site measurements. This can be attributed to approximated soil hydraulic conductivity or new drainage condition caused by borehole installment. Settlement records were predicted using both numerical approach and empirical equations. Numerical approach provided more accurate results than empirical equations. This approach also underestimated the settlement. Moreover, a sensitivity study was performed on the effect of hydraulic conductivity on settlement results. It was found out that hydraulic conductivity affects the settlement occurrence speed and has little effect on the degree of settlment. Consequently, this method can be used to predict achieved settlement due to blast faster and more efficiently.