The extraction of neodymium ions from monazite leach solution was achieved by synergistic extraction via hollow fiber supported liquid membrane (HFSLM). Applying the results from central composite design (CCD) experiments, further optimization experiments were carried out using response surface methodology (RSM). Validation tests revealed optimum performance at 0.1M Cyanex 272 and 0.05M TOPO, 4M HNO3 as the stripping solution and flow rates of both feed and stripping solutions were 100mL/min. The extraction of neodymium ions reached a maximum of 98%. Results indicated that the highest fractional resistance was a chemical reaction. This showed that mass transfer resistance due to chemical reaction was dominant for transport of neodymium ions through the hollow fiber supported liquid membrane system.membrane area (cm hydraulic diameter of the hollow fiber (cm) inner diameter of the hollow fiber (cm) log-mean diameter of the hollow fiber (cm) outer diameter of the hollow fiber (cm) aqueous diffusion coefficient (–) diffusivity of neodymium ions extractant complex in the liquid membrane phase (cm diffusivity of neodymium ions in the aqueous solution (cm flux of neodymium ion through the liquid membrane phase ( overall mass transfer coefficient (cm/s) mass transfer coefficient in the feed solution (cm/s) mass transfer coefficient due to the extraction reaction (cm/s) forward constants in the extraction reaction mass transfer coefficient of the liquid membrane phase (cm/s) mass transfer coefficient in the shell side between of the hollow fibers (cm/s) mass transfer coefficient due to the stripping reaction (cm/s) mass transfer coefficient for the stripping solution (cm/s) reverse constants in the extraction reaction fiber module length (cm) partition coefficient between the liquid membrane and the feed phase (–) partition coefficient between the liquid membrane and the stripping phase (–) inner radius of the hollow fiber (cm) outer radius of the hollow fiber (cm) overall mass transfer resistance (s/cm) Reynolds number (–) Schmidt number (–) Sherwood number (–) time (s) linear velocity of feed solution in the tube side (cm/s) linear velocity of feed solution in the shell side (cm/s) volume of the feed solution (cm volume of the liquid membrane solution (cm porosity of hollow fiber (%) tortuosity factor membrane (–) kinematic viscosity of organic phase (cm Rare earth metals (REMs) consist of fourteen lanthanides and three elements which are Sc, Y and La. Thus, the total number of REMs is 17. They are divided conventionally into two groups: the light group (Sc, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Pm, Sm, Eu, Gd) and the heavy group (Y, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu) ( Various methods can be used to recover these metals from aqueous solutions. Traditional methods, for example such as ion exchange, precipitation and solvent extraction have been found to be ineffective at a very low concentration of contaminated metal ions ( Many advantages of HFSLM over traditional methods include lower energy consumption, lower capital and operating costs and less extractant used ( To investigate the relationship between various determinants, response surface methodology (RSM) was employed. RSM, utilizing a group of mathematical and statistical techniques, is most useful for designing experiments, evaluating the effect of factors and finding the optimal condition for a particular response. A central composite design (CCD) helps to fit the collected data with an empirical, second-order polynomial model. Moreover, CCD together with a second-order polynomial model provides an adequate representation of most continuous response surfaces over a relatively broad factor domain ( The separation of neodymium ions by synergistic extractants has been studied in detail, using octane as a diluent and HNO In this work, the separation of neodymium ions from monazite leach solution using synergistic extractants was investigated. An investigation of the related mass transfer of neodymium ions was also undertaken. The objective is to find the optimum conditions for synergistic extractants. RSM was employed to identify the optimal conditions for high extraction yield of neodymium ions. The hollow fiber module system contains hollow fibers aligned horizontally; within them an extractant is embedded. An extractant, which dissolves in the organic solution as the liquid membrane, can be used singly or as a mixture of two types of extractant. The target metal ions diffuse across the liquid membrane from the feed phase to the stripping phase. The feed and stripping solutions flow counter-currently in the tube and shell sides of the hollow fibers, respectively. The descriptive schematic mechanisms were the counter transport mechanisms via HFSLM. The concentration profile for the system is shown in For the 1st extractant, the extraction of neodymium ions from feed solution by acidic organophosphorous ( For the 2nd extractant, the extraction of neodymium ions from feed solution by neutral donors ( For synergistic extractants, the extraction of neodymium ions can be expressed by the following Eq. The complex species continuously react with hydrogen ions at the membrane-stripping interface to strip neodymium ions to the stripping phase. Thus, the stripping reaction, due to 1st extraction reaction (1st extractant), is shown in Eq. The stripping reaction, due to 2nd extraction reaction (2nd extractant), is shown in Eq. The stripping reaction, due to the synergistic reaction, is shown in Eq.   If S.C. If S.C. For S.C. where The overall mass transfer coefficient of neodymium ions represents the mass-transfer resistances in the tube side, the interfacial resistance of the extraction, the liquid membrane phase resistance, the shell-side resistance, the resistance of the stripping reaction and the strip-side resistance ( Eq. The relative contribution of each resistance to the overall resistance to mass transfer was obtained as follows: The partition coefficient of neodymium ions between the liquid membrane phase and the feed phase can be calculated by: The mass transfer coefficients of neodymium ions in the feed solution can be calculated using Lévêque equation ( In the hollow fiber operation, metal ions in the complex, occurring at the feed–liquid–membrane interface, are stripped out continuously by the stripping agent at the liquid–membrane–stripping interface. Therefore, the total reaction in Eq. The mass transfer coefficient due to extraction reaction rate can be approximated as follows ( The mass transfer coefficient in the liquid membrane phase can be expressed by ( The mass transfer coefficient on the shell side of two hollow fibers can be calculated by The hydraulic diameter of hollow fibers is calculated by ( The feed solution as supplied by courtesy of the Rare Earth Research and Development Centre, Office of Atoms for Peace, Bangkok, Thailand, was supplied in nitrate solutions i.e. the digestion product of monazite ores processing. The feed solution contained Y 16.3 The extractant was diluted in octane and then circulated throughout the tube and shell sides of the hollow fibers for 40 The extractability of neodymium ions in this research can be calculated by the percentage of extraction and stripping: Inductively coupled plasma spectrometry (ICP) was used: ICP Spectrometer-model Stroflame-ICP M from Spectro Co. can detect the elements of concentrations higher than 1 The analyzing method was comprised of: introducing 1 adding 1% (v/v) HNO analyzing the amount of neodymium ions in the sample A central composite design (CCD) was used to optimize the extracted neodymium ions based on the results revealed from the factorial experiments. The From a review of the literature, Cyanex 272, PC88A, D2EHPA, and DNPPA show high performance in the extraction of metal ions ( The percentages of extraction and stripping of rare earth metals are shown in From a review of the literature TOPO, Cyanex 923, TBP and TEHP were used in the extraction of lanthanide metals ( The synergistic extraction of neodymium ions was effected using the mixtures of Cyanex 272 and neutral donors (TOPO, Cyanex 923, TBP and TEHP) according to the more than unity synergistic coefficient illustrated in To optimize the concentration of synergistic extractants, it was necessary to consider their mutual and interactive effect on the extraction yield of neodymium ions. For this purpose, a centered central composite design (CCD) was employed for the optimization of Cyanex 272 concentration and TOPO concentration for the extraction of neodymium ions via HFSLM. The range and levels of individual variables are given in To determine the regression model for these dependent parameters, a two-factor and five-level CCD with 13 individual design points were chosen in this study. All these 13 experiments were performed by varying initial Cyanex 272 concentration from 0.05 to 0.25 The percentage of extraction was modeled from the experimental data using a second-order polynomial regression equation: From In The influences of Cyanex 272 and TOPO concentration and their interactive effect on neodymium ions extraction via HFSLM are shown below in Stripping investigations were carried out with regard to the organic solution consisting of the synergistic extractants. The effect of HNO The effect of operating time was investigated using optimum conditions of the synergistic extractants. In a once-through operation, the percentages of extraction and stripping of neodymium ions reached 95% and 90%, respectively. To further enhance performance, the extraction cycle mode was repeated. As a result, following the fourth cycle, the cumulative extraction and stripping of neodymium ions rose to 98% and 95%. The results are seen in The effect of flow patterns of both feed and stripping solutions via the HFSLM system (i.e. single-pass flows of feed and stripping solutions, circulating flows of feed and stripping solutions as well as single-pass flow of feed solution and circulating flow of stripping solution) was studied. The data is as shown in Equal flow rates of both feed and stripping solutions were studied. The results are as shown in The values of mass transfer coefficients can be calculated employing optimum conditions. The values of the four individual mass transfer coefficients and the relative contribution of each resistance can be characterized by fractional resistance with respect to the total resistance as shown in Results show that the HFSLM system could successfully extract neodymium ions from monazite leach solution. A quadratic regression model, predicted by using CCD, revealed the interaction between independent parameters (concentrations of Cyanex 272 and TOPO). The acquired statistical model had an excellent goodness of fit confirmed by the significant regression coefficient ( The authors highly appreciate the support from the