Brazilian iron ore fines were reduced in a laboratory fluidized bed with different Ca-based additives at 800°C using 0.5L/min H2–0.5L/min N2. The fluidization results show that pure CaO and Ca(NO3)2·4H2O only slightly prolong the fluidization time, with defluidization occurring eventually. However, mixtures of Ca(NO3)2·4H2O and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O could effectively inhibit defluidization. Reduction results of CaO/Fe2O3 suggest that Ca-based additives mainly inhibit defluidization through the physical spacer effect. Microstructure observations indicate that 2CaO·Fe2O3 could suppress the growth of sharp-pointed whisker, and the introduction of Fe2O3 allows the Ca species to adhere tightly to the surface of the sticky iron, thereby decreasing its adhesiveness. Moreover, Fe2O3 is demonstrated to be a general binder capable of enhancing the ability of ineffective additives to prevent defluidization.Surface coating is an effective method of preventing possible defluidization during high-temperature fluidized bed reduction of iron ore fines Guo et al. In the present study, we used Fe In this work, a commercial Brazilian iron ore was used. High-purity (99.99%, by volume) H Two different coating methods were used in this study: the powder method and the impregnation method. For the powder method, the CaO powder was first calcined under pure N The experimental apparatus used in this study is the same as our previous studies The phase composition of the samples was determined by X-ray diffraction (X'Pert MPD Pro, PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu K The point of defluidization was determined by the pressure drop vs. time profiles and visual observations of the bed. Defluidization is defined as a condition where a well-fluidized bed loses partial or total fluidization. Bed pressure drop rapidly decreased at defluidization time. We prepared four samples with different Ca-based additives, and the preparation methods are shown in The fluidization times of samples A, B, C, and D are shown in The most notable difference between samples A, B, C, and D is that the coating materials on the surfaces of samples C and D contain 2CaO·Fe The microstructure analyses of the as-reduced samples are illustrated in In summary, according to the above analyses and the former studies In this study, the effect of Fe The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the