Carbon dioxide (CO2) is an alternative working fluid to water for hydraulic fracturing in shale reservoirs. It offers advantages as a substitute for the use of large quantities of potable water and for the concurrent sequestration of CO2, however sorption and swelling effects, and their impact on permeability may be detrimental and are undefined. Hence, it is of great importance to understand the mechanism of supercritical carbon dioxide fracturing in shale and its effect on shale permeability enhancement. We conduct hydraulic fracturing experiments on shale samples using both water (H2O) and supercritical carbon dioxide (Sc-CO2) as fracturing fluids to explore the surface characteristics and permeability evolution of fluid-driven fractures. We use profilometry to measure the roughness and complexity of the resulting fracture surfaces and measure the permeability of the fractures. Results indicate that: (1) Sc-CO2 fracturing creates fractures with larger tortuosity relative to H2O fracturing (macroscale); (2) the topography of Sc-CO2 fracture surfaces is more rough and complex compared to that of H2O fractured surfaces; (3) larger mineral grains are removed and relocated from induced fracture surfaces by Sc-CO2 fracturing – these acting as micro proppants that result in a larger fracture aperture; (4) correspondingly, the permeability of shale fractures increases by ∼5 orders of magnitude with Sc-CO2 fracturing and this enhancement is ∼3 orders of magnitude higher than that by traditional hydraulic fracturing. This observation potentially validates the feasibility of Sc-CO2 as a fracturing fluid for the stimulation of shale reservoirs.Over the last decade, shale gas has been successfully recovered in the United States due to the application of improved techniques of horizontal drilling and massive hydraulic fracturing ( Previous investigations of Sc-CO In this study, Sc-CO This experimental study comprises three interrelated components: first, we conduct hydraulic fracturing experiments with both H The shale samples are collected from the Lower Silurian Longmaxi Formation, which is the most successful shale gas production area in the Sichuan basin (northwest of Chongqing, China). The black shale is fine-grained, highly laminated and with low-grade kerogen ( The samples are shown in The hydraulic fracturing experiments are performed with a triaxial testing apparatus that can independently apply confining stress, axial stress and perform fluid injection for fracturing ( Post-hydraulic fracturing, the fractured samples with freshly exposed surfaces are scanned by profilometer to determine the fracture surface roughness and complexity. Two types of profilometry measurements are made - stylus profilometry and optical profilometry, respectively. Stylus profilometry (model: KLA Tencor P16+) is a contact apparatus to determine fracture surface topography at a large scale. Two 20 mm × 10 mm windows on each exposed fracture surface are scanned as shown in Roughness and complexity are two crucial properties to describe fracture surface topography ( The arithmetic mean ( The root mean square (RMS) ( The maximum height of the surface ( The fractal dimension, Helium permeability is measured by the pulse decay method ( The applied confining stress and axial stress are equal to that in the fracturing experiment. For a comparison, the matrix permeability was measured using three intact samples 5.08 mm (0.2-inch) long and 25.40 mm (1-inch) in diameter as shown in Permeability is recovered from the pressure response as ( In this section, we first describe the macroscopic observations of the fracture and calculate the fracture tortuosity. We then interpret the measurements of the topographic properties of fracture surfaces by stylus and optical profilometry. Finally, the permeability data are analyzed to compare the permeability enhancement by Sc-CO For H A tortuosity parameter is introduced to describe macro-observation of fracture topography as follows (  Photographs of the fractured samples are digitized ( Representative images from the stylus and optical profilometry are shown in The topographic characteristics ( The optical profilometry results which includes topographic characteristics ( The permeability of each sample with increasing effective stress is shown in We discuss potential mechanisms that may control the observed difference in fracture topography (roughness and complexity) due to fracturing with different fluids. Then, we explore the anticipated behavior for the flow of helium in a single fracture and constrain the relationship among fracture roughness, fracture permeability and fracture effective hydraulic aperture. Finally, we discuss potential primary causes for increased permeability enhancement when fracturing by Sc-CO Two different mechanisms that vary in fracture initiation and fracture propagation determine fracture surface topography: (1) near the injection well, viscosity controls the invasion of fluid into the formation through diffusion before fracture initiation. This process is a time-dependent process; (2) Distal from the injection well, capillary effects and modes of fracture propagation control the fracture surface topography. As fracture propagation speed could up to 30 m/s ( Near the borehole, the low viscosity of the injected fluid results in a high diffusivity of Sc-CO Based on pressure vs. time curve during fracturing tests which shown in Comparing the diffusion depth with the optical profilometry measurements near the injection wellbore ( Stylus profilometry results indicate that Sc-CO In Eq. As another potential mechanism, we posit the fracture propagation type may affect the fracture surface roughness and complexity. For a 2-D fracture tip, the fluid lag zone at the fluid-driven fracture tip is described as ( In addition, numerical calculation method was deployed by Garagash which found that a larger dimensionless toughness Eq. The estimation results indicates that smaller viscosity Sc-CO In summary, we posit an assumption that the direction of fracture propagation is not only controlled by far-field stress state, but also by fluid viscosity. At the macroscopic scale, the far-field stress state will make the fracture propagate parallel to the maximum principal stress direction. At microscopic scale, the penetration of a low viscosity fluid leads to a small fluid lag at the fracture tip, penetration into shale matrix and into smaller pore throats. This may create a fracture surface with larger roughness and complexity; high viscosity fluid has a larger fluid lag at the fracture tip and creates a relatively smooth fracture surface. Here, we need to clarify that it may be a potential mechanism on controlling fracture surface roughness since one of limitations of our experiment is that the fluid lag phenomenon cannot be observed or measured in our experiments. Further research may be carried to investigate the fluid lag control on fracture surface roughness. Helium flow ( With the effect of fracture roughness, the cubic law may be rewritten by considering a coefficient of correction ( The permeability of samples both before and after fracturing can be evaluated from: Combining Eq. Based on Eq. The fracture aperture reduces with the increasing effective stress. The average aperture of the Sc-CO The induced fractures remain imperfectly mated after the fracturing and for the measurement of permeability. To investigate potential mechanisms for this self-propping, stylus profilometry is applied at a same location for the two sides of the imperfectly mated fracture.  This removal and presence of mineral grains by Sc-CO We summarize two possible mechanisms that explain how mineral grains are removed and redistributed in the case of Sc-CO In summary, the primary cause for the larger permeability enhancement by Sc-CO We have conducted hydraulic fracturing experiments to evaluate the difference between fracturing with Sc-CO Small-scale laboratory fracturing experiments indicate that Sc-CO Sc-CO Given the same stress conditions, Sc-CO These experimental results validate the potential of Sc-CO This work is the partial result of support provided by  The arithmetic mean roughness, μm The root meansquare(RMS) roughness, μm The maximum height of the surface, μm Fractal dimension, dimensionless Fluid viscosity, Pa·s Fluid compressibility, Pa Permeability, m Frature tortuosity,dimensionless Diffusion length, m Diffusion coefficient, m Diffusion time, s Entry pressure for fluid to enter the pore throat, Pa Interfacial tension, N/m Contact angle, ° Critical pore throat size, m Parameter associated with viscous dissipation, m Fracture and fluid propagation velocity, m/s Plane-strain modulus, MPa Young's modulus, GPa Poisson ratio, dimensionless Far-field stress, MPa Fracture toughness, MPa·m A parameter associated with viscous dissipation, m A parameter that characterizes the dissipation due to fracturing of the solid, m Dimensionless toughness, dimensionless Dimensionless fluid lag length, dimensionless Fluid lag length, m Flow rate, m Fracture aperture, m Effective hydraulic fracture aperture, m Surface arithmetic mean height, m