Mineral carbonation (MC) using recyclable ammonium salts pH swing processes is considered among the most promising MC techniques to store CO2 permanently. However, the main key challenge to use this process at large scale is related to the energy consumption associated to the regeneration of the employed additives and in particular to the separation of the salt to be regenerated from the water solution.
                  This work investigates the feasibility of a liquid-liquid extraction technique to replace the energy intensive salts/water separation step. Also, the CO2-balance of a 500MW coal-fired based power plant with an integrated pH swing MC facility was investigated. Different operating conditions were investigated, including temperature, reaction time, pressure, solid to liquid ratio (S/L), reagents concentration and stirring rate. An ammonium sulphate/water separation higher than 90% was achieved at 25°C, 10min, 1bar, 200g/lS/L ratio, 70% methanol and, 350rpm. The associated energy consumption was calculated, resulting in an energy saving of 35% in comparison to water evaporation. The process resulted carbon negative when water evaporation was replaced by extraction technique, with 33% of CO2 sequestered by using a S/L ratios of 300g/l.Acid Mine Drainage Ammonium Sulphate Mineral carbonation CO Eutectic Freeze Crystallization Experimental Standard Deviation of the Mean Fourier Transform InfraRed spectroscopy GreenHouse Gases High Heating Value Potassium Nitrate Ex Waste Mechanical Vapour Recompression Thermo Gravimetric Analysis Relative Humidity The electricity and heat production sectors release around 30 billion of tonnes of CO However, at the current stage of development, MC drawbacks such as its slow kinetics, low efficiency and large energy consumption are limiting its wide deployment. MC can be classified in direct and in-direct processes. In the direct processes, where the dissolution of mineral is the rate-limiting step, Ca/Mg rich solids are carbonated in a single process step. Multiple steps are instead used in the in-direct approach, where the reactive components (Mg As natural carbonation of silicate rocks is very slow because of low exposed surface and diffusion limitations, ex-situ aqueous in-direct carbonation reactions are being developed to accelerate the process. Indeed, the addition of a mineral dissolution step with the employment of chemicals is able to shorten the reaction times and enhance the reaction extent Wang and Maroto-Valer have also optimized the MC technique to reduce the water used by increasing the serpentine to water ratio As shown in Ammonium sulphate, methanol, acetone and ethanol were obtained from Sigma Aldrich. A 250 A Parr high pressure reactor was used to run the extraction process at 1 The experimental conditions were selected modifying those suggested in a recent patent filed for clean up a solution of (NH Acetone tests and high pressure tests were carried out using a 200 Different parameters including temperature (25 and 40 A Thermogravimetric Analyzer (TGA) Q500 was used to determine the ammonium sulphate recovered at the end of the extraction process, after the filtration of test 6 (200 XRD analysis were carried out using a Bruker Nonius X8-Apex2 CCD diffractometer equipped with an Oxford Cryosystems Cryostream, typically operating at 100 For each S/L ratio, a first experiment called ‘test 0’ was run to determine the minimum amount of methanol required for the solution to react. Then, the amount of methanol was increased in order to improve the ammonium sulphate recovery efficiency. These optimum parameters were determined by comparing the efficiency of two tests, with only one variable differing. For example, comparing tests 1 and 2, the percentage of recovered ammonium sulphate at 40 Tests 1 and 2 clearly indicate that there is not gain in terms of AS recovered, when the temperature was increased from 25 to 40 As seen in  TGA analyses were used to confirm the composition of the separated salt. XRD analysis of materials remaining after tests 6 and 8 were carried out to establish if the separated ammonium sulphate was in anydrous of hydrated mineral phase, since it was not possible to define this by the TG plots.  The energy consumed by the water evaporation step required prior to the (NH  The energy calculations made for the CO For 5247.12  In the previous sections, it has been shown that the liquid-liquid extraction process (90% efficiency and, 35% energy saved compared to water evaporation step) can reduce the energy consumption compared to evaporative techniques for the separation of the AS from the carbonation solution. This section investigates the feasibility of a 500 CO To evaporate the water from ammonium sulphate solution and to regenerate ammonium bisulphate salts from ammonium sulphate crystals, a Mechanical Vapour Recompression (MVR) evaporator and a melting vessel were considered. Assuming that the heat required for these two stages was provided by natural gas, the relative CO To evaporate the methanol from ammonium sulphate solution an evaporator also was required. The heat required was about 157   Considering natural gas as source of energy, the total CO MC using the extraction process performed better in terms of energy consumption than using evaporative technique, but was still carbon positive at 100 This work investigated the feasibility of a liquid-liquid extraction technique as alternative method for the separation of AS salts from the water solution remaining after the CO An ammonium sulphate/water separation higher than 90% was achieved at 25 The extraction process would require 2908 The authors thank the Centre for Innovation in Carbon Capture and Storage, Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 