In this work, the flocculation behavior of suspension systems containing poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) with different molecular weights and aluminum oxide particles was studied fundamentally. Correlations were developed among the adsorption of PAAs on the particles, the zeta potential of the aluminum oxide suspensions and the turbidity of the suspensions. The structure of flocs formed between PAA and aluminium oxide particles were comprehensively studied under stirring and non-stirring conditions. The fractal dimension, Df, of the flocs ranged between 1.1 and 2.4 revealing that the flocs generated by PAAs could be considered as fractals. The flocs formed by PAA with molecular weights of 100 kg/mol (PAA-100k) and 450 kg/mol (PAA-450k) were more compact (Df of 1.418), while those formed by PAA with the molecular weight of 1250 kg/mol (PAA-1250k) were larger and random-shaped with loose and porous structure (Df of 1.179). The presence of 3 mg/g of PAA-1250k in aluminum oxide suspension increased the chord length of particles dramatically. Reasonable relationship was developed between settling velocity and chord length of flocs, and flocs with smaller fractal dimension and sediment compactness had faster sediment kinetics.Flocculation is an important phenomenon in the chemical industry. It is widely used in dewatering processes, such as wastewater treatment systems Poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) has been widely used as a dispersant and flocculant for mineral suspensions Polymers form flocs with different sizes and structures. Generally, the flocs formed by polymers with a high molecular weight (>10 The structure of flocs significantly impacts their separation from suspensions. Based on Stokes’ law, large particles settle faster than small ones As stated earlier, the flocculation of aluminium oxide with PAA was studied in the past The fundamental studies on the flocculation behavior of suspension systems would lead to many practical applications. For example, the use of flocculants as retention aids is crucial in papermaking processes to improve the retention of organic (e.g., cellulosic fines) and inorganic (e.g., filler) particles in paper composites In this work, the impact of molecular weight of PAA on flocculation, settling behavior and structure of induced flocs of PAA/aluminium oxide was comprehensively studied for the first time. The flocculation mechanism of PAA and aluminum oxide particles was studied under dynamic (i.e., agitation) conditions using an FBRM, and static (natural settling) conditions using a vertical scan analyzer; and the results were fundamentally correlated. A mathematical relationship between the equivalent size of flocs and their settling velocity was developed, and the fractal structure of flocs was correlated to their settling behaviour. Aluminum oxide (Al The surface area of aluminum oxide particles was measured by a surface area and pore size analyzer (NOVA 2200e, Quantachrome Instruments). In this method, approximately 0.05 g of the particles was pretreated at 105 °C overnight for moisture removal. Then, their specific surface area was determined following the BET (Brunauer-Emmett-Teller) method, while their average pore size was identified at relative pressures (P/P The isoelectric point (IEP) of aluminum oxide suspension was determined by a zeta potential analyzer (NanoBrook Omni, Brookhaven Instruments Corporation) that was attached to an auto titrator (BI-ZTU, Brookhaven Instruments Corporation). In this set of experiments, 100 µL of aluminum oxide suspension (5 g/L at pH 7) was added to filtered KCl solution to make a diluted suspension of a 25 mg/L concentration. Afterward, the diluted suspension was dispersed by ultrasonic for 1 min, and the zeta potential of the suspension was measured in the pH range of 3 and 10 using HNO The charge density of PAAs was determined by a particle charge detector (PCD 03, BTG Mütek GmbH) at pH 7 with a 0.005 mol/L PDADMAC solution. In this set of experiments, 1 mL of PAA solution with the concentration of 1 g/L was added into the PCD cell, and deionized water was added to the cell to make the total volume of 10 mL solution in the cell. Then, the solution was titrated with PDADMAC solution, and the charge density of PAA (mmol/g) was determined based on the amount of PDADMAC needed to neutralize the solution containing PAA as stated in a previous work The molecular weight of PAAs was measured by a gel permeation chromatography (GPC, Malvern GPCmax VE2001 Module + Viscotek TDA305 with multi-detectors) with columns of PolyAnalytic PAA 206 and PAA 203 using 0.1 mol/L NaNO In adsorption kinetic studies, PAA solutions were added to an aluminum oxide suspension (5 g/L, pH 7) to induce a 10 mg/g PAA/particle ratio, and the mixtures were stirred at 300 rpm and 25 °C for different time intervals of 15 min to 24 h. In the adsorption isotherm studies, PAA solutions were added to the aluminum oxide suspension (5 g/L, pH 7) at the dosage range of 0.2 mg/g and 50 mg/g, and the mixtures were stirred at 300 rpm and 25 °C for 30 min. Then, the mixtures (PAA and PAA/particle mixtures) were filtered by 0.45 µm nylon filters. The PAA adsorbed on aluminum oxide particles was retained with the particles on the filters, but un-adsorbed PAA passed through the filters. The filtrates were collected for PAA concentration measurement. The concentration of PAAs in the solutions/filtrates was determined by identifying their organic carbon content using a total carbon analyzer (TOC, Vario cube, Elementar) In this set of experiments, the PAAs and aluminum oxide suspension (5 g/L, pH 7) were mixed to generate PAA/aluminum oxide ratios of 0.2–5 mg/g. After stirring at 300 rpm for 30 min, the suspension was diluted with 1 mM KCl solution to approximately 25 mg/L prior to the zeta potential analysis. The zeta potential of aluminum oxide suspensions with and without PAAs was measured by a zeta potential analyzer (NanoBrook Omni, Brookhaven Instruments) following a previously established procedure In this experiment, aluminum oxide suspension (5 g/L) was stirred at 300 rpm in a dynamic drainage jar, DDJ (Britt, Paper Research Materials Inc.). The suspension was filtered by a 200-mesh stainless steel filter and then passed through a 3 mm tube (Tygon, R-3603) at a 20 mL/min flow rate. The turbidity of the suspension passing through the tube was determined using a particle dispersion analyzer (PDA 3000, Rank Brothers Ltd.). After detection, the suspension was recycled to the DDJ. In this analysis, only the flocs that were sufficiently small to pass through a 200 mesh (designed as default based on TAPPI Method T-261(80)) and un-flocculated aluminum oxide particles, which would pass through the mesh, affected the relative turbidity of the suspension. The 200-mesh screen was used to screen extremely large flocs to prevent clogging of the tubes The hydrodynamic diameter of aluminum oxide particles in the suspension was determined by a particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern). About 10 mL of the 5 g/L aluminum oxide suspension was added to 600 mL of deionized water under stirring at 250 rpm to make a 0.08 g/L concentration, then the measurement was conducted at the wavelength of 633 nm with red laser light. Afterward, the hydrodynamic diameter (d The fractal dimensions of the flocs were determined by volume obscuration analysis and used to characterize the compactness of flocs Volume obscuration is a more robust method to measure the fractal dimension In this experiment, volume fraction and mean particle diameter were obtained by Malvern Mastersizer 2000, as stated in The flocculation and sedimentation performance of aluminum oxide particles under static (natural settling) conditions in the absence or presence of PAAs were assessed by a vertical scan analyzer, Turbiscan (Lab Expert, Formulaction). In this analysis, different dosages of PAA were added to the aluminum oxide suspension (5 g/L, pH 7). After stirring at 300 rpm for 2 min, 20 mL of the suspensions were transferred to the cylindrical glass cells of this instrument for analysis. Electro luminescent diode light at 880 nm scanned the cell from bottom to top at 40 µm height intervals In the flocculation analysis, the flocs generated by PAA would settle at different rates. This settlement would clarify the top part of the suspension cell, while creating a layer of sediment at the bottom of the cell. The transmission data collected from the top layer after settling for 30 min was considered for evaluating the flocculation efficiency of PAA on the aluminum oxide suspension. The sediment thickness was analyzed based on the backscattering data collected from the bottom of the cell. The compactness of the sediment was determined as the ratio of the mass to volume for settled flocs after 30 min of settling experiments. Samples were collected from the top part of the cell before and after (30 min) adding PAA. The concentration of particles in these samples was determined via drying them at 105 °C overnight. The mass of the settled flocs was identified based on the concentration of particles in the suspensions before the flocculation experiment and after 30 min of the sedimentation. The settling velocity of flocs can be defined as the rate of sediment thickness growth with respect to time The hydrodynamic diameter of suspended particles in the system (described as d In these equations, r The chord length of flocs in aluminum oxide suspensions was assessed by focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM, Mettler-Toledo E25). Chord length of particles is defined as the distance between the two edges of a particle or a floc detected by a laser light. The chord length is determined by multiplying the optical rotating speed of laser scanner by the reflected signal time. The chord length distribution was acquired directly by using 90 log-channels over the range of 1 and 1000 µm using IC-FBRM software The surface area of aluminum oxide particles was 100.3 m Data on the adsorption kinetics of PAA on aluminum oxide particle is available in supplementary materials (Fig. S1). To investigate the flocculation efficiency of PAA and aluminum oxide particles under dynamic (i.e., stirring) conditions, the relative turbidity of PAA/aluminum oxide suspension was investigated as a function of adsorbed PAA on particles in Electrostatic neutralization plays a significant role in the interaction of oppositely charged polymers and particles The zeta potential of the aluminum oxide suspension without PAA was +34 mV at pH 7. The zeta potentials of PAA-100k, PAA-450k and PAA-1250k were −25.05 ± 3.30, −28.97 ± 2.85, and −29.85 ± 1.39 mV, respectively. The addition of anionic PAA decreased the zeta potential of the suspension significantly. PAA-100k decreased the zeta potential in a faster pace. The reversal of zeta potential (IEP) occurred when 0.35 mg/g of PAA-100k, 0.8 mg/g of PAA-450k and 1.4 mg/g of PAA-1250k were adsorbed on the particles. Although three kinds of PAA had similar charge densities, the IEP of three systems was different. The reason is that zeta potential shows the charge of the diffuse double layer on the particles, and different configurations of PAA adsorbed on alumina particles would alter the zeta potential in different ways by shifting the shear plane and slipping plane further from the particle surface. It is well known that small polymers develop a flat configuration on the surface of particles upon adsorption, while large polymers may develop a tail and loop configuration when adsorbed via electrostatic charge interaction As the zeta potential of PAA-100k sample dropped dramatically at a low PAA dosage, it could confirm that the adsorbed PAA was located on the surface of the particles. For larger PAA (PAA-1250k), however, the zeta potential was reduced gradually with increasing its dosage. This behavior implies that (1) not all of PAA adsorbed on the surface of particles even though un-adsorbed PAA was available in the suspension at a low dosage (e.g., 0.2 mg/g), (2) by adsorbing more PAA, some PAA diffused through layers of adsorbed PAA and reached to the surface of the particles, and (3) the increase in the multilayer adsorption of PAA on the particles compressed the first layers and reconfigured them to have a more flatten configuration, interacting with more charges on the surface of the aluminum oxide particles  The results depicted that charge interaction helped coagulation most probably via patching mechanism and thus caused a reduction in the relative turbidity of the suspension for PAA-100k and PAA-450k at a very low dosage. However, the adsorbed PAA started to promote repulsion between particles when the zeta potential was smaller than 20 mV, and thus the relative turbidity started to increase with further addition of these PAAs As the lowest relative turbidity for PAA-100k and PAA-450k was obtained at 0.2 mg/g, while that for PAA-1250k was obtained at 3 mg/g in The D  The settling velocity and the compactness of sediments after 30 min of settling are listed in Accordingly, more efficient flocculation and settling lead to sediment with smaller compactness, and the largest effect was observed for 3 mg/g of PAA-1250k treatment. These results suggest that even though the large flocs formed via treating particles with PAA-1250k, they had looser and more porous structures after settling (i.e., smaller compactness). This may imply that these large flocs contained more water and indirectly confirmed the existence of voids (containing water) in the formed flocs, which may ultimately indicate PAA’s tail and loop configurations on the particles. The formation of loose flocs via bridging mechanism was claimed in the flocculation of precipitated calcium carbonate, kaolin, and hematite in the past The settling velocity is characterized as the increase rate of the sediment thickness  The reason for smaller flocs in After settling for 30 min, the number of particles with d To assess the fundamentals of flocculation process, the number of the formed flocs (in counts) in the aluminum oxide suspension treated with PAAs at 0.2 and 3 mg/g dosages were plotted as a function of the chord length distribution of the flocs in  Based on Stokes’ law, flocs size and density as well as fluid viscosity affect the settling velocity of rigid particles  Generally, the settling velocity of flocs was increased with enlarging their sizes, which followed what’s typically predicated in Stokes’ law. However, d  At the same dosage, the zeta potential of the suspension responded to the PAA-100k addition more dramatically than did so to that of PAA-1250k. A larger amount of PAA-1250k was needed for occupying cationic charges available on the surface of the particles and for reversing the zeta potential of the suspension. These results would illustrate that the adsorbed PAA-100k were located on the surface of the particles with a flatten configuration, while PAA-1250k adsorbed with a tail and loop configuration. The flocculation analysis confirmed the bridging mechanism for PAA-1250k generating the flocs with the d The authors would like to thank NSERC-Canada, Canada foundation for Innovation, Ontario Research Fund, Northern Ontario Heritage Fund Corporation-Industrial Research Chair and Canada Research Chair programs for supporting this research. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 