Prediction of machine performance is an essential step for planning, cost estimation and selection of excavation method to assure success of tunneling operation by hard rock TBMs. Penetration rate is a principal measure of TBM performance and is used to evaluate the feasibility of using a machine in a given ground condition and to predict TBM advance rate. In this study, a database of TBM field performance from two hard rock tunneling projects in Iran including Zagros lot 1B and 2 for a total length of 14.3km has been used to assess applicability of various analysis methods for developing reliable predictive models. The first method used for this purpose was principal component analysis (PCA) which resulted in development of a set of new empirical equations. Also, two Soft computing techniques including adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) and support vector regression (SVR) have been employed for this purpose. As statistical indices, root mean square error (RMSE), correlation coefficient (R2), variance account for (VAF), and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) were used to evaluate the efficiency of the developed artificial intelligence models for TBM performance prediction. The results of the analysis show that AI based methods can effectively be implemented for prediction of TBM performance. Moreover, it was concluded that performance of the SVR model is better than the ANFIS model. A high correlation was observed between predicted and measured TBM performance for the SVR model. This study shows the feasibility of using these systems and subsequent work is underway to expand the database of TBM field performance and use the aforementioned methods to develop a more comprehensive TBM performance prediction model.Hard rock tunnel boring has become more or less the standard method of tunneling for tunnels of various sizes with lengths over 1.5–2 Many researchers have worked to develop new prediction models or adjustment factors for the common existing models. Research works by  Due to the complexity of TBM performance prediction, beyond mathematical and empirical solutions, artificial intelligence (AI) methods have been widely utilized by many researchers ( Growth of TBM manufacturing technology and existence of some shortcomings in the prediction models have made it necessary to continue the research on the development of new TBM performance prediction models. In this investigation, a database of machine performance from two hard rock tunneling projects from Iran including Zagros lot 1B and 2 with 14.3 Zagros long tunnel with total length of 49 The maximum depth of Zagros tunnels is 1000 To obtain the required data for analysis of TBM performance at Zgaros lot 1B & 2, results of studies performed during the pre-construction phase and construction phase have been compiled into a database ( Locations where exploration borings extended to the tunnel level Tunnels sections where the rock face was inspected during geological back-mapping Places where extrapolation of surface geological parameters to tunnels level were possible with high degree of reliability. Descriptive statistical distribution of variables in the data base and input parameters for generated models summarized in The data includes the first 5.3 In order to establish the predictive models among the parameters obtained in this study, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed in the first stage of the analysis. PCA is a classical method that provides a sequence of the best linear approximations to a given high-dimensional observation. This method has received much attentions in the literature in recent years for various application. PCA is used frequently in different types of analysis (from neuroscience to computer graphics) because it is a simple, nonparametric method of extracting relevant information from confusing data sets. With minimal additional effort, PCA provides a roadmap on how to reduce a complex data set to a lower dimension.  In rock engineering, statistically based formulae comprise most of empirical models to predict a variable based on other operational or geological parameters. In fact, empirical equations have great role to play in tunnel design due to their more practical base as compared to more theoretical analysis. Hence, in the present investigation, single and multiple regression analysis were performed between TBM performance and geomechanical parameters in data base. As mentioned before, among geological and geomechanical parameters, UCS and Js have been selected as effective parameters on FPI. Considering the FPI as representative of TBM performance, it is commonly utilized to present the “boreability” of the rock with changing geological/geotechnical circumstances which expresses the ease or difficulty of rock mass excavation by a tunnel boring machine. The main advantage of FPI is that it allows penetration to be normalized for cutterload and thus it automatically takes care of machine thrust variations. FPI also has the capability to be used across different TBM diameters since it accounts for cutterhead RPM and number of cutters. Usually, stronger and less fractured rock masses are more difficult for cutting by disc cutters and boring by TBM require higher thrust levels to achieve a certain depth of penetration. So, higher values of FPI are usually seen in strong and massive rock masses. In contrast, there is no need to apply high thrust values for excavation of poor quality rock masses (weaker and more fractured) due to crack initiation and propagation is enhanced by pre-existing fractures ( In this investigation, the relationship between different rock mass classifications, including Q-system, RMR It is important to note that, where multiple joint sets are identified, different strategies could be adopted to incorporate their impact. One approach is to focus on the critical joint set which can have the highest impact (most assist or hinder) on TBM penetration rate. Another approach is to use a combination of the joints as prescribed by NTNU system and using a Ks-tot. The last approach is to compute an average α angle for all existing joint sets. This approach has some down sides since it assumes an arithmetic averaging of the joint orientation to represent the cumulative impact of the joints. The approach used in this study is the first one i.e. using the critical joint set, which was selected to be the set with highest frequency and minimum joint spacing. Non-linear multiple regression analyses have been utilized in rock engineering and engineering geology to find non-linear solutions for TBM performance models, which often seem to provide higher accuracy ( Due to variation in geotechnical conditions and machine operational parameters in tunneling, artificial intelligence (AI) based models have been successfully employed by some researchers to develop TBM performance prediction models ( In ANFIS, both of the learning capabilities of neural network and reasoning capabilities of fuzzy logic were combined in order to give enhanced prediction capabilities in comparison with using a single methodology alone. This method has become a popular tool in rock and soil engineering as well as engineering geology in recent years ( Rule 1: if Rule 2: if The node functions in the same layer are of the same function family as illustrated: Layer 1: every node  Layer 2: every node in this layer is a circle node labeled  Layer 3: every node labeled as encircle  Layer 4: containing adaptive nodes:  Layer 5: containing a single labeled encircled In this study, the available data sets were divided into two subsets randomly, i.e., 80% data sets for training and 20% datasets for testing (the same as Support Vector Regression). Several models with two input parameters and one output parameter were constructed and trained. To evaluate the models root-mean-square-error (RMSE) was calculated. The proposed ANFIS model for predicting performance of TBM has three membership functions for each input parameter and three rules. The A novel kind of machine learning algorithm, support vector machine (SVM) was developed for solving both classification and regression problems, which maximize predictive accuracy and avoids over-fitting simultaneously. The term SVM refers to both classification (SVC) and regression (SVR) methods. Obviously only SVR is capable to solve extrapolative problems by building a predictive model. The basic concept of SVR is to map nonlinearly in the original data The details of the topology selected for the SVR model are listed in In this section, the developed AI models to predict the TBM performance are compared. Here, the performances of these models were evaluated according to statistical criteria such as correlation coefficient (R The most frequent input parameters used in the previous studies for predication of TBM performance are: the uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock (used by 70% of the models), distance and the orientation of discontinuities (used by 50% of the models), the assumed thrust per cutter (used by 40% of the models) and the cutter diameter (used by 30% of the models). In this investigation, a limited set of TBM performance data was used to examine the accuracy of various models and their input parameter. The initial evaluations show that the results of PCA have good agreement with previous models for prediction of TBM performance. In general, the penetration rate depends on the toughness of the rock material and on the characteristics of the joints in rock mass as well as TBM operating parameters. Among these parameters, the rock strength has major impact on TBM performance, along with joint spacing and cutter load. To account for the effects of cutterload and offer the ability to scale the model to other machine sizes, FPI has been used as the representative of machine performance. As anticipated a strong logarithmic correlation was found between UCS and FPI, where, boreability of rock decreases with increase of UCS. In addition, the joint conditions certainly affect the rock cutting process and have major impact on the TBM performance, as represented by Js. In this study, the use of PCA method has allowed for selection of the input parameters with the maximum impact on the TBM analysis. Using this method, regression analysis of the TBM field performance was conducted using linear and non-linear regression on the parameters of highest impact based on PCA analysis. As a result, empirical equations have been presented for TBM performance based on the database of TBM performance in Zagros tunnel project, using various AI approaches. These models are not intended to be a universal model since the range of input data; rock types, machine parameters used for development of the proposed prediction model was very limited. Therefore, the proposed formulas can be used in similar geology and machine type, although the use of FPI allows for using the model for various machine sizes. This was followed by using the AI methods for development of a predictive model based on SVR and ANFIS methods. The result of comparison between VAF, RMSE, MAPE and coefficient of correlations (R Authors extend their sincere thanks to Dr. Jafar Hassanpour for his help in building the TBM database. Also, the special thanks to Mr. Ehsan Sharafian and Mohammad Esmaeili for their helps and comments for this research.