Wet media milling is a well-established unit operation for the manufacturing of suspension formulations during early phase pharmaceutical development. However, knowledge about the kinetics of particle breakage is limited, although the impact of hydro-mechanical process parameters on the mean particle size of finished suspensions has been thoroughly investigated. We performed in this work milling trials with two different compounds on two milling devices with different mechanical design and volume scale. We analyzed our data in terms of a kinetic milling model where we included the milling speed as an explicit process parameter in addition to the process duration. We show, that the milling kinetics can be fairly well predicted for a wide range of these operating parameters. The proposed milling model may therefore be useful for rational process planning and scale-up considerations in the industrial setting.Active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) for use in preclinical studies are often formulated as suspensions, which have been prepared by wet media milling. Micro- or nanosuspensions are a practicable approach for oral or parenteral administration, if solutions are not feasible because of limited drug solubility ( From a pharmaceutical technology perspective, micronization may lead to improved physical stability of suspensions, e.g. due to a more consistent sedimentation behaviour or due to a reduced risk of uncontrolled particle growth ( Early phase pharmaceutical development suffers notoriously from aggressive timelines and limited resources, particularly with regard to API availability. Unmilled material shows often considerable batch-to-batch variation with respect to particle size and shape. These differences can be largely compensated for when the material is processed to a suspension in a wet milling process. The shortage of material delimits the application of detailed design of experiment (DoE) and of quality by design (QbD) principles, for exploration of a process design space ( The design space for wet media milling seems to be fairly well investigated. Several hydro-mechanical models are available, which describe the influence of the milling energy as well as the impact of collisions between grinding beads on the particle breakage ( In this work, we performed wet milling trials using suspensions of poorly water-soluble model compounds. We used milling devices of different mechanical design and volume scale. We varied the milling speed and the process duration, while we kept the composition of the grinding media constant in all experiments. Milling progress was monitored in terms of the mean particle size. We analyzed our data with a modified kinetic milling model ( As crystalline model compounds we used either Atorvastatin calcium trihydrate (Atorvastatin) or an experimental research compound RO5285119. Atorvastatin (mean particle size 3.3 The particle size distribution and the mean particle size of the compounds was determined at Two types of ball mills of different mechanical design and scale were used in this work: A rotary, planetary ball mill (PM400, Retsch GmbH, Haan, Germany) and an agitated, horizontal ball mill (Dynomill Multilab ML, Bachofen AG, Muttenz, Switzerland). We used either 0.5–0.75 The PM400 mill was equipped with 50 All experiments in this work with the Dynomill were performed in flow-through mode. The mill was equipped with a 600 It has empirically been shown, that the rate of decrease in mean particle size D(t) of a suspension during wet media milling can be fairly well described by a milling model according to Eq. ( Another study has shown, that the exponent (− It has been further shown, that the milling energy in stirred media mills scales linearly with the milling duration and with the third power of the milling speed ω, that is, E Milling speed and process duration thus become explicit variables and remain the only adjustable process parameters, once a milling device has been loaded with the charge. The lumped process constant α is characteristic for a particular set-up. As soon as α is known, the decrease of the mean particle size of crystalline material can be predicted depending on the selected milling speed and process duration. Loosely bound agglomerates may however follow different breakage kinetics ( In this study we performed milling experiments using different APIs and milling devices whereas the suspension vehicle was the same in all experiments. We analyzed our data in terms of the kinetic milling model and determined either the milling rate c or the process constant α by nonlinear fitting. The grinding limit D The mean particle size DS remained almost constant over a wide range of milling durations and speed settings ( In order to test the suitability of the milling model (Eq. We observed considerable scattering in the data mainly at the lowest speed setting (ω Milling rates c and calculated process constants α (according to Eq. As wet milling is a stochastic process, the milling results often show considerable fluctuations even if all process parameters are kept constant. Knowledge of the process parameter α and its variability can be useful for the overall design of a particular milling process and the implementation of an adequate control strategy e.g. for the proper timing of the collection of in-process control samples.  Knowledge of the process constants α for different milling set-ups and milling devices may be useful to support scale-up considerations. Even for otherwise unchanged process parameters like e.g. grinding media and milling beads, the various devices will differ with regard to the efficiency with which the energy input is made available for milling and will therefore be characterized by different values of their respective process constants. The scaling condition with respect to milling duration and speed for the transfer of a certain process from one milling device (1) to another one (2) might therefore be written as: The kinetics of mean particle size decrease during wet milling can be sufficiently well described with a milling model that includes milling speed and milling duration as explicit parameters. The model includes also the mean particle size of the unmilled material and the grinding limit, which both can be determined experimentally. All other process parameters for a particular set-up and volume scale may be lumped into a single characteristic process constant α, which can be determined by a fit of the milling model to experimentally determined mean particle size data. The model allows a prediction of the mean particle size for a wide range of speed settings and processing times, not only for a range which has been used in milling experiments before. Knowledge of the kinetics of particle breakage can be applied for rational process design, workflow planning and scale-up considerations, particularly in the industrial setting. The authors report no conflicts of interest. Parts of this work are included in the Diploma Thesis of PK, supervised by Prof. Dr. Regine Süss, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy, University of Freiburg, Germany. Peter Egloff, Jean-Michel Clavey and Sascha Röder of F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. are sincerely acknowledged for their practical support.