A two-stage method for the desulfurization of oil is presented. The first stage strongly oxidizes sulfuric material to do away with its chemical aggressiveness and promote its removal. Desulfurization of the overall product is reached at the second stage by means of conventional methods.Because of the trend in supplying crude oil with heavier and higher sulfur content for refining and stronger environmental requirements, the problem of clearing oil distillates and oil residue from sulfuric compounds has become more important. Today, this is dealt with by using a complex technique that requires the use of catalysts and hydrogen and then processing at high temperatures and pressure. The existing technologies for the desulfurization of oil products can be seen using two basic approaches: In the first approach, sulfur compounds are reduced to H Irradiation techniques can also be applied to efficiently reduce sulfuric compounds by using radiation-induced reactions of hydrogenation in which hydrogen results from the radiation-induced hydrocarbon destruction. This can be supplemented by radiation methods developed for H In the traditional approach, one presumes the oxidation of the sulfuric materials in the oil with subsequent extraction of the oxidized high molecular weight sulfuric compounds. The most prominent difficulty is to achieve a high level of sulfur oxidation since, in the second stage, the extraction of oxidized material is well advanced and does pose technical difficulties. If the degree of oxidation of the sulfuric compounds is higher, this process becomes the appropriate technology. Our experiments with hydrocarbon mixtures have shown that radiation processing (RP) can be efficiently used for conversion of mercaptans and other light sulfuric species to sulfones, sulfuric oxides and acids. The proposed irradiation method of desulfurization includes two stages. The first stage is radiation processing, and the second one is the standard procedure for extraction of highly oxidized sulfuric compounds. In the first stage, no desulfurization of the overall product is observed. This results in the strong oxidation of sulfuric material that does away with its chemical aggressiveness and enhances its removal. In addition, it causes some sulfur redistribution in the overall product leading to the partial desulfurization of light oil fractions. The high level of sulfur oxidation is due to the double activation of oxidation processes both by radiation activation of the feedstock and activation from atmospheric air. The ozone-containing air excited by energetic electron bombardment appears here in the role of an oxidizer. In particular, one of the routes for mercaptan oxidation and transformation can be illustrated by the following scheme: Accumulation of hydrogen hampers mercaptan conversion, but the controlled access of ozone-containing air mixed into the reactor allows one to regulate the degree of mercaptan conversion. The application of ozone as an oxidizer for oil mixtures was proposed earlier ( The processing of heavy fuel oil in two irradiation modes with the purpose of producing light oil fractions from the feedstock and, simultaneously, transforming sulfur into harmless and easily extracted forms was described in previous papers (  Standard chemical analysis and infrared spectroscopy data have shown disulfides, sulfones, sulfoxides, and sulfonic acids in the products of oil-irradiation processing conducted in mode 2, indicating a higher degree of mercaptan oxidation under these irradiation conditions. Radiation processing in mode 1 leads to considerably greater destruction of hydrocarbon molecules and appearance of hydrogen in amounts sufficient to reverse the reaction of sulfide formation from disulfides. For this reason, lower disulfide yields were observed in mode 1. For comparison, it should be noticed that the “Kazan” technology for oil demercaptanization that is used today on the Tengiz oil field by the Chevron Company and considered to be one of the most efficient ( The conversion (cracking) of oil feedstock in the described modes was accompanied by oxidation and partial desulfurization of light fractions as a result of total sulfur redistribution in the overall processed product. So, the sulfur content in the gasoline fraction in fuel oil was decreased by 40 times in comparison with its concentration in the original feedstock and, without additional extraction of sulfuric compounds, resulted in 430 If crude oil cracking is not desired and the sole purpose of processing is desulfurization, then the appearance of by-products (gases, cocking rest) could be considered as product yield losses that will be reduced to a minimum. In this case, other conditions of radiation processing can be applied for the oxidizing of sulfuric compounds. When the irradiation dose rate or the processing temperature become lower than certain threshold values and the rate of development of the cracking chain reaction becomes comparable with the recombination rate of hydrocarbon radicals generated by radiation, the intensity of hydrocarbon destruction drops sharply while the intensity of radiation-induced oxidizing remains high. These conditions are optimal for oil desulfurization with the minimum product yield losses (1–5%). Distributions of sulfoxides and sulfones forming as a result of oxidation process were similar both in the “severe” and in the “mild” irradiation modes. According to the data from chemical analysis and IR spectroscopy, sulfur did not pass to the gaseous fraction (H Therefore, as a result of radiation-induced conversion, sulfur is present after distillation in heavy oil fractions mainly in the forms of high-molecular oxidized compounds (sulfones, sulfoxides, sulfonic acids) that can be easily extracted by well-known methods using appropriate solvents (water solutions of sulfuric acid, acetone, ethylene glycol, monoethyl alcohol). The extracted high-molecular weight sulfuric compounds are valuable commodity products. They are used in mining and metallurgy as extraction agents in the processes of extraction and separation of radioactive and rare metals (uranium, thorium, zirconium, hafnium, niobium, tantalum), and rare-earth elements (tellurium, rhenium, gold, palladium, etc.) It is forecasted that the use of oil-derived sulfoxides will have a great impact on ore enrichment of many rare and noble metals. Oil-derived sulfoxides appear to be more efficient than tributylphosphate and other traditional extraction agents. The oil-derived sulfoxides are also used in hydrometallurgy, being the best extraction agents because of their high efficiency and selectivity in the extraction of gold, palladium and silver. During the last several years, information was published on the use of sulfones and sulfoxides of oil origin in oil refining as selective solvents for paraffin hydrocarbon purification of unsaturated and organic sulfuric compounds ( Another method of oil desulfurization, now under development, can also have considerable merit. In this method, the electron beam is not directly used for crude oil irradiation. The irradiation source in this case is the gamma-radiation background that appears as a result of high-energy electron deceleration in the air medium of the accelerator room. The feedstock is just following on the gamma-irradiation field being bubbled by the active ozone-containing air that fills the accelerator room during irradiation processing. The use of this method will require a longer duration of feedstock processing but the processing will be very inexpensive since only the side effects of accelerator action are used. The electron beam generated by an accelerator can be simultaneously used for any other technical purpose. In this case, the costs for desulfurizarion could be radically reduced, the product yield losses being practically zero. Radiation processing of crude oil in such “mild” conditions can solve the problem of transportation of mercaptan-containing oil even without the use of the second stage when oxidized compounds are extracted. Oxidation of sulfur compounds due to oil-irradiation processing makes oil safer for transportation and more useful for further refining.