The effect of the cobalt carboxylate chain length (C2, C5 and C9) on the preparation of alumina supported cobalt catalysts has been studied by TPR, XRD and hydrogen chemisorption techniques. The activity and selectivity of the prepared catalysts have been evaluated for Fischer-Tröpsch (FT) activity in a stirred basket reactor. It is shown that for catalysts with Co content of 10wt.% the activity increases as the carboxylate chain length increases while the selectivity towards methane and light hydrocarbons decreases with the carboxylate chain length. This change relates to the effect of the chain length on the catalyst particle size. The catalyst prepared using cobalt acetate was found to present the highest metal–support interaction and the poorest performance for the Fischer-Tröpsch reaction. When the metal content was increased to 15 and 20wt.% Co, respectively, the metal–support interaction for the catalyst particles prepared from cobalt acetate significantly decreased making it a better catalyst for the FT reaction compared to the catalyst particles prepared from C5 and C9 cobalt carboxylates.The catalytic activity for the Fischer-Tröpsch (FT) reaction is a function of two conflicting parameters: metal dispersion and precursor reducibility and an ideal catalyst would involve an optimal combination of these two parameters. Highly dispersed catalysts generate a strong precursor–support interaction which tends to interfere with the reduction of precursors to the metal state Previous studies have shown The effect of precursor type on SBA-15 and MCM-41 supported cobalt catalysts has also been reported Panpranot et al. Most of these previous studies have compared catalysts prepared from a range of precursors that have been compared with catalysts prepared from cobalt nitrate as a reference. However, the Co precursors have been quite disparate and issues relating to the effect of the The present study aims at studying the effect that could originate from varying the cobalt carboxylate chain length during catalysts preparation. Little is known about the influence of cobalt precursors on the dispersion and reducibility of cobalt when different organic precursors with the same functional group are used. The dependency of the above effect on Co loading is also examined in this study. Cobalt acetate was used as received (Aldrich 99%) while the other cobalt carboxylates were prepared by reacting CoCO In the case of cobalt nonanoate, instead of dissolving the solid that had formed after cooling, the solid was washed several times with cold, distilled hexane and then dried at 90 Catalysts were prepared by incipient wetness impregnation of the γ-Al TPR analysis was performed in an apparatus constructed at the University. The calcined catalyst (0.1 Hydrogen chemisorption was performed on a Micromeritics ASAP 2010 analyser. A sample of 0.5 After H The metal dispersion percentage ( The average crystallite diameters ( The XRD analysis was done on an ENRAF NONIUS FR590 powder diffractometer. A Cu Kα radiation (30 The new catalysts were designated as Co The FT reaction was carried out in a stirred, cruciform-shaped basket fitted into a cylindrical reactor chamber (internal diameter 50 The purity of the prepared cobalt carboxylates was determined by TGA analysis in air. The TPR profiles for Co10-2Al, Co10-5Al and Co10-9Al are presented in Two major peaks at ca. 350 A high temperature peak (above 850 The TPR profiles of the  The increase in cobalt loading in the catalyst increases the area under the peaks corresponding to the two step reduction of Co The increase of cobalt loading in the catalyst induces a shift of reduction peaks to lower temperatures. In each case, when catalysts prepared from the same precursor are compared, it can be seen that reduction of Co The high reduction temperature peak (>700 These observations show that the catalyst reducibility is improved with increasing cobalt loading in the catalyst. The amount of cobalt reduced during TPR experiments was calculated for each catalyst after calibration with Ag It is generally agreed in the literature that the high temperature reduction peak (around 500–600 With a Co loading around 10%, the reducibility of Co/Al The metal–support interaction factor Previous studies The results from the H By increasing the Co content on the catalyst, the average cobalt cluster size on the catalyst prepared from cobalt acetate is significantly increased while the average cluster size on catalysts prepared from cobalt pentanoate and cobalt nonanoate is only slightly affected. By loading at the highest Co loading in this study (20 The average Co   No significant Co No peak for CoAl The average particle diameters calculated from XRD differ significantly from those obtained from chemisorption. This is probably because the Co  As discussed earlier, an increase in cobalt loading in the catalyst significantly increased the cobalt particle size for catalysts prepared from cobalt acetate. An apparent correlation between the cobalt particle size and the TOF can therefore be established: the TOFs decreases when the Co particle size decreases. Catalysts prepared using cobalt pentanoate and cobalt nonanoate had comparable cobalt particle size leading to comparable TOFs. Previous studies have also reported a decrease in TOF with decreasing cobalt particle size (increasing dispersion) Particular attention has been drawn to the fact that the particle size range where the Co specific activity has been reported to decrease with increasing dispersion The effect of precursor chain length on the Previous studies The effect of the chain length of the cobalt carboxylates used in the preparation of supported cobalt catalysts has been studied by TPR, XRD and hydrogen chemisorption techniques. The as-prepared catalysts have been tested for CO hydrogenation activity. It has been shown that when a Co content of 10 We wish to thank the DST, the NRF, THRIP and the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, for financial support.