Cobalt and nickel are among the most important nonferrous metals. The using of flat sheet supported liquid membranes (FSSLMs) to remove metals from wastewaters has been used actively by the scientific and industrial communities. In this study, the selective separation of cobalt from thiocyanate solutions containing cobalt and nickel by FSSLM was examined using tri-n-octylamine (Alamine 300) as carrier. The FSSLM was consisted of extractant, flat sheet support and organic solvent. The various parameters were studied to determine the optimum extraction and striping conditions of cobalt and nickel. These parameters were stirring speeds of phases, NH4SCN concentration, pH, diluent type, extractant concentration, stripping reagent concentration and modifier concentration. Concentration of cobalt and nickel were determined by Shimadzu AA-6701GF spectrophotometer. In the optimum conditions, selective separation of cobalt was achieved with an efficiency of 98.4% within 8h, for equimolar feed mixtures, 400mg/L Co+400mg/L Ni, and the separation factor of Co(II) over Ni(II) was 234.4. In addition, for nonequimolar feed mixtures, 500mg/L Co+1000mg/L Ni, Ni in excess, selective separation of cobalt was 99.9%, and the separation factor of Co was 506 in the same time.Cobalt is mainly obtained as a product of the extraction of nickel, copper, zinc, and lead from their ores. Separation of cobalt and nickel from sulphate and chloride media has been practical interest for researchers The extraction chemistry is basically the same as that in solvent extraction except that transport is governed by kinetics rather than equilibrium parameters, i.e. it is governed by a non-equilibrium mass transfer. Previously, our group has investigated separation of metal ion mixtures and their selective extraction of transition metals The supported liquid membrane (SLM) technique has been used by several researchers for extraction and separation of cobalt and nickel using several extractants such as TEA Most of these studies concerned solvent extraction processes using organophosphorus acid extractants such as D2EHPA and Cyanex 272. The using of this extractants in liquid membranes offers an alternative method to solvent extraction process for selective separation and concentration of various metal ions from aqueous solutions. Solute transport across a liquid membrane is a combination of extraction and stripping in a single stage unit operation process Amines are generally used as representative extracting reagents which extract the metal ions according to an ion association and ion-pairs principles. The amine extraction chemistry of thiocyanate complexes was investigated by Sanuki et al. For this extraction system, the extraction reaction of cobalt can be given by Eq. Competitive transport of the equimolar or nonequimolar mixture of cobalt and nickel ions across the FSSLM from the aqueous solutions was studied using a two-compartment permeation cell, made from Teflon, with flat-sheet membranes of 19.63 Various feed solutions were prepared by adding both cobalt and nickel salts to study the effect of feed composition. Ammonium thiocyanate (NH The mass transfer of cobalt crossing the membrane is described considering only diffusional parameters. The interfacial flux due to the chemical reaction is neglected, as the chemical reactions seem to take place at the interface feed phase/membrane and membrane/receiving phase interface, and it has been suggested that chemical reactions can be considered as occurring instantaneously relative to the diffusional process Diffusion of metal species from the bulk of feed solution to the aqueous feed boundary layer. Diffusion of protons and chloride ions from the bulk of feed solution to the aqueous feed boundary layer. Reaction between metal species, protons and chloride ions and carrier at the feed-membrane interface. Diffusion of metal–carrier complexes from the feedmembrane interface to the membrane-receiving phase interface. Stripping of metal species at the membrane-receiving phase interface and diffusion of them to the bulk of the receiving solution. Diffusion of the regenerated carrier back to the feedmembrane interface, after which the process is repeated. CoSO Membrane permeability was determined by monitoring cobalt and nickel concentration by FAAS (Shimadzu AA-6701GF spectrophotometer) in the feed and stripping phase as a function of time. The cobalt and nickel concentrations in the various phases were found to be reproducible within ±3%. The permeation coefficient ( The effect of stirring speed in the feed and stripping phases were studied in the range of 600–1500 As in conventional solvent extraction and in LM process, the diluent affect the metal transport and the membrane performance As a result, the permeability behaviour of cobalt using various diluents is presented in The effect of the NH The effect of Alamine 300 concentration in the membrane phase on cobalt flux was studied in the range of 5–20% (w/w). The cobalt fluxes were calculated at different Alamine 300 concentrations in organic phase and are shown in In order to assess the role of the pH on separation of cobalt from the equimolar solution of cobalt and nickel, pH variation studies in the range of 3.0–5.0 were carried out, as seen from Ammonia and triethanol amine solution mixtures were used as reagents to strip and separate the cobalt from membrane phase to the aqueous phase. In previous emulsion type liquid membrane studies, the highest extraction efficiency was obtained with 6 To reach maximum extraction efficiency value, we used for four different type of modifier which is 1-decanol, isodecanol, tributyl phosphate (TBP), trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO). We saw that modifiers increased extraction efficiency and decreased in precipitation of [(R The following results were obtained from the experimental parameters: Diluent: chloroform Feed solution pH’1: 4.0 Complexing reagent (NH Feed solution stirring rate: 1200 Stripping solution stirring rate: 1200 Extractant (Alamine 300) concentration: 5% (w/w) Neutral or solvation extractant (TBP) concentration: 25% (w/w) Stripping solution: 1 Polymer support: Celgard 2500 ( The separation factors of cobalt over nickel, Supported liquid membrane process using Alamine 300 to extract and separate cobalt from the acidic solutions was investigated. From this study the following conclusions can be drawn: The optimum conditions were determined experimentally as stated above. The best cobalt flux was provided at pH 4 in the feed solution as 9.12 The best cobalt flux was provided at 25% (w/w) TBP 5% Alamine 300 concentration in the membrane phase as 8.32 At the optimum conditions, the extraction of cobalt was achieved with an efficiency of 98.4% within 8 The financial support of this work was provided by