Underbalanced drilling is one of the drilling methods for better drilling according to its advantages. Cuttings transport effects on cost, time, and quality of oil/gas wells in drilling operation. Inefficient cleaning of wellbore may cause many drilling problems. Prediction and measuring of the cleaning efficiency in the wellbore annulus is a complex problem according to many effective factors. The field and experimental measurements of this parameter are time consuming and costly. This paper presents the radial basis function network (RBFN) method for prediction of cuttings concentration in underbalanced drilling condition to avoid the high cost experimental and field measurements. The average absolute percent relative error (AAPE) for train and test datasets in this study is 2.9e-13%, and 5.7% for the RBFN model. The comparison results of this study with literature review show the benefit of RBFN in prediction compared to back propagation neural network (BPNN) according to higher accuracy, faster training and simple network architecture. So, this network can be used in many mathematical problems for prediction and estimation instead of BPNN. Results of this study show that implementation of this developed model can be incorporated in drilling simulators for accurate estimation of cuttings concentration in wellbore instead of field and experimental measurements for hydraulic design in drilling operation.Cuttings transport and efficiency of hole cleaning has been one of the major concerns in the petroleum industry. Inefficient cleaning of wellbore leads to decreased rate of penetration, increased cost of drilling, fractured formation, increased plastic viscosity of mud as a result of grinding of cuttings and stuck pipe. Cuttings transport in drilling operation is a complex problem that is influenced by many factors such as well structure, drilling fluid flow rate, drilling fluid characterization, pipe rotation and rate of penetration (ROP). High cuttings concentration in wellbore annulus can produce many costly problems. Experimental and field measurements of this parameter are costly and time consuming for hydraulic design in drilling operation. Many studies have been done in this area. These studies have developed some empirical and mechanistic models to cuttings transport In underbalanced drilling (UBD), the pressure of the drilling fluid in wellbore is intentionally kept lower than the formation pressure. This is done for a variety of reasons including reducing formation damage, increasing ROP, increasing bit life, benefit of characterizing the reservoir while drilling, eliminating drilling problems such as differential sticking and lost circulation. Foam drilling is one of underbalanced drilling candidates using foam as homogeneous emulsion obtained by mixing liquid, gas and an emulsifying agent. This drilling is good candidate for naturally fractured reservoirs, under pressure reservoirs and horizontal wells Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are a reliable predictive tool inspired by studies on the human nerve that can be used to model various highly complex and nonlinear problems. The different types of neural networks include back propagation neural network (BPNN), radial basis neural network (RBFN), etc The aim of this study is indirect measuring of cuttings transport efficiency of foam in horizontal annulus from effective parameters for hydraulic design using simple and cost effective RBFN according to its advantages. The results of the RBFN model are compared with experimental data from the literature and the BPNN model. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are mathematical models inspired by studies on brain system, consisting of highly interconnected processing nodes or elements (artificial neurons) under a pre-specified topology (sequence of layers or slabs with full or random connections between the layers). The different types of neural networks include BPNN, RBFN, etc. RBFN is a three-layer feed-forward neural network. RBFN has only one hidden layer and it has some advantages including fast convergence speed, strong approximation ability, simple network architecture, cost effectiveness, etc This network includes input layer (p), hidden layer with radbas transfer function and output layer (a). Here the net input to the radbas transfer function is the vector distance between its weight vector w and the input vector p, multiplied by the bias b. The  Radial basis networks can be designed with either newrbe or newrb in MATLAB software In this study, the experimental data (77 data) of cuttings transport using foam from the literature The input layer of RBFN has 6 neurons including foam velocity (V), foam quality ( For sensitivity analyses of parameters, the correlation matrix between cuttings concentration (CC) and independent variables using SPSS software, has been shown in For training and testing the RBFN, the inputs and outputs of RBFN were normalized between −1 and 1 The RBFN was trained by different spread constant (SPREAD) for the radial basis layer to achieve the optimum SPREAD according to AAPE and As can be seen, it is composed of three layers as follows: Input layer: the neurons of the input layer are effective parameters (6 inputs (P, T, V, RPM, e, Hidden layer: In RBFN, the number of the neurons in the hidden layer can be simply considered equal to the number of training patterns (60 neurons in this study) with radbas transfer function in all neurons. Furthermore, in the designing process of RBFN, it is needed to determine a proper spread value to control the sensitivity of hidden neurons. In this work, AAPE was used to find the proper value of SPREAD. After some trial and error the value of SPREAD was set equal to 0.83. Output layer: It has one neuron (CC%) with linear transfer function (purlin) in this layer.  The RBFN code was designed in MATLAB software. 60 samples of 77 data samples from the literature were used to train the RBFN for estimation of cuttings concentration in annulus from input variables (V, To ensure correct training, the network was tested using the test data. The results of RBFN are compared with results of BPNN in literature In this paper the RBFN model with three layers was applied for estimating cuttings concentration in foam drilling from effective parameters (foam velocity, foam quality, eccentricity of annulus, pressure, temperature, and pipe rotation). Hidden layer has 60 neurons with a radbas transfer function. Two criteria (