The oxygen potential prevailing during iron ore sintering was measured with a zirconia sensor in a series of sinter pot experiments. This was done to get a better indication of the redox conditions during commercial sintering. It was found that the pO2 is appreciably more oxidizing than previously assumed, with a minimum value of ~0.01atm. It is concluded that this value represents the oxygen potential of the gas phase and it is therefore a mixture of combustion gas and downdraft air.
                  The contents of a quenched sinter pot where the reactions were interrupted with the flame front situated midway through the sinter bed were investigated. X-ray diffraction analysis, using an internal standard to quantify the amorphous slag phase, revealed that at the flame front only magnetite and slag were present. SFCA phases only formed at the top of the bed after the flame front had passed.
                  Thermodynamic modeling of the phases at equilibrium agree qualitatively with the phase analysis and explained the extensive presence of magnetite and melt, as well as the formation of calcium ferrite phases during cooling below 1100°C.The variation in redox conditions during iron ore sintering has been the subject of discussion in a number of publications. It is generally agreed that drying, dehydration, and carbonate dissociation occur at the preheating zone ahead of solid fuel combustion. The sintering reactions are initiated at the flame front where the fuel (usually coke or char) is combusted. The flame front rapidly moves downward through the sinter bed by the suction of the combustion gas. At the combustion zone the redox conditions are reducing and this then changes to oxidizing as the already sintered material cools by the downward passage of air through the partially molten charge ( Establishing the redox conditions during sintering was indirectly monitored by determining the CO and CO To evaluate the reactions taking place during sintering, fine-grained synthetic mixtures were examined by in situ high-temperature X-ray diffraction in air and at slightly reducing conditions ( The melting behavior of CaO-SiO In addition, some studies on larger sinter pot samples where the flame was terminated by the introduction of nitrogen ( The phase relations and melting behavior of sinters were investigated by The aims of the present investigation are the following: (1) the direct measurement of the pO A split circular pot (internal diameter 20 The pot was ignited using gas burners at the top of the pot and suction was applied from the bottom. When the middle thermocouple showed maximum temperature the aim was to “freeze” the pot in order to stop all reactions taking place. In the first experiment liquid nitrogen was poured on top of the sinter pot. In the second experiment water was used. Air suction was not stopped during the cooling of the pot test in order to promote the cooling effect through the sinter material. The pot was then opened and the top layer of material was removed. The samples were then collected from the center section of the pot since this area is not associated with shrinkage due to the inflow of excess air or because edges of the pot might not receive sufficient heat and therefore result in incomplete sintering. The following sinter parameters were used for all experiments: Bed height: 400 Ignition temperature: 1058 Pressure drop: 1000 Fuel addition: 4.7% The composition of the sinter is given in SIRO When there is an oxygen concentration gradient across the sensor an emf (E), which obeys the Nernst equation develops. If air is used as a reference the oxygen partial pressure can be calculated from the EMF and absolute temperature using the following equation: The sensors were calibrated in the laboratory according to the following method. A mullite tube was partially inserted into a small tube furnace. The oxygen sensor was then inserted into this tube with a gas inlet on the opposite end. Inside the oxygen sensor an S-type thermocouple was inserted. A tube was fitted over the end of the oxygen sensor and thermocouple. This tube was then connected to a small compressor pump. The oxygen sensor has a Pt-coated electrode which is connected to the data logger with a pure Pt-wire. The data logger was connected to a computer and was set to measure the voltage and temperature every second. Calibration tests were carried out at temperatures between 700 and 1300 The sensors were first calibrated using a gas mixture consisting of a 50% CO, 50% CO Initially the sensor was inserted horizontally in a sinter pot together with three additional thermocouples. When the sinter mixture was combusted, shrinkage of the sinter mixture caused the connecting alumina tube to break. This caused several experiments to fail. The experiments were then repeated with the probe tube almost vertical. This arrangement allowed uninterrupted measurements to be conducted. Most experiments were done with the sensor in the middle of the sinter pot. The arrangement is shown in Using this procedure, it is clear that an average pO In order to study the reactions taking place at the various zones of the sinter bed, the bed was quenched with liquid nitrogen or with water when the flame front showed a maximum temperature at the middle thermocouple. The temperature profiles during liquid nitrogen and water quenching are shown in The sinter pot was split open and samples taken at regular intervals, as shown in These samples were milled, micronized, and mixed with a silicon internal standard so that the amount of quenched slag can be quantified in addition to the crystalline phases. A PANalytical X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer with X'Celerator detector and variable divergence- and receiving slits with Fe filtered Co Kα radiation was used for data collection. Phase quantification was done using the Rietveld method using the Autoquan program ( The SFCA phases are the important binding phases in iron ore sinters and they belong to the aenigmatite structure type with SFCA having a M The melt phase in four samples was analyzed on polished sections of the powdered samples using a JEOL JSM IT300 electron microscope operated at 15 Thermodynamic modeling was performed using the FACTSage™ software ( The results of the pO As can be seen from the figure, the results are highly variable, but all follow the same expected trend, i.e. a decrease in pO The distribution of the different phases as a function of bed height is shown in Several aspects are noteworthy; first, there is still unreacted calcite, dolomite and quartz and predominant hematite in the bottom sample — an indication that the flame front is not yet affecting the bottom of the quenched bed. Also of interest is the presence of small amounts of Wüstite in samples 4 and 5. Wüstite was also found to be present in quenched sinter samples by The composition of the liquid phase (given as mass fractions), the amount of slag and the slag basicity as a function of temperature, calculated by FACTsage, is given in From the data it is apparent that the Fe The average slag compositions for four analyzed WNRF samples are remarkably constant and do not show the expected compositions as shown in Comparison with estimates from the literature show that the measured values from this study are much more oxidizing than those given by  The pO Comparison with the hematite–magnetite equilibrium shows that the measured pO Simulation of the phase equilibria using FACTSage™ was attempted using the analyzed sinter composition and a gas mixture approximating the measured pO Comparison with the phase quantities as reported by The predominance of magnetite plus slag is clearly shown at 1300 An important conclusion from this calculation is the fact that the major SFCA binding phases are formed only on cooling, and that the extent of melt formation together with the cooling history of the sinter are most probably major factors affecting the properties of the sinter. Comparison of the FACTsage results with the phase quantities determined by XRD below the solidus temperature of ~ Examination of the phase assemblages of the quenched samples shows that at the flame front, (Sample WNRF3), the major phases are magnetite and melt, with minor (relict?) hematite. This is qualitatively in agreement with the thermodynamic modeling and with the findings of Melt compositions as measured by SEM analysis show that their compositions are very similar and this probably reflects a melt composition quenched at 1200 The SFCA phases are not stable in the presence of melt; this was conclusively shown by The measured compositions of the liquid phase in all the samples from the quenched sinter pot are remarkably constant and most probably reflect a composition where crystallization of the solid phases ceased, leaving a residual quenched slag phase. More attention needs to be given to reactions that take place during cooling of the bed, as this can maximize SFCA formation, the main binding phases in the sinter. The combustion step, important for the development of sufficient melt formation, assumes less importance for the development of strong sinter. This study has shown that the pO2 developed during sintering, as measured by a zirconia oxygen sensor, is significantly more oxidizing than previously postulated, with a minimum value of ~ Examination of samples from a quenched sinter pot show magnetite plus melt as the major phases at the flame front, with essentially no development of SFCA phases. These phases only form when the melt phase is greatly diminished. Thermodynamic modeling keeping the pO2 at 0.01 More attention should be given to the quenching part of the sinter operation since this is where the SFCA binding phases form. Changing cooling rates by control of incoming air temperatures could enhance or inhibit the formation of these phases with a concomitant change in the metallurgical properties such as tumble index or reduction disintegration index. The assistance of Andre Dippenaar and Kobus Vreugdenburg from Anglo American Kumba for pot sinter tests is acknowledged. These were conducted in addition to their normal duties. They also provided valuable input to make these tests a success. The first author also acknowledges financial assistance from Thanks also to Johan Zietsman for assistance with the FACTsage modeling and for valuable suggestions. The comments of Andrie Garbers-Craig are also gratefully acknowledged.