Nepheline syenite is a complex rock consisting of different mineral phases such as nepheline, alkali feldspar, and biotite. It is a promising source for the recovery of potassium and alumina values. India is importing most of its potassium demand from the global market. An attempt is therefore made to extract potassium values from nepheline syenite available in the state of Odisha. It contains 2.8% Fe2O3, 19.9% Al2O3, 55.5% SiO2 and 5.4% K2O as its prime constituents. Magnetic separation and flotation techniques are found unsuitable to recover appreciable amounts of potassium values. Chemical leaching with dilute sulphuric acid could recover only ~40% of the potassium values. The potassium values present in nepheline syenite are unlocked through roasting with calcium chloride followed by water leaching. In this approach, it is possible to recover ~99.6% K2O value at 900°C temperature and 30min of roasting time. The results indicate that the use of planetary mill grinding prior to roasting is favorable for potassium extraction due to mechanical activation of the potassium bearing phases. The different mineral phases present in the feed and the leach residue have been characterized by using optical microscope, XRD and SEM-EDX which shows a phase conversion of locked potassium into sylvite which is soluble in water.Potassium is an essential element for plant nutrition. Its demand for agricultural use is growing steadily at 3–3.5% per annum ( The main potassium mineral reserves for fertilizer prospects are soluble K-chlorides or sulfates such as the minerals sylvite, kainite, carnallite and polyhalite. Solution mining or leaching in closed dissolvers are applied to these minerals in which heated brine preferentially dissolves the potassium values. Recently, a pilot plant operation has been developed to produce fertilizer grade potassium sulfate from polyhalite (K Literature shows that not much research efforts have been made to make use of alternative low grade mineral resources due to the availability of highly soluble potash salts of marine origin in many countries, with a K Nepheline syenite is a light-colored medium- to coarse-grained, feldspathic, plutonic igneous rock largely made up of nepheline (Na, K) AlSiO Considering the huge deposits of nepheline syenite in India, a systematic study has been pursued on the recovery of potassium value from the host rock. In the present investigation systematic characterization and application of physical beneficiation methods like magnetic separation and flotation have been applied to recover the potassium values. Furthermore, sulphuric acid leaching using a design of experiments such as Taguchi L A nepheline syenite sample from the Koraput district of Odisha was used in this study. The complete chemical analysis of the bulk sample such as Fe, Al The sample was prepared using stage crushing with a laboratory jaw crusher and a roll crusher. The size analysis of the sample as received was measured by standard screens and sieves. The particle size distribution of the crushed and ground products is shown in The X-ray diffraction study of the powder sample was carried out on a Philips X-ray diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation. The diffractograms were recorded from 10 to 80° with a scan speed of 30 The magnetic separation of the ground product was carried out in a standard wet magnetic separation unit supplied by Box-mag rapid separator, England. The magnetic intensity was varied from 4000 to 14,000 All the leaching experiments were carried out in a 1 The design of experiments significantly reduces the number of experimental configurations to be studied. The Taguchi method possesses distinct advantages over conventional experimental design methods as it minimizes the variability around the target value ( An orthogonal array, L Roasting studies of nepheline syenite samples with calcium chloride were carried out in refractory crucibles using a laboratory muffle furnace. The experiments were carried out at 900 The nepheline syenite investigated consists of dark and light colored minerals and is holo-leucocratic with a hypidiomorphic texture. It is also known as a holocrystalline plutonic rock consisting largely of nepheline and alkali feldspar. The structure is similar to the graded texture of a foyaite. The hand specimen photograph of the received nepheline syenite bulk sample is shown in The stereomicroscopic studies of the sample as shown in The elemental mappings of the sample from different areas are shown in Semi-quantitative elemental analyses of various phases occurring in the nepheline syenite were carried out and are reported in The ground nepheline syenite sample was subjected to wet high intensity magnetic separation to evaluate the possible enrichment of K Initially, the nepheline syenite sample was subjected to water leaching. It was observed that the potassium leaching was only 1.6%. This indicates that the potassium is locked in the nepheline syenite matrix and needs either acid or alkali treatment to release the potassium values. The potassium extraction from nepheline syenite samples using both sulphuric acid and hydrochloric acid at different concentrations is shown in The ground products of ball mill and planetary mill at different intervals of grinding time were subjected to acid leaching. The experimental conditions of leaching were 60 Some of the major variables for leaching include grinding time, acid concentration, solid/liquid ratio, and leaching temperature. The signature plots of Taguchi L  Based on these results obtained on acid leaching by Taguchi design, extended leaching studies were pursued to enhance the K extraction. In a set of experiments, both acid concentration and leaching time were increased. The leaching time was extended up to 8 Based on Taguchi optimization design, the maximum K The choice of a suitable chloridizing salt depends upon economic as well as thermodynamic considerations. With reference to the free energy–temperature diagram for the metal–chloride system, it has been observed that the standard free energy change for the formation of potassium chloride is much lower than for many other chlorides (− Experiments were carried out by varying the calcium chloride dosage for both planetary mill and ball mill ground products. All the roasted products were subjected to water leaching instead of acid leaching. The results are shown in The possible chemical reactions between nepheline syenite and lixiviants are shown in Eqs. A CaCl The SEM images of nepheline syenite samples roasted with and without calcium chloride are shown in The different methods adopted for the recovery of potassium values from nepheline syenite are shown in The potassium present in nepheline syenite is intricately associated with different mineral phases present in the host rock. Conventional beneficiation by magnetic and flotation techniques could recover only up to 21% of potassium values. Sulphuric acid leaching at higher temperature and longer time could extract only 60% of potassium value from nepheline syenite. The results indicated that mechanical activation caused by a planetary mill increased the reactivity of nepheline syenite which in turn had a positive effect on potassium extraction. The chloridizing roast-leach route was applied and found to be a feasible process for extraction of potassium from nepheline syenite. It was possible to recover 99.6% potassium value at 45% CaCl