Flotation of oxides of Ni, Cu(II), Zn and Fe(III) by long chain xanthates, up to decyl, has been studied. Flotation is pH-dependent and follows an electrostatic mechanism, recovery being related to the isoelectric point of the oxide. Recovery increased with the chain length, the rate constant increasing linearly with the number of carbon atoms in the chain. At pH 10.5, CuO and NiO were selectively floated from ZnO and Fe2O3.The use of xanthates as collectors for non-sulphide minerals, in particular, oxides, has not been extensively investigated. Recent studies at McGill on the separation of nickel minerals from laterite ores showed that the nickel mineral, which is mainly a complex oxide-silicate, could be floated to some extent by amyl xanthate. Basic studies with nickel oxide confirmed its floatability with amyl xanthate over the pH range 4–8. The action of xanthate has been explained by a combined electrostatic mechanism and chemical interaction The present investigation explores the flotation characteristics of Ni, Cu(II), Zn and Fe(III) oxides with xanthates, and their selective separation by pH control. Base metal oxides occur naturally, and such deposits are attracting increased attention. They also occur in potential secondary sources such as smelter dusts and residues from acid rock drainage treatment. An understanding of their flotation characteristics could be of potential use in developing physical methods of recovery. Nickel oxide, cupric oxide, zinc oxide and ferric oxide were reagent grade (97–99% purity) obtained from Aldrich Chemicals. Silica was obtained from Indusmin, Toronto. Particle size distribution, determined by Sedigraph, showed 90% <20 μm for each sample. Potassium isopropyl and amyl xanthate were obtained from Prospec Chemicals and were purified by the standard method Flotation response was measured using the microflotation cell described by In the experiments with binary oxide mixtures, the dried products were assayed to determine the metal content. This was done by digesting 0.1 g in hydrochloric acid and analyzing the solution by atomic absorption spectroscopy. To determine the flotation rate constant, the float product was collected at time intervals of 30, 60, 90 and 120 s. The product for each time was dried and weighed and the cumulative recovery The isoelectric point of the oxides was measured with the Zeta Potential Analyzer (Zeta Plus), Brookhaven Instruments. The flotation tests for each condition were conducted at least in duplicate. The maximum variation observed was ±2.5%. The average for each point was plotted.      The isoelectric point (IEP) for the four metal oxides is given in    In decreasing order of response, the oxides of Cu(II), Ni, and Zn can be floated by long chain xanthates (amyl or higher) but not Fe(III) oxide (or silica). The flotation rate constant (of NiO) appears to increase linearly with chain length. Flotation follows an electrostatic mechanism, generally decreasing as pH increases and trending with the oxide isoelectric point. Some selective flotation is shown in the case of CuO and NiO from the other oxides but zinc oxide could not be selectively recovered even from silica. Release of metal ions causing accidental activation and heteroaggregation may be factors in reduced selectivity.