Heap leaching of malachite–atacamite ores with high silica gangue using sulphuric acid is reported. The base metals were present in the ores in copper rich nodules with a network of fine strings rich in cobalt and manganese along the quartz grain boundaries. It was observed that leaching of copper was quicker and the corresponding recovery of copper was consistently higher when the ore particle was finer. The recovery of copper measured at different leaching times revealed that the efficiency of the process was better enhanced by refinement of the ore particle size than by increasing the concentration of sulphuric acid in the lixiviant from 60 to 120 g/L. Iron contamination in the pregnant leach solution (PLS) subsequently increased as the initial acid concentration in the lixiviant increased. The water loss during the heap leaching process was higher when the ore particle size was finer and when the concentration of sulphuric acid in the lixiviant was higher. Leaching residues typically contained 92% SiO2 and 4% muscovite.Heap leaching is applied worldwide to extract copper from low grade oxide and sulphide ores and from different plant residues ( Crushed ore is usually heaped on an impermeable pad and sprayed with the lixiviant solution that permeates and traverses the heap by gravity. The pregnant leach solution (PLS) is collected at the basement of the heap and re-circulated for spraying at the top until a prescribed concentration of metal in solution is reached. This operation may last for weeks in some cases. Many variables has been identified that influence the process, e.g. pH of the lixiviant, height of the heap, ore particle size distribution, spraying flow rate, irrigation technique, permeability, porosity, aeration, impurities, valuable metals, accompanying metals, temperature of the PLS, solid-to-liquid ratio, etc… (  The role of silica in acid leaching of the base metal ores has been investigated ( The effect of ore particle size, concentration of sulphuric acid and leaching time on the dissolution of copper from the heaps of malachite–atacamite ores with high siliceous gangues, the concentration of copper and iron in the pregnant leach solution and the loss of water during the process are investigated in this work. It is common practice to investigate the effect of each of these factors separately by varying only one of them while the others are kept constant or within controlled ranges. This experimental approach, also adopted in the present work, has the shortcoming of not depicting the dynamic interactions between the above factors. Copper ores from the Disele open pit mine were classified into three particle size ranges. Ore A was prepared by removing part of the less dense gangue particles from ores B and C using a gravity table. Ores B and C were used as received from the mine. The heaps were built using 650 kg of ore arranged in a 2000 mm The minerals present and their distribution within the ore grains have been identified by means of X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) respectively. XRD measurements were performed with a PANalytical X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer with X'Celerator detector and variable divergence — and receiving slits with Fe filtered Cu-Kα radiation. The phases were identified using X'Pert Highscore plus software. The Reference Intensity Ratio method was used for semi-quantitative analysis as not all crystal structures needed for the Rietveld method were available. Amorphous phases, if present, were not taken into account in the quantification. Samples for scanning electron microscopy were cold mounted in resin, mechanically polished using 1 µm diamond paste. Area and point chemical analyses of different phases present in the ores and in the leaching residues were carried out using EDX technique. Three different concentrations of sulphuric acid were used for leaching, i.e. 15 g/L, 60 g/L and 120 g/L H The particle size distributions of the three ores A, B and C are shown in X-ray diffraction analysis showed that the ores contained about 80% quartz. Copper was contained in the minerals malachite CuCO Scanning electron microscopy indicated that copper and cobalt were contained in particles,75 to 200 µm in size, interconnected by fine strings, about 3 µm in width, that were formed along the grain boundaries between the large quartz particles. The fine webbing strings were rich in cobalt, iron and manganese. The preferential formation of these mineralised phases along the grain boundaries rather than inside the quartz grains suggests that porosity of these grains would not play a significant role in leaching this ore. It would therefore be sufficient to grind the ores to ~ The effect of ore particle size on heap leaching was investigated by leaching the three ores using 60 g/L H Three major observations were pointed out from the variation of the Cu It is inferred from  The effect of sulphuric acid concentration in the lixiviant was then investigated by leaching of the finest and coarsest materials, using three different acid concentrations. The change of the concentration of Cu A copper recovery higher than 80% was achieved after leaching of material A for 3 days with lixiviant containing 60 or 120 g/L. However, it remained at approximately 10% when using the lixiviant at 15 g/L H The concentrations of cobalt, iron and manganese in the PLS, obtained after 6 days, are given in The X-ray diffraction analysis showed that leaching typical residues contained more than 90% silica and 4% muscovite. The silica content of the solid residues was confirmed using EDX technique. The ores from the Disele deposit contains malachite–atacamite minerals with a siliceous gangue. Copper, cobalt and manganese are contained in two different phases. Nodules rich in copper, 75–200 µm in size, in some zones of the ores are interconnected by fine strings, 5 µm in size, rich in cobalt and manganese that are formed along the quartz grain boundaries. It was observed that at initial concentrations of sulphuric acid in the lixiviant comprised between 60 and 120 g/L H The recovery of copper after leaching for 6 days was less than 30% and the PLS contained less than 18 g/L Cu Percolation of the PLS was fast in all runs. The crystalline structure of the quartz present in the ore and the ore particle size ranges considered in this work may have contributed to the good permeability of the heaps. The absence of chrysocolla-type minerals, alumina, calcite and clays also contributed to the good permeability of the heaps with no precipitation evident. Leaching typical residues formed after leaching of the fine ore (average particle size Iron concentration in the PLS obtained after leaching for 6 days increased from 26 to 45 g/L as the initial acid concentration in the lixiviant increased from 15 to 120 g/L. These iron contents were higher than the 2.5 g/L maximum required in copper electrowinning, rendering a purification stage necessary. Precipitation of iron as lepidocrosite by a lime saturated solution, in the pH range of 3.5–3.8, reduced the iron content to 10 mg/L. Significant water losses occurred during acid heap leaching of the malachite–atacamite ores, resulting in 30 to 50% decrease of the total volume of liquid. These water losses are mainly due to the evaporation at the heap/air interface and in some proportion to the hydration of the ore particles. The leaching heat of reaction constitutes a source of latent enthalpy that contributes to the evaporative water loss. These water losses increased when the initial concentration of acid in the lixiviant increased and also when the heap was composed of finer ore particles. The authors thank Dr. Nicholas J. Welham, Dr. C. Montross, Mpho M. Malatjie and Siu Wah-Wai for their valuables comments on the content as well as the presentation, and for editing the text of this paper.