Rock masses of the primary copper ore at the El Teniente mine fail mainly through the infill of preexisting veins during the caving processes, especially through those composed of less than 35% hard minerals (quartz and pyrite). In this study, the Synthetic Rock Mass (SRM) approach is used to reproduce the results of ten uniaxial compression tests on veined core-size samples of El Teniente Mafic Complex (CMET) lithology, from El Teniente mine, Codelco-Chile. At the scale of the tested samples it is observed that veins composed mostly of quartz dominate the failure process. The developed methodology considers generating a deterministic Discrete Fracture Network (DFN) based on the veins mapped at the surface of each core sample. Then, the micro-parameters of the Bonded Particle Model (BPM) are calibrated to represent the macro-parameters of the average block of intact rock within all samples. Next, the micro-parameters of the Smooth-Joint Contact Model (SJCM), which represent the mechanical properties of veins, are calibrated to reproduce the stress–strain curves and the failure modes of the veined core-size samples measured during the laboratory tests. Results show that the SRM approach is able to reproduce the behavior of the veined rock samples under uniaxial loading conditions. The strength and stiffness of veins, as well as the vein network, have an important impact on the deformability and global strength of the synthetic samples. Contrary to what was observed in the laboratory tests, synthetic samples failed mainly through weak veins. This result is expected in the modeling given that anhydrite veins are considered weaker than quartz veins. Further research is required to completely understand the impact of veins on the behavior of rock masses.Discontinuities are structural breaks characterized by their geometry and strength properties, which may or may not impact the rock block and rock mass strength. In the case of El Teniente mine, the largest known copper–molybdenum deposit in the world, The Synthetic Rock Mass (SRM) approach has been implemented in PFC The SRM technique can be used as a virtual laboratory to perform numerical experiments in order to represent in a qualitative and quantitative manner the mechanical behavior of a rock mass. Several studies have been carried out by the El Teniente mine to estimate vein strength and stiffness The objective of this study is to apply the SRM technique to reproduce the behavior of laboratory scale samples from El Teniente mine (Codelco-Chile) under uniaxial loading conditions. Samples are from a veined rock mass, specifically El Teniente Mafic Complex (CMET) unit. This paper first reviews the main aspects and limitations of the components of the SRM modeling technique. Next, the input and validation data are presented, which are obtained from laboratory tests developed for this study and from the El Teniente mine laboratory tests database. Subsequently, The SRM model represents the intact rock as an assembly of bonded particles using the Bonded Particle Model (BPM), Conventional PFC In general, BPM represents the mechanical behavior of a collection of spherical grains joined by cement. The particle diameters satisfy a uniform particle size distribution bounded by The geometric and mechanical characteristics of joints have an influence on the anisotropy and scale effect presented by some rock mass properties. DFN modeling is based on a representation of the discontinuity network within a geotechnical domain using statistical distributions to describe the orientation, persistence, and spatial location. In the case of El Teniente rock mass, veins instead of discontinuities have to be modeled. Even though DFN is a valuable tool, models are limited by the uncertain fracture system geometry and, in general, can only be approximately estimated. The model has some shortcomings based on basic assumptions. As veins are considered as planar and circular discs, parameters such as the thickness, roughness and heterogeneities of the discontinuities, and intact rock bridges are not explicitly considered. However, they are implicitly accounted for in the calibration process by matching laboratory test results. Interfaces can be represented in PFC The main rock types at the El Teniente mine are described as mafic intrusive complex (andesite), felsic intrusive rocks (dacite and diorite), and hydrothermal breccia (Braden breccia). The most abundant rock is denominated as the El Teniente Mafic Complex (CMET) and hosts 80% of the copper mineralization. The following section includes a summary of the geological characterization of the veins visible at the surface of the samples from the CMET HW lithology tested in the laboratory, and the parameters from the El Teniente mine database describing the intact rock and veins properties at laboratory scale. Ten cylindrical rock samples were prepared according to the standard ASTM D4543-08,  Samples were tested using a servo-assisted press under controlled loading conditions with a constant speed of 0.3 In the laboratory samples, quartz veins dominates the failure process contrary to field observations of the caving progress, The influence of the stockwork has changed the concept of the intact rock at the El Teniente mine, being described as a rock sample with veins of thickness less than 1 The macro-parameters of intact rock samples are adjusted using a database of 173 laboratory tests, standardizing values to 50-mm-diameter samples and considering an aspect ratio of Veins are very competent as a result of the occurrence of cemented infilling. In order to study the mechanical behavior of veins, a number of direct tension and direct shear tests were performed on samples containing isolated weak veins (both thin and thick) at the SP laboratory in Borås, Sweden. The shear behavior of veins is a combination of different phenomena and interactions such as roughness, wall strength, friction, and cohesion of the infill. The shear strength is essentially controlled by the roughness profile and the mineralogical content, in cases where the ratio between the thickness of the veins and amplitude of the roughness is lower than one. This is the condition of the primary mineralization rock mass at the El Teniente mine. The The methodology applied in this study consists on the calibration and assembly of the three components of the SRM model: DFN, BPM, and SJCM, in order to represent the mechanical behavior of core-size samples from the CMET HW lithology. The calibration of the SJCM and DFN is simplified to match just three types of veins: anhydrite, chalcopyrite, and quartz. Quartz veins represent hard infilling, while chalcopyrite and anhydrite represent intermediate hard infilling. The major challenge of the calibration of the SRM model is to properly determine the values of the micro-parameters in order to be consistent with laboratory tests.  The vein network is constructed deterministically in order to represent explicitly the veins within the sample using vein exposures on the surface of the core-size sample. The deterministic DFN construction involves the use of a CAD software to transform mapped veins from 2-D to 3-D. Joint hierarchy affects the order of insertion of veins. To start the calibration of the BPM it is necessary to define the scale of the problem. The options are to calibrate the parameters of the model to a scale of 50 mm or to the average intact rock block size. The average intact rock block is defined by the equivalent diameter (  Samples are generated following the procedure outlined in Ref. The following assumptions are considered during the calibration of the BPM: (1) modeling does not include p-bricks, (2) samples are created using the same seed number and the parallel-bond refinement to match the macro-parameters of hard rock, Many researchers have studied the calibration procedure for PFC applications and tried to establish the relationship between microscopic and macroscopic parameters using different optimization methods and stochastic techniques. Most of the studies are in PFC The first step of the calibration procedure is to match the deformability parameters. Poisson’s ratio is only controlled by the ratio between the normal and shear stiffness of parallel bonds ( By using the enhanced BPM it is not possible to properly reproduce simultaneously a brittle behavior and a consistent Poisson’s ratio value. In this study, it is assumed that the Poisson’s ratio value is more influenced by the movement along veins than by the behavior of intact rock blocks. Therefore, the ratios The macroscopic Young’s modulus is controlled by the parallel bond Young’s modulus ( The next step is to calibrate the strength parameters. The tensile strength of the parallel bonds ( To calibrate the friction angle of the parallel bonds ( For the calibration of the SJCM the peak and residual friction angles are considered equal to 40°. To relate the micro-parameters of the SJCM with laboratory macro-parameters the smooth joint area ratio ( The dependency of the smooth joint area ratio ( As a first approach, the enhanced BPM is calibrated to reproduce the behavior of a 50-mm-diameter sample of intact rock under uniaxial compressive and tensile conditions (target macro-parameters are presented in  The micro-parameters of the BPM in the SRM sample are selected to match the behavior of scaled macro-parameters that represent the average intact rock block size. Before start the calibration of the SJCM, the influence of the stiffness micro-parameters on the deformability macro-parameters is studied, using the sample NNM 7-4 and considering the same micro-parameters for all type of veins. Results are presented in The calibration of the SJCM considers the use of two samples: NNM7-4 and NNM16-1. The first step to adjust the deformability micro-parameters is to choose the stiffness micro-parameters ( The next step to calibrate the micro-parameters considers choosing the strength macro-parameters to reproduce the global strength of both samples. For this purpose, it is considered the calibration of the strength parameters of the smooth-joints, which are set to a large value, and then are reduced until reach the global strength of samples NNM 7-4 and NNM 16-1. From field studies, it was concluded that the failure mode of veins forming blocks during caving at the El Teniente mine Samples NNM7-4 and NNM16-1 are used to calibrate the micro-parameters necessary to define a SRM sample. The calibrated micro-parameters for the enhanced BPM and SJCM, which reproduce in a better manner a brittle post-peak behavior and capture the peak strength as well as the failure mode for both samples, are presented in The stiffness and cohesion micro-parameters of the BPM result to be higher than the respective micro-parameters of the SJCM. In particular, the cohesion micro-parameter of the enhanced BPM results to be one order of magnitude higher than the cohesion micro-parameters of the SJCM. On the contrary, the resulting tensile strength micro-parameters of the SJCM are higher than the tensile strength micro-parameters of the BPM. If the tensile strength of quartz veins is decreased, the tensile strength of anhydrite and chalcopyrite becomes higher than that of quartz veins. Moreover, reducing the tensile strength of quartz veins to match the failure mode observed in laboratory tests in a better manner also resulted in a higher number of smooth-joint contacts that failed by tension, which is not representative of the laboratory tests. The same comparison can be made with the macro-parameters of the intact rock presented in  It is considered that the calibration is satisfactory as it reproduces the macroscopic behavior of the samples and matches the principal failure modes observed in laboratory tests. All macro-parameters are constantly verified after each step until the calibration is accepted. To completely test the model not only the calibration is important. Therefore, the following subsections present the results of the verification simulations that represent eight samples from the same lithology.  The Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD) and the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) are used to calculate the global error of the estimated macro-parameters in comparison to laboratory tests using the following expressions: The MAD errors of Synthetic samples failed mainly through the weakest veins, which are represented by anhydrite and chalcopyrite; contrary to what was observed in laboratory tests, where quartz veins dominated the failure. Failure though quartz veins can be explained by heterogeneities, which could reduce their strength. Moreover, anhydrite and chalcopyrite veins within the sample may be locked-in, generating high strength intact rock bridges and increasing the apparent strength of those veins. The model assumes that all quartz veins have the same characteristics, and the only difference among them is their orientation within the sample. If the micro-parameters had included heterogeneities or any other assumption based on mapping, the consideration of only quartz veins could have implied that 100 sets of micro-parameters would need to be defined instead of just one. The calibration of more than three sets of veins would mean a large number of iterations in order to calibrate all the parameters. This means that the problem will become impossible to solve, given that all veins should have been characterized in detail in order to be able to differentiate each of them. Commonly, open joints compose rock masses, but the primary copper ore at El Teniente mine is mainly composed of cemented healed joints. With the use of a deterministic DFN it is possible to represent explicitly the vein network in a core-size sample. After simulating ten veined core-size samples of CMET lithology under uniaxial compressive conditions, it can be concluded that the SRM approach acceptably reproduces the peak strength, elastic parameters, and failure mode of the samples. In order to achieve the best combination of micro-parameters, the stress–strain curves and failure modes of the contacts in the model need to be checked. Otherwise, multiple combinations of micro-parameters could reproduce similar stress–strain curves with completely different failure modes In the El Teniente rock mass, the global rock mass strength is affected not only by the geometrical characteristics of the vein network but also by the strength of veins. In jointed rock masses, the geometrical characteristics affecting the rock mass strength are the fracture orientation and persistence regardless of the fracture intensity expressed as the fracture area per unit volume (P The SRM technique has a high potential to represent the behavior of samples including both joints and veins. The main advantage of the technique is that it uses standard input data from laboratory tests and standard mapping techniques. However, there are still some limitations in the enhanced BPM, DFN and SJCM that need to be overcome to adequately represent the rock mass behavior. The most critical considerations are that Poisson’s ratio of the intact rock cannot be matched at the same time that the stress–strain curve reproduces a brittle post-peak behavior, and that veins are modeled as smooth discs without considering the roughness profile explicitly. Another limitation is the run-time of the models. An increment from 50 to 150-mm-diameter samples means an increment from 30,000 to 826,000 particles using the same particle diameter. It was corroborated that running times increase exponentially as a function of the number of particles; therefore, it is not possible to simulate, with the same particle diameter, a large number of synthetic tests in order to evaluate the size effect in a reasonable simulation time. A critical factor affecting the reliability of the model is the quality of the input data. Even though samples fail preferentially though veins in laboratory tests, they are the worst described component in the system. There is a lot of information available to describe the intact rock behavior of the El Teniente rock mass, but there are only few laboratory tests describing the behavior of weak and hard veins. One hundred and eleven samples containing infilled veins were included in this study, tested under different conditions, but only 12 of them represented quartz veins. The lack of data produces an overestimation of the quartz parameters. The few tests including quartz veins show that quartz increases the strength of the sample. However, it is also important to quantify the effect of factors reducing the strength of quartz veins such heterogeneities, which can have an impact in the variability of the strength. One assumption during the modeling made sets of quartz veins to have the highest strength in the system; consequently, it is not possible to reproduce the failure of larger percentages of quartz veins. The geotechnical database of the El Teniente mine includes scaling laws of intact rock that were adjusted using larger sizes than the ones that represent the average intact rock block of the laboratory samples of this study. Therefore, macro-parameters have to be extrapolated. It is necessary to have available data describing both intact rock and vein behavior considering different mineral compositions and scales, and implement the scale effect in PFC The authors acknowledge the El Teniente Division of Codelco Chile for giving permission to publish the data and for supporting this work, as well as Itasca Chile for providing the PFC This study was financed by