The size reduction of wood pellets during pneumatic transport in a laboratory test rig is investigated. For the quantification of pellet breakage and attrition, the length distribution of each bulk sample is measured in combination with the gravimetrical determination of the amount of fines before and after every conveying step. In laboratory tests a variation of pipe elements (bend radii, couplings, pipe reducer or cyclone separator), air volume and product mass flows and pellet quality is investigated. Additionally, particle velocities are determined with a stereoscopic high-speed camera set.
                  Results demonstrate the strong dependence of wood pellet degradation on operating conditions and selection of pipe components. Increasing air volume flow and, thus, higher particle velocities induce particle size reduction, whereas increasing pellet mass flow has the opposite effect, although the influence is weak. Increasing pipe length or decreasing bend radius leads to progressive formation of fines.Wood pellets belong to the most established trading forms of wood based fuels. The EU-28 is the largest end user of wood pellets, burning over 20 million tons in 2017. The largest share is utilized in the domestic heating market [ Before they are thermally converted, wood pellets pass various transport and storage steps. Not only for industrial but also for domestic purposes they are often conveyed pneumatically. There, they undergo various mechanical load histories, leading to abrasion, pellet degradation and an increase of fines [ The quality of wood pellets for heating purposes is defined by European certification (ENplus) and standardized by the European standard ISO 17225-2 since 2014 [ Of course, the general tendencies on fines formation due to pneumatic conveying of bulk material has been extensively studied. For example, Chapelle et al. [ Degradation of feed pellets during pneumatic conveying is examined by Mina-Boac et al. [ The number of studies on wood pellet degradation itself is rather limited. For instance, Oveisi et al. [ Pneumatic conveying tests of wood pellets were carried out by Abdulmumini et al. [ Kotzur et al. [ Finally, in a recent study Wiese et al. [ As the short overview shows, no systematic and comprehensive study on the fines formation during pneumatic conveying of wood pellets exists, varying pipe components, pellet and air mass flow. The goal of the current study is to fill the knowledge gap and to provide a set of data under well-defined conditions which allows quantifying the influence of operational parameters and selection of pipe components on wood pellet degradation under conditions similar to blowing truck delivery. Therefore, a laboratory pneumatic conveying test rig was built and subsequent experiments were carried out, testing the influence of varying bend radii, couplings, pipe reducers or cyclone separators, air volume and product mass flows and pellet type. The findings of the current study can serve as a first guideline how a “gentle” pneumatic wood pellet transport process shall be set up in terms of operating parameters and selection of pipe components and may by a first basis to formulate guidelines for pneumatic blowing truck operating staff. An automated optical measuring system was designed, which allows the determination of the pellet size distribution (~10 The pellet bulk to be examined is stored in a silo. From there, successive pellet samples of 100–200 pellets are distributed on a LED-panel through a dosing system consisting of a clocked pneumatic cylinder and a connecting pipe. While falling onto the panel through the connecting pipe, small particles and fines contained in the sample are vacuumed off through a 3.15 An area scan camera captures an image of the contours of the backlit pellets on the panel. Afterwards, the pellets are removed from the panel by an automated slider and the process of capturing pellet images starts again. The images of the pellet contours are analysed in several steps using a MATLAB-script to detect and separate the individual pellets from the background and for the final length determination. This procedure is exemplified by a series of images in Note that the “circular” pellets (8, marked in blue) would be wrongly counted with a length according to their diameter. To avoid this, they are not included in the frequency distribution of pellet size ( Since the pellet length measuring system itself acts as a component which may cause pellet degradation, we identified this additional degradation by repetitive tests. Each repetition reduces the average pellet length by about 0.52 %. A laboratory test facility was designed, which allows the investigation of the influence of operating conditions or pipe elements on the particle flow pattern and, finally, on the degradation of the products conveyed. The design and the working principle are sketched in For the experiments, samples of pellets (about 10 All pipes have a diameter of 100 An overview of all experiments performed and, thus, all pipe elements analysed and operating conditions applied is given in Experiments evaluating the influence of pipe components were executed with several bends, where the radius to diameter ratio For the most of the experiments carried out, the setup of the test rig was as shown in Note, that the straight conveying line section (length 3400 To investigate the dependence of the degradation behaviour on the material properties, two different wood pellet qualities, named as A and B, are examined. Basically, both type A and B are ENplus-certified, but type B has the lower A2-classification whereas type A is A1-labeled. The durability (DU) of both pellet types is examined with a pellet tumbler according to ISO 17831-1 [ The initial size distributions of both pellet types are illustrated in For the quantification and comparison of the degradation occurring during each conveying step, a suitable measure is required. Following a suggestion of Stamboliadis [ For further interpretation of the results, especially of the influences of pipework-independent operating parameters as air volume and pellet mass flows, the ratio of product to conveying air mass flow, the so-called solids-loading-ratio ( Repeating all experiments several times would be very laborious and material-consuming. However, to check for repeatability, selected experiments (straight pipe element, D5-and D2-bends) are executed six times. The results are illustrated in The charts indicate that with increasing air volume flows the crushing ratio ( Concerning repeatability, the charts depict crushing ratio's variance within the range of 0.3 and 1.1 %, whereas the fines' variance ranges from 4 to 8 %. The greater variance in the fines is not surprising, because a relative small amount of fines is produced and small deviations in the gravimetrically determined mass have a significant influence. The integral pellet length (or crushing ratio) is less sensitive. Particle trajectories and velocities are extracted from high speed video sequences by a tracking algorithm based on a MATLAB-script. For the current context, the average particle velocity component in axial direction is measured to obtain the particle velocity just ahead of the pipe component to be examined with respect to the air volume flow provided by the compressors. Note, that the indicated experiments were carried out at constant ambient conditions between 18 and 20 The same is done for four different pellet mass flows at a constant air volume flow ( Generally, the average particle velocity decreases with rising The influence of pellet quality on particle degradation is depicted in The expected increase of the crushing ratio and thus, the growing pellet degradation with rising air volume flows (rising particle velocity) is clearly visible. Comparing the two pellet qualities, it becomes obvious, that the pellets of type B (lower DU) are more prone to damage than type A-pellets, as their crushing ratio is larger for all air volume flows considered. Especially in case of the smallest air volume flow, nearly no comminution of type A-pellets occurs. The generally smaller crushing ratio of type A-pellets wasn't necessarily to be expected, as pellets of greater length (type A, see The influences of pipework-independent conveying conditions as air volume and pellet mass flows on pellet degradation are shown in The crushing ratios and fines contents in dependence of varying pellet mass flows are illustrated in Note, that the experiments are performed in laboratory scale (small product mass flows, short pipe work, only one critical line element, etc.) so that in practice with higher pellet mass flows (up to 40 To quantify the influence of particle loading on pellet degradation, The impact of different pipe elements on the pellet degradation effects is summarized in The wood pellet size reduction during pneumatic conveying processes and its dependence on various operational parameters like air volume and product mass flows as well as different pipe constellations were evaluated during laboratory experiments. The crushing ratio CR was used as the major parameter to quantify pellet degradation. The crushing ratio is the ratio of the arithmetic average of the pellet length distribution of each sample before and after the conveying step. Air volume flow has been varied from 478 Pellets of the higher quality (ENplus A1 compared to A2) show, as expected, less pellet degradation. For a D2-bend the crushing ratio increases from 1.07 from higher quality A1-pellets to 1.09 for lower quality A2-pellets for the highest air volume flow examined (957 The degradation-controlling process parameter is the particle velocity. It has been shown that the particle velocity increases with increasing air volume flow and with decreasing pellet mass flow. In a straight pipe a doubling of the air volume flow leads to a doubling of the pellet velocity (at a pellet mass flow of 1.44 The higher the air volume flow and, thus, the pellet velocity, the higher the pellet degradation. The increase in crushing ratio as a function of the air volume flow depends on the pipe component examined. For a D2-bend (2.7 A rising pellet mass flow (rising solids-loading-ratio) decreases the mechanical loads on the pellets as particle velocity decreases. The dependence of the crushing ratio on the pellet mass flow is rather weak, because the dependence of pellet velocity on pellet mass flow is weak. For example, for a D2-bend (at 957 With rising amount and decreasing radius of installed bends, the comminution effect increases. For the highest air volume flow examined (957 The other components can be ordered in the following sequence with increasing tendency for pellet degradation: reducer Note, that the quantitative numbers given in the summary are exemplary values for the test conditions in the current study. For a general correlation of these numbers (crushing ratio) on process conditions and pipe components, further experiments in a wider parameter range would be needed.   The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at