Eighteen patients with intraarticular calcaneal fractures treated with open reduction and internal fixation and augmentation with an injectable carbonated apatite cement. Functional follow-up studies using the Zwipp Foot Score and densitometry were performed at 6-month intervals postoperatively. Histological samples of biopsies obtained at the time of hardware removal (6 months postoperatively) were also analyzed. The use of bone cement led to intermediate-term functional outcomes that were no better than those reported with conventional surgical procedures using bone graft. Patients demonstrated postoperative difficulties similar to those seen in other studies of this fracture, including pain, subtalar motion restrictions, peroneal impingement, and difficulties on uneven terrain and with toe- and heel-walking. However, compared to patients treated surgically without injectable carbonated apatite cement, full weight bearing on the affected extremity was regained at an average 4 weeks postoperatively. In addition, autogenous bone graft was not required to fill the osseous defect using this technique, minimizing morbidity and discomfort. During the present observation period of 3 years, only a slight decrease in the density of the peripheral zones of the cement block was observed. Histological examination revealed fibrous bone formation resulting from remodelling processes. Complete resorption and remodeling of the bone cement were not complete at 3 years. One patient developed a postoperative wound infection. Another displayed cement loosening secondary to failure of bony ingrowth.The joint depression type fracture is the most frequent calcaneal fracture type. Occasionally, graft augmentation is required (cancellous bone, bone cement) to support and reconstruct the posterior facet ( Use of carbonated apatite cement has been shown to improve the biomechanical properties of unstable intertrochanteric fractures ( No conclusive studies have been performed to suggest that the addition of bone graft into the neutral triangle is a required element of operative fixation of calcaneal fractures. However, biomechanical considerations suggest that, because the posterior facet is a central part of the calcaneal arc, a depression in this area requires graft augmentation, inserted beneath and perpendicular to the fractured joint surface. The ideal material for such augmentation would exhibit exceptional resistance to compression forces. Carbonated apatite cement (Norian SRS; Synthes, West Chester, PA), as described by Constantz et al., demonstrates these characteristics and may be beneficial in the management of calcaneal fractures ( The study was designed as a prospective cohort study including 18 patients with 19 joint depression type calcaneal fractures, treated between April 1997 and December 1999 at the Trauma Department of the University of Cologne, Germany. All patients were older than 18 years of age. The fractures were subclassified according to Zwipp ( Clinical follow-up was performed at 6-month intervals postoperatively, using the Zwipp foot score for calcaneal fractures ( At the 6-month interval follow-up visits, anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were performed and osteodensitometry measurements of the cement plug were taken. The hardware was routinely removed 6 months postoperatively and, at that time, a CT scan was performed ( For osteodensitometry measurements of the cement, the LUNAR DPX-IQ (LUNAR Europe, Brussels, Belgium), software version 4.6, was used ( At the time of hardware removal (6 months postoperatively), tissue biopsies for histological examination were obtained with a small chisel from the center of the cemented area. Following dehydration with alcohol and fixation with methyl methacrylate (Technovit 9100; Apparatebau GmbH & Co., Norderstedt, Germany), the specimens were cut into sections of 2μm and stained using Paragon stain. The sections were cleaned and degreased with 95% ethyl alcohol. They were rinsed twice with distilled water, followed by 15–30 minutes staining in the 60°C warm Paragon solution consisting of 0.73 g Toluidine blue (Chroma 1B481) and 0.27 g alkalic Fuchsin (Serva 31627) dissolved in 100 mL 30% ethyl alcohol. The slides were rinsed twice and covered using Eukitt (O.Kindler GmbH&Co, D-Freiburg). Mineralized bone was stained pink, fibrous tissue red and cell nuclei blue. After staining, qualitative analyses were performed with light microscopy. The presence of osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts were recorded as well as the presence ingrowing vessels. The fracture was exposed through an extended lateral approach. The posterior facet and the angle of Gissane were meticulously restored and the reduction temporarily fixed with K-wires. The bony defect, present just below the posterior facet at the area of the neutral triangle, was cleaned of debris and blood clots. Under fluoroscopic control, the radiopaque Norian SRS cement was injected into the fracture void. Once the cement was hardened (approximately 10 minutes), the lateral cortical bone of the calcaneus was restored ( No postoperative immobilization with casting or other methods was used. Early mobilization was begun on the third postoperative day, guided by a physiotherapist. Patients were trained in the use of crutches. Weight bearing was limited to 10 kg during the first 4 postoperative weeks. After hospital discharge, patients had outpatient physiotherapy sessions of 45 minutes, 3 days per week. During physiotherapy, passive and active range of motion (ROM) exercises were performed, as tolerated. All patients started full weight bearing without crutches at the beginning of the fifth week, while continuing manual active and passive physiotherapy. Proprioception training began at 6 weeks. Athletic activities were allowed at 3 months. The study consisted of 18 patients (19 feet). There were 5 women and 13 men, with a mean age of 47 years (range, 29–74). The mean follow-up was 22.3 months (range: 4–41). ORIF was performed at a mean 8 days after injury (range, 3–21 days), and hospital stays averaged 5 ± 4 days. According to the Zwipp classification, there were three 5-fragment 1-joint fractures, nine 4-fragment 2-joint fractures, and seven 4-fragment 3-joint fractures. According to the Sanders classification, there were 4 type IIA, 3 type IIB, 1 type IIC, 7 type IIIAB, and 4 type IIIAC fractures. All fractures were closed. The injuries were caused by falls (n=11) or motor vehicle accidents (n=8). The radiographs at last follow-up revealed no secondary flattening of Böhler’s angle. Using the Zwipp foot score, the mixed subjective and objective outcome after Norian SRS augmentation of complex calcaneus fractures revealed 32% good (n=6), 47% fair (n=9), and 21% poor (n=4) results ( A secondary wound infection developed in 1 case; in another case the cement loosened and required extraction at the time of hardware removal. At the time of final follow-up, 9 patients (50%) complained of pain with ambulation. One patient developed severe secondary arthritis of the subtalar joint, which eventually required arthrodesis. The pain disappeared completely after subtalar arthrodesis. None of the patients developed material rejection, wound necrosis, or osteonecrosis. The mean range of subtalar joint motion was 21% of the normal contralateral side, (or in the 1 case of bilateral fractures, against standardized normal range of motion measurements). In all cases the ankle joint was unaffected. The density of the cement decreased by 4.2% ± 3.1% at 6 months (n=19), by 7.1% ± 4.9% at 1 year (n=15), by 12.9% ± 3.3% at 2 years (n=12), and by 43.5% ± 2.1% (n=5) at 3 years postoperatively ( Histological samples taken and classified 6 months postoperatively showed bone cement resorption and transformation into fibrous bone. There are three biological and biomechanical features of calcaneal fractures that may be important for understanding the utility of augmentation of surgical treatment with Norian SRS. When the calcaneal arc is intact, the spongiosa-free triangle in the calcaneus represents a force-neutral triangle ( However, the present observations were affirmed by a cadaver study from Thordarson et al. ( Depression of the posterior facet into the spongiosa-free triangle is a common feature of joint depression type calcaneal fractures. Previous studies have shown that the spongiosa-free triangle constitutes a watershed for the lateral and medial arteries ( Osteodensitometry showed a delayed process of degradation and remodeling of the bone cement, taking more than 2 years ( The use of carbonated apatite cement (Norian SRS) in calcaneal surgery may have advantages for patients because it allows full weight bearing 4 weeks after surgery, as compared to 8 weeks with traditional surgical methods. Although weight bearing was hastened, the cement group did not show better long-term functional outcomes (as measured by the Zwipp Foot score) when compared to reports in the literature. A positive effect of using bone cement was the lack of necessity for further surgical procedures (ie, cancellous bone graft harvesting from the iliac crest) and subsequent morbidity. Due to its biomechanical properties and easy technical handling, Norian SRS cement provides satisfactory augmentation of the posterior joint facet in calcaneal fractures. In addition, in vivo densitometry measurements and histological analysis in this study showed a prolonged biodegradation pattern of the cement.