In the present work, a binary mixture of sec-octylphenoxyacetic acid (CA12, H2A2) and 8-hydroxyquinoline (HQ) was applied to the extraction of rare earth elements. The mixture had synergistic extraction effects on all the lanthanoids (except polonium) and yttrium. The separation ability of rare earth elements was studied according to the various extraction effects. As representatives of light, medium, and heavy rare earth elements, the compositions of the extracted species for cerium, terbium, and lutetium were investigated by the slope analysis method and constant molar ratio method. The values of the equilibrium constants and the thermodynamic functions were also determined.In recent years, with the ever-increasing demand for high-purity rare earths and their compounds, the separation and purification of rare earth elements (REEs) has gained considerable attention. Synergistic solvent extraction, the extraction of metal ions with the mixture of two kinds of extractants, has become major purification operation in practice ( 8-Hydroxyquinoline (HQ) is a type of strong ligand for metal ions and is widely used in separation and enrichment of metal ions through various methods, such as cloud point extraction ( Organic carboxylic acids are another kind of extractant, which have been applied to hydrometallurgical process. Accordingly, the aim of this work is to explore a new synergistic extraction system using CA12 and HQ, which has not been reported so far. The synergistic coefficient, the extraction mechanism and the thermodynamic functions are determined. Based on the various extraction effects on rare earths, the possibilities of separating them are discussed according to the separation factors. CA12 and HQ were supplied by Shanghai Rare-earth Chemical Co., Ltd., and Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Shanghai Co., Ltd., respectively. Both of the extractants were used without further purification and dissolved in High purity rare earth oxides (> 99.95%) were obtained from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Changchun, China). Stock solutions of REEs were prepared from these oxides by dissolving in concentrated nitric acid and diluting with distilled water. For some indissolvable rare earth oxides, the dissolving procedure in concentrated nitric acid was conducted when heated by an oven. Initial metal ion concentration was maintained at 0.002 The concentrations of REEs were determined by spectrophotometry using a TU 1810 ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometer (Beijing Purkinje General Instruments Co., Ltd., China). A pHs-3C digital pH meter was employed for pH measurements (Shanghai Rex Instruments Factory, China). The extraction procedures were carried out as follows. Equal volumes (5 The loaded organic phase was equilibrated with nitric acid of different concentrations. The mixtures were shaken at 293 The extraction of REEs, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu, and Y, with CA12, HQ, and their mixtures were investigated. Whether a binary mixture has synergistic effects on metal ions or not can be evaluated with the synergistic enhancement factor,  Since the mixtures of CA12 and HQ had different extraction effects on REEs, the extraction effects of REEs with mixtures of CA12 and HQ were studied in detail. On the basis of the various synergistic effects on different REEs, mixtures of CA12 and HQ could be considered to separate REEs. If The further The extraction of Ln Where “a” and “o” represented the aqueous and organic phases, respectively. The following equation could be used to express the extraction stoichiometry of RE In the present study, Ce The relationship between the distribution ratio To obtain the extraction stoichiometries, a series of experiments were carried out to determine Similarly experiments have also been carried out to obtain the extraction stoichiometries of Tb The equilibrium constant, log The effect of temperature on the extraction of Ce The values of Δ The loading capacities of REEs by CA12 The binary mixture of CA12 and HQ had evident synergistic extraction effects on REEs (La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu, and Y) from nitrate medium. The extraction stoichiometries of three lanthanoids, Ce, Tb, and Lu, were investigated in detail. When extracted by CA12