Molybdenum distribution between TBP dissolved in kerosene and aqueous sulfuric acid media is investigated. The influential parameters are temperature, molarity of sulfuric acid and concentration of TBP. The results show that the extraction reaction is exothermic. Increasing the TBP concentration at sulfuric acid molarities greater than 4 M does not change the distribution factor of molybdenum. The distribution factor of molybdenum in sulfuric acid media with TBP has a maximum at 0.03 mol/l of H2SO4 and a minimum near 0.2 mol/l of H2SO4. The stoichiometric reaction indicates neutralization of 2 mol of H+ with 1 mol of MoO4
                     2− and solvating a neutral molecule with 3 mol of TBP. At the lower acidity, the complex structure may be 3TBP·H2Mo2O5(SO4)2.The conventional method for extraction of molybdenum involves roasting of molybdenite concentrate, containing molybdenum sulfide, into molybdenum oxides. Molybdenum dioxide sublimes with other volatile materials such as Re Many investigations have so far been made on the solvent extraction of molybdenum from aqueous media containing sulfuric acid There are, however, no quantitative details on effect of temperature, TBP concentration and sulfuric acid molarity on distribution factors given in the literature. Thermodynamic properties such as enthalpy, entropy and equilibrium constant of extraction reaction are, however, required for detailed scientific studies and industrial applications. These properties can conveniently be utilized for estimation of the distribution factor prevailing under practical extraction conditions. Extensive research has been carried out during the past few years in our laboratory to evaluate these properties. Sample results corresponding to extraction of MoO The extraction reaction has the following general form: Stock of molybdenum ion (5 g/l solution) was prepared by dissolving analytical grade sodium molybdate (Na Batch experiments were carried out in a flask containing equal volumes (20 ml) of aqueous and organic phases. The mixture was agitated at a constant temperature with a mechanical shaker. The experiments were allowed to run for 1 h, even though equilibrium could be obtained within 15 min The initial concentration of molybdenum in the aqueous phase in all experiments was 1 g/l. Molybdenum content of the aqueous phase was analyzed with the thiocyanate spectrophotometric adsorption method. Chemical composition of the organic phase was determined through mass balance calculations. Spectrophotometric measurements were done with a Unicam 8700 series UV/VIS spectrophotometer. The effect of temperature on the extraction of molybdenum was determined by changing temperature between 25°C and 60°C at a constant TBP concentration. It can be seen from  Hanson and Patel Plotting the molybdenum distribution factor at constant temperature and TBP concentration vs. acid molarity, gives a straight line with a constant slope equal to Regime one — increasing acid concentration from 0.002 to 0.03 M has an increasing effect on the distribution factor. Regime two — increasing acid concentration from 0.03 to 0.2 M decreases the distribution factor. Regime three — increasing acid molarity from 0.2 to 0.4 M and TBP concentration from 10% to 40% has a positive effect on the slope of the distribution factor. Changing TBP concentration from 60% to 80% results in variation of the slope of the distribution factor from a slightly positive to a negative value. Regime four — increasing the acid molarity does not significantly affect the extraction of molybdenum and thus the distribution factor. In some special cases of practical importance, the complex formed has multiplicative dissolving behavior in organic and/or aqueous media. For these cases ln We can compute constants of Pruett The values measured for molybdenum distribution factor are compared with the calculated ones in Comparing The apparent standard Gibbs free energy of extraction of molybdenum from the solution is, therefore: Cox and Flett The value of log The structure of molybdenum ions depends on pH and molarity of the acid in aqueous media In the upper acidity range (H Regression analysis of the data given in Based on the experimental data and the above discussion, it may be said that for sulfuric acid molarities greater than 0.002 (pH approximately 2.4) the stable molybdenum ion is [Mo Based on the data presented in this paper, one can deduce that the molybdenum extraction reaction with TBP is an exothermic reaction. The apparent standard molar enthalpy for extraction of molybdenum anions is −75.90 kJ/mol and the apparent standard entropy of molybdenum extraction with TBP from sulfuric acid aqueous media is −0.21 kJ/mol K. So the apparent standard Gibbs free energy of extraction of molybdenum from the solution presented in this paper is: The apparent equilibrium constant of extraction reaction at 25°C, 40°C and 60°C is 162.6, 37.5 and 6.5, respectively. The investigation of extraction of molybdenum for acid concentration with molarities less than 0.4 M at constant temperature and TBP concentration indicates that neutralization of every mole of molybdenum anion needs 2 mol of H The authors wish to thank Mrs. Z. Moshefi Shabesteri from Amirkabir University of Technology for her useful consultance on the method of analysis of materials.