The formation of stable bubble–particle aggregates is essential to the froth flotation process. To form such aggregates, bubbles and particles must collide, the intervening liquid film must be drained below its critical rupture thickness, and three-phase contact (TPC) formation must occur. A good understanding of the interaction mechanism between bubbles and particles during collision and attachment is important. We herein investigated the effects of emulsified kerosene in a 0.01M MgCl2 solution (a model seawater component) on bubble interactions with pure molybdenite (MoS2) and chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) surfaces. In 0.01M MgCl2 at pH 6 and 11, kerosene retarded the bubble surface mobility and reduced the bubble rise velocity. In the presence of kerosene at pH 6, the TPC formed more rapidly on both mineral surfaces. This was due to the increase in surface hydrophobicity caused by kerosene. In addition, TPC formation was more rapid on the molybdenite surface than on the chalcopyrite surface due to the effect of the adsorbed kerosene and the low surface homogeneity of molybdenite. Finally, floatability tests demonstrated that the separation of molybdenite and chalcopyrite should be possible by adding emulsified kerosene in a 0.01M MgCl2 solution at pH 9.Flotation is a physicochemical mineral separation process that utilizes the differences in surface properties of valuable minerals and unwanted gangue minerals Upon collision of the bubble with the solid surface, the liquid between the bubble and the solid surface begins to drain, forming a thin liquid film. This film can rupture and form a TPC if the total interaction forces acting on the thin liquid film are attractive A number of studies into bubble–particle interactions in electrolyte solutions have been conducted using atomic force microscopy (AFM) It has also been reported that liquid film stability and critical rupture thickness depend mainly on surface hydrophobicity The effect of surfactants, and in particular frothing agents, on bubble size and hydrodynamic properties has been reported The bubble release system was previously studied by Tomiyama et al. AFM has been employed in the characterization of adsorbed CMC on a molybdenite surface The production of molybdenum is mainly carried out using copper–molybdenum (Cu-Mo) ores Molybdenite floatability depends on a number of factors, such as the types of collector and frothing agent employed and the flotation pH. Furthermore, the addition of fuel oil or kerosene during grinding enhances molybdenite recovery We herein studied the effects of emulsified kerosene in MgCl Molybdenite from Wolfram Camp, Queensland, Australia and chalcopyrite from the Miyatamata Mine, Akita Prefecture, Japan were employed in the bubble–surface interaction experiments and for surface characterization by AFM. For the floatability tests, fine molybdenite powder (<30 For bubble–surface interaction experiments and surface characterization, molybdenite was cut, and the cleaved surface was exposed by peeling off the top layer of the mineral sample using tweezers. The molybdenite surface was then polished consecutively with 3 The mineral powder employed in the various experiments was prepared by adding the crude mineral powder (5 The polished surface was immersed in the treatment solution (both with and without kerosene addition) at pH 6 and 11 for 10 Air bubbles were removed from the surface by removal of the surface from the solution, followed by re-immersion. This cleaning process was carried out following each single bubble generation experiment. A calibration silhouette (Kyowa Interface Science Co., Ltd.) with a 3 The presence of a precipitate in the 0.01 The interfacial tension between the bubble and the 0.01 The mineral powder was added to the treatment solution (both with and without kerosene addition) and mixed under ultrasonication for 1 AFM was conducted in the adhesion measurement mode to simultaneously obtain surface topography and adhesion images. The surface was scanned under air at an ambient temperature of 20.0 An Olympus BX51 optical microscope was used to observe kerosene emulsion in 0.01 The movies obtained from the high-speed camera were converted into sequential images in JPEG format using Free Studio v.6.4.0.1122. For each mineral and condition, 4000 image sequences were collected. The image sequences were analyzed offline using MATLAB image processing software. The parameters including bubble size, bubble aspect ratio, bubble distance to the surface, bubble velocity, length of the bubble–surface contact line, and dynamic receding contact angle were calculated using this custom-made software. These parameters were tracked at an interval of 0.5 A range of bubble shapes was adopted, ranging from an ellipsoidal to a spherical shape. Thus, to compare bubble diameters between the different treatments, the bubble diameter was calculated using the sphere-volume equivalent diameter method. In this calculation, the bubble was assumed to adopt a spherical shape during the experiment. The volume of the ellipsoidal and spherical bubbles could therefore be calculated using Eqs. In addition, the bubble equivalent diameter (d Axisymmetric shapes are conveniently described by the aspect ratio (E), defined as the ratio of the length projected on the axis of symmetry to the maximum diameter normal to the axis The bubble distance to the surface can be calculated as the vertical distance from the front side of the bubble to the surface ( The bubble–surface contact line length and the receding contact angle as a function of time were calculated when the bubble was in contact with the surface. The linear distance between the contact points is defined as the length of the bubble–surface contact line ( The time taken for TPC formation (t  The zeta potential and particle size of emulsified kerosene in a 0.01 As previously mentioned, In the absence of kerosene, the bubble shape remained an oblate spheroid upon increasing the solution pH. The addition of kerosene at pH 11 increased the bubble aspect ratio to 0.96, which was comparable to that obtained at pH 6. This increase in bubble aspect ratio in the presence of kerosene at both pH values indicates that kerosene was adsorbed at the air/liquid interface and retarded the bubble surface mobility. Similar results have been reported by several authors  Tomiyama et al.  In Following the initial collision, the bubble bounced backwards as the liquid film had not reached its critical rupture thickness. In the absence of kerosene at pH 6 and 11, the bubble surface oscillated rapidly while bouncing (Figs. Following a collision, the bubble bounce height depends on the bubble velocity when approaching the surface, along with the respective bubble surface deformation.  The TPC was not formed on the initial collision for 97% of the total bubble population under all conditions studied ( Following several collisions, bouncing ceased, allowing the bubble additional time to thin the liquid film on the mineral surface to form a TPC.  The average times for t  As shown in Interestingly, at pH 6, the time required to form a TPC on the molybdenite surface was shorter than that required on the chalcopyrite surface, although the receding molybdenite contact angle was comparable to that of chalcopyrite in the absence of kerosene, as shown in The contact line on the chalcopyrite surface shows a plateau during the time interval studied in this work (both with and without kerosene addition) at pH 11. This indicates that TPC formation did not occur on the chalcopyrite surface due to an increase in liquid film stability. In addition, such an increase in liquid film stability could be observed by the longer TPC formation time on the molybdenite surface at pH 11, both with and without kerosene addition ( As shown in  Although a smooth molybdenite surface (2-nm roughness) was observed in some cases, in other sections this roughness increased 17-fold. In contrast, chalcopyrite exhibited a relatively smooth surface (surface roughness of 4 The surface characterization of chalcopyrite and molybdenite was carried out by AFM for all conditions used in this study. The two-dimensional (2D) and 3D topography images in These white spots have a relatively high deflection value, as shown by the bright color in the cantilever deflection image ( We also observed that precipitation occurred in the 0.01 Upon the addition of kerosene, similar surface characteristics to those obtained at pH 6 and 11 in the absence of kerosene were observed in the AFM images. Under these conditions (i.e., kerosene addition), the chalcopyrite surface remained clean at pH 6 ( The AFM images of the molybdenite surface shown in We then examined chalcopyrite and molybdenite floatability in 0.01 At pH 6, a high bubble rise velocity and longer TPC formation time were obtained for both minerals, thus reducing the bubble–particle attachment probability. As the bubble rise velocity determines the contact time between the bubble and the particle, a higher rise velocity means a shorter contact time. With a shorter contact time and longer TPC formation time, the probability of forming stable bubble–particle aggregates is low, thus resulting in low mineral recoveries. A similar trend can be seen in However, the mineral floatability increased significantly in the presence of kerosene at pH 6 ( Furthermore, we observed that a thicker froth layer was formed in the presence of emulsified kerosene. This can likely be attributed to the stabilizing effect of the fine hydrophobic molybdenite and chalcopyrite particles on the froth layer in the presence of kerosene, as the fine hydrophobic particles remain attached to the air/liquid interface, thus increasing the rigidity of the froth structure. Indeed, Johansson and Pugh A further reason for the increase in molybdenite and chalcopyrite floatability in the presence of kerosene at pH 6 is the formation of agglomerates of molybdenite and chalcopyrite fines, which increase the size of the floating particles in the presence of kerosene. Song et al. Moreover, At pH 11, the molybdenite and chalcopyrite recoveries remained low, even following kerosene addition. As outlined in Finally, the formation of kerosene–Mg(OH) We investigated the effect of kerosene addition on bubble interactions with molybdenite and chalcopyrite surfaces, and found that in a 0.01 At pH 6, the addition of kerosene accelerated the draining process of the thin liquid film, thus accelerating TPC formation on both mineral surfaces. This is due to the adsorption of kerosene on the mineral surfaces and at the air/liquid interface, which increases the hydrophobicity of the mineral surfaces and destabilizes the intervening liquid film. In addition, the bubble removed the liquid film on the molybdenite surface faster than that on the chalcopyrite surface at pH 6, both in the absence of kerosene and with the addition of 104 At pH 11, both the molybdenite and chalcopyrite surfaces became hydrophilic due to the presence of Mg(OH) This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for