Correct sampling and sample preparation practices are critical to obtaining meaningful analytical data in the gold industry for the accurate delineation of ore resources, metallurgical accounting, and the evaluation and control of mining and processing operations. The basic rule for correct sampling and sample processing is that all parts of the ore, concentrate, or slurry being sampled must have an equal probability of being collected and becoming part of the final sample for analysis. If this is not the case, bias is easily introduced that cannot be eliminated by simply averaging replicate measurements, and the entire measurement chain is corrupted at the outset. Clearly, there is little point in using the latest analytical methods and equipment and spending considerable time and effort estimating resources or attempting to reconcile production figures if the samples presented for analysis are not representative in the first place. Consequently, sampling and sample preparation need to be given the attention they deserve as the first critical steps in the measurement chain. Special care must also be taken to ensure that sample masses are adequate at each stage of sampling and sample preparation to achieve the required precision.The use of correct sampling and sample preparation practice is critical to the accurate delineation of ore resources as well as the evaluation and control of subsequent processing operations from mining through to delivery of the final product ( Samples are taken from a range of locations, including percussion and diamond drill holes, blast holes, relevant feed and product streams, trucks, trains, and stockpiles. The fundamental rule for correct sampling and sample preparation is that all parts of the material being sampled must have an equal probability of being collected and becoming part of the final sample for analysis ( The presence of bias is a major problem in sampling, because it does not average out over time. In contrast to poor precision, which can be improved by calculating the average of the results from replicate sampling, sample preparation and analysis, no amount of replicate sampling, sample preparation and analysis will eliminate bias once it is present. The final result is just a more precisely incorrect analytical value. Consequently, minimizing or preferably eliminating biases is in many respects more important than improving precision. Sources of bias that can be eliminated at the outset by correct design of sampling and sample preparation systems include sample spillage, sample contamination and incorrect Once bias has been addressed, precision can be assessed by determining the overall variance of the final analysis This approach is particularly useful for designing, optimizing and assessing sampling schemes, because the contribution of each stage to the overall variance can be examined; it already appears in a number of International Standards Organization (ISO) sampling Standards (e.g., A better understanding of the sources of sampling errors and how to eliminate sampling bias and minimize variance is obtained by splitting the total sampling error This equation is strictly applicable to sampling from moving streams, so not all of the above components of error apply to every sampling situation. For example, the long-range and period quality fluctuation and weighting errors do not apply to percussion and blast-hole sampling, but the fundamental error, increment delimitation, increment extraction, and accessory errors do apply. The last three components require special attention, because they can result in the introduction of sampling bias. Fortunately, these biases can be eliminated by the use of correct sampling equipment and procedures. Accessory errors in the sampling context are nonselective operations without change of mass, such as crushing, grinding, mixing, sample transfer, drying, etc. Typical errors include sample contamination, sample loss (e.g., due to sample spillage), moisture loss, and operator mistakes, such as mixing up sample labels. These errors can be eliminated using correct sampling equipment and practices. For example, sample cutters should be covered if necessary to prevent entry of extraneous material in the parked position, and moisture samples should be prepared and weighed quickly to avoid change in moisture content. Care also needs to be taken to ensure that the finer particles are not lost in crushers or mills or during sample division due to excessive air flow from dust extraction systems installed in sample preparation laboratories. Increment delimitation errors arise from incorrect geometrical definition of the increment to be taken (i.e., not taking a complete column when sampling an ore deposit in situ or incorrect cutter geometry when sampling from a moving stream). Increment extraction errors occur when increments are not fully extracted (i.e., sample material is lost). For example: When sampling an ore deposit using percussion drilling, the drill hole must have parallel sides (correct delimitation) and all the cuttings must be transported to the surface for subsequent sample division (correct When sampling an ore deposit using diamond drilling, the drill hole must have parallel sides (correct When sampling a blast-hole cone, a complete sector of the cone of cuttings must be selected (correct When sampling concentrate in a truck using a spear sampler, the spear must be pushed down to the bottom of the truck (correct When sampling from moving streams, all parts of the stream cross section must be diverted by the sample cutter for the same length of time (correct The weighting error largely relates to sampling from moving streams and is usually not a major problem. It arises from variations in the flow rate of the stream, so that individual increments do not carry with them the correct weighting information when they are combined into partial samples and gross samples, particularly for time-basis sampling. However, the problem can be overcome by regulating the flow rate prior to sampling. Periodic quality variations also relate to sampling from moving streams and may arise from bucket-wheel reclaimers, pumps, etc. Difficulties arise when the sampling interval approaches that of the periodic variation and the taking of increments is in phase with the periodic variations. For example, when a bucket-wheel reclaimer is traversing the face of a stockpile, the center and edges of the stockpile usually have different grades and particle size distributions. Hence, if increments are taken only when the reclaimer is at the edge of the stockpile, the resulting composite sample will be biased. Consequently, such sampling situations should be avoided unless increments are taken at random within each time or mass interval selected for sampling. The fundamental error is a critical consideration in designing any sampling scheme, whether it is for sampling drill holes, process streams, trucks, or wagons. It results from the differences in composition between the individual particles being sampled, and as a consequence, for a given particle size, there is a minimum mass of sample, Determination of this minimum mass is covered in considerable detail by The mass of cuttings extracted from percussion holes is generally manageable, so it is possible to collect all the cuttings for subsequent sample preparation. The best method is to use reverse-circulation drilling to automatically collect the cuttings, where compressed air is pumped down the drill hole to force the cuttings up the center of the drill stem and through a cyclone. The cuttings are then passed through a suitable divider, such as a riffle (see Blast-hole sampling practices have changed relatively little in recent years and continue to be problematic. However, analyses of the samples collected are becoming increasingly important for grade control as mining companies continue to push down operating costs by reducing the number of mining machines, the size of blending stockpiles, and sample stations in the processing plant. This places much more pressure on the operators to feed ore of the required grade to the primary crusher, which in turn requires better estimates of the grades of ore blocks that are derived from blast-hole analyses. When the diameter of blast holes is relatively small (less than ∼200 The second method is to manually take two complete radial cuts from the blast-hole cone at 180° spacing after drilling has been completed and divide the cuttings down to an appropriate mass on-site using a riffle. There are several technical difficulties with this approach. The radial cuts taken, rather than being sector shaped, generally have parallel sides, which is incorrect. Also, making allowance for subdrill cuttings by removing the top of the blast-hole cone can be problematic. However, the accuracy of this approach is superior to the more conventional approach of taking vertical cuts from near the center of the blast-hole cone, as used for larger-diameter blast holes. The third method is to use an automatic vacuum extraction system and cyclone on the drill rig to pick up the cuttings around the top of the blast hole and pass them through a suitable divider, such as a riffle or cone divider, to extract a sample of appropriate mass. In principle, this approach sounds good, but in practice a substantial proportion of the cuttings are left around the blast hole (usually the coarser particles). Furthermore, a substantial amount of dust (the finer particles) often completely bypasses the sampling system and goes directly to the dust filter, and substantial material buildup occurs on the sample divider, particularly when the drill cuttings are wet. Once again, some of the sample dividers do not conform to correct sampling principles. As for percussion holes, the best approach is to use reverse-circulation blast-hole drilling to automatically collect the cuttings (see For larger diameter drill holes (∼300 Taking two complete radial cuts from the blast-hole cone 180° apart after drilling has been completed and divide the cuttings down to an appropriate mass on-site using a suitable divider. Installation of an automatic sample extraction system on the drill rig to pick up the cuttings around the top of the blast hole and pass them through a suitable divider to extract a sample of appropriate mass. The first option is very labor intensive, although a substantial section of the cone is removed when the vertical slice sampling method is used, so the additional effort is not as great as might first be thought. The second option has all the problems just outlined for smaller-diameter blast holes, so significant improvements in engineering design are required before it becomes a practical option. By far the best way of sampling a moving stream of ore, concentrate, or slurry is using a correctly designed sample cutter at the discharge point of a conveyor belt, chute, or slurry pipe. The stream can be intersected at preselected times or tonages, and representative samples, or increments, can be collected by taking a complete cross section of the stream with a sample cutter ( When sampling from moving streams, the stream is divided into strata of equal time or mass, and increments are then taken from a fixed point of time or mass in each stratum ( For Sample cutters for sampling moving streams must satisfy the following design rules to eliminate increment delimitation and extraction errors: The cutter must collect a complete cross section of the stream, with both the leading and trailing edges of the cutter (lips) completely clearing the stream at the end of each traverse. Cutters that collect only part of the stream on a continuous or periodic basis, such as The sample cutter must be nonrestrictive and self-clearing, discharging completely each increment without any reflux, overflow, or hang-up. This is particularly important for reverse-spoon–type cutters, where the ore, concentrate or slurry has to change direction as it strikes the back of the cutter body, otherwise sample reflux may occur. Generously large cutter bodies and chutes are therefore required to avoid reflux and overflow from the cutter aperture. For sticky The geometry of the cutter opening must ensure that the cutting time at each point in the stream is equal. Hence, for linear-path cutters, the cutter edges must be parallel, while for cutters traveling in an arc, such as The cutter should intersect the stream either in a plane normal to, or along an arc normal to, the mean trajectory of the stream. The plane of the cutter lips must not be vertical or near vertical, because particles that strike the inside edge of the cutter lips, and which should appear in the sample, are deflected away from the cutter aperture by gravity into the reject stream. The cutter must travel through the stream at a uniform speed, accelerating up to its cutting speed before entering the stream and then decelerating to a stop after leaving the stream. The cutter drive must also have sufficient power to ensure that the cutter does not slow down as it enters the stream and speed up as it leaves the stream. The cutter aperture must be at least three times the nominal top size ( Bucket-type cutters must have sufficient capacity to accommodate the increment mass obtained at the maximum flow rate of the stream without any reflux or overflow of material from the cutter aperture. No materials other than the sample must be introduced into the cutter or the sample delivery chute. If necessary, both need to be covered when the cutter is parked between increments to eliminate ingress of dust or spillage. If a belt scraper is required to remove material adhering to the belt, the scraped material must fall within the area traversed by the cutter. When sampling slurries, the cutter lips must be sharp and the sample cutter streamlined to minimize turbulence as it cuts the slurry stream ( While both The cutter speed is important for cross-stream cutters and Cutters can be found in mineral processing plants with speeds in excess of these limits to reduce the sample mass collected. However, the effective cutter aperture decreases as the cutter speed increases, and this can preferentially exclude the coarser particles and thereby introduce bias. The increment mass Consequently, for a given flow rate, the minimum increment mass that can be correctly taken to avoid bias is determined by the minimum cutter aperture and the maximum cutter speed. It is not possible to take unbiased increments of smaller mass unless the flow rate is reduced or the ore is crushed prior to sampling so that the cutter aperture can be reduced accordingly. A very useful parameter for checking the design and operation of sample cutters is the While taking representative samples from a stockpile may at first sight appear straightforward, this process is at best very difficult and often impossible. Samples are commonly taken from the side of the stockpile with a shovel or scoop (see Because of their smaller size compared to stockpiles, it is possible to sample fine concentrates (<1 As for the other stationary sampling situations just described, it is impossible to reliably extract representative samples of solids or slurries in situ in holding tanks and other vessels using a ladle. There is bound to be some segregation in the vessel, particularly for slurries, where the coarser and denser particles tend to settle toward the bottom. The only acceptable ways of extracting representative samples are as follows: Full-depth sampling in which a number of full vertical columns are extracted from the vessel (usually impossible) Sampling from moving streams as the vessel is filled or emptied Of these options, the second method is by far the best. After collection, samples may be prepared individually or combined into gross samples if required. In both cases, they are crushed, dried and divided as necessary in a number of smaller scale sampling stages to produce test samples. At each of these stages the aim is to maintain the overall variance at an acceptable level and minimize bias. As already discussed above, for a given particle size, there is a minimum mass of sample that must be retained after division to obtain the required division variance. A common fault during sample preparation is to reduce the sample mass too far before crushing and grinding, resulting in unacceptable overall variance. Other problems that can occur and can be eliminated through proper training of sample preparation personnel include: Discarding part of a sample prior to division, because it is too heavy to lift or carry Incorrect use of sample dividers, particularly riffles, resulting in bias Sample contamination due to inadequate cleaning of equipment between samples Sample loss via the laboratory dust extraction system Suitable methods for sample division include rotary sample division, riffle division, strip division, and manual increment division. Of these, rotary sample division is the most reliable method, provided a minimum of 20 rotations of the carousel occur during division, followed by riffle division. The variance of riffle division is generally larger than for rotary sample division, particularly in the hands of unskilled operators. However, the variance can be minimized by spreading out the sample to be divided along the length of one of the sample collection trays and then dividing it into two by pouring the sample uniformly into the middle of the riffle slots with the tray parallel to the long axis of the riffle. One of the two divided samples should be selected at random in order to avoid introducing bias, taking care not to leave any material remaining in the slots of the riffle divider. Accurate sampling methods are critical to obtaining meaningful analytical data in the gold industry. The basic rule for correct sampling and sample processing is that all parts of the ore, concentrate, or slurry being sampled must have an equal probability of being collected and becoming part of the final sample for analysis. If this is not the case, bias is easily introduced that cannot be eliminated by simply averaging replicate measurements. Special care must also be taken to ensure that sample masses are adequate at each stage of sampling and sample preparation to achieve the required precision.