In this study, separation of copper ion (Cu2+) from aqueous solution using two phosphorous based extractants (tri‑n‑butyl phosphate and di‑2‑ethylhexyl phosphoric acid) was aimed. The parameters monitored under the equilibrium study were initial copper concentration, extractant concentration, and pH. The copper concentration was taken in the range of 20 to 100ppm, the extractant composition in the organic phase was varied from 10 to 40vol% dissolving in toluene as an inactive diluent, and the pH effect was studied in the range of 1 to 11. The distribution coefficients were calculated, and a model equation was developed to estimate model parameters like the number of reacting molecules of the extractant and equilibrium constant using experimental results. In the kinetic study, the initial aqueous phase copper concentration, and the extractant concentration were changed, and initial rates of extraction were found out to develop a kinetic model and their parameters like rate constant and order of reaction.Heavy metals are extraordinary gathering of trace elements which are associated with the health risks while handled by plants including chromium (Cr), cadmium (Cd), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), zinc (Zn), lead (Pb), etc. These metals are called heavy metals in light of the fact that in their metallic frame, their densities are more noteworthy and grater than 4 The removal of heavy metals from the aqueous streams are performed by using reactive extraction which proven to be a promising alternative to the separation methods, and widely accepted commercially [ In case of metal extraction by a suitable extractant-solvent, the process involves the transport of either a metal cation, a metalate anion, or a metal salt, into the water-immiscible phase. Some of the extractants, e.g. phosphoric acid, phosphine oxides or trialkylphosphates can perform more than one of these roles, transporting metalate anions when they are in a protonated form and metal salts when they are in their neutral form. However, a tactic frequently used in extractive hydrometallurgy to achieve efficient separation and concentration of metals is to employ mixtures of solvent extractants [ Some properties of the materials used in this study are presented in De-ionized water was used to prepare the aqueous solutions of various concentrations of copper, and was procured from S. D. Fine-Chem Ltd., India. The ranges of parameters used in this study are determined as such to simulate the conditions of actual industrial wastewater streams. The ranges of these parameters with which the extraction experiments were carried out are listed in The upper limit of the aqueous phase copper concentration was taken to be 100 The organic phase phosphorus-based extractants used were TBP and D2EHPA. The TBP concentration was varied from 0.365–1.461 The equilibrium and the kinetic studies were based on the results obtained from the experiments performed. The experimental methodology that was followed to obtain the extraction properties for the extraction of copper from its aqueous solutions is described in this article. The experimental work was divided into two parts (i) equilibrium, and (ii) kinetic experimental study. Since, the aim of this study is to observe the effects of various factors on the extraction characteristics, equilibrium properties, and the kinetic properties of the parameters. For the equilibrium studies of the extraction system of our choice, these parameters are aqueous phase copper concentration, organic phase extractant composition, type of extractant, and the pH. The experimental studies were done at constant temperature (298 The distribution coefficient ( The extraction process is also analyzed by means of the degree of extraction, and is defined as the ratio of copper concentration in the extracted phase to the initial copper concentration in aqueous solution by assuming no change in volume at equilibrium as given by: Kinetic studies of the extraction were completed at steady temperature (298 Here, the data obtained for the extraction of copper from the aqueous phase by the respective extractants after attainment of equilibrium are presented. The degree of extraction is monitored for different initial copper amount in the aqueous media, and extractant concentrations. Also, the pH has been monitored so as to report its effect on the equilibrium condition. The equilibrium results obtained from the extraction of copper metal ion from the aqueous media to the organic media at varying initial aqueous phase copper concentration, and varying extractant composition are provided below in the form of plots in On the off chance that concoction co-operations between the segments (copper and extractant) of the complex are solid contrasted with the physical associations in the framework, and the balance conduct can be demonstrated adequately by proposing the arrangement of different stoichiometric complex of copper and extractant. This mass activity law depiction of a framework as a progression of stoichiometric responses will be alluded to as substance demonstrating. The cation trade is the important method of activity of the phosphoric extractant amid the extraction response. The oxygen molecule of the phosphoryl group (P Therefore, the distribution coefficient ( Using Eqs. Taking the logarithm of the above equation on both sides, the following form of Eq. A straight line plot between log Thus, the results obtained gave a clear indication of the complex formation between the copper ion and the extractant molecules. The extraction is affected by the extractant concentration, and the degree of extraction is directly proportional to the extractant concentration. This advises that the oxygen bonded phosphorus atom present in the extractant promotes the extraction process. In the extractive hydrometallurgy, the transport of solute metal present in the water phase may take place in the form of metal cations (M The phosphoric acid based extractants like D2EHPA have one ionisable proton. This type of extractants forms a stable dimeric structure. Generally, when the metal is complex formed it retains one of the hydrogen bonds in the dimer, while the other releases a proton substituted by the metal cation making of an 8-membered pseudo-chelate structure ( The effect of mixed extractant on the degree of extraction was studied by changing the composition of one extractant (10 The extraction was also studied for various initial aqueous phase pH. The initial copper concentration in the aqueous phase was kept constant at 100 The rate of extraction, The plot in The experiments on reactive extraction of copper by means of phosphorous based extractants diluted in the toluene provided useful data for designing the extraction system. It was found that at lower ppm solutions of copper, extraction up to 93% was obtained for a combination of 40 Authors would like to thank the Department of Chemical Engineering, Birla Institute of Technology & Science (BITS), Pilani to provide the necessary laboratory and infrastructure facility to carry out the experiment. Mr. Amritendu Ghosh (1st Author) was previously doing his master studies at Department of Chemical Engineering, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani Campus, Pilani, Rajasthan, India, and this work is part of his dissertation under the guidance of Dr. Dipaloy Datta.