The Kuannersuit Glacier surged 11km between 1995 and 1998. The surge resulted in the formation of an ice cored thrust moraine complex constructed by subglacial and proglacial glaciotectonic processes. Four main thrust zones are evident in the glacier snout area with phases of compressional folding and thrusting followed by hydrofracture in response to the build-up of compressional stresses and the aquicludal nature of submarginal permafrost and naled. Various types of stratified debris-rich ice facies occur within the marginal zone: The first (Facies I) comprises laterally continuous strata of ice with sorted sediment accumulations, and is reworked and thrust naled ice. The second is laterally discontinuous stratified debris-rich ice with distinct tectonic structures, and is derived through subglacial extensional deformation and localised regelation (Facies II), whilst the third type is characterised by reworked and brecciated ice associated with the reworking and entrainment of meteoric ice (Facies III). Hydrofracture dykes and sills (Facies IV) cross-cut the marginal ice cored thrust moraines, with their sub-vertically frozen internal contact boundaries and sedimentary structures, suggesting supercooling operated as high-pressure evacuation of water occurred during thrusting, but this is not related to the formation of basal stratified debris-rich ice. Linear distributions of sorted fines transverse to ice flow, and small stratified sediment ridges that vertically cross-cut the ice surface up-ice of the thrust zone relate to sediment migration along crevasse traces and fluvial infilling of crevasses. From a palaeoglaciological viewpoint, marginal glacier tectonics, ice sediment content and sediment delivery mechanisms combine to control the development of this polythermal surge valley landsystem. The bulldozing of proglacial sediments and the folding and thrusting of naled leads to the initial development of the outer zone of the moraine complex. This becomes buried in bulldozed outwash sediment and well-sorted fines through surface ablation of naled. Up-ice of this, the heavily thrust margin becomes buried in sediment melted out from basal debris-rich ice and subglacial diamicts routed along thrusts. These mechanisms combine to deliver sediment to supraglacial localities, and promote the initial preservation of structurally controlled moraines through insulation, and the later development of kettled dead ice terrain.This research examines the glaciotectonic signature of a recently surged glacier snout, and explores the subglacial and marginal processes responsible for the generation of its ice cored terminal moraine complex. The processes that operate subglacially during a surge are complex and only partially understood, with erosion, entrainment, sediment deformation, basal melting, regelation, congelation, supercooling and switches in drainage regime being some of the key mechanisms that determine the architectural nature of the submarginal ice zone ( At Kuannersuit Kuussuat, In this paper we investigate (i) the mechanisms controlling the structural glaciology of the surge terminus, (ii) the derivation of basal ice facies through subglacial debris entrainment and regelation mechanisms, (iii) the combined effects of compressional stress and the aquicludal nature of permafrost and naled in triggering hydrofracturing and supercooling in the terminal zone of the glacier, (iv) the role of crevasses in sediment delivery to supraglacial locations, and (v) the influence of these factors on the development of this polythermal surge valley landsystem. Kuannersuit Kuussuat is a 22 The Kuannersuit area is fed by multiple glaciers emanating from surrounding plateau ice fields. Between 1995 and 1998 the Kuannersuit Glacier surged 10.5 Geomorphological mapping was carried out through ground survey over three field seasons and supplemented by reconnaissance of air photographs at 1:150,000 scale and oblique air photographs taken from a helicopter. Structural mapping of the glacier terminus was executed in cross section and plan view and followed the established methodologies of The terminal zone of Kuannersuit Glacier is composed of a partially overrun pre-surge moraine, bulldozed sediment, and an ice cored thrust moraine. In 2002 the ice cored thrust moraine was demarcated into four zones based on large scale, clearly discernible structural discontinuities ( Zone 1 forms the outer area of the thrust moraine complex ( The zone is clearly composed of multiple repeat thrust blocks of Facies I ice, with many blocks isoclinally folded and dislocated along thrust boundaries ( Zone 2 is denoted by a dark, debris-rich, boulder-strewn ice surface. It is separated from Zone 1 by a distinct shear plane that dips steeply up-glacier initially, but which can be seen to level out before intersecting with the ice bed interface further along the western margin of the glacier ( Above the lower deformed layers of Zone 2, the glacier is composed of sub-horizontally stratified, bubbly, meteoric glacier ice (this is referred to as intermediate ice by Site 1 is composed of 14 Above this lies a stratified debris-rich ice layer approximately 1 The upper surface of the stratified debris-rich ice is sharply bounded by overlying englacial, meteoric ice which is sub-horizontally stratified and cross-cut by forward and reverse thrust faults. The forward thrusts dip up-ice at between 20 and 40°, originating in the lower stratified debris-rich ice (and to a lesser extent along sub-horizontal strata within the overlying ice) and cross-cut the upper ice to the ice surface. The reverse thrusts appear to be superimposed over the initial forward thrusts and dip down valley at 25–40°. There are also occasional sub-vertical fault traces which appear to postdate the forward thrusts, and but their relationship to the reverse thrusts is unclear at this site. Site 2 is situated 1 At Site 3 the glacier exhibits a basal cavity on the leeside of a bedrock protuberance at the base of Zone 4 ice ( Approximately 10 On the ice surface within Zone 4, these sub-vertical fault traces, plus ubiquitous vertical transverse crevasse traces, deliver consolidated aggregates/blocks of fine sediment to the glacier surface. The sediment blocks (ca <3 Within Zone 1 there are many sites where hydrofracture structures cross-cut the Facies I ice thrust blocks. The hydrofractures form branched dyke and sill structures, cross-cutting the pre-existing ice and clearly postdate its formation. Some dykes are composed of sediment that has been partially sorted by water and then frozen in At Sites 5 and 6 ( In Zone 4 the ice surface is dissected by a series of sub-vertical annealed crevasse traces that feed fine sediment to the surface as described above. However, these contrast strongly with frozen, discontinuous sediment lenses that criss-cross and protrude from the ice surface. These are oriented both sub-parallel and transverse to ice flow direction and typically were no more than 50 The geomorphology and structural glaciology of the snout of Kuannersuit Glacier between 1999 and 2002 had many of the key characteristics of a polythermal, surge type glacier ( Zone 1 marks the onset of increased marginal compression with open folding of Facies I ice and its subsequent thrusting into several repeated blocks ( This distinction is important glaciohydraulically as the naled, together with localised areas of permafrost, will have acted as an aquiclude to subglacial and proglacial groundwater flow. This, combined with warm based conditions up-ice during the surge and increasing marginal compression as the ice began to bulldoze and fold the naled (and underlying sandur), will have elevated water pressures substantially at the glacier bed. As listric thrusting then followed, so hydrofracture resulted as water escaped through the fracture naled. This was of sufficient force to rupture blocks of naled and cause interleaving of hydrofracture dykes within it ( The transition between Zones 1 and 2 is marked by a strong, sub-vertical discontinuity highlighted by intermixing, deformation and brecciation of Zone 1 naled ice with basal glacier ice in Zone 2 over a depth of ca 1 Zones 3 and 4 duplicate Zone 2 with large shallow thrusts emanating from subglacial localities ( Using the overall structural glaciology of the glacier the sequential development of planar structures can be determined. The primary stratification within the glacier (S The exposed basal ice sections along the margin are predominantly composed of laterally extended and deformed stratified debris-rich ice. The lensoid, anastomosing and sheared structure of this ice, with inclusions of subglacially derived boulders, diamicts and reworked ice blocks supports basal freeze-on, basal entrainment and subglacial deformation mechanisms for its production, similar to that reported from other surging glaciers such as Variegated Glacier ( At Kuannersuit, however, the basal ice structure is largely derived through subglacial tectonic processes. At Sites 1 and 2, repeated compression, isoclinal fold development, lateral attenuation/extensional shear and down-ice thrusting, clearly caused substrate entrainment, deformation and net thickening of basal ice (Facies II) ( At Variegated Glacier, The basal thrust faults down-ice of Site 3 suggest that water released into the adjacent basal cavity penetrated and filled the lower part of the thrusts ( The evidence of proglacial upwellings reported by However, there is no definitive link at Kuannersuit for the formation of basal stratified debris-rich ice subglacially as a result of supercooling. Sediment delivery mechanisms along crevasses are an important part of the surge landsystem ( The first are sub-vertical, flow transverse ridges that have annealed. They are clearly defined by the release of sorted, fine-grained sediment from their surfaces. They contain no debris coarser than this. The thin debris traces are often enveloped by adjacent clear ice (cf. The intersecting flow parallel and transverse ridges on the glacier surface are not crevasse squeeze ridges formed though vertical squeezing of subglacial material ( Through the analysis of the structural glaciology of the glacier, it is possible to consider the influence of surging activity on the future development of the Kuannersuit glacier landsystem ( At Kuannersuit, the polythermal setting, topographic constraints, and the position and spatial extent of thrust naled, basal ice and englacial ice, coupled with debris content and cover, will determine the long term development of this polythermal surge valley landsystem ( Basal ice in Zone 2 (Facies II; S Down valley of the Kuannersuit surge margin, a previous ice limit in the valley appears to relate to the pre 1898 advance of the Sorte Hak glaciers. This landsystem is typified by an outer zone of extensive thrust dead ice terrain with up-ice, and inset, kame and kettled topography, and an up-valley concertina esker. It thus appears to be a surge limit that provides a likely analogy for the future polythermal surge valley landsystem development of the Kuannersuit snout. The structural glaciology of the Kuannersuit snout following the 1995–1998 surge was typical of a polythermal, surge type glacier ( Four distinct structural zones on the snout reflect compressive deformation during surge cessation, with marginal folding followed by intense repeat thrusting in Zone 1, and the later development of large englacial thrusts demarcating ice dislocation from the glacier bed. The deformation of proglacial winter naled (Facies I) was important glaciohydraulically, as together with localised areas of permafrost, the formation of a steep reverse gradient, and warm based conditions during the surge, it created aquicludal high pressure conditions, which triggered hydrofracturing. Evidence of sub-vertically frozen water and sediment pipes (Facies IV). within the hydrofractures further suggest that the pre-conditions for supercooling existed. However, the derivation of stratified basal ice has been controlled predominantly by localised freeze-on and extensional shear, marginal compressive folding and entrainment. This produces a brecciated, discontinuous, anastomosing, lensoid basal ice stratigraphy (Facies II and III). There is no evidence to support the formation of basal ice through supercooling subglacially. Localised regelation through conductive cooling of subglacial meltwater does operate in cavity locations and where water ponds, but there is no evidence for accretions of undeformed (or low strain) ice around the base of upwellings, with inclusions of fluvially bedded units or channel fills. Sediment delivery to the glacier snout during the final phase of the surge is controlled through bulldozing, thrusting, hydrofracture and crevasse processes. The combination of net thickening of debris-rich basal ice and englacial thrusting feeds subglacial sediment to the glacier surface through direct entrainment and rotational creep along thrust interfaces. The thrusting of naled blocks is important for the delivery of fine grained material to the ice cored moraine surface as it begins to ablate, as are annealed transverse crevasse traces which deliver small consolidated ‘micro’ blocks of compacted fines to the glacier surface through the upward migration of fines along fractures. Ice flow parallel and transverse ridges on the glacier surface are formed through the influx of englacial or supraglacial meltwater into open crevasses during surging, with individual sediment layers representing separate influx events. They are not formed through the squeezing of subglacial material into the bases of crevasses or the vertical pressurised injection of meltwater into crevasses. The Kuannersuit polythermal surge landsystem signature will be determined principally by the thrust and stacked structure of naled, basal and meteoric ice, the debris content of the ice facies and surficial debris cover. The outer edge of this landsystem will be characterised by ice margin parallel, subdued, linear moraines produced from melted naled and bulldozed proglacial sediments. Up ice of this more pronounced hummocky, kettled topography will result from the meltout of debris-rich basal ice, with lower meltout tills draped by reworked surface diamict material derived from subglacial material delivered along thrusts. This topography will become less pronounced in areas of buried meteoric ice with a low debris content, and will give way to subdued lower terrain occupied by crevasse squeeze ridges and concertina eskers draped by englacial and supraglacial crevasse infills related to high water pressures during surging. This work was supported by the Carlsbergfondet, NERC ARCICE Grant No. ST022189, the Arctic Station at Qeqertarsuaq, Disko Island (University of Copenhagen) and the University of Durham. We would like to thank Morten Rasch and Niels Nielsen in particular for their help and support. The staff of the Design and Imaging Unit, University of Durham is also thanked for the production of figures.