When a plant and its controller are sufficiently linear and time-invariant so that they can be represented by transfer functions, and this plant is under classical control (meaning the controller can also be represented by a transfer function), the model-plant mismatch (MPM) that often plagues industrial processes can be written as a closed-form expression. This includes a variety of controllers, among which the ubiquitous Proportional, Integral and Derivative (PID) controller. The MPM expression can then be used to identify a representative transfer function of the “true plant” from the currently available plant model. The MPM expression works for single-input single-output as well as multiple-input multiple-output systems. The closed-loop data required for application of the expression has to be sufficiently exciting. If significant disturbances perturb the plant their values need to be available. In this article the expression is applied to industrial data to show its applicability.The situation where only poor process models are available for control is a common one. When there is a notable difference between a process and the available model of the process, it is said that model-plant mismatch (MPM) is present. This situation is not only common, but will usually contribute to deteriorated controller performance. The availability of poor process models is known to be a source of poor control performance, in fact this is listed as one of the most significant reasons for poor control performance in the minerals-processing industry by For processes where only poor models are available, Many controller design methods make use of a plant model. A good plant model usually helps to improve controller performance, but the dynamics of industrial processes can change significantly over time (as is shown for the example of a milling circuit in An alternative to full process re-identification is to firstly identify the elements in the process transfer function matrix that contain significant mismatch and to only re-identify these. Algorithms for MPM detection have been proposed by Model identification techniques that make use of closed-loop data have been introduced some time ago (see for example This paper presents a closed-form expression for the model-plant mismatch (as first derived in Although this method is related to closed-loop identification, it does make use of the explicit expression for the mismatch to identify the representative plant model. This implies that the model structure is known The most common form of advanced control in the process industry is linear model predictive control The sources of mismatch mentioned earlier are either due to discrete events (such as plant shut-downs) or e.g. slowly degrading instruments that cause the model to slowly drift over time. It is therefore sufficient to make use of this method after such events (depending on their frequency) or at certain times when the control performance has deteriorated. This supervised approach is preferable for processes where this is the case, rather than on-line model tracking, which would be preferable in processes where the model may change drastically at a high frequency. The newly identified model may then be used to update the controller, such that it can perform in an optimal manner. The expression is however only valid for systems that contain a controller and plant model that can be expressed by means of transfer functions. This does include an array of controllers, but probably most importantly it includes PID controllers. PID control is still very predominant in the processing industry. An industrial survey on grinding mill circuits by Another limitation on the expression is that it requires the input signals to be sufficiently exciting in order to make the implementation sensible. This limitation is however also present for the MPM detection algorithms presented by The requirement for sufficient excitation means that either sufficiently large (and known) changes are required for the independent variables (such as achieved with sizeable set-point changes) or sufficiently large (and known) disturbances should be present, or both. The expression handles known disturbances directly, but does not handle unknown disturbances. If it is unavoidable to use data without the presence of large unmeasured disturbances their values should first be estimated for example by making use of a Kalman filter ( Identifying the mismatch in the manner proposed in this paper is equivalent to identifying the additive uncertainty in the model The paper firstly presents the derivation of the MPM expression and shows how the representative transfer function model of the true plant may be obtained from it. Thereafter the expression is used in a MIMO application example to show its usefulness. Finally the expression is applied to industrial data and the representative plant transfer function is calculated by means of the MPM expression. Consider the one degree of freedom, negative feedback control loop shown in The derivation of the MPM expression which follows is done for a general MIMO system in which all signals may be vectors and all transfer functions may be matrices. The reference to the Laplace operator (  This expression may be used to derive the mismatch if the disturbances are known. If the disturbances are however unmeasured or even unknown, data from a period of operation free from significant disturbances can be used (if this is possible), and with The problem with large unmeasured disturbances also plagues classical system identification techniques. This is because the output error (the difference between the measured output and the model output) can be large in the presence of large disturbances, even if the model is perfect Usually signals (such as The expression If Notice from the derivation that there is no mathematical limit on the size of Δ The application of the MPM expression to a SISO system is straightforward, as presented in In order to illustrate the working of the MPM expression in the MIMO case, the algorithm is applied to a 2 The manipulated variables are the fresh ore feed rate [ The MIMO transfer function model of the milling circuit is given by  The plant is then perturbed to be Once the output signals have been generated the mismatch can be identified. The mismatch is calculated using To show the application of the method on industrial data, a case study is presented in this section for a splitter column which is part of a Polymer Hydrotreating unit. The data presented was collected during a step testing campaign conducted in 2014. The purpose of the Polymer Hydrotreater is to convert olefins to the corresponding paraffins to produce a slate of petrol and diesel or jet fuel. After the hydrotreating reaction has taken place, the material is sent to a stripper column (which mainly removes unwanted components) and finally into the splitter column. The splitter column (see The main variables to be controlled in this splitter column are: the temperature near the top of the column (on the tray just below where the reflux is added), and the percentage vaporization of fluid leaving the heater (this is a good indication of the temperature). A 5-hour excerpt of step test data is shown in The tuning parameters for the controllers are shown in It is usually possible to sufficiently represent a binary distillation column with a linear model if both products are of high purity and the reflux is large In order to apply the model-plant mismatch expression an initial model is needed ( Model identification of the splitter column was done using third party vendor software. Selected step-test campaign data were used, and the resulting 2  Consider now the scenario where there was a plant shut-down during which changes were made to the original plant (represented by  To reiterate,  The last signal needed for the application of the MPM expression is  and  This method supplies the signal in the Laplace domain, which means that all the signals needed to apply the MPM expression are now available. Once the MPM expression of It can be seen that the calculated transfer function The question remains whether the calculated transfer function is truly a better reflection of the plant than the model Once the mismatch (Δ There are many ways of tuning PI(D) controllers. Some of the more common methods include the Ziegler-Nichols method, the Cohen-Coon method, the IMC tuning relations There are also many other controller design methods that do not specifically lead to PI(D) controllers but do produce controllers representable by means of transfer functions. These methods include linear quadratic Gaussian (LQG) control, as well as The method chosen for controller design is not so important, what is however important is that the reader appreciates how commonly the plant transfer function is used in controller design. In these cases MPM will cause the controller to perform outside of its original design intent. If the MPM is severe enough this could lead to the dynamic performance specifications not being met or even instability. In such a case the MPM expression presented in this article may be used to update the available plant model and the controller design procedure may be repeated. This will lead to better adherence to the control specifications. This paper presents a closed-form expression for the MPM that may be present in a feedback control system where the controller is representable by means of a transfer function. The expression may be used to identify a representative plant transfer function from closed-loop operational data. The expression is directly applicable for SISO systems where the plant is easily identified. In the MIMO case some provisions are needed to ensure correct results. The plant model was correctly identified in an example with a MIMO plant. The main contribution of this paper as opposed to This expression does however need sufficiently exciting signals to make its application sensible. By using industrial data containing noise, Section Because this is a data driven method the fidelity of the data is important. Deviations in the data such as may be caused for example by sensor failures or valves getting stuck in place are not handled directly by the method. The same care taken when selecting data for system identification should be taken when selecting data when applying this method. The MPM expression also handles measured disturbances, but unmeasured disturbances may affect the accuracy of the identified model. Care should therefore be taken to use plant data that do not contain significant unmeasured disturbances. It was stated in Section from which  The input signal can easily be written in the form of a square matrix as in A similar situation holds true for measured disturbances. If disturbances are however unmeasured, care would need to be taken to use a portion of data that is disturbance free as unmeasured disturbances are not explicitly handled by the expression.