The influence of malonic acid and other additives has been investigated during the electrowinning of zinc from acid sulphate solutions containing manganese ions. It was found that adding malonic acid “MA” increased the current efficiency and decreased the anodic and cathodic potentials and the cell voltage in the standard electrolyte. Adding malonic acid to the industrial electrolyte containing antimony impurity also led to an increase in the current efficiency. Triethyl-benzylammonium chloride “TEBACl” was the best additive to improve current efficiency with the presence of 5 mg/L Ni2+ impurity and it also counteracted the deleterious effect of Sb3+ better than the other additives such as polyethylene glycol, sodium lauryl sulphate, perfluoro-heptanoic acid and malonic acid—these were not as good as glue and chloride ion together. Adding 2 mg/L of “TEBACl” to sulphuric acid solution with the presence of nickel ions increased the cathodic potential of hydrogen evolution on the zinc deposit, much more than that of 100 mg/L “MA”.During the electrowinning of zinc sulphate electrolytes, two main reactions compete on the cathode, one is zinc deposit, and the other is hydrogen evolution. In the pure zinc electrolyte, over 90% of the total reaction corresponds to the zinc deposit. The electrolyte often contains some metal ion impurities, such as Ni, Co, Sb, Ge, etc, more electropositive than zinc, and their presence can be very detrimental. This results in a deterioration of zinc deposit quality, a decrease in current efficiency (CE), and an alteration of cell voltage (CV). These impurities can accelerate the parallel process of hydrogen evolution due to the lower overvoltage of the discharge of H Organic additives are widely employed to counteract the harmful effects of these metallic impurities. In combination with some glue, antimony also plays a beneficial role producing optimum current efficiency and acceptable surface morphology of the deposit ( Triethyl-benzylammonium chloride (TEBACl C Triethyl-benzylammonium chloride “TEBACl” can be adsorbed on the cathodic surface and block the active sites. The decrease in current efficiencies with the increase of glue concentrations has also been observed by other workers ( Malonic acid belongs to the polyacid family. The effect of malonic acid on zinc electrowinning has been studied by The objectives of this study are to investigate the influence of malonic acid, triethyl-benzylammonium chloride and other additives on the current efficiency, anodic and cathodic potentials, cell voltage and deposit morphology during the electrowinning of zinc. In particular, the acid sulphate solutions contained Mn Experiments were done in 800 ml of synthetic standard acid electrolyte containing 60 g/L Zn Two galvanostatic experimental set-ups were employed at a current density of CD Some experiments were made in duplicate and triplicate and only experiments which were made in triplicate are considered for error bars statistical evaluation as shown in the corresponding figures. The two used set-ups gave the same trend but did not match in absolute values. The current efficiency was calculated as CE% SEM analyses were conducted using JEOL JSM-25s III model Scanning Electron Microscope to characterize the zinc deposit. The effect of 0, 10, 50, 100 and 500 mg/L MA on CE% and on the anodic, cathodic potentials and cell voltage during the 24 h deposit is shown in The addition of MA to the zinc electrolytic resulted in increasing the CE% with the best increase of 1.2% and 0.8% found for the addition of 100 mg/L MA after the first and second set-ups respectively. Addition of 500 mg/L did not show any advantage for CE% and could be considered as excessive. Error bars indicate the difficulty to have reproducible results with the second set-up for current efficiencies for the concentrations of 100 and 500 mg/L MA. The different results from the two set-ups might be due to the rate of Zn  The addition of malonic acid increases the current efficiency of zinc deposit since it complexes with impurities of the electrolyte, such as iron (II) and also decreases H  In the acid electrolyte, the addition of MA increased the CE by 1% whilst the addition of glue Adding 0.01 mg/L of Sb There are two proposed mechanisms to explain the decrease of the CE due to the presence of impurities in the zinc electrolyte ( the reduction of H continuous co-deposition and evolution of H The latter mechanism may involve interaction between the impurities and H  In the standard electrolyte, the cathodic and anodic potentials and cell voltage were − The effect of TEBACl (2 mg/L) and MA (100 mg/L) as well as other additives such as PEG (1 mg/L), PFHA (10 mg/L) and SLS (1 mg/L) was added to the standard zinc electrolyte with and without antimony to examine CE%, anodic, cathodic potentials, and cell voltage. The optimum concentrations of TEBACl, PEG, PFHA and SLS were considered after the literature ( With reference to acid electrolyte containing glue G A similar comparison with acid electrolyte containing Sb Clearly, the addition of malonic acid to the standard acid electrolyte led to better current efficiency than that of other additives. However, MA counteracted the deleterious antimony impurity less than the other four additives. The possible reason is that MA is not well adsorbed on the surface compared to other additives to form a strongly adsorbed additive layer that can complex with harmful metallic impurities. Among the tested additives, PEG added to an electrolyte containing Sb The effect of glue, MA and TEBACl on the Ni It can be deduced from As previously reported by The nature of induction period in the course of zinc redissolution in the presence of nickel ions has been explained by the action of the hydrogen bubbles arising on the areas of co-deposited zinc and nickel. The increase in the induction period and beneficial effect of triethyl-benzylammonium chloride “TEBACl” in nickel-containing electrolytes has been related to a decrease in the screening effect of hydrogen bubbles where local galvanic cells can be generated ( SEM was used to examine the formation of zinc deposit; and typical images are shown in The addition of MA to the standard acid electrolyte caused the production of deposits with many pores or holes ( Zinc deposits from the electrolyte containing glue Electrolytes containing Ni Finally, the zinc deposit from the electrolyte containing Ni The cathodic polarisation curves shown in The cathodic polarisation curves of the hydrogen evolution reaction of the Zn deposit as a function of electrolysis time were carried out at the current densities of 40, 50, 60 mA/cm   After 4 min of electrolysis at the current density of 50 mA/cm Considering 24 h of galvanostatic polarisation of zinc electrowinning in acid sulphate electrolyte at 50 mA/cm Among the examined additives, the use of PEG and TEBACl seems to be better than anionic PHFA and SLS. Cationic TEBACl decreased the cell voltage by ~ The optimum concentration of malonic acid appears to be 100 mg/L. The addition of 100 mg/L MA in the acid electrolyte containing 60 g/L Zn In electrolytes containing 0.01 mg/L Sb The current efficiency of zinc deposit in the standard electrolyte solution containing 5 g/L Ni 100 mg/L MA and 2 mg/L TEBACl added to H The authors are grateful to the Hydro-Quebec, Montreal (number 4600011922) and National Science and Engineering Research Council “NSERC” (number RDCPJ 346365-06), Ottawa, Canada for their financial support. The authors are grateful to Mr Gary Monteith (Canadian Electrolytic Zinc) and Gill Champoux (Hydro-Quebec, Montreal) for their fruitful discussions in the conception, realization and participation in this project.