Recently, medical diagnostics has emerged to be a promising application area for electronic noses (e-nose). In this paper, we review work carried out at Warwick University on the use of an e-nose to diagnose illness. Specifically, we have applied an e-nose to the identification of pathogens from cultures and diagnosing illness from breath samples. These initial results suggest that an e-nose will be able to assist in the diagnosis of diseases in the near future.Electronic noses (e-noses) have been used to analyse the complex odorous headspace of food and drink — mainly employing metal oxide or conducting polymer resistive gas sensors as shown in Monitoring the spoilage of foodstuffs is closely related to the monitoring of the growth of bacteria in a certain medium. In other words, an e-nose may be able to recognise characteristic smells from diseases and bacteria cells because cell metabolism is the biological oxidation of organic compounds, such as glucose (C We now describe work carried out at Warwick University on the use of an e-nose for three medical applications: (i) the identification of pathogens that cause infectious disease of the upper respiratory tract and ears; (ii) the classification of cyanobacteria, Measurement systems were designed for each of the three applications. First, we applied an e-nose to identify bacteria that cause disease of ears, nose and throat. Diseases of the upper respiratory system are often associated with microorganisms, such as   Second, we have constructed the measurement system Finally, we applied an e-nose system to diagnose illness in dairy cows. The dairy industry in the UK is responsible for milk production and the cost of feed for dairy cattle is about one billion pounds per year. Ketosis is a condition in cows associated with the inefficient use of feed and not only causes economic loss but also threatens the health of the cow. Clinical ketosis in cows is detected by the sudden loss of appetite and/or the appearance of the smell of acetone on their breath. Sub-clinical ketosis is normally detected through the analysis of blood or milk samples taken from a cow. However, this is a laborious, costly and intrusive method of diagnosing the health of the cow. Instead, an instrument has been developed in collaboration with Silsoe Research Institute and the University of Southampton to diagnose ketosis in cows  We have demonstrated that e-noses are able to identify unknown bacteria under laboratory conditions. This offers the possibility of using e-noses for lab-based, in-vitro diagnostics. The idea being that an e-nose could be used for the rapid screening of biological samples. For instance, the e-nose may be able predict a type of pathogen more rapidly (ca. 1 h) than existing semi-manual methods (ca. 1–2 days) and thus permit a more appropriate course of treatment. In this early stage of e-nose technology, it will be necessary to validate its predictions with existing, well-tested methods. However, should the lab-based e-nose technology prove reliable, then there is the very attractive option of moving the technology E-nose technology offers a number of significant advantages over other competing technologies. First, e-noses detect the major headspace volatiles and these may be related to the cell metabolism. In other words, the e-nose will only detect living cells and it is these viable cells that offer the threat to human health. Other techniques exist and can identify pathogens more specifically from protein sequences (e.g., biochips) but these will not indicate whether the microorganism is alive or dead. The major competing technology to the lab-based e-nose for in-vitro diagnostics is probably mass spectrometry (MS) or gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS). MS-based techniques can be used to identify specific molecules in, for example, the breath and these can then be associated with certain illnesses. Compounds such as dimethyl amine, acetone, hydrogen sulfide, and pentane have been reported in the literature to be associated with diabetes, uremia/kidney failure, lung carcinoma, liver disease and schizophrenia, respectively. However, the major advantages of an e-nose technology over MS-based methods is first that a chemical fingerprinting method may be more generic, but secondly and more importantly that sensor-based e-noses can be fabricated at a much lower cost than MS-based analytical instrumentation. Thus the possibility of near-patient, low-cost units for at-patient or in-vivo diagnostics becomes a realistic option. We anticipate that the next 3 years will lead to the commercial application of e-noses in lab-based in vitro medicinal diagnostics. We also believe that there are a number of technical challenges that need to be overcome before in-vivo diagnostics (e.g., mouth/breath) is realisable — such as the need to boost the sensitivity/selectivity of sensor-based e-noses to the key minor headspace volatiles (e.g., acetone on the breath), perhaps through the use of pre-concentrators, while in the presence of harmless major volatiles (e.g., TMA, H The authors would like to thank Dr. Crawford Dow and Dr. Mark Craven (Warwick University), Prof. Philip Bartlett (Southampton University) and Dr. Toby Mottram (Siloe Research Institute) for their contribution to one or more of the experiments reported here.