Some history and modern practice of Process Control in metallurgical operations is reviewed. Clearly the early deliverables from the pioneer days in the 1950s through to the 1970s and early 1980s were under-appreciated. The discipline has since grown into a more visible, sophisticated and accepted practice as a result of the assembly of appropriately recruited and trained individuals and teams, who have successfully negotiated deliverable projects that impact all metallurgical performances beyond early milling processes. The skill set in these individuals and teams essentially includes organisational behaviour in addition to their specialist technical attributes. A strong network to internal and external specialists and experts is essential. Furthermore, instrumentation and control technology has improved immensely. The challenge in the current modern practice is to win support of senior management in operations for the project cost, schedule and deliverables of Process Control. Once gained, this acceptance then amounts to the logistics of project scope and delivery—a track record well-demonstrated by the Xstrata Process Control Group.The objective of the third plenary lecture is to present the state of the art of applied automatic control and information processing in one or several MMM fields (physical metallurgy, mineral processing, extractive metallurgy, and mining). Mineral processing and extractive metallurgy are the selected MMM fields for this discussion. In this paper, automation is understood in a broad sense including: measurement and instrumentation; process modelling and simulation; process monitoring and data reconciliation; data mining and multivariate statistics; fault diagnosis and fault tolerant control; Process Control; monitoring of product quality and control performance; off-line and on-line process optimisation; maintenance scheduling and production planning; as well as AI methods like: expert systems, neural networks, fuzzy control. To address as many of these areas of automation as possible, this paper divides into the following sections: Introduction and Process Control definition, objective and cycle Elements necessary for successful Process Control in mineral and metallurgical plants, covering: People—control/process knowledge Tools—instruments; systems; technology Actions—support, management, technology transfer XPS Process Control philosophy summary The ‘near term’ outlook Conclusions Examples and case studies are briefly presented throughout the paper to illustrate the points being made. Acknowledgements and references follow after the conclusions section.  “Process Control is a long-established technology.” “Within the minerals industry, single loop pneumatic controllers became commonplace in the 1950s.” “By the mid 1960's, process control was seen by the mineral industry as a technology which offered a great deal in terms of potential improved plant performance.” “Work on flotation control systems began in the early 1970's based upon the availability of on-stream analysis data.” “Although the flotation control task was inherently more difficult than for grinding, there were many promising flotation control systems around the world in the mid to late 70's” (and early 80's).  Control A growing understanding of Operator An understanding for the absolute necessity for good An understanding of the need for  Enthusiastic The active and productive Although it is now several years later, these key elements have been selected to be discussed in this paper, as they are also seen to be very relevant to the approach of the XPS Process Control Group. The goal of the XPS Process Control Group is plant Process Control for People—control/process knowledge Tools—instruments, systems, technology Actions—support, management, technology transfer. More recently, In the process of stabilisation, it is very important to consider ‘the whole loop.’ ABB (  Additionally, Process Metallurgists/Engineers also need to be aware of ‘data compaction’ in the production management information system (PMIS). Over compaction, as over filtering, minimises the ability to ‘see’ the real process dynamic response. The XPS Process Control Group is often requesting Referring back to In general a well established hierarchy ( While process and area optimisation can have considerable financial returns, it is well recognised (and reported), by those practising Process Control, that this can only be achieved by having a robust and solid regulatory lower level.  start by defining what is important through an analysis of the process (an audit) to determine what is required and the level of control; understand the process and ensure the basics for good control are in place (e.g. instrumentation); match the installed system to the capability of the people available; recognize the on-going commitment required for success; with regard to the actual control, consider three levels as follows: basic PID—via DCS or equivalent; supervisory (cascade control, dead-time compensation, etc.—via DCS or equivalent); optimising (e.g. expert system, adaptive)—via a package such as G2 or implemented within the DCS.” However, it is important to understand that Process Control will not correct inherent design, instrumentation related flowsheet, and actual flowsheet problems in a plant. The hybrid Process Mineralogy group at XPS was started up in 1997. The key deliverable from this young discipline is to reliably formulate and demonstrate the optimum flowsheet for the processing of a given ore body (  The XPS Process Control Group continually make the point that Process Control involvement during the early engineering stages (of a project) ensures effective start-up and the fastest turn-around to on-line process optimisation. The Kidd Metallurgical Site Montcalm project was taken through the full Six Sigma stage gate procedure, ensuring all specified design criteria were met before proceeding to the next stage. This required the Process Control plan ( The control philosophy generally specified only lower level (regulatory) loops with some cascade loops included where necessary. The approach taken was to have the regulatory loops ready for use at circuit start-up and to develop higher-level controls later as required. Following commissioning all control loops had been inspected, optimised and documented with the ExperTune software package, thus allowing the Process Engineers and Operators to focus on optimum process beneficiation, i.e. The XPS Process Control Group are often called into Plant processes  This section discusses the elements necessary for successful Process Control in mineral and metallurgical plants and what is required to attain operational performance excellence.  It has been the experience of the XPS Process Control Group, that successful Process Control results from a combination of  “Many countries lack experts who are trained in Process Control, and who have a good understanding of the process and control engineering expertise.” “Process engineers in mineral-processing plants are generally not well trained in Process Control and, except in very large companies, there are usually no process-control engineers on the plant.” This section addresses both of these points. The XPS Process Control Group's philosophy is summarised as follows: Employ appropriate number of skilled resources: Having technical ability and training; Championing Process Control and process improvements. Participate and have projects in Operations linked to the Business Unit plans, covering: Operations support, audits, process analysis studies and support of Six Sigma projects. Support capital project design engineering: Ensuring appropriate levels of instrumentation and controls using control strategies based upon an ‘approved’ operating philosophy and standards. Capabilities and services of the Group are primarily: Process design and commissioning; Controls auditing; Control loop optimisation; Advanced controls; Slow process response; Off-gas system controls. The Group maintains an ability to identify and deliver robust Process Control technology and engineering solutions to operations and strategic projects. Solutions implemented are based upon solid control engineering practice and operating experience from throughout Xstrata operations. Enabling, and appropriate technologies, are used through the involvement of engineering specialists who may involve, or work with other outside specialists/consultants/contractors All the current members of the Group are from an Engineering background covering Mineral Processing, Metallurgical, Chemical and Electrical Engineering. Several have Masters’ and some have a PhD in some aspect of control or advanced control. The Group has many years of experience with a diverse and comprehensive background. Academic background covers degrees from the following academic institutions: Laval, Québec; Malaviya National Institute of Technology (India); The University of Manchester (UK) MSc program “Advanced Control and Systems Engineering”; McGill, Québec; McMaster, Ontario; Natal, (South Africa); Nottingham (UK); Ottawa, Ontario; Queens, Ontario; Sheffield (UK); RSM, Imperial College University, (UK); TUNS, Nova Scotia; U of T, Toronto, Ontario. For example (Manchester University website), MSc in Advanced Control and Systems Engineering ( Attention has not just been on the XPS Process Control Group capabilities and competencies. For several years now, the XPS Process Control Group has facilitated basic ‘Process Control Training’ generally addressed to all new (Metallurgical) Engineers in Training (EITs), Process Engineers and Instrumentation Technicians. The course involves three day sessions focused on approximately fourteen students per session. This is both necessary as well as ‘good common sense’ in increasing the awareness and importance of Process Control in modern plants. We have seen huge impacts in ‘empowering’ operations, e.g. Falcondo as a result of taking this training. Presently there are considerable opportunities to extend to the ‘new’ Xstrata operations. While this training has actually been given by Lakeside Process Controls ( P893A Extension ( There are also specific vendor training programs, such as: Invensys, Emerson, E&H, METSIM, ABB, Perceptive Eng., etc. These are very important to fully realise the benefits of installed control systems and their associated software. Process knowledge comes from projects and work in the plants and piloting facilities. A centralised (XPS Centre) and decentralised (plants) model is practised that allows ongoing connectivity to operations, mentoring, technology transfer, resource time management, benchmarking, and performance management (see  The Ontario Plants of Xstrata have specific (discounted) procurement agreements covering instrumentation from Emerson (e.g. Fisher-Rosemount), Siemens, and E&H. Each manufacturer, and associated supplier, provides excellent instrumentation that is significantly better than that supplied to plants in 1993. For example, E&H's new Memosens pH instrumentation ( Other ‘key standards and methodologies’ that are important in applying a common methodology while ensuring a timely implementation: Control and control related systems: Support & exploit installed DCS (generally ABB, Foxboro & Fisher-Rosemount) and Hybrid PLC systems (like Modicon, utilising IEC61131, i.e. Concept—a multi-function programming language); PROFIBUS for Fieldbus; ExperTune for optimal loop tuning and PlantTriage for continuous loop monitoring; Smith Predictor for single loop time delays; Automatic Setpoint Regulation System (ASRi) for Crusher {gap} Controls; Connoisseur (Invensys) for (MPC) Model based Control; OPC for interfacing different systems. Plant management monitoring (PMIS): OSI Pi. On-line failure and fault detection: MonitorMV (Perceptive Engineering) for Furnace analysis and on-line fault detection. LeakNet (EFA Technologies) for pipeline leak detection. Some specific examples are discussed below. The Sandvik ASRi Controller for Crushers (shown in    Flotation is so fundamental to the separation of copper, zinc, nickel and lead sulphides. Therefore it plays a very important part to the Xstrata operations. Optimum flotation performance is reliant on good level control, air sparging and flow control, as well as precise chemical additions. Significant opportunities are found in flotation operations by attention to these fundamental controls. Flotation control has,     Flotation performance is difficult to control because it is integrally tied to the performance of the online sampling systems for the XRF. Best practise at Xstrata is the use of automation for the sampling system ( Robust and accurate assays allow better flotation control, often in a layered approach as shown in MPC applied to Xstrata processes was addressed by Roasters (Connoisseur, e.g. Kidd Zinc—1993); Flotation Process (G2/Generalised Predictive Control—GPC)—originally implemented by Noranda in 1999; Flotation Level Control (FloatStar, Mintek—Collahuasi, 2004); 12 Nickel Shaft Furnaces (Connoisseur) at Falcondo (2002). ( Kidd Copper Smelter (DIY on DCS)—Matte Grade Control (2002); Nickel Smelter Electric Arc Furnace (Connoisseur)—Fe:SiO There are many references covering the applicability of MPC. Recently, The XPS Process Control Group obtains process identification information from tools (like Invensys’ Connoisseur) that allow PRBS (pseudo random binary sequence) tests on the process. These more complex tests, would follow the simple initial step tests used for identifying basic process dynamics. However successful and beneficial, these systems will not be robust in the long run unless there is an appropriate and knowledgeable resource capable of maintaining and supporting them.  While online systems like EFA Technologies Inc. ‘LeakNet’ fault (leak) detection system have been available for oil and slurry pipelines for several years, similar applications to the metallurgical industry's key process equipment are very limited. One such system ( The application was developed in concert with Perceptive Engineering, UK (  As shown in Two of the four business groups at the Xstrata Process Support Centre, the Process Mineralogy Group and the Extractive Metallurgy Group, operate pilot facilities ( The philosophy and practise of XPS piloting is to engineer to an equivalent or higher standard as the operation plants, thereby obtaining key controls knowledge, by obtaining excellent process data. Often these data are used in detailed engineering studies.  Additional instrumentation added included: flow measurement (Coriolis) at the inlet and outlet, additional pressure measurements along the pipeline, and tank levels. All measurements were then continuously monitored and captured by the Pi PMIS historian including: pressure/flow difference calculations, and pump amps/volts measurement. Robust communications, plus pressure controllers on the inlet and outlet, were installed and commissioned. Finally a leak detection system (  Instrumentation is so much better than it was 25 years ago and procurement agreements with key, major suppliers allows the latest technology into the plants where they are ultimately proven for both accuracy and robustness. Utilisation of ‘asset management’ systems (like E&H's FieldCare) will help to ensure instrumentation is performing appropriately. But this is also where other tools, like PlantTriage (ExperTune Inc.) and online PCA/PLS models (MonitorMV, Perceptive Engineering) can play an important part—quickly identifying and reporting failed instrumentation to mitigate costly productivity losses and expensive equipment problems/failures. Well tuned, adaptive—where necessary, control loops operating in auto are essential for  Beyond the ‘tools and systems’ new improved mineral beneficiation processes, are gaining a worldwide acceptance (at an increasingly rapid pace), like Xstrata Technology's IsaMill (  Plant The author acknowledges the inspiration provided by Don McKee, through the AMIRA P9L final report. (D. McKee spent 10 years developing control systems, first at Mount Isa, then Climax Molybdenum in Colorado; he is now a Director of the Sustainable Mineral Institute, SMI, University of Qld). The author would also like to thank XPS Management for permission to present/publish this material and all present/past members of the Xstrata Process Control Group whom have contributed in many ways to the examples discussed in this paper. Additionally, the excellent support of the many operational clients is much appreciated and makes a difference. The discussion and examples for this paper have drawn upon experiences gained at the following Xstrata operations: Strathcona Mill, Raglan Mill, Collahuasi Mill, Kidd Site, Altonorte Smelter, Mt. Isa Cu Smelter, Pilot Plant Activities, Sudbury Ni Smelter, Nikkelverk Refinery, Falcondo Site, Brunswick Smelter, Horne Smelter, CCR Refinery.