A combined experimental and numerical approach is proposed in this study for the characterisation of the mechanical behaviour of foamed geopolymer concretes. Advanced experimental techniques employing X-Ray CT give both microstructures and mechanical responses of a range of geopolymer concretes with varying densities. In parallel with this, a numerical modelling technique based on the discrete element method (DEM) is developed for explicit descriptions of air-void distribution, while the mortar binder is described at the micro/meso scale with cohesive behaviour. The calibrated and validated DEM model is then used to systematically study the effects of air-void content, air-void distribution and microstructural parameters, including particle size and porosity on the compressive strength of foamed concretes. A non-linear relationship between the compressive strength and porosity of foamed concretes is found from DEM simulations, which are consistent with our experimental findings and existing strength-porosity models. Furthermore, it is found that the air-void distribution has a significant influence on the compressive strength of foamed concretes, while the micro-void structure has less effect on the loading bearing capacity of the material. The proposed combined approach demonstrates the tight correlations between experimental and numerical techniques in characterising the mechanical behaviour of foamed concretes for practical design purposes.In recent years, the trend of lightweight concrete in construction has significantly increased. Lightweight concrete is well recognised as a material with advanced physical properties such as low cement and aggregate content, as well as excellent sound and thermal insulation The mechanical properties of foamed concrete, such as the modulus of elasticity and the compressive, tensile and flexural strengths, are regarded as the most important factors in the application of the material in infrastructure construction. Among these properties, the compressive strength is mostly considered. It has been well recognised that the compressive strength of foamed concrete decreases as the porosity of the material increases In the view point of computational modelling, both continuum-based and discrete-based numerical approaches have been successfully utilised to investigate the mechanical behaviour of conventional concretes The aim of this work is to characterise the effects of porosity and air-void structure on the compressive behaviour of foamed concrete using both experiment and DEM modelling. To characterise the air-void structure for the DEM simulation, an X-ray computerised tomography (CT) scan is conducted. This is carried out in conjunction with mechanical testing for the macro compressive behaviour of the material. In parallel with this, DEM algorithms to generate representative volume elements from a given pore size distribution are developed. The proposed DEM model is first calibrated with uniaxial compression test data for a specific sample density to obtain the required constitutive parameters for fly-ash based foamed concrete. Then, it is further validated with experimental data obtained from the same material with lower and higher densities. Subsequently, the model is used to systematically investigate the relationship between the compressive strength and density/porosity for a large number of numerical samples with different densities/porosities and air-void distributions. Numerical results are then compared with the experimental data obtained in this study and other existing empirical models available in the literature. The content of this paper is organised as follows: DEM was first developed by Cundall and Strack As mentioned above, the translational and rotational motions of DEM particles are based on Newton's second law. For each particle The vector force ( The centred finite difference method is then used to integrate the equations of motion. The translational and rotational velocity vectors at the By assuming the velocities are constant from time step In order to ensure the numerical stability of the above time integration scheme, the time step must be less than the following upper limit In this paper, a cohesive particle model developed by Šmilauer In contrast to the classical DEM, which only allows particles to be in contact ( The interaction domain between two particles that share the contact point When the two spherical particles are in contact, the contact law, which is also known as the constitutive law of the material at the micro-level, is activated. The total contact force consists of two components, normal force The normal and shear forces are computed from the normal ( The normal stress ( The use of the Heavisible function allows the normal stress to be switched between the tensile and compressive states as the sign convention of the total accumulated strain increment changes. In compression, In the tension mode, the framework of fracture mechanics is applied. The damage variable For the shear behaviour, the framework of plasticity is used. The total shear strain increment is decomposed into elastic shear strain ( The total shear strain The shear stress The shear stress is limited by the following yield function: The plastic deformation can be obtained using the non-associated plastic flow rule: A stress return mapping algorithm is then adopted to ensure that the stress state of the material is always located on the yield surface. At every step, the normal stress is computed first using Equation The corresponding shear strains also need to be updated: In DEM simulations, quasi-static analyses are normally used to investigate the rate-independent mechanical behaviour of a material. However, owing to its inherent dynamic formulations based on Newton's second law, quasi-static equilibrium conditions are not naturally achievable in DEM simulations. Accordingly, when DEM is applied to investigate the mechanical behaviour of granular materials, dynamic relaxation procedures are normally adopted to achieve quasi-static equilibrium states. The basic idea is to reduce the total unbalanced forces in order to reduce the acceleration of the particles. This can be achieved by adding a non-viscous type global damping force, which is proportional to the magnitude of the unbalanced force acting on the particles A series of uniaxial compression tests was conducted to investigate the compressive behaviour of the foamed concrete under consideration. The material used in this study is the fly-ash based geopolymer foamed concrete, which consists of three major components: fly-ash, alkali solutions and foam. Geopolymer mixture was fabricated by replacing sand and ordinary Portland cement with fly ash and activated alkaline. A pre-foaming method was employed to generate air-voids inside the material, in which foam was produced separately and then blended with geopolymer paste. Different mixtures of the fly ash, activators and foam were used to produce a large number of foamed concrete samples with various densities for the experiment. The rest of the section is organised as follow: First, the X-ray computerised tomography and 3D image processing tests are presented to provide information on the pore structure (i.e. shape, size and distribution of air-voids) and the total porosity of foamed concretes with the density of 500 X-ray computerised tomography (X-CT) and 3D image processing were conducted to investigate the pore structure of the material. Two small cube samples (20 After the X-ray CT scan, a series of uniaxial compression tests was conducted to investigate the effect of density on the compressive strength of foamed concrete, and to provide data for validating the DEM model. A number of cube-shaped foam concrete samples of (50 The typical stress-displacement curves observed from laboratory tests for samples with the densities of approximately 425 The compressive strength of foamed concrete for different dry densities is summarised in The above experimental evidences highlight the complex behaviour of foamed concrete that generally results from the influences and interactions of density, mortar properties and pore structures. However macro observations of both mechanical response and failure patterns can only give qualitative explanations on the underlying failure mechanisms and its connections with stress-strain responses. In addition, given the complex behaviour of the material and many interacting factors, it is also very expensive and difficult in our opinion to generate sufficient experimental data for further understanding and practical design purposes. In this sense, the proposed DEM approach, once properly calibrated, can be used effectively to both enhance our understanding and expand the range of data for better predictive equations in practical design. In this section, a method to create a foamed concrete sample with a specific density is presented. First, the air-void particles in the sample are generated using a given air-void size distribution and are randomly distributed within the numerical specimen bounded by rigid walls. Next, regular particles with much smaller sizes representing the mortar/binder phase are randomly filled in the remaining gaps within the sample. These particles are bonded together using the cohesive bond model (see  It is well known that the particle size may have a significant effect on the results obtained from DEM simulations. As such, the effect of mortar particle size on the macroscopic behaviour of DEM foamed concrete sample is investigated in this section. Five DEM samples with different mortar particle sizes were simulated using the same assumptions for the normal air-void size distribution and the following DEM constitutive parameters:  In this section, the effects of air-void structures (i.e. closed void system and a mixture of closed and merged void systems) on the mechanical behaviour of foam concrete are considered. To obtain further insight into this investigation, two types of DEM sample of identical properties (i.e. density, number and size of the mortar particles, air-void size distribution and constitutive parameters for the mortar phase) except for different internal air-void structures are investigated. The first sample type has a closed void system, which consists of all isolated voids randomly distributed in the sample as shown in  As discussed in In the DEM simulation, the sample size of 50  As discussed in the previous section, the predictive capability of the DEM foamed concrete model needs further verification for samples with different densities before it is used for the numerical investigation of the compressive behaviour of the material. In this section, the reliability of the DEM micro constitutive parameters for foamed concrete, drawn from the previous section (  The above numerical investigation confirms the reliability of the proposed DEM foamed concrete model, that is, once the DEM constitutive parameters are calibrated for a given foamed concrete sample of a specific density (i.e. best fit the load-displacement curve and fracture pattern), the method can be utilised to systematically investigate the compressive response of the material. However, we acknowledge the lack of validation of crack size/orientation distribution as a shortcoming of the proposed approach, due to the fact that it is almost impossible to generate explicitly the pore structure of each sample. In this section, the relationship between the compressive strength and density of the foamed concrete is investigated using the validated DEM model. A total of 60 cubic foamed concrete samples with a size of (50  The relationships between the compressive strength and the density of the foamed concrete in the experiments and DEM simulations are compared in The above simulations show that the proposed DEM model can capture the overall compressive response of foamed concrete, together with its underlying failure mechanisms and macro failure pattern, without having to take into account the exact microstructure of the material. This demonstrates the capability of this DEM-based approach in investigating the effects of internal pore structures, such as the air pore distribution and mortar properties, on the macro behaviour of foamed concrete, which is a difficult and also expensive task for laboratory tests. Both empirical and theoretical studies have been extensively conducted to establish the relationship between the compressive strength and porosity in foamed concrete; and a large number of strength prediction models based on the total porosity have been developed Several strength-porosity equations have been developed for different types of foamed concrete from the above model. For example, Hoff Although the prediction of the compressive strength of a foamed concrete based on its porosity can be achieved with an empirical method, different mixtures of mortar phase and foam content require a large amount of time and effort in the laboratory. In addition, the effect of the internal structures, such as air pore distribution, air pore size and mortar properties, on the macro behaviour of the foamed concrete is not possible to achieve based on conventional laboratory compression tests. As shown in the previous section, DEM has a great capability for investigating the effect of these physical properties on the macro response of foamed concrete. Therefore, it is beneficial to use a validated DEM-based approach for the proposal of a compressive strength-porosity equation for a given foamed concrete. In order to establish a relationship between the compressive strength and porosity of the foamed concrete using DEM simulation, a large number of specimens with different porosities subjected to the same compressive loading is used. The procedure to create new DEM samples representing foamed concretes with different densities is similar to that used in A wide range of foamed concrete samples with a porosity ranging from 0.58 to 0.86 is conducted in this investigation. For each specific porosity, five samples with a random distribution of air-voids are conducted. In total, 115 DEM samples are generated in this study. The DEM geometric parameters and the numerical outputs are summarised in   The above numerical simulations have demonstrated the capacity of DEM in characterising the influences of internal pore structure on the macroscopic behaviour of foamed concretes, and in modelling fragmentation processes using only simple constitutive laws. It has been shown that, once fully calibrated, DEM could be a useful numerical tool for practical design purposes such as developing a strength model for a certain type of concrete. Nevertheless, full exploitation of the proposed approach requires both understanding of failure mechanisms at the grain scale (like the DEM simulations in this study), and macro scale modelling for structural design. The latter was partly and preliminarily tackled in this study through the development of a strength model for geopolymer foamed concretes. Further from that, the development of a continuum damage model for foamed concretes is needed to bring the full potential of this approach to structural analysis and design. While in our opinion this development is outside the scope of our study (that focuses RVE modelling and a strength model for practical design), we have envisaged the mapping of the homogenised behaviour of the RVE modelled in this study to our generic size dependent constitutive framework This study presents a combined experimental-numerical approach for the characterisation of the mechanical behaviour of foamed geopolymer concrete. Experiments provide the initial microstructure and macro responses of a range of foamed concretes, while a DEM-based numerical approach supplies further insights into the underlying failure mechanism of the material and extends the range of densities that can be covered. Based on the experimental and numerical results, the following conclusions can be drawn: Once fully validated, DEM can predict quite well the macro response of foamed concrete. A non-linear relationship between the compressive strength and density of foamed concretes are found from both experimental and numerical investigations. The porosity and types of air-voids in foamed concrete have a profound effect on its loading bearing capacity, while the micro-porosity seems to have less influence on the loading bearing capacity of the material at a given uniform mortar particle size. Numerical results obtained from DEM simulations suggest the following strength-porosity model for fly ash based geopolymer foamed concrete: A tight correlation between experimental and numerical techniques can help both complement laboratory testing and further enhance the understanding of the mechanical behaviour of foamed concretes for practical design purposes. Funding support from the