Titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) has been the chemical precursor of virtually all titanium metal commercially produced to date. It is a key intermediate species in both the Kroll and the Hunter processes. This Chapter explains how titanium tetrachloride is produced via fluidized bed or molten salt chlorination, and subsequently purified to the quality required by titanium sponge manufacturers. The Chapter also provides an introduction to the production of purified titanium dioxide (TiO2), which is used as precursor in a number of experimental processes for titanium production.The authors would like to thank their colleagues Ganlin Wang and Yves Pépin for their corrections and comments. This document is published with the kind permission of Rio Tinto Iron and Titanium. Titanium tetrachloride (TiCl This Chapter describes the two chemical processes used to produce TiCl Emphasis is placed on practical and technical information in order to provide the reader with a general understanding of the technologies involved, with references to fundamental studies when appropriate. At room temperature (20 Titanium tetrachloride was discovered in 1825 by E.S. George by passing chlorine over titanium carbonitride in a heated glass tube In 1910, M.A. Hunter prepared “pure” titanium metal for the first time by reducing TiCl The breakthrough in commercial scale titanium metallurgy really came in the late 1930s through the work of W.J. Kroll who demonstrated that titanium could be produced by reacting TiCl The development of the TiO Fluidized bed chlorination was adopted by Western and Japanese titanium sponge producers as the Kroll technology became the dominant industrial process in the 1950s and 1960s. On the other hand, titanium sponge plants built in the Soviet Union selected a different technology to produce TiCl As of 2017, seven countries were producing titanium sponge and the estimated world capacity was 277,000 Fluidized bed chlorination is a continuous process in which TiO Although a well-established commercial technology, the carbochlorination of TiO The basic chemical reactions involved in the chlorination process are the following: Reaction and chlorination via carbon monoxide gas A detailed review of chlorination mechanisms is out of scope, but the reader interested in the matter should consult the work of Garmatta et al. The chlorination reactions are exothermic and the process is generally self-sustaining (although air can be added to burn coke and generate more heat). Depending on the size of the unit and the nature of the chlorinated feedstock, the operating temperature is between 900 and 1100 The chlorination kinetics are very fast. Under normal operation, the fluidized bed height of commercial chlorinators (a few meters) provides sufficient residence time to reach complete chlorine conversion, and therefore there is no free chlorine present in the chlorinator off-gas. As explained by Reeves and Reeves Proper fluidization conditions are essential to ensure efficient operation of the chlorinator. The gas injection system, either pipe injectors or nozzles, must provide sufficient pressure drop so that the distribution of chlorine gas is uniform throughout the reactor cross-section. The superficial gas velocity has to be higher than the minimum fluidizing velocity of the bed solids, which depends on the characteristics (particle size, density) of the TiO Since chlorine conversion is complete, once the operating gas velocity is determined, the TiCl Given its high TiO Most impurities found in TiO Calcium chloride (CaCl Deposition of metal chlorides in the chlorinator off-gas duct, which can eventually lead to plugging, is another common process issue in chlorinators. The most likely metal chlorides to cause these problems are iron chloride (FeCl Contrary to other impurities, a significant fraction of silicon dioxide (SiO In natural rutile and synthetic rutile, SiO The physical properties, and more specifically the particle size and porosity, of feedstocks have a major impact on the carry-over TiO Because of its low ash and low hydrogen content, calcined petroleum coke is the preferred source of carbon for fluid bed chlorination After World War II, the Soviets established an industrial process for chlorinating carnallite, a potassium magnesium mineral of the type KCl·MgCl Like for fluidized bed chlorination, coke is used as reductant in the molten salt chlorination process. However, the reaction takes place at lower temperatures, typically in the range of 700–800 The process takes place in either circular or rectangular vessels In commercial chlorinators using the molten salt process, KCl is the main component (70%–80% wt.) of the fresh melt, with NaCl, CaCl The main advantage of molten salt chlorination is its tolerance for high calcium and magnesium containing feedstock. In contrast to fluid bed chlorinator, in which they can defluidize the bed, in the molten salt process, liquid calcium and magnesium chlorides simply become part of the melt. Another benefit of chlorination in the melt is that it can accommodate finer feedstock. According to Garmatta et al. In addition to TiCl The first stage of purification typically consists in the condensation of high boiling point metal chlorides (e.g., FeCl Specific treatments are required to remove AlCl The next stage is the condensation of TiCl Dissolved gases (e.g., Cl As discussed in subsequent chapters in this book, a number of thermochemical and electrochemical titanium processes that use purified TiO Pure TiO Two technologies are used at commercial scale to upgrade TiO The Sulfate process ( Batches of dried and milled ilmenite and/or sulfate slag are attacked with concentrated sulfuric acid. Water and/or steam are added to initiate the reaction. The digestion reaction is vigorous and the temperature rises rapidly to around 200 The Chloride process ( The first stages of the Chloride process to obtain purified TiCl In addition to TiCl