Microbial biodegradation and biodeterioration of cellulose based thickeners is a serious problem in industry. A new tosylic ester of carboxymethyl cellulose (TsCMC) was prepared with anhydride of p-toluensulphonic acid. The TsCMC has improved rheological properties, higher viscosity and pseudoplasticity, superior emulsification properties and decreased wettability compared to parental CMC. The biodeterioration of TsCMC was significantly reduced compared to parental CMC or other commercially used modified cellulose thickeners in water based paint industry. Improved rheological properties combined with low biodeterioration make TsCMC a promising new material for industrial applications with a potential to reduce the use of hazardous antimicrobial agents.Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) is the most important commercial water-soluble cellulose ether derivative. It is inexpensive and widely used in many industrial sectors including adhesives ( In this work a new tosylic ester of carboxymethyl cellulose (TsCMC) was prepared using CMC and anhydride of CMC tosylate (TsCMC) was prepared as an ester of Viscosity was measured on an Anton Paar Physica MCR 301 rotational plate–plate system with a plate diameter of 49.98 IR spectra were recorded on Perkin Elmer Spectrum 100 FTIR spectrophotometer with diffused reflection technique as described previously ( Elemental analysis of TsCMC was performed according to the following standardized methods: SIST EN 13137 for the determination of total organic carbon (TOC) in waste, sludges and sediments, SIST ISO 609 for hydrogen determination with high temperature combustion method, SIST ISO 351 for determination of total sulfur with high temperature combustion method, and ISO 6878 for determination of phosphorus with ammonium molybdate spectrometric method. The samples for the determination of phosphorous were prepared according to SIST EN 13346—determination of trace elements and phosphorus with aqua regia extraction methods. For evaluation of emulsifying efficiency solutions of 5 The dynamic contact angle measurements were performed on FIBRO DAT 1100 Dynamic Absorption Tester. A testing surface was prepared by soaking filter paper with 1% (w/v) water solution of CMC or TsCMC and dried at 45 The biodegradation of TsCMC used as a sole carbon source was measured as an increase in reducing sugar concentration during the incubation, by increase in optical density ( The biodeterioration of TsCMC defined as a process of any undesirable change in the properties of materials caused by organisms was measured as the decrease in viscosity of the growth medium and was tested with cultures of To the best of our knowledge, the tosylation via ester linkage to CMC has not been performed yet. As given in As given in The main focus of this work was to develop CMC derivative with significantly decreased biodegradation and biodeterioration. The results of incubation experiment with TsCMC or CMC as a sole carbon source are given in The results of comparison of biodeterioration of cellulose thickeners that are widely used in water-based paint industry and TsCMC are given in We would like to thank Anja Simčič for help with biodeterioration experiments. This work has been financially supported by