Majority of potash production around the word is still conducted through froth flotation, during the process of which the adsorption of collector on salt crystal surface is one of key points determining the accomplishment of flotation. In this work, the adsorption kinetics and isotherm models of one common collector, Octadecylamine Hydrochloride (ODA), on KCl surface in different saturated salt solutions at different temperature is studied for details. The results show that the adsorption equilibrium time is 4h for ODA adsorbed on KCl surface in all systems at 25°C. High temperature can increase the adsorption quantity, however, the presence of Mg2+ will decrease it. This may be attributed to the property of ‘water structure maker’ for Mg2+ in solutions. The pseudo-second-order model is appropriate to describe the adsorption kinetics for all studied systems. The adsorption isotherm of ODA on KCl surface is much more close to the Langmuir isotherm model than the Freundlich isotherm model. The adsorption process for all the systems need additional energy and the energy requirement increases with the temperature decreasing. In addition, the adsorption in all systems also presents an exothermic process. The randomness at the solid–solution interface becomes less in the KCl-MgCl2 and KCl-NaCl-MgCl2 saturated solutions than in KCl saturated solution. This work provides detailed information of adsorption process of ODA on KCl surface, which may constitute a step forwards in our understanding of froth flotation of KCl and help to improve the flotation recovery at low temperature.Potash is a significant raw material in medicine, food and other chemical industries and most notably finding use as a fertilizer in agricultural Collector, always special surfactant, is comprised of hydrophilic head group and hydrophobic chain. During the process of froth flotation, the hydrophilic head is adsorbed on the surface of salt crystal and the hydrophobic section is captured by the bubble. Then the salt crystal is picked up to the surface with the bubble rising. Therefore, the adsorption of collector at the three-phase point of gas/liquid/solid becomes the key aspect determining the accomplishment of flotation. The selective adsorption of collectors is always involved in the previous works and several models had been proposed, including ion exchange model In this regard, the adsorption of Octadecylamine Hydrochloride (ODA), one common efficacious collector for the flotation of KCl, on KCl crystal surface is investigated in detail. The equilibrium and kinetic data of the adsorption process are then analyzed to study the adsorption isotherms, kinetics, thermodynamics and mechanism of ODA from saturated solution being adsorbed onto the surface of KCl. Different adsorption systems are discussed to study the effect of other salts. This work may promote a further understanding of the adsorption of ODA on KCl surface and provide new insights to improve the flotation at low temperature. Potassium chloride, sodium chloride and magnesium chloride hexahydrate used in this study was of analytical reagent grade purchased from Tianjin Bodi Chemical Limited by Share Ltd. Octadecylamine Hydrochloride (ODA) with purity of 99.0% was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. These reagents were used without any further purification. Millipore water (Milli Q, Millipore Corp., 18.2 MΩ For each adsorption experiment, 10 The obtained value is equal to the concentration of ODA in saturated KCl solution at time The adsorption quantity of ODA on KCl surface in different saturated salt solution with time is depicted in In order to obtain the information of adsorption kinetics of ODA on KCl surface, two common kinetics models, pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order, are used to fit the experimental data. The pseudo-first-order In order to obtain more information about the adsorption behaviors of ODA on KCl surface, the adsorption isotherms in different saturated solutions at different temperature are measured and shown in The mathematical correlation between Different from the Freundlich isotherm model, Langmuir model  Thermodynamic parameters are also evaluated to understand the adsorption behavior of ODA on KCl surface. The thermodynamic constants ( The calculated thermodynamics parameters of adsorption of ODA on KCl surface in different saturated solution at different temperature are listed in In summary, the adsorption process of ODA on KCl surface in different saturated salt solutions at different temperature is investigated in detail. The results show that the adsorption will reach equilibrium after 4 This work was financially supported by the