The effects on the milling quality of bulgur were compared using stone, disc and hammer mills. For each milling system bulgur particles were examined for appearance, surface structure, dimensions (max., min., mean, standard deviations and coefficient of variance), particle size distribution, bulk density and 1000 particle weight. Smooth and regular shaped bulgur particles were obtained using the abrasive stone and disc mills. Stone milled bulgur particles, were not split or glassy, but were opaque. Hammer milling significantly affected the appearance and surface characteristics of the bulgur particles and gave the lowest minimum dimensions and the highest deviation and variance in dimensions. The milling yields for hammer (98.3%) and stone (97.4%) mills were higher than for the disc mill (96.5%). Each mill gave a different distribution between coarse, medium and fine fractions. The highest yield of the coarse fraction (83.1%) was obtained using the stone mill. The results indicate that due to loss of quality, hammer milling is not suitable for bulgur preparation.Bulgur is a wheat product, generally produced from The number of bulgur production plants has increased to nearly 600 worldwide (500 in Turkey, 15–20 in the United States and Canada, 4–6 in the EU, 10–15 in Arabic countries). About one million metric tonnes of bulgur is produced annually in Turkey. This production is 2.5 times greater than pasta, with the annual consumption of about 12 The milling operation, one of the most important steps in bulgur production, is different from milling to produce other granular food products such as flour and semolina. In wheat milling to produce semolina and flour the object is to dissociate the bran from the starchy endosperm. Ideally the separation should occur at starchy endosperm–aleurone layer interface, so that the aleurone, with its high ash content, is excluded from the semolina or flour. However, the aleurone layer, ontogenetically part of endosperm, is separated as part of the bran fraction during milling together with some underlying starchy endosperm ( There is no universal milling method or system for producing bulgur. The two most popular, the Antep and Mut (Karaman) systems, are basically different ( No detailed information on the milling of bulgur has been published. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine and compare the quality and processing effects of stone, disc and hammer mills on the appearance, surface characteristics, dimensions and bulk density of bulgur. Industrially cleaned, classified, cooked, dried and dehulled (removed bran) The stone and disk mills (Günmak South Milling and Screw Conveyor Ind. Co., Gaziantep, Turkey), disc mill (Günmak South Milling and Screw Conveyor Ind. Co., Gaziantep, Turkey) and the hammer mill (Toprakcıoğlu Mills Co., Karaman, Turkey) were typical of those used in bulgur plants. The stone, disc and hammer mills were operated at 400, 400 and 2850 Bulgur was imaged before and after the milling using a Digital Jenoptik 4.1 Exclusiv (4.1 The 1000 particle weights of bulgur were measured using an analytical balance (sensitivity ±0.0001, Shimadzu, Japan). Bulk densities (hectolitre-weight) were measured using a graduated cylinder and an analytical balance. Sieve analyses were performed using 2.20, 2.00 and 0.50 Granular materials are commonly produced by compression, impaction, attrition or rubbing and cutting. Generally compression reduces hard solids to coarse particles with relatively few fines; impaction gives coarse, medium or fine products and attrition yields very fine particles from soft, non-abrasive materials. Cutting gives particles of a uniform size, sometimes with a defined shape, with few or no fines ( In this study, stone (compression and rubbing action), disc (compression, rubbing and cutting action) and hammer (impact action) mills were used to compare their effects on bulgur quality. Both traditionally and commercially bulgur is classified after milling as coarse, middle (Midyat) and fine. The main objective the size reduction of cooked, dried, dehulled and tempered grain is to obtain ovoid or ellipsoidal (ant-head-shaped) particles. The selection of the mill determines the nature of the particles obtained from the treated kernels. During milling the main problems arise from (i) deformation, scratching and formation of burrs on the surface of particles (especially in abrasive type mills), (ii) formation of sharp edges on the particles (the loss of ovoidal shape and smooth surface profile causes adhesiveness, breakage, flour formation and loss of quality) during preparation of pilaf and köfte from bulgur, (iii) loss of translucency and polished appearance, (iv) decrease in yield due to flour formation (particles <0.50 The moisture and protein contents of cooked, dried and dehulled wheat ( The particle surfaces of the stone ( The microscopical appearance of individual bulgur particles is shown in During hammer milling, the appearance and smoothness of the surface of the particles deteriorated ( In comparing milling systems it was important to analyse the length, width and thickness of the bulgur particles. Minimum, maximum, mean, standard deviation and coefficient of variance values of the dimensions ( To compare variability in the dimensions of the bulgur particles from the three mills standard deviations and coefficient of variance (CV) were calculated. The highest standard deviation in the length (±0.573) of the bulgur particles was found for stone milled bulgur ( Bulgur is commercially classified into three sizes, pilaf (coarse), midyat (middle) and köfte (fine) after milling. In this study coarse bulgur was collected over a 2.20 The yield of coarse bulgur from the stone mill (83.10%) was higher than the hammer (82.20%) and disc (31.16%) mills. As expected, the disc mill produced the lowest amount of coarse bulgur due the size reduction effect of the disc mill as discussed earlier ( The yields of the middle bulgur fraction from the stone, hammer and disc mills were 8.30, 8.60 and 30.30%, respectively. The same ranking, stone<hammer<disc, was also obtained for the fine bulgur fraction, 5.87, 7.46 and 35.02%, respectively. The flour (by-product) yield from the disc mill (3.50%) was higher than the stone (2.62%) and hammer (1.70%) mills. Collectively the middle, fine and by-product fractions from the disc mill were the highest due to its compression, rubbing and cutting effects. In practice the choice between stone, disc and hammer mills could be made from sieve analysis results. For example, if producers require coarse bulgur, the stone or hammer mills may be used, although in the case of the hammer mill, the choice based on particle size can only be made by ignoring quality losses, i.e. appearance, etc. of the bulgur. The disc mill would be preferred for the simultaneous production of the three sizes with subsequent sieve classification. Alternatively, increasing the gap between discs of the disc mill could increase the yield of coarse bulgur. The 1000-particle weights from stone, hammer and disc mills were 5.84, 4.57 and 2.30 The comparative evaluation of the stone, disc and hammer mills is summarized in