A finite element method for the flow of dry granular solids through a domain involving a frictional contact boundary is formulated. The granular material is assumed as a compressible viscous-elastic–plastic continuum. Based on the principles of continuum mechanics, a complete set of equations is developed. The resulting boundary value problem is solved by the finite element method in space and by the finite difference method in time. The derivation of the finite element equations and the mathematical framework of the numerical technique are presented, together with two illustrative examples to demonstrate the validity of the technique.Granular flows impact on many natural and industrial processes such as mineral processing and land slides. In many industries, disruption to granular flows is the major cause of inefficiencies, which often involve serious financial penalties. However, unlike the other continuum mechanics disciplines, the flow of granular materials is still not well understood and is scientifically a controversial topic. Granular materials are neither solid nor fluid, but share some characteristics of both, and there is no theoretical model that is widely accepted for such materials at present. Over the last few decades, many research investigations have been carried out worldwide to study the flow of granular materials, including experimental investigations, discrete element simulations and continuum mechanics based modeling. In discrete element simulations Most theoretical investigations on granular mechanics focus on developing proper continuum constitutive equations, which are the equations that distinguish a granular flow from other kinds of material flow. Through the joint efforts of many scientists and engineers, two types of constitutive equations have been developed, namely plasticity models (see for example Due to the special features of granular materials, the governing constitutive equations for granular flows are quite different from those for fluid flows. Consequently, numerical techniques different to those for fluid dynamics are needed for the simulation of granular flows. In this paper, we present a viscous-elastic–plastic model and construct the mathematical framework of a finite element numerical method for the flow of granular materials through a domain involving a frictional boundary. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section two, the complete set of equations for the problem is presented. In section three, an alternative boundary value problem in integral form is established. Then, the finite element approach is used to discretize the problem in space and the resulting system of nonlinear equations is solved by a quasi-Newton method in section four. Finally, two numerical examples are given in section five to demonstrate the validity of the presented method. In viscous plastic models, the stress tensor is assumed to be decomposed into a rate dependent part and a rate independent part, and the constitutive equations relating the stress tensor to the deformation tensor are as follows: The other field equations governing the velocity and stress fields in granular media are the usual stress equations of motion, namely Other conditions which distinguish one granular flow from another are the geometry of the computation domain and the applied boundary conditions. In the present work, we consider the flow of a granular material that occupies the spatially fixed domain To solve the boundary value problem numerically, we first need to derive an integral representation of the boundary value problem. For this purpose, we find the weak form of Eq. For the integral on ∂ On using the boundary conditions Hence, we have derived the following alternative integral form of the boundary value problem: Find In order to solve the boundary value problem numerically, we formulate the problem in an At all interior points and points on ∂ Thus, we have from At any point on ∂ Now, at a typical instant of time To simplify the notation, in the following formulation, we drop the superscript ( The next step is to approximate By substituting Eq. The quasi-Newton method is then used to solve system In order to illustrate the application of the numerical technique, we consider the flow of a granular material through two typical storage structures used in industry, a bin–hopper combination and a converging hopper, using a special kind of constitutive model. In the general constitutive equation     A numerical procedure has been developed within the framework of the finite element method to model the flow of granular material through a domain involving a frictional boundary. The technique can be used to investigate the behaviour of granular flow. Two illustrative examples are presented to demonstrate its viability in terms of correctly encapsulating the flow behaviour of granular materials. The first example shows that the numerical results are qualitatively satisfactory in the sense of capturing the pressure concentration in the transition area of vertical and converging hopper wall. The results also agree with certain results computed using approximation theories. The second example also confirms that the numerical predictions on the converging hopper wall lie between the Walker flow and Walter flow pressures. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council. The authors also wish to acknowledge the referees for their helpful comments and suggestions.