An efficient non-overlapping domain decomposition algorithm of the Neumann–Neumann type for solving both coercive and semicoercive contact problems is presented. The discretized problem is first turned by the duality theory of convex programming to the quadratic programming problem with bound and equality constraints and the latter is further modified by means of orthogonal projectors to the natural coarse space introduced by Farhat and Roux in the framework of their FETI method. The resulting problem is then solved by an augmented Lagrangian type algorithm with an outer loop for the Lagrange multipliers for the equality constraints and an inner loop for the solution of the bound constrained quadratic programming problems. The projectors are shown to guarantee fast convergence of iterative solution of auxiliary linear problems and to comply with efficient quadratic programming algorithms proposed earlier. Reported theoretical results and numerical experiments indicate high numerical scalability of the algorithm which preserves the parallelism of the FETI methods.Duality based domain decomposition methods proved to be practical and efficient tools for parallel solution of large elliptic boundary value problems It has been soon observed that duality based domain decomposition methods may also be successful for the solution of variational inequalities that describe equilibrium of a system of elastic bodies in unilateral contact Our goal here is to exploit the projector to the solution of the “natural coarse problem” to improve numerical scalability of our previous algorithms for numerical solution of contact problems. In particular, it turns out that application of the projectors decomposes the Hessian of the augmented Lagrangian so that it has at most one point of the spectrum outside the span of the spectrum of the dual Schur complement, and that iterative solution of auxiliary linear problems with such Hessian has an optimal rate of convergence with respect to both penalization and discretization parameters. The algorithm preserves all the plausible properties of our duality based algorithms for the solution of contact problems We start our exposition in In The dual formulation is modified in The quadratic programming algorithms that we use are reviewed in Results of numerical experiments that demonstrate the power of our algorithms are given in To simplify our exposition, we have restricted our attention to the frictionless contact problems. However, the algorithm may be extended to the solution of contact problems with Coulomb friction Our exposition of the variational formulation with the basic FETI algorithm for contact problems follows Consider a system of We can also decompose each body into subdomains, assign each subdomain a unique number, and introduce new `gluing' conditions on the artificial intersubdomain boundary Let More general boundary conditions, such as prescribed normal displacements and zero forces in the tangential plane, may be considered without any conceptual difficulties. If there is no secondary decomposition, then finite element discretization of If there is a secondary decomposition, then the continuity of the displacements across auxiliary interfaces requires that Even though The complications mentioned above may be essentially reduced by applying the duality theory of convex programming (e.g. Dostál et al. The Lagrangian associated with problem Now assume that The matrix Even though problem Let us denote To assess our progress, let us compare the distribution of the spectrum of the Hessians Our final step is based on observation that the augmented Lagrangian for problem The idea of using projectors in preconditioning is related to the older idea of preconditioning by projector Our development of an efficient algorithm for the solution of The algorithm that we propose here may be considered a variant of the augmented Lagrangian type algorithm proposed by Conn, Gould and Toint To simplify our notation, let us denote All of the parameters that must be defined prior to the application of the algorithm are listed in Step 0. Typical values of these parameters for our problems are given in brackets. (Simple bound and equality constraints)       end if.  An implementation of Step 1 is carried out by the minimization of the augmented Lagrangian The salient feature of this algorithm is that it deals completely separately with each type of constraint and that it accepts inexact solutions of the auxiliary box constrained problems in Step 1. For parallel implementation it is necessary to keep the factors that form It was recognised earlier that the augmented Lagrangian method may be useful for the solution of contact problems The algorithm has been proved In the rest of this section we shall describe, in more detail, the implementation of Step 1 of An efficient algorithm for the solution of convex QP problems with simple bounds has been proposed independently by Friedlander and Martı́nez If the inequality (General Proportioning Scheme – GPS) Let a feasible (i) If (ii) If The set relation ⊂ is used in the strict sense so that it is satisfied if the set on the left is a proper subset of the set on the right. Basic theoretical results have been proved in  (i) (ii) (iii) Step (ii) of Algorithm GPS may be implemented by means of the conjugate gradient method. The most simple implementation of this step starts from An obvious drawback of the feasible proportioning algorithm is that it is usually unable to add more than one index to the active set in one iteration. A simple but efficient alternative is to replace the feasibilty condition by The algorithm uses the single parameter The performance of the algorithm depends essentially on the rate of convergence of the conjugate gradient method that minimizes In this section, we illustrate the practical behavior of various implementations of our algorithm on the solution of a scalar model problem and on the solution of a semicoercive contact problem of elasticity arising in mining engineering. We have implemented  The solution of the model problem may be interpreted as the displacement of two membranes under the traction The model problem was discretized by regular grids defined by the stepsize The model problem was solved for   These results are completed by The experiments with the model problem were run on a SUN Sparc Ultra1 computer, under SunOS 5.5.1, using the f77 (version 4.0) FORTRAN compiler and double precision. The auxiliary problems were solved by QUACON, a routine developed in the Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Scientific Computation at Unicamp  The performance of our algorithm with various values of the balancing parameter We have also used the algorithm with projectors to the natural coarse grid to solve the problem to the higher feasibility precision The considerably better performance of the algorithm with coarse grid projections is rather surprising if we take into account that the dimension of the coarse grid is only two. Again, as predicted by the theory, we observe no negative effect of high penalization parameter on the performance of the algorithm. We believe that the results indicate that the algorithms presented are efficient. The solution of the contact problem was carried out on a PC-586/200 type computer, DOS operating system, Microsoft We have described a new domain decomposition algorithm for the solution of coercive and semicoercive frictionless contact problems of elasticity. The method reduces the problem to the contact interface so that it directly computes the tractions on the contact interface. The stress and strain distribution may then be obtained by the solution of standard linear problems for each body separately. The approach combines a variant of the FETI method with projectors to the natural coarse grid and recently developed algorithms for the solution of special quadratic programming problems. A new feature of these algorithms is the adaptive control of precision of the solution of auxiliary problems with effective usage of the projections to the natural coarse grid. The implementation of this approach deals separately with each body or subdomain, so that it is suitable for parallelization. Theoretical results are presented that guarantee convergence and high numerical scalability of the algorithm. In particular, the algorithm is shown to be in a sense optimal with respect to both penalization and discretization parameters. First numerical experiments are in agreement with the theory and give further evidence that the algorithms presented are efficient. We believe that the performance of the algorithms may be further improved by adapting the standard regular preconditioners to the unconstrained minimization in faces. The first reported experimental results are encouraging. We believe that the performance of the algorithm may be further improved with preconditioners adjusted to faces. We shall address this issue elsewhere.