The degradation characteristics of various ores and coal types due to particle breakage have been studied by a number of researchers to determine the causes of degradation and its prevention during the handling process from mines to end users. They have used several drop tests to determine the degradation characteristics of each ore and coal such as: critical drop height tests; cushioning tests; different types of impact surface tests; different sample sizes tests; stabilization tests; weathering tests and volume breakage index tests. Researchers have also used a tumbler drum test to measure the attrition or abrasion properties of the material during handling.
                  This review highlights that the fines generation increases during transport from mines to end users due to more large vertical drops, replacing the larger vertical drops with smaller drop heights reduces the fines generation, the cushioning effects with initial fines reduce the degradation of lump size ore during handling, the different impact surfaces have different degradation characteristics, the stabilized ore produced less percentage of fines than the normal ore during handling and the rate of fines generation of coal increases with the period of weathering. The rate of degradation is higher in larger lump size coal compared to smaller lump size. The lump coal dropped from lower heights does not follow a first order breakage process behavior. Volume breakage decreases with the increases of the sample mass.
                  A degradation model was developed with several parameters to predict the total fines generation of bulk materials during handling. The model has the following dimensionless parameters: height parameter, cushioning parameter, surface parameter, stabilization parameter and weathering parameter.A research project was commissioned by the Gladstone Port Authority (GPA) because of the strict particle size requirements of coal exported to India for the COREX steel making process. The COREX process cannot accommodate coal particle sizes below 16 mm. In this research the fines component is defined as the coal fraction that is less than sixteen millimetre particle size. The Mean Particle Size (MPS) of coal is an important factor for the COREX Process because a decrease in the MPS reduces the permeability of the char bed, resulting in gas channelling which drops the hot metal temperature and quality. The COREX technology coal should be sized at + Large coal lumps frequently command better prices than fines, so degradation during transportation and handling can represent a considerable loss in revenue. Many industrial consumers, like the COREX iron making process, demand closely sized coal. The value of blast furnace ore and pellets decreases with an increased amount of fines. Therefore, material handling and transportation equipment should be designed to produce minimum breakage and wear of the material during handling. Between the mine and end user, lump material is subject to a number of mechanical actions which cause degradation. These include: at the mine site – crushing and screening, conveying, stockpiling and rail wagon loading; at the port – rail wagon unloading, conveying, drops at transfer points, screening, stockpiling, reclaiming and ship loading. Degradation was defined by Goodwin and Ramos Tromp and Bushell Fagerberg and Sandberg Devaswithin and Pitchumani Few researchers have undertaken in the past to study the coal degradation process during handling. None of the researchers used the drop tests to identify the factors (critical drop height, cushioning, types of impact surfaces, stabilization and weathering) that affect the coal degradation during handling at the port and mining sites. A degradation model for coal has not previously been developed to predict the total fines generation during handling. The GPA commissioned research confronts an industrial problem that has many facets. The hypothesis of this research work is to identify the factors affecting coal degradation and to develop a degradation model which can predict the total percentage of fines generation during transport through the GPA′s shiploading facility. The model equation takes into consideration several parameters which are closely associated with the degradation problem during handling. The degradation characteristics of lump ore can be simulated under laboratory conditions by studying its breakage characteristics in different test methods as reported by earlier researchers. The laboratory tests are mainly classified into two types: drop tests and tumbler tests. Various drop tests and tumbler test studies reported in the literature have been carried out to determine the following: Critical drop height of lump size ore below which the fines generated is a minimum, Cushioning effects of fines which reduce the ore degradation, Effects of different impact surface types on ore degradation, Effects of different sizes of ore samples on degradation, Stabilization effects on ore degradation. Lump sizes ore are “stabilised” as the internal micro-cracks are used up as the lump is stressed during handling, Weathering effects of coal on degradation, The degradation characteristics of lump size ore in a tumbler drum, and Effects of sample size, sample mass and drop height of the sample with respect to the volume breakage constant. Goodwin and Ramos Fagerberg and Sandberg Discharge from improperly designed bins and stockpiles forces the movement of the loose material to adapt itself to the shape of the storage device instead of the other way around. Enclosed bins must always be discharged through one or more bottom openings. Kvapil Fagerberg and Sandberg Degradation was caused during transportation of sintered ore from the sinter plant in Mindanao Island Philippines to Chiba steel plant as reported by Ooshima et al. Ooshima et al. Vogel and Quass Teo and Waters Teo et al. Several drop test studies were reported by researchers to determine the degradation of lump ore during handling. These drop test studies were Critical drop height tests, Cushioning tests, Different impact surface tests, Tests involving different sample sizes, Stabilization tests and Weathering tests. Fagerberg and Sandberg Ooshima et al. Sahoo Fagerberg and Sandberg Sahoo et al. Ooshima et al. Sahoo et al. Sahoo and Roach Fagerberg and Sandberg The friability of weathering coal was tested by Bird Sahoo The friability of coal was defined by Yancy and Zane Vogel and Quass Fagerberg and Sandberg Sahoo and Roach The volume breakage index is presented in the treatment of volume breakage of material as a first order process. Waters et al. Mass of coal sample remaining in the given size fraction during tumbling test (kg). Breakage rate constant for the given size fraction. Tumbling time (min). Eq. Integrating Eq. It is convenient to express the rate equation in terms of the number of revolutions rather than time. Eq. Teo et al. Initial mass of the size fraction. Mass of the unbroken material after the first drop. Mass of material still in the initial size fraction after Volume breakage constant Therefore, Similarly, for the second drop, For The numerical value of Sahoo  The conclusion from Sahoo When the sample of particles of smaller mass is dropped from a given height, a higher percentage of particles impact on the steel plate, which is at the base of the drop tower. Whereas, with a sample of particles of larger mass dropped from the same height, a higher percentage of particles fall on other particles that have not achieved a static state after impact. Thus the collision of particles in a dynamic state possibly results in a smaller impulse force than the collision of particles on a steel plate. Hence the degradation rate is higher in smaller mass coal samples. An obvious conclusion is that real breakage is a complex process in nature. This agrees with findings of Teo et al. A degradation model was developed by Sahoo The degradation model predicts total fines generated according to the following relationship: The percentage of fines produced as a result of the drops from different heights, when dropping the different types of coal of various sizes The mass percentage of each feed size fraction The mass percentage of each coal type The fines percentage of each feed size fraction The percentage of fines produced during handling of each feed size fraction The percentage of fines increases due to change of weathering period of each feed size fraction The percentage of fines reduced due to cushioning effects of each feed size fraction The percentage of fines reduced due to change of impact surfaces of each feed size fraction The percentage of fines reduced due to stabilization effect of each feed size fraction The number of feed size fractions to be dropped The number of coal types to be dropped The prediction of coal degradation for the cushioning tests (initial 30% fines) using the model for one month weathered South Blackwater coal dropped onto a steel surface from 5 m height is shown in The transportation of iron ore, coke and limestone from mines to steel plant produces unwanted fines, and fines are unacceptable for the COREX iron making process. The value of blast furnace ores decreases with an increase in the amount of fines. The impact forces are the chief factor in producing most of the fines when the lump material falls freely from different heights. Some of the laboratory studies and field studies used to measure the degradation characteristics of the materials during handling have been reviewed. The different experimental techniques used to determine the degradation characteristics of each ore and coal included: Drop tests, cushioning test, different impact surface tests, different sample sizes tests, stabilization tests, weathering tests, tumbling tests and volume breakage index test. The lumpy materials could be reduced by two mechanisms during handling from mines to steel plant, these being volume breakage and surface breakage. Cushioning effects reduce the degradation of lump ore significantly during handling. Most of the researchers suggested that larger drop heights should be avoided to reduce the degradation, and be replaced by multiple smaller drop heights. The rate of degradation was higher in larger lump sizes compared to smaller lump sizes. The lump coal dropped from lower heights does not follow a first order breakage process behavior. Volume breakage decreases with the increases of the sample mass. A degradation model was developed with several parameters to measure the total amount of fines generation caused by the bulk materials handling process. The author wishes to thank the management of Gladstone Port Authority for funding and use of their coal samples for this research work.