The clustering of mineral occurrences and their spatial associations with particular geological features are critical aspects of mineral distributions for exploration and understanding ore genesis. Variations in the degree of clustering of mineral occurrences or geological features can be measured by fractal dimensions, obtained from a shifting box counting method. Spatial associations between mineral occurrences and geological features can be quantified by the weights of evidence (WofE) method using the contrast value, which increases with the strength of the spatial relationship. A new method is proposed to evaluate mineral occurrence distributions by combining the power of fractal analysis of clustering with the WofE approach. The method compares the correlation between the variation in degree of clustering of mineral occurrences and a geological feature in a study area, with the contrast value of the same feature. The possible outcomes can be simplified into four scenarios, depending on whether the correlation in variation of clustering and the contrast are high or low, respectively. Each outcome has specific exploration implications. If either a high correlation in variation of clustering or a high contrast value is obtained, the geological feature can be used for exploration targeting.
                  The integrated fractal and WofE approach is applied to copper occurrences in the Proterozoic Mount Isa Inlier, NW Queensland, Australia, which hosts large numbers of copper deposits (1,869 occurrences), including the world class Mount Isa copper deposit. Variation in clustering of copper occurrences has a positive correlation with variation in clustering of fault bends (R
                     =0.823), fault intersections (R
                     =0.862) and mafic rocks (R
                     =0.885). WofE results indicate that the copper occurrences are spatially associated with fault intersections and bends and with mafic rocks. Analyses were carried out separately for the two major lithostratigraphic sequences in the Inlier, the Eastern and Western Successions. The Western Succession copper occurrences are apparently more clustered than those of the Eastern Succession, which may reflect a lower degree of exploration and/or geological factors. The association of copper occurrences with mafic rocks compared with fault bends and intersections is greater in the Eastern Succession, which may reflect genetic factors. Correlations in the variation of clustering of mineral occurrences and geological features have a linear relationship with the contrast values, and the spatial association between all geological features and copper occurrences constitute high correlation/high contrast cases. The linear relationship suggests that the geological features that control the clustering of the copper occurrences could be the same features that control their localization.Perhaps the most obvious feature of any map of mineral deposits is that they exhibit some degree of clustering. Following Fractal analyses of clustering of mineral deposits have generally attributed a single, global fractal dimension to the data sets studied. This approach cannot give a spatial context to the clustering of mineral occurrences within the study area and does not indicate variations in clustering. By contrast with fractal analysis of clustering of mineral deposits, the weights of evidence (WofE) approach emphasizes spatial context by focusing on geological features that may have localized mineral deposition, and this method has been widely applied to exploration (e.g., Determination of how clustered mineral occurrences are and their spatial association with particular geological features is critical for exploration and ore genesis. These characteristics of mineral occurrences can be interpreted in terms of potential controls on the distribution of the occurrences and can be used to rank these controls. The primary aim of this study is to present and test a new method of analyzing mineral deposit distributions that combines the power of the fractal geometry to describe the clustering of mineral deposits, with the weights of evidence approach that describes their spatial associations. The method is applied to copper mineralization in the Mt. Isa Inlier, NW Queensland, Australia. Ancillary aims of the study are to establish whether copper deposit distributions can be described by fractals and to examine the spatial variation in degree of clustering of the copper occurrences. The approach of this study addresses a critical question for understanding the genesis of mineral deposits and for exploration: Are the features that controlled the degree of clustering of the copper occurrences the same features that localized them? The Mount Isa Inlier is selected for this study as it contains a wide range of base and precious metal deposits coupled with a long exploration history and because the geological and mineral data are appropriate for analyzing the spatial distribution of mineral occurrences. Copper is particularly suitable because of the large number of mineral occurrences. The Mount Isa Inlier, in NW Queensland, Australia, is a significant Proterozoic base metal province covering an area in excess of 50,000 km The Mount Isa Inlier is divided into three tectonic units ( Rocks in the Mt. Isa Inlier recorded two major orogenic events: the Barramundi Orogeny (ca. 1870 Ma) and the Isan Orogeny (ca. 1600–1500 Ma); ( The distribution of the cover sequences, and their propensity to host copper deposits, varies throughout the Inlier. The copper deposits are hosted within both cover sequence 2 and 3 rocks. In the Western Succession, the Lawn Hill platform, which hosts the Lady Annie copper deposit ( Both stratigraphy and structure have been suggested as controls on copper mineralization in the Mount Isa Inlier (e.g., Copper mineralization may have occurred late in the Isan Orogeny with timing suggested as syn-D In the Western Succession, the source of the copper for the world class Mount Isa copper deposit and the significant Mammoth and Esperanza deposits in the Gunpowder area has been attributed to the Eastern Creek Volcanics (  The spatial distribution of 1,869 copper occurrences was examined on the basis of the Queensland Mineral Resources Database, MINOCC ( Fault bends, fault intersections and mafic rocks were investigated as potential controls on copper mineralization as they had already been shown to be important factors for copper mineralization ( The log–log approach was used to find the box counting fractal dimension ( A graph of log( A study area of 506.6 km A contour map was generated to visualize the variation in the fractal dimension across the study area ( The degree of spatial association between features on two or more binary maps can be quantified by the contrast value in WofE analysis ( Weights of evidence analysis was performed on the data using the MapInfo-Spatial Data Modeller © software package (Avantra Geosystems) to determine the spatial correlation between copper occurrences and the same geological features examined in the fractal analysis. Buffers around the features were varied from 0 to 3 km to determine the buffer distance that gave the optimum contrast value, as judged by the maximum value. A confidence value was also calculated for each contrast value, calculated as the contrast value divided by its standard deviation ( Degrees of clustering were determined for selected geological features by their fractal dimension in each of the shifting boxes and then compared to the clustering of mineral occurrences in the same boxes by Pearson's correlation coefficient. The spatial association of these geological features with the copper occurrences was measured by their contrast. Fractal analysis of clustering was combined with the weights of evidence approach by plotting the correlation coefficient for the variation of clustering against the contrast value for each geological feature. Four schematic maps representing the range of possible outcomes are superimposed onto the graph for such a plot in As this study deals with spatial data analysis, the quality of the input data is critical to generating and interpreting the results accurately. Potential limitations include variations in the quality and homogeneity of mapping, the degree of outcrop, and that the study was only done in 2D ( The quality of mapping should not be a problem since only mafic intrusive and extrusive rocks have been used in the analysis, and there is no reason to doubt that the mapping identified such distinctive rocks correctly. The issue of the homogeneity of the mapping was addressed by using only geological data from the Northwest Queensland Mineral Province Report ( The Palaeozoic and younger rocks that overly the Proterozoic Inlier in places could, potentially, have some bearing on the results. Any such effects of cover can not be easily quantified. This study compares copper occurrences with geological features, and there is no clear evidence to suggest that cover affects the distribution of the copper occurrences more than the geological features or vice versa. Confidence in the value of the fractal dimension would be diminished by increasing levels of cover, but it is not clear whether the value of the fractal dimension would change as a result. Although the weights of evidence method is sensitive to cover due to areas that contain neither mineral deposits nor the feature being examined ( The global fractal dimension box counting method for all copper occurrences in the study area ( Fractal dimensions calculated for the copper occurrences by the shifting box counting method in the ∼ Correlations between the variations in clustering of the copper occurrences and the variations in clustering of the fault bends and intersections and between variations in clustering of copper deposits and mafic rocks within the Eastern and Western Successions are listed in Results from the weights of evidence analysis are listed in  The global fractal dimensions in  The correlations between the clustering of copper occurrences and geological features listed in The weights of evidence analysis indicates that there are strong spatial relationships between the copper occurrences, fault bends and intersections and mafic rocks (  Fault bends and intersections may thus have a major influence on both the spatial association and the clustering of the copper occurrences in the Mount Isa Inlier. Though the results indicate that the spatial relationship between the faults and the copper occurrences is stronger in the Western Succession than the Eastern Succession, their control on the copper occurrences in the Eastern Succession is also significant. The differences between the Eastern and Western Successions appear to be real and suggest that differences exist in the role of the faults in the hydrothermal mineralizing process ( The results of this study raise questions about the processes that controlled both the spatial association and clustering of the copper occurrences. While some of the features used in the fractal and the weights of evidence analyses show high fractal dimension correlations and contrast values (e.g., fault bends and fault intersections in the Eastern Succession), the values are not high enough to imply that any of these factors individually played an exclusive part in the clustering and localization of the copper occurrences. The significant relationship between the results of the fractal and weights of evidence analyses has potential exploration relevance. Four possible implications from combining fractals and weights of evidence as outlined in For geological features with high fractal dimension correlation and high contrast (in the top right of For features with high fractal dimension correlation and low contrast (top left of For features with low fractal dimension correlation and high contrast (bottom right of For features with low fractal dimension correlation and low contrast (bottom left of These outcomes are possibly most relevant to guiding brownfields mineral exploration at the regional scale, and they may be used to re-evaluate areas of previous exploration ( Future research should focus on subdividing mineral occurrences by style of mineralization. Consideration of the different styles of mineralization may provide further insights into what factors controlled the clustering and localization of the mineral occurrences. However, styles of mineralization are known only for the largest deposits. The conclusion that the features that controlled the clustering of the occurrences are the same that controlled the localization requires additional testing for different commodities and geological features in other study areas. Clustering of mineral deposits and their spatial association with selected geological features are basic attributes of mineral deposit distribution that have implications for exploration and understanding ore genesis. This study suggests a method for evaluating the degree of clustering and spatial association simultaneously. In this method, the correlation between spatial variations in degree of clustering of mineral occurrences and geological features is compared with the spatial association of the occurrences with the same geological features, as measured by contrast values. This integrated fractal analysis and weights of evidence method was tested on the copper occurrences in the Mt. Isa Inlier. These copper occurrences have a better-defined fractal distribution than any previously analyzed mineral occurrence populations. However, there are important spatial variations in the degrees of clustering. Significant spatial associations occur between the copper occurrences, fault bends and intersections and mafic rocks, in both the major lithostratigraphic divisions of the Inlier, the Eastern and Western Successions. Variations in the degree of clustering of these geological features correlate with variations in the clustering of the copper occurrences. The higher degree of clustering (lower fractal dimension) observed in the Western Succession may be due to either or both relative lack of exploration and geological factors. Slight differences in the spatial relationships between the Eastern and Western Successions, which are also seen in the respective styles of mineralization, suggest differences in mechanisms of copper mineralization. This paper is published with the permission of the Chief Executive Officer, predictive mineral discovery Cooperative Research Centre (