Five quaternary ammonium salt Gemini surfactants 2-hydroxyl-propanediyl-α,ω-bis (alkyldodecyl ammonium chloride) (n-3(OH)-n, where n represents hydrocarbon chain lengths of 10, 12, 14, 16, and 18) were synthesized and characterized by 1H NMR. Surface activity, adsorption and aggregation behaviors of these cationic Gemini surfactants were investigated by methods of measuring equilibrium surface tension, dynamic surface tension and transmission electron microscope (TEM). The critical micelle concentration (CMC) decreased with an increase in hydrophobic chain length, while the surface tension at the CMC (γCMC) showed little change. With TEM measurements, formations of vesicles in n-3(OH)-n (n=16, 18) solutions occurred and vesicles dimensions depended on their n values. Moreover, data obtained were analyzed in accordance with Word-Tordai equation, and the diffusion coefficients for ionic liquid molecular adsorption in the initial stage and final stage under different concentration were figured out respectively. The results indicated that the adsorption process was controlled by a diffusion step at low surfactant concentration while by a mixed kinetic-diffusion adsorption mechanism at high surfactant concentration.Gemini surfactants containing two hydrophobic chains and two hydrophilic groups in one molecule have attracted more and more attention. The spacer group is a unique component in Gemini surfactant molecule, which strongly tightens the connection and reduces the electrostatic repulsion between the hydrophilic groups. Thus it is more probably for the alkly chain to generate stronger hydrophobic force. Those combined is the root cause of spacer group's superior properties in comparision with traditional single-headgroup and single-alkyl chain surfactants. Given this, it is possible to obtain different functional Gemini surfactants through changing its component, hydrophobic chain, spacer group length, spacer group softness and introducing specific functional groups depending on factual need. Those changes of factors enrich structure of and add superior function to Gemini surfactants. Introducing hydroxyl into traditional Gemini surfactants could effectively enhance its aggregation ability, promote the viscoelastic wormlike micellar systems growth and enhance the system's viscoelasticity. Rosen and Liu, found that Geminis with a flexible, hydrophilic spacer appear to aggregate more readily than Geminis with a rigid, hydrophobic space. Their shorter homologs are also more surface active exhibited better surface active properties than those having a rigid, hydrophobic spacer Surfactants could change interface property significantly and adsorb onto the interface results in decreased surface tension, which is the foundation for its widespread application in commodity chemicals, agrochemicals, oil exploration and food processing In this article, a series of Gemini quaternary ammonium salt surfactant 2-hydroxyl-propanediyl-α,β-bis(alkyl dimethyl ammonium chloride)(abbreviated as The chemicals Add hydrochloric acid to a stirred solution of All the products are characterized using The surface tension of the aqueous solution of the Gemini surfactant were measured with a Power Each JK99C tensiometer by the Wilhelmy plate technique. The dynamic surface tension was measured using a Kruss BP100 bubble-pressure tensiometer, necessary to blow a bubble in a liquid from the tip of a capillary. The measurements were conducted with effective surface ages ranging from 5 Structures of surfactant aggregates in solutions were studied using JEOL JEM-1011 transmission electron microscopy. In addition, all of the surfactant solutions were freshly prepared in doubly distilled water, and all of the measurements were performed at 25 Static surface tension was measured to evaluate the surface activity of Gemini surfactants. In The saturation surface excess concentration, Γ here, γ denotes the surface tension, R is the gas constant (8.31 Experiments found that the concentrated 16-3(OH)-16, 18-3(OH)-18 aqueous solutions was in colloid state, as shown in As shown in To investigate the kinetics of adsorption for the As can be seen from In addition, for the shortest homologs (n The Word-Tordai equation can describe well the diffusion-controlled adsorption on freshly surface where γ where E When the ratio of the diffusion coefficient in initial stage (D For one certain surfactant, the absolute gradient’ value of the plots in The diffusion coefficient of five Gemini surfactants’ solutions in initial stage D A series of cationic Gemini surfactants The work was supported by the