The Sudbury Structure, formed by meteorite impact at 1850 Ma, consists of three major components: (1) the Sudbury Basin; (2) the Sudbury Igneous Complex, which surrounds the basin as an elliptical collar; and (3) breccia bodies in the footwall known as Sudbury Breccia. In general, the breccia consists of subrounded fragments set in a dark, fine-grained to aphanitic matrix. A comparison of the chemical composition of host rocks, clasts and matrices indicates that brecciation was essentially an in-situ process. Sudbury Breccia forms irregular-shaped bodies or dikes that range in size from mm to km scale. Contacts with the host rocks are commonly sharp. The aspect ratio of most clasts is approximately 2 with the long axes parallel to dike walls. The fractal dimension (Dr)=1.55. Although there appears to be some concentration of brecciation within concentric zones, small Sudbury Breccia bodies within and outside these zones have more or less random strikes and steep dips. Sudbury Breccia bodies near an embayment structure tend to be subparallel to the base of the Sudbury Igneous Complex. Sudbury Breccia occurs as much as 80 km from the outer margin of the Sudbury Igneous Complex. In an inner zone, 5 to 15 km wide, breccia comprises 5% of exposed bedrock with an increase in brecciation intensity in embayment structures. Sudbury Breccia may be classified into three types based on the nature of the matrix: clastic, pseudotachylite and microcrystalline. Clastic Sudbury Breccia, the dominant type in the Southern Province, is characterized by flow-surface structures. Possibly, a sudden rise in pore pressure caused explosive dilation and fragmentation, followed by fluidization and flowage into extension fractures. Pseudotachylite Sudbury Breccia, mainly confined to Archean rocks, apparently formed by comminution and frictional melting. Microcrystalline Sudbury Breccia formed as a result of the thermal metamorphism, of the North Range footwall, by the Sudbury Igneous Complex. This produced a zone, approximately 1.2 km wide, wherein the matrix of the breccia either recrystallized or, locally, melted. An overprint of regional metamorphism obliterated contact effects in the South Range footwall. The Ni–Cu–PGE magmatic sulphide deposits may be classified into four types based on structural setting: Sudbury Igneous Complex–footwall contact, footwall, offset, and sheared deposits. Sudbury Breccia is the main host for footwall deposits (e.g., McCreedy East, Victor, Lindsley). Sudbury Breccia locally hosts mineralization in radial (e.g., Parkin and Copper Cliff) and concentric (e.g., Frood–Stobie) offset dikes.Sudbury Breccia (SB), also known as Frood breccia Early ideas as to the process that formed SB include: foundering of the crystalline basement under the weight of the SIC Following the meteorite impact theory for the formation of the Sudbury Structure The numerous references to SB are widely scattered throughout the literature. The aim of this review is to summarize and interpret the features, distribution, classification, economic significance, mechanisms of formation and origin of SB. Locations referred to in the text are shown in The Sudbury Structure, formed by the Sudbury Event at 1850 Ma The Sudbury Basin is filled by rocks of the Whitewater Group which consist of the following four formations, in ascending order: Onaping, Vermilion, Onwatin and Chelmsford The SIC Rocks to the west, NW, north, and immediately to the NE of the SIC consist of Archean gneisses, migmatites, granites and volcanic rocks of the Superior Province (>2500 Ma). The North Range is partly fringed by rocks of the Levack gneiss complex Supracrustal rocks of the Huronian Supergroup (2450–2219 Ma; Historically, the Sudbury Structure was interpreted as the product of explosive volcanism (e.g., Prior to the Sudbury Event (1850 Ma; After the Sudbury Event, the central and southern parts of the Sudbury Basin were openly folded about NE-trending axes and more widely spaced NW-trending axes Sudbury Breccia forms irregular-shaped bodies or dikes with contacts which are either straight Sudbury Breccia bodies range in length and width from mm-scale veins to that of a breccia belt referred to by Based on detailed maps (scale=1:40) at eight sites (see The orientation of fragment long axes, as measured in map view, are depicted in rose diagrams Average aspect ratios ( The average roundness of the fragments for the eight sites ranges from subrounded to well rounded The size distribution of clasts in certain fragment populations, including SB  Sudbury Breccia bodies tend to follow zones of structural weakness such as lithologic boundaries, faults, joints and foliations In the footwall of the South Range, discontinuities such as bedding in sedimentary rocks and faults, strike northeasterly suggesting that most SB bodies in this area should also strike to the NE. In the Footwall of the North Range, in the predominately granites, gneisses and migmatites of the Superior Province, discontinuities are more or less randomly oriented and this should result in randomly oriented breccia bodies  In an area in the North Range, which extends from approximately 6 km NE of Strathcona mine to 1.5 km SW of the mine, most SB dikes strike northeasterly and lie in a belt with the same trend, while other dikes have an E–W trend It is difficult to portray accurately the distribution of SB from published reports and maps because of variations in rock exposure from place to place, the use of different map scales and the uneven recording of SB occurrences by various field geologists. For example, some investigators show relatively large areas on maps as SB without indicating what percentage of the exposed rock is actually brecciated while others indicate breccia localities as a single point regardless of the size of the body. The difficulty of quantifying SB can be appreciated when breccia bodies smaller than 50×50 m must be shown as a point on a 1:50. 000 scale map such the Sudbury Geology Compilation Map According to     To the writers' knowledge, the only published study that attempts to quantify the distribution of SB is that of The distribution map of SB Although SB exposures along Highway 144, NW of the SIC, apparently display specific spacial concentrations, more field work is required in order to determine if these exposures are laterally continuous and to prove the suggestion that SB, in the North Range footwall, is disposed in concentric zones. In the footwall of the South Range, SB occurs in an inner zone known as the Frood Belt or South Range Breccia Belt. More distal belts, if they existed, would have been obliterated by subsequent Grenvillian tectonism. Several classifications have been proposed for SB but no single scheme has been widely adopted. As the classifications are based on a variety of criteria, it is not always possible to correlate the various types between classifications. The terminology may be influenced by the model (endogenic vs. exogenic) the author accepts for the origin of Sudbury Structure. Some investigators Early workers did not recognize SB as such. For example  According to     A three-fold classification of SB, based on the nature of the matrix, is proposed here. It similar to that of The name “clastic” is applied to this type of SB because of the clastic nature of the matrix Steeply dipping arcuate flow surfaces Rocks of the clastic SB type have been affected, to a varying degree, by regional tectonometamorphism. Fragments are locally tectonically elongated (e.g., Frood belt). Crystalloblastic micaceous minerals impart a schistosity of varying intensity. Late chlorite pophyroblasts locally cut across the foliation Two other types of “breccia”, which should not be confused with clastic SB, occur in rocks of the Huronian Supergroup in the Sudbury area. The types are sedimentary intrusions, and breccias associated with diabase bodies. Sedimentary intrusions occur throughout the Espanola Formation. They consist of remobilized sedimentary material that was emplaced under fluid condition as sills, dikes Pseudotachylite SB resembles pseudotachylite from the Vredefort Structure, South Africa The dark colour of the aphanitic matrix appears to be due, at least in part, to finely disseminated opaque material. Shades of grey and red occur locally. Clasts are mainly subrounded, but may locally be angular In the North Range, footwall rocks adjacent to the SIC have undergone contact metamorphism in a zone as much as 1.2 km wide. Basement rocks in the zone are characterized by stubby, decussate, recrystallized plagioclase grains, whose diameter decreases from 0.33 mm very close to the contact to 0.06 mm furthest away A total of 182 thin sections of SB matrix (courtesy of Inco Ltd.) were examined in an area near Levack mine, which extends 1.1 km along the base of the SIC and 500 m into the footwall. In an inner zone, 60 to 140 m wide, a mosaic of twinned plagioclase grains Most SB clasts are derived from local host rocks. However, petrography alone does not allow proper genetic characterization of very fine-grained and aphanitic matrices, even though they commonly contain fragments of local host rocks. It is for this reason that several researchers (e.g.,    In conclusion, geochemical research on SB supports an in-situ, cataclastic milling to frictional melting process for the formation of SB. Compelling chemical evidence for magmatic, fenite The Ni–Cu–PGE magmatic sulphide deposits of the Sudbury Structure may be classified into four types based on the structural setting SIC–footwall contact deposits lie at or near the basal contact of the SIC with the underlying footwall rocks. The principal host rocks for these deposits are the Sublayer and Footwall Breccia. The Sublayer, a discontinuous unit whose thickness (0 to 700 m) is controlled by the topography of the footwall surface, is thickest in “embayments” or troughs, which plunge hundreds of meters down-dip. Footwall deposits consist of veins or dikes of massive sulfide and occur in the footwall as much as 700 m from the base of the SIC. Sudbury Breccia is the main host rock. Although there are approximately 10× as many SIC–footwall contact deposits as footwall deposits, the relatively high PGE grades in the footwall deposits greatly enhance their value. Footwall deposits are best developed in the Levack embayment (North Range); examples of deposits hosted by SB include the McCreedy West mine Although most of the ore in the Lindsley mine (South Range) is of the contact type, there are also footwall ore bodies. The largest footwall orebody, which lies within granite of the Murray Pluton, is enclosed by an envelope of SB. Narrow protrusions of ore apparently follow individual veins of SB which occur throughout the granite. According to The offset dikes occur in the footwall and either extend radially from the outer margin of the SIC or are concentric to the margin. Apparently, quartz diorite magma was injected into fracture zones that locally contained SB. Several of the major deposits of the Sudbury area occur within the offset dikes. Sulphide mineralization in the Milnet mine, located at the distal end of the Whistle radial offset dike, occurs in quartz diorite and SB Footwall Breccia is a xenolithic-bearing rock with a metamorphic-textured matrix As Footwall Breccia occurs mainly in the North and East Ranges, where the exposed crustal level is up to 5 km higher than the South Range,  Although virtually all investigators agree that the SB is a product of the Sudbury Impact Event (1850 Ma), there is a lack of unanimity as to the exact mechanism of formation of the SB types. In this section, possible mechanisms for the formation of SB are presented. This is followed by a discussion of several topics, which are relevant to an understanding of the origin of SB, including diatremes, breccias and the cratering process and the origin of pseudotachylite. The formation of clastic SB may be considered in terms of two processes: rock fragmentation and material flowage. In general, fragmentation is the result of brittle deformation which is promoted by rapid strain rate, high pore pressure, low temperature and low confining pressure. The unique and probably dominant factor associated with meteorite impact is the ultra-rapid strain rate imposed on the target rocks by the shock wave. This wave also deposits a considerable amount of heat in the rocks they compress, leading to vaporization of pore water, which significantly raises the pore pressure, resulting in the expansion and shattering of the rock The flow surfaces, in clastic SB, are interpreted to have formed by lamellar convection flow. At an early stage of the brecciation process, flow was probably turbulent and the breccia matrix may have resembled experimentally produced convection flow ( The walls of some bodies of clastic SB are locally penetrated by fractures which are filled by SB matrix. New fragments are in the process of being detached from the walls. Some large clasts, cut by matrix-filled fractures, are in the process of splitting. Long matrix-filled fractures, branching off from the main bodies, have straight walls suggesting that the breccia material was not actually derived from them. Instead, breccia matrix was forcefully injected into the offshoots from the “breccia-producing” or “feeder” bodies. Truncation of flow-surfaces at the branch lines indicates that the offshoot dikes are younger than the feeder bodies. Apparently, fracture propagation, wall and clast fragmentation, flowage and clast rounding were on going processes of unknown duration.  Field work and studies of radar imagery have led other workers to question the very existence of the faults  The apparent lack of prominent fault planes associated with pseudotachylite SB poses the question as to how breccia could form by comminution and frictional melting along slip planes. The subrounded clasts and the presence of local flow surfaces suggests that some of the pseudotachylite SB may have formed in a manner similar to that of clastic SB.    The nature of pseudotachylite, and how it formed, has been the subject of controversy (e.g.,  Within the Outer Hebrides thrust zone there are, locally, large masses of fault breccia which consist of country rock clasts, commonly rounded and rotated, set in a matrix of pseudotachylite. These masses are reminiscent of bodies of pseudotachylite SB. According to A frictional experiment by A plausible answer to the question as to whether pseudotachylite can form as a result of shock waves, as well as fault slip, may lie in the interpretation of so-called shock veins. These are dark, thin (≪1 mm) veins found in certain meteorites and impact structures.  In summary, SB is a product of the dynamic processes related to meteorite impact. Pseudotachylite SB is probably formed by a combination of comminution and melting, due to microscopic slip along numerous small fractures, and possibly by displacement along yet to be recognized faults. Clastic SB appears to be the product of comminution. The sudden heating of pore water may have triggered explosive dilation, fluidization and flowage. Rock type and pore fluid content (a function of rock type), are important factors which determine the type of SB which develops. Pseudotachylite SB formed in the relatively dry gneisses and migmatites of the Superior Province, whereas clastic SB developed in the relatively wet supracrustal rocks of the Southern Province. Contact metamorphism of footwall rocks of the North Range, by the SIC, converted pseudotachylite SB to microcrystalline SB. SB is the most conspicuous feature, attributed to the Sudbury Impact Event, in the footwall rocks surrounding the SIC. The most distal exposures apparently define the outer margin of the impact structure. The possible disposition of the breccia in concentric zones suggests an analogy to multi-ring basins on the moon. Meteorite impact apparently triggered the formation of unique, world-class Ni–Cu–PGE mineral deposits at Sudbury. SB hosts significant deposits in the footwall rocks and in the offset dikes. Accordingly, an appreciation of the nature, origin and distribution of SB is of practical importance in mineral exploration. We thank Robert W. Grant and John G. Spray for reading an early version of the paper and A.M. Killick and an anonymous reviewer who acted as referees for the journal. Any errors or omissions rest with the authors. Simon Hardy and Liu Houxiang provided field assistance, Lorraine Dupuis and Nicola Young drafted the diagrams and Roxanne Mehes assisted with the makeup of the paper. We are indebted to numerous investigators in industry, government and academia, who have grappled with the problems of Sudbury geology for over a century.