The deformation behaviour of a hanging wall will follow distinct stages related to the changing material properties of the overall rock mass. This changing rock mass behaviour can be due to increasing underground opening size, blasting, changing stress conditions, as well as increasing opening exposure time. This paper examines the deformation behaviour of stope hanging walls due to changing opening geometry. The effect of time on deformation is observed, but is difficult to interpret. Field deformation data are presented from open stope hanging walls at Mount Isa Mine in Australia. Changing deformation response is related to increased opening spans recorded for two stopes. Some modelling studies are also presented which relate modelled elastic deformation near an opening surface to the opening geometry. Based on numerical modelling methods, it is difficult to predict the deformation of a hanging wall surface. This paper presents an approach for interpreting the rock mass behaviour based on the recorded deformation response of the hanging wall to continued mining.The deformation of an underground opening surface is dependent on many factors. For a completed mine opening with a static geometry, ongoing deformation is usually due to changing stress conditions, deteriorating ground conditions, nearby blasting or other effects related to opening exposure time. An underground opening with an active mining face, generally referred to as a stope, has a changing geometry and the deformation with time is predominantly due to increasing the size of the opening. This paper considers hanging wall deformation as the hanging wall size is increased due to continued mining activity, as studied by Milne Several factors influence hanging wall deformation with increased hanging wall size The volume of destressed rock in the hanging wall will increase causing deformation towards the stope opening. The deformation modulus of the rock mass may decrease with continued deformation of the hanging wall, due to deterioration of the rock mass, leading to increased movement. With further deformation, the rock mass may stop acting like a continuous linear elastic material. The factors that influence hanging wall deformation are dependent on the distance to the supporting hanging wall abutments, or supporting walls. A term called the effective radius factor (ERF) is used to quantify the changing hanging wall geometry of a stope. The next section describes the development and application of the ERF term. The ERF term was developed to assess the relative stability of any arbitrary point on a hanging wall surface The hydraulic radius (HR) of a surface is simply the surface area divided by the perimeter. The maximum ERF value usually corresponds quite closely to the hydraulic radius. However, the relation between the two terms varies with the surface geometry. The ERF term can be calculated at any point on an opening surface, where A correlation between deformation and ERF values has been shown for computer modelled elastic deformation Choose a reference plane parallel to the excavation surface being studied. Cut sections through this reference plane and determine elastic deformation of points on the section. Project the points on the reference plane to the excavation surface. Determine ERF values for these points. On each section cut, plot the elastic deformation of points on the reference plane corresponding to ERF values on the excavation surface. Initially, deformations above a 50 A second model was run with a hydrostatic stress field, to better match mining conditions. This run was made to determine if a linear ERF to deformation relation would still be obtained if stresses parallel to the opening were considered. Deformations were modelled at the same locations ( The two stress states modelled represent a range in the stress ratio In all models, the ERF to deformation graph deviated from linearity near the abutments, where the ERF value is close to zero. Abutment compression cannot be accounted for by using the simple ERF factor, which is always equal to zero at abutments. Other model runs were conducted on various simple shapes of single openings in varied stress fields. The deformation of surfaces at varied distances above openings were plotted versus the corresponding ERF value on the surface and in all cases a near linear relation was obtained which diverged from linearity only near the abutments The magnitude of modelled deformation versus corresponding ERF values is only of academic interest since elastic deformations can easily be estimated from computer models. The consistent near linear relation between increasing ERF values and modelled elastic deformation is of interest as a means of interpreting observed field deformations. It is proposed that when a linear relation between the ERF value and the corresponding deformation above the surface is obtained, the rock mass is deforming elastically. When this relation between deformation and the ERF value exceeds linearity, the rock mass is no longer deforming in a simple elastic mode. The next section looks at field deformations, which are much more difficult to model realistically. Hanging wall deformation has not been analysed with respect to time because of the changing conditions due to continued mining. For each of the case histories, data analysis starts with the ‘mining by’ or the undercutting of the extensometer anchors. The term ‘mining by’ an instrument location refers to the point at which the mining front reaches the longitudinal projection of the instrument location. The calculated ERF value for each extensometer anchor and mining step is then plotted against total anchor deformation. Deformation is expressed as total movement from the collar. Based on these graphs, insight into the rock mass response to mining as well as the effect of future mining can be made. The previous section has shown how the effective radius factor of a point on an opening can be related to the elastic deformation of the point above the surface. The next section will look at deformation collected in the field, and show how it relates to mining geometry. Data from several instrumented stoping blocks were collected from the Lead Mine at Mount Isa and two of these case histories are presented The lead–silver–zinc ore body consists of multiple parallel beds dipping approximately 70° to the west. The ore body hanging walls are bedded shales of varied strength, with bedding oriented parallel to the hanging wall. Hanging wall stability and dilution are a priority and a great deal of effort and research has gone into studying and instrumenting stope hanging walls. In general, the ore body hanging wall has three predominant discontinuity sets, described by Windsor et al. Bedding planes are very continuous and weak with little or no cohesive strength and angles of friction typically in the order of 10°. The bedding planes are parallel and form the hanging wall surfaces. Steep north and south dipping joints which are continuous up dip, but tend to terminate on bedding. Steep east dipping joints, often with calcite infilling. The major controlling rock mass properties for the hanging walls are the spacing, strength and continuity of the bedding planes. The main mining methods used in the silver–lead–zinc ore body are open stoping and bench stoping. With these mining methods, large open hanging walls may be exposed which leads to a corresponding concern for the control of hanging wall dilution. A substantial amount of instrumentation data on hanging wall behaviour has been collected at the mine. The closely spaced parallel ore bodies have made access for extensometer instrumentation relatively simple. Hanging wall deformation data have been obtained from several stopes, and two case histories are given in the next section. Bench stope mining operations have been underway for over 15 years at the Mount Isa Lead Mine. A bench stope is created with drifts driven at the top and bottom of the ore block along its entire strike length. Blasting is conducted on the upper overcut bench and mucking is done from the lower bench. A detailed description of the bench stoping method is given by Tucker et al. An extensive hanging wall instrumentation program was implemented for the mining of the initial panel stope in the 8 ore body at Mount Isa Lead Mine ( The final open stope strike length was 71 Mapping was done in the area and indicated bedding plane breaks in the immediate 5 The measured extensometer deformation has been related to the extensometer anchor distance from the supporting abutment, as shown in the longitudinal view (  This instrumentation program gave detailed data on the deformation behaviour of the immediate hanging wall of the 80G3 panel stope. Modelling of this stoping block was conducted to determine if the recorded movements correspond to linear elastic deformation. A 3-D boundary element program (Map3D Virgin stress conditions were input for the 3-D computer modelling, with the maximum principal stress oriented normal to the ore body with a magnitude of 35   The M665 stoping triplet is a group of three stopes—M662, M665 and M667 as shown in This instrumented stope study included 9 extensometers, a rock noise event counter, as well as CSIRO overcoring conducted at two separate stages of mining. The instrumentation of interest in this study are the extensometers located in the stope hanging wall recording deformation due to mining. Four extensometers, 1–3 and 5 were located in the stope hanging wall and recorded deformation due to mining past the instrument anchors. Extensometer 3 was located above stope M665 and was undercut only after the mass blasting of this stope resulting in only one ERF value and corresponding deformation. The backfilled abutment of stope M667 was treated as a rock abutment for calculating ERF values. Extensometers 1–3 monitor deformation 4–8 A limited amount of 3-D boundary element computer modelling has suggested a near linear relation exists between increasing ERF values on a surface and elastic deformation at a set distance above the surface. The magnitude and rate of movement with increasing ERF values will, however, vary with the stress field and elastic properties of the rock mass. This near linear relation between increasing ERF values and deformation above a surface has been observed with field data from two stoping areas at the Mount Isa Lead Mine. In the first case the linear relation between deformation and the ERF value was matched to numerically modelled deformation values. A similar linear trend was observed for both the field data and the modelling. In the second case, the relation between movement and ERF deviated from linearity after a mass blast, indicating the elastic deformation limit had been exceeded. Field data from instruments such as extensometers give the engineer an excellent method of estimating the reaction of the rock mass to mining activity. The major drawback to using extensometer data is the fact that these instruments provide only a local assessment of rock mass behaviour. The ERF value has been used to generate a link between local measured deformation and the position on an opening surface. This allows the local measured rock mass deformation to be extrapolated over the total opening surface. Support design and pillar placement can be optimized based on the expected level of deformation linked to the surface geometry, defined by the ERF value The authors wish to thank Xstrata Mount Isa Mines Limited for permission to publish this paper. The contribution of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) towards this research is also acknowledged.