The assessment of elastic properties in children’s cortical bone is a major challenge for biomechanical engineering community, more widely for health care professionals. Even with classical clinical modalities such as X-ray tomography, MRI, and/or echography, inappropriate diagnosis can result from the lack of reference values for children bone. This study provides values for elastic properties of cortical bone in children using ultrasonic and mechanical measurements, and compares them with adult values. 18 fibula samples from 8 children (5–16years old, mean age 10.6years old ±4.4) were compared to 16 fibula samples from 3 elderly adults (more than 65years old). First, the dynamic modulus of elasticity (E
                     dyn) and Poisson’s ratio (ν) are evaluated via an ultrasonic method. Second, the static modulus of elasticity (E
                     sta) is estimated from a 3-point microbending test. The mean values of longitudinal and transverse wave velocities measured at 10MHz for the children’s samples are respectively 3.2mm/μs (±0.5) and 1.8mm/μs (±0.1); for the elderly adults’ samples, velocities are respectively 3.5mm/μs (±0.2) and 1.9mm/μs (±0.09). The mean E
                     dyn and the mean E
                     sta for the children’s samples are respectively 15.5GPa (±3.4) and 9.1GPa (±3.5); for the elderly adults’ samples, they are respectively 16.7GPa (±1.9) and 5.8GPa (±2.1). E
                     dyn, ν and E
                     sta are in the same range for children’s and elderly adults’ bone without any parametric statistical difference; a ranking correlation between E
                     dyn and E
                     sta is shown for the first time.Cortical bone is an organic structure with mineral comprises approximately 80% of the human skeleton. Pathologies impacting human cortical bone quality include osteoporosis There is a tremendous lack of data on young bone strength and mechanical behaviors: several papers The aim of this study was to obtain ultrasonic wave velocities, dynamic and static modulus of elasticity, and Poisson’s ratio for cortical bone samples from children, and then to compare these results with elderly adult cortical bone samples. Our two-stage study proceeded first by performing experimental ultrasound measurements to assess ultrasonic wave velocities, dynamic modulus of elasticity (  In accordance with the stipulations of the French ethical committee, we studied cortical bone samples from Caucasian patients (5–16 Sixteen elderly adult (+65 We used an ultrasonic protocol specifically developed, to process small and thin samples, and which has been validated on standard materials (plexiglass) The parallelepiped bone sample to be tested was placed in the presumed geometrical center of the bench so that the maximum distance between the transducers and the center was 30 The thickness of the samples estimated by caliper measurements ranged from 1.5 to 3 Two focused broadband transducers at 10 Time of flight (TOF) of the propagating waves was determined in the reflection mode, from the left (respectively right) transducer to the left (respectively right) interface of the sample. The TOF measured between transducers without sample was used as reference. All the thicknesses thus obtained were compared to caliper measurements. Then the longitudinal and transverse velocities were determined in the transmission mode by rotating the bone around the clamp axis so as to change the incidence of the acoustic beam. The emitter was fixed and the receiver could be moved laterally. We define When the incident angle The velocities  Each parameter was assessed by performing the tests in triplicate. From these measurements, the transverse dynamic modulus of elasticity The mass density The US protocol tested the transversal axis of each bone samples, consequently only the transverse dynamic modulus of elasticity is calculated here. The errors of the ultrasonic device without taking into account the uncertainty from the water velocity is 2.25%, which leads to a relative error of 4.55% for the dynamic modulus of elasticity. The mechanical tests were led on fresh frozen bones samples moistened with a PBS solution. We designed a 3-point microbending testing system specifically to deal with such small samples ( To evaluate the cortical bone samples, a span-to-depth ratio of 16:1 is recommended; but in small samples it cannot be achieved. The shortest sample tested here was 14.5 The three point flexion protocol tested the longitudinal axis of each bone samples, consequently only the longitudinal static modulus of elasticity is calculated here. The Shapiro–Wilk test was performed to evaluate the distribution of results, Student’s   The three-point microbending test provided a mean Both tests, parametric and non-parametric show no statistical difference with respect the mass density The assessment of cortical bone mineral status in children via non-radiating and non-invasive techniques using ultrasound techniques may well enhance diagnosis in pediatrics, but their successful use must rely on gold-standard reference values. The aim of the study was first to measure ultrasonic wave velocities ( The ultrasonic method results for the children indicate that When we compared the ultrasonic measurement results for the children with those for the elderly adults (+65 One of the critical points concerning acoustical measurements is the sensitivity of The mechanical measurements performed here found the mean The set-up was inspired from Spatz et al. Ultrasound offers two advantages over static measurements: (i) it is a non-destructive tool; (ii) it can be performed In conclusion, this study contributes a new set of ultrasonic wave velocities and elasticity values for children’s cortical bone. Furthermore, for the first time it provides a ranking correlation between children’s cortical bone elasticity values obtained using two different approaches (acoustical and mechanical measurements). Finally, the comparison performed here with elderly adults’ bone does not support the theoretical optimization hypothesis This study was based on research supported by the French National Research Agency (BioGMID Program ANR under Grant no. 183692 and MALICE Program ANR under Grant no. BS09-032). We thank the Timone Hospital surgery team and the donors or their legal guardians who gave informed written consent to providing their tissues for investigation, in accordance with the French Code of Public Health (Code de la Santé Publique Française) and approved by the Committee for the Protection of Persons. This work benefited from the very fruitful help of Georges Boivin, and Héléne Follet from INSERM U1033 and from UMR-T 9406 Ifsttar/UCBL. We thank Marjorie Sweetko for English language revision.