This article explains the results of the feasibility study about using neutron activation technique via Deferred gamma rays, to analyze the fluorine content in a sample from a fluorspar concentration plant. The theoretical responses of 12 items, constituting the samples have been analyzed. 468 reactions have been obtained from the study with the database EXFOR of these elements with neutrons from an Americium Beryllium source of 1Ci activity.
                  The radioactive decay of 29 products, anticipated from such an activation, has also been analyzed. From these results, a prototype for neutron activation has been designed. The different criteria of the measurement procedure to enable the activation of the fluorspar samples and to record their spectra with minimal interference from the source have been adjusted. A mathematical model of the activation response has been created and validated. The activation method to determine the fluorine content in fluorspar samples proved to be scientifically and technically feasible and verified by the results obtained.The determination of fluorine content in a concentration plant is a problem whose solution is based on conventional chemical analysis. This chemical analysis must be in accordance with ISO standards, as well as other procedures in the industry, for example, the Bidtel Method ( This standard procedure is used in the fluorspar concentration plant of the company MINERSA in Asturias, in NW Spain. Such a method is considered suitable by the industry and its accuracy is appropriate for the purpose of concentration plant management. However, this procedure suffers from an important drawback: the total time needed to ascertain the fluorine concentration in a sample can exceed 24 This problem prevents the setting up of better controls in operating the plant and making the necessary adjustments to maximize performance and production. Therefore, a method of analysis needs to be developed that is valid for sample analysis from different points of the concentration plant, with varying concentration in fluorine and whose results can be achieved in the minimum time possible, so an anomaly in the process can be detected and the necessary steps taken to correct it almost instantly. In a review of analysis techniques of the fluorine concentration the feasibility of using different techniques has been shown. Among others the possibility of using the following has been referred to: ICP-MS, the literature indicates that it is not suitable for fluorine detection. PIXE, this method is not capable of measuring fluorine. RMN, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. It can be used to detect fluorine, because fluorine has a magnetic number that is different from zero. AAS, Atomic Absorption Spectrometry. ( Activation spectrometry, which forms the basis of most routine work in the field of activation analysis, is the combination of neutron activation and gamma ray spectrometry ( The reaction F Since the half life of N In this work, we outline the development of analysis equipment of fluorine in samples taken from different points of a fluorspar concentration plant with a wide range of ore grade especially from 4% to 97% in CaF The device and the developed procedure have been adapted to the following function: detection of fluorine in samples from a concentration plant. The choosing of this method is simple: on the one hand, fluorine determination is needed, and on the other hand, the availability of basic and necessary equipment: the neutron source and the radiation detector. It is only necessary to find and control all potential sources of influence and amplify those that are of interest and minimize any that are harmful.  The isotopic composition of a mineral sample is well-known, and it is used to study the feasibility of determining of the fluorine concentration in a mineral sample. In a fluorspar sample like the one from the studied concentration plant we find the elements listed in The neutrons from the Americium Beryllium source with the interaction of the isotopes of the samples have been analyzed. Activation analyses are done mainly with the measurement of gamma rays due to their high penetration (in contrast to charged particles and X-ray photons), the large number of elements which produces gamma-emitting nuclides, and the existence of high resolution gamma-ray spectrometers which allow the determination of the energy of the gamma rays ( Secondly, those which lead to the emergence of a radioactive element are selected, from among the reactions that have not been previously discarded. This element will decay and will continue its decay after irradiation, and the gamma rays produced during the decay are counted by a conventional system. In this situation, 29 radioactive products have been obtained (NuDat) (   The energy of this radiation is the largest of the theoretical spectrum emitted by the sample so it is easily distinguishable, and valid as a means of analysis. On the other hand, in a fluorspar sample, the 16N only originates from three types of reactions: 16O(n,p)16N, 17O(n,D)16N and 19F(n,α)16N.   Application of isotopic neutron source for activation analysis can be divided into three sections: industrial, scientific, and medical. In industrial application, large quantities of material to be inspected pass through a measurement station made of a neutron source and a gamma detector, both shielded. The detector is connected to an analyzing system which analyzes the results and provides information about the quantity of element(s) sought ( The source used is an alloy of two metals, Americium 241 and Beryllium 9, mounted on a double cylindrical casing of stainless steel. This double capsule has a size of 35 A detector INA (Tl) 2″ diameter and 2″ length is used, and the equipment made up of a photomultiplier detection Canberra 2700P, a high tension source Ortec 556, analog digital converter Canberra 8701, multichannel analyzer Canberra 100, and the Software System 100. Preliminary test and prototype to respond to the energy levels and decay time, deducted in the preceding paragraph, have been designed and produced. The test and prototype include the activation system, displacement and measurement of gamma radiation emitted by the fluorspar sample. The distance between the position of the irradiation sample and the reading position would be small, because of the low half life of 16N of the irradiated sample, 7.13 We have tried to control other parameters, such as the activation grade of the sample, or the gamma emissions level, before using an automatic prototype. In the test a container is used — with the original shielding source of stainless steel, which has the following dimensions: 565 The container is made up of: An internal mobile tube which is used to move the source horizontally, called   A hollow guide, where the sample tube container is moved between the irradiation and reading positions, is a square section. The guide is made up of a plate at each end, when open allowing the entry of the sample tube container and when closed serving as reference to the end in the movement. An upper support where the gamma rays detector is placed also used to introduce samples into the sample tube container. A lower support for the gamma rays detector. An output tube for neutrons emitted by source. A lower shield with a circular section, crossed by the sample tube container, mentioned above. The block 2 or element (6) shows the upper shield which is filled with paraffin wax, its function being to close off and prevent the passage of neutrons so that the operator is safe at all times. In block 3, there are two sample container tubes which are of steel, they have no upper cover and are used to move the samples inside to the hollow guide. Inside they are filled with paraffin wax, except in the center where the sample containers are placed. Under the space occupied by the sample — in the steel surface — a circular hole smaller than the sample container was drilled to prevent the reduction of radiation from source and sample. The operating procedure includes various phases: Place the sample in position. Move the sample to irradiation position. It is guided by the hollow guide to a position facing the source ( Irradiating samples. The sample is placed in front of the source for a time called Moving of the sample to its place in front of the detector ( Reading of the irradiated sample. The prototype is designed so that the sample and source are as near as possible. A lead wall is placed round the detector. The displacement mechanism of the sample is the same as that in the test ( Initial results with the test, The causes were as follows: There appeared in the background readings with energies higher than 3 The activation level of the sample was very low because of the long distance between the neutron source and the sample. On the first point, it was found that the origin of this radiation was the reaction between Americium and Beryllium from the source. In The closeness between the detector and the source is due to the need for displacement time; in as short a time as possible the sample has to be moved from the irradiation position to the reading one. The increase in the thickness of the lead wall around the detector is caused by the high value of the energy that is to be filtered. By increasing the space between the detector and the source the background readings are reduced. In this space lead blocks are placed as a base, to achieve acceptable reading values (< Concerning the second point, the space between the source and the sample must be reduced to increase the fluorspar activation. In the first approach, the element (6) — block 2 — was eliminated and the sample was manually introduced into the tube (4), as illustrated in Two relative positions between the source and sample were tested to activate the samples: Irradiation on the lateral surface sample: the source tube container was moved horizontally, and the sample was moved to the hole created by the source. The irradiation was realized through the lateral surface of the sample container. Irradiation on the lower surface of the sample: the source was returned to center position in the container, and the sample was placed over the source, in direct contact and without any paraffin between them. On this occasion, activation was increased and gamma radiation resulted. In both situations, in the readings, the detector was located below the sample, because it is the only surface, on which there was irradiation. The energies in the study interval of 4500–7500 In With a grade of 97.20% by irradiation of the lateral surface there were 60–62 counts, and when the irradiation was at the bottom, there were some readings from 335 to 350 counts compared with a background reading of 25 counts. With a grade of 36.75%, the reading was 129 counts from irradiation at the bottom. The relationship, signal/background, represented by the values listed above to confirm: There has been a good activation of the sample. It is possible that there is a relation between fluorspar concentration and gamma rays emitted by the irradiated sample. If this information is confirmed we will find a relationship between an ore grade and gamma readings of the activated fluorspar. Modifications in the test would permit the activation of samples, with variable ranges in grade and weights, under safe conditions. On completing work on the prototype we aimed at putting source and sample in direct contact and setting up a repeatable, reliable and synchronized operating system for activation and reading. A shield of sufficient thickness was provided in front of the radiation from the source. This meant slightly increasing the displacement of the sample between the source and the detector. The prototype is shown in The results and measurements, in the predefined energy ranges, on the samples of grades between 4 and 97.20% in CaF In this experiment, it appears that: The correlation is almost linear, as shown in The number of counts in the range of study for the selected sample is extremely low. The number of counts is very low because: The neutron source has a low neutron flow compared with others. The performance of the detector INA (Tl) for energies greater than 2–3 The resolution of the detector for high energy values, such as our range of analysis is low. The count number per channel is very low; it is not more than 3 or 4 counts. For this reason an individual spectrum form does not give any information and does not look as might be expected. A large number of spectrum samples with the same grade, mass and registration are added together to simplify the previous item. The sum of the individual spectrums has been shown in In this picture there is a peak around 6128 Two more peaks appear at two energy levels lower than the previous peak. The distance from the previous peak is 500 The height of this peak is quite greater than that for the photopic. The cause must be sought within the phenomenon of gamma detection in a scintillation detector. The number of gamma rays that interacts inside the scintillation detector by the photoelectric phenomenon is smaller when the gamma radiation energy increases. In fact, it decreases with the cube of energy. However, the phenomenon of forming pairs increases linearly with the energy from about 1 Thus the more important phenomenon (as indicated in the literature about the scintillation detectors), in the spectrum energy of 16N, is pair formation. The area of the spectrum between 3 and 5 The Compton front does not appear in Spectra corresponding to the background readings and readings for the grade samples between 4 and 97% approximately are illustrated in In  To conduct a rigorous study of the data obtained experimentally, in order to quantify the ore grade sample by the number of detected gamma rays, a mathematical model reading of the gamma rays detector has been done. The model includes two simultaneous phenomena: On the one hand, the effect of neutron flux decreasing with distance from the neutron source, On the other hand, the exponential attenuation effect that is suffered by gamma rays emitted by the sample when they travel to the detector. The gamma rays emitted, are attenuated in function of a characteristic coefficient of the sample. According to this model,    The model equation is expressed as: The term The proportion between the reading counts and excited atoms. The proportion between excited atoms and fluorine atoms in the sample. The proportion between excited atoms and the neutrons flow from the source. The proportion between the neutrons flux at a point of the sample, and the distance to the source. The model adjustment via the data set of the experiment has been made, and a correlation coefficient This equation is depicted in The following is a comparison between the ore grade values obtained by chemical analysis and values predicted by the model. In this comparison, three sets of different samples are used: Sample set whose results were used to make the model, Sample set, not used to set up the model and characterized by a mass of about 300 A second sample set, with different masses among them, and a dissimilar ore grades in comparison to samples used to make the model. To begin the ore grade is stated according to the counts. From the equation of the model we obtain: The three-dimensional representation of this equation is shown in In The results of the application of neutron activation for the first sample set, used in developing the model, are presented in  It has been confirmed that the activation produced by the Americium Beryllium source of 1 It has been shown that the remaining elements that are or may be present in the fluorspar sample do not interfere with the measurement of fluorine content. The proportionality between fluorspar grade and reading in the different fractions of the overall reading range has been found. The average value of 4 measures taken from the fluorspar sample of 97% is 339. The correspondence to the sample of 36.7% is 129. The relationship between ore grades (2.64), and also the relationship between counts (2.63) are maintained. It is possible to use neutron activation analysis, with an Americium Beryllium source as a neutron producer. It is probable that the Americium Beryllium source is at least, 1 You can perform neutron activation analysis of a fluorspar sample by using the neutron activation method for measuring the gamma radiation with a thallium-doped sodium-iodide detector.The performance of a sodium-iodide detector decreases with the growth in energy of the gamma rays and is particularly low for energy exceeding 2 You can carry out neutron activation analysis of fluorspar using a detector NaI 2″ It is necessary to have multichannel equipment to measure energy in a range of 8 It is necessary to shield the detector rigorously with lead. The energy ranges that are of interest have a large number of background counts rendering the use of the system impossible without having a lead shield because the relationship signal/background would be very low.Fluorine is an element that lends itself to analysis by a neutron activation procedure. Fluorine only presents one natural isotope which is a help in conducting this analysis. An important advantage of this technique is the activation time. The most important radioactive element created during the process is the 16N, its advantage being its higher radiation created in a zone that has a low probability of suffering interference from energies of other elements. In order to determine the fluorspar grade it is necessary that the readings are situated in the energy range between 4.5 and 6 This work has been supported by:  Research grant scheme of the Public grant scheme to aid research projects.