The Mg corrosion mechanism was explored using galvanostatic polarisation curves, hydrogen evolution and weight loss. The data (a) were consistent with the existence of the uni-positive Mg+ ion, (b) indicated that some hydrogen dissolved in the WE43 metal, and (c) indicated that self corrosion was more important than the applied current density in causing weight loss.This research builds on our research Our prior papers The applied anodic galvanostatic current density is given by: The anodic partial reaction is assumed Summation of Eqs. If the anodic and cathodic current densities obey Eq. The current research aims to extend the prior work WE43, supplied as an extrusion by Boeing Research and Technology, had the typical composition (in wt ppm or wt%): 3.55%Y, 2.8%Nd, 0.35%Gd, 0.024%Ce, 0.37%Zr and 80 ppm Fe. WE43 was high purity in that each impurity element was below its tolerance limit Plug-in specimens A galvanostatic anodic polarisation curve was measured for WE43 by measuring the potential during application of a constant current density for 3 h. The evolved hydrogen was measured simultaneously, and is reported as The specimen mass,    The red line drawn on The anodic potentiodynamic polarisation curve for WE43,      The amount of hydrogen dissolved in the Mg metal lattice, The fraction of evolved hydrogen was rather high for most cases, significantly higher than for cathodic charging of steels in the study of hydrogen embrittlement of steels where values of less than a fraction of a percent are quoted  The fraction of self corrosion to the total weight loss can be evaluated from    The data were consistent with the existence of the uni-positive Mg Some hydrogen dissolved in WE43 during the measurement of the Mg anodic polarisation curve. Self-corrosion was more important than the applied current density in causing weight loss throughout the anodic polarisation curve. The research on Mg corrosion was supported by the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence Design of Light Alloys. The support of Donald S. Shih of the Boeing Research and Technology, and of Boeing Research and Technology, is gratefully acknowledged.