Absence of curative treatment creates urgent need for new strategies for unresectable hepatoma. Novel selenium-substituted hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (SeHAN) were designed to serve as anticancer agent. The authors examined the nanoparticles by physicochemical techniques. The in vivo efficacy and toxicity of these nanoparticles were also investigated on a nude mice model of human hepatocellular carcinoma. The results showed that the selenite ions can be incorporated into the hydroxyapatite lattice facilely. They exhibited bundles of needles shape with a size of 160–200nm. In the in vivo study, they showed better survival advantage. The overall survival rate of nude mice in the control, pure hydroxyapatite and SeHAN group were 50.00%, 76.92%, and 100.00% respectively. Blood biochemical studies showed that SeHAN group had significantly lower toxicities on the liver and kidney functions. Histopathological studies confirmed that massive tumor necrosis and calcium deposition were evident after SeHAN treatment. Moreover, immunohistochemistry and Western blot assay showed significantly reduced expression of the Ki-67, VEGF and MMP-9 protein in the SeHAN group. Taken together, these results suggest that the selenium-substituted hydroxyapatite nanoparticles could be a new type of promising anticancer agent to provide both survival advantage and lower toxicity.Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent and lethal neoplasms worldwide HCC treatment options involve various strategies: surgical resection, regional radiotherapy, systemic chemotherapy, adjuvant anticancer chemotherapy and liver transplantation. Hepatic resection (HR) is the conventional curative treatment for improving the survival status of HCC patients Some investigators have begun to utilize tumor target therapy system, a new promising form of treatment for unresectable HCC. In this modality, nonviral nanoparticles carrier system, because of their safety, ease of use and mass production, has attracted much attention. The cationic iron oxide nanoparticles were used to inhibit HCC cell growth Hydroxyapatite (HA) is the main inorganic mineral in the hard tissues of humans and animals, including bone and tooth enamel. It has been found that its nanoparticles have stronger apoptosis induction and inhibitory effects on HCC cells than microparticles Selenium (Se), a nutritional trace element, has been intimately associated with many health problems, such as arthropathy and cardiomyopathy, thyroid function, immune function, and reproductive function Nowadays the anticancer mechanism of selenium is still controversial, but many reports testified that selenium could promote the growth of normal cells while inhibiting the growth of cancerous cells. Webster et al. demonstrated that nano-structured Se inhibited the growth of cancerous osteoblasts and promoted the proliferation of healthy osteoblasts In the current work, the nano-crystalline selenium-substituted hydroxyapatite was applied as an anticancer carrier to treat hepatocellular carcinoma so as to evaluate the inhibiting effect on other type of cancerous cells. Different from the conventional materials, the biological responses of the nanoparticles largely vary with their size. Usually, smaller nanoparticles had stronger cytotoxic effect than larger one because of the nano-size effect on redox activity and super oxide ions of normal cells Ca(NO The HAN and SeHAN powders were prepared by an aqueous co-precipitation method The average particle size of the HAN and SeHAN was measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS, Nano-ZS90, Malvern Co., England). The particle morphology was investigated using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2 20, FEI, Netherlands). The powders were dispersed in ethanol and a drop of this suspension was applied on a copper grid coated with carbon film. The copper grid was dried in air and then ready for TEM observation. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using an automated diffractometer (X’Pert PRO, PANalytical, B.V., Netherlands), at a step size of 0.02°, scanning rate of 1.2° in 2 Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was carried out using a spectrometer (Vertex 70, Bruker, Germany). The powder samples were mixed with KBr and compressed into pellets for measurements. The wavenumber range of 4000–400 Male BALB/c nude mice ( Animal model construction was conducted after 3 days of adaptation, following a standard procedure During the study period, the animals were regularly observed to record the body weight, general status, and any abnormalities. At the end of the fourth week, the animals were sacrificed and autopsy was conducted, the peripheral blood was obtained for biochemical studies, and the tumor tissue and other relevant organs harvested for histological and immunohistochemical studies as deemed necessary. At autopsy, the final tumor size and weight, major blood vessel invasions and lymph nodes metastasis were recorded. In addition, serum levels of alpha fetoprotein (AFP) were also measured using immuochemiluminescence assay (i2000, Abbot Ltd., USA). The tumor specimens were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and then embedded in paraffin. Five micrometer-thick continuous sections along with the biggest area of the tumor tissue were prepared and stained by hematoxylin and eosin dye and von Kossa stain kit (GMS80045.1v.A, Genmed Scientifics Inc., USA). von Kossa staining is the most common method for indirectly identifying the presence of calcium in tissue In order to study the effect of treatment on tumor growth and progression, both immunohistochemistry stain and Western blotting were performed to study the key parameters including Ki-67, VEGF and MMP-9 protein. The immunohistochemistry procedures followed our previously established protocols with slight modification To study the potential toxicities of the nanoparticles, the following biochemical parameters from blood samples were determined, including alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) representing liver function, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) representing heart function, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine (Cr) representing renal function. In addition, any organs with evident toxic changes were also sampled for detailed histological studies. The statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS 13.0 statistical software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and results were given as mean As shown in Both HAN and SeHAN samples exhibited pure HA phase (JCPDS No. 09-0432). As shown in All nude mice were at good general status before treatment, with stable body weight gain and food intake. With tumor development and progression, the animals in the control group began to show obvious tumor signs and first animal death occurred on day 7 after injection. The disease symptoms in HAN group appeared later than the control group, and the first animal death occurred on day 10 after injection. In the SeHAN group, however, no animal death was observed during the study period. By the time of the study endpoint on day 34, the overall survival rate in control, HAN and SeHAN group were 50.00% (6/12), 76.92% (10/13) and 100.00% (15/15) respectively. The survival curve is shown in Blood biochemical results are shown in Before treatment, there were no statistically significant differences in tumor size among the three groups. After four weeks’ injection, the average tumor volume and weight in SeHAN group had no significant difference from those of the control and HAN group. However, the overall survival rate for SeHAN group was 100%, which was significantly higher than the other two groups (see As observed in light microscope after HE staining ( In this study, von Kossa stain method was employed to confirm the presence of calcium and hydroxyapatite in tissue sections. As shown in  In order to further confirm the expression of Ki-67, VEGF and MMP-9 protein among the three groups, we applied the immunoblotting assay. In the results as shown in The incorporation of trace elements into HA has brought new biological properties to the synthetic HA materials. Silicon-substituted HA is found to improve the biocompatibility of the HA thin films and accelerate the bone healing process It is well-known that selenium plays very important roles in the human body and the up-take of selenium will induce the apoptosis in lots of cancer cells We explored the potential anticancer effects of this kind of novel selenium-substituted hydroxyapatite nanoparticles, using an established nude mice model of human HCC with high metastatic potentials, to evaluate the We further explored the possible mechanism involved. One possibility could be the effects on the transcription factors and kinases activity and cytoplasm calcium concentration in cancer cells can be the HA anti-tumors mechanism Tumor cell proliferative activity, new blood vessel formation and tumor metastasis can be attributed to the overall survival Apart from the promising results, this study also has limitations. Firstly, it focused on only a subcutaneous HCC-neoplasm model system, which can hardly mimic the clinical situation of liver cancer As HCC clinical therapy efficacy is very far from satisfactory, it is imperative to develop new therapeutic strategies, including using nanoparticles to increase drug delivery to cancer cells and to minimize toxicities. In this regard, our selenium modified HAN-based system might pave the way for new nanoparticle-based cancer therapeutic drugs. Further investigation using more cancer models could help gain deeper insights into this promising field. This study is the first to systematically evaluate the Sincerely, we will thank Dr. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: