Knoop microhardness studies were carried out on urinary calculi and synthesized calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM) crystals. COM calculi showed a higher value of microhardness than the synthesized crystals. Calcium oxalate dihydrate (COD) and uric acid (UA) stones showed microhardness values close to that of COM. In the case of mixed stones, the stone with COM showed higher hardness value than the stone with COD component. The presence of calcium phosphate (hydroxyapatite, HAP) in the mixed stones did not contribute in anyway to the overall hardness of the stones. The variation of microhardness with the orientation of COM calculi showed a cyclic pattern indicating the presence of alternate layers of crystalline and matrix materials.Urinary calculi has become one of the common causes of morbidity. Many reports are available regarding the composition analyses of these stones using different analytical techniques such as polarization microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD) etc. There is lack of data on the fundamental mechanical properties of the stones which is one of the reasons for the poor understanding of the comminution behaviour of the stones by lithotripsy. Also calcium oxalate forms the major composition of the majority of the stones. 43% of the single composition calcium oxalate stones are monohydrate stones. COM is one of the hardest stones to be fragmented by lithotripsy methods. The Vickers microhardness of synthesized COM crystals have already been reported and there is no report on the Knoop microhardness studies of COM crystals. There are different types of microhardness testers like Vicker’s, Knoop, etc. But Knoop hardness is preferred for testing urinary calculi as it is anisotropic in composition. The shape of the Knoop indenter is relatively less symmetric and a less elastic recovery is expected along the long diagonal. Since there is greater need for the data on the mechanical properties of the stones, in the present study we made an attempt to study the Knoop microhardness of urinary calculi of various compositions and synthesised COM crystals. Ten renal calculi removed after surgery from patients of the Stanley Medical College Hospital, Chennai, have been used for the study. The COM crystal was synthesized using a double diffusion technique as reported by Girija et al. Variation of Knoop microhardness with load was studied on synthesized single prismatic COM crystals with smooth (100) surfaces. The indentation marks were produced for different loads from 20 to 60 The Knoop hardness number was calculated using the formula Composition analyses of the stones showed that five stones were COM, one stone was COD, two stones were a mixture of calcium oxalate (COM or COD) and HAP and two stones were UA. The microhardness values of the calculi are given in A COM stone showed the highest Knoop microhardness value. Although the major composition of the five stones were COM, the hardness values of the stones were found to vary between a range of 110–133 (±10) to 20–89 (±18) The calculus with COD as the predominant constituent showed a higher hardness value, close to that of COM. In the case of calculi with mixed composition of calcium oxalate (COM or COD) and HAP, the stone with COM as the oxalate component showed high hardness value than the stone with dihydrate oxalate component. The hardness values of pure components of COM, COD and HAP are found to be 75–100, 180 and 310–350 The plot of load versus Knoop hardness of COM crystal is shown in Knoop microhardness of dry renal calculi and synthesized COM crystals were measured. The maximum value of Knoop microhardness observed for COM calculi and synthesized crystal were 133 One of the authors, EKG, gratefully acknowledges the University Grants Commission, India, for the award of Senior Research Fellowship. This work was supported by a grant from AICTE, India.