Rapeseed and sunflower oil were used to replace pork backfat in UK-style sausages by incorporating the oils as pre-formed emulsions. Replacing the pork backfat emulsion with rapeseed emulsion at total fat content of about 12%, reduced total saturated fatty acid (SFA) composition from 38% to 14% (4.5 to 1.8g/100g), increased monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) composition from 45% to 59% and increased polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) composition from 15% to 25%. Partial replacement of pork backfat with rapeseed at a fat content of about 20% reduced SFA from 38% to 24% (7.2 to 4.8g/100g). There were no significant differences in eating quality and overall liking other than slight differences in the attributes ‘firmness’ and ‘particle size’. Improvement in the fatty acid composition was achieved without adversely affecting colour shelf life or lipid oxidation. The study suggests that a substantial reduction in SFA can be achieved by incorporating ‘healthy’ oils in UK-style sausages without adversely affecting eating quality or shelf life.Throughout the European Union, governments as well as health advocates are encouraging food manufacturers to improve the health of consumers by improving the nutritional characteristics of processed food products. In the United Kingdom, for example, the Food Standards Agency (FSA) has been working with industry to formulate foods with less salt and fat ( According to the UK National Diet and Nutrition Survey, meat and meat products contribute 26% to the saturated fat intake ( Generally, the food industry has reacted well to calls to reformulate foods by developing meat products with lower fat and lower saturated fat. The reductions in fat and saturated fat have usually been achieved by increasing the lean meat content, or by replacing fat with water combined with a hydrophilic fat replacer. However, reducing fat can have deleterious effects on eating quality (reducing flavour and juiciness, and modifying the texture) and can also increase costs (e.g. An alternative approach to reducing saturated fatty acid content is to replace some of the animal fat by healthier oils that are low in saturated fatty acids (SFA) and rich in monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) (e.g. For obvious reasons, the substitution of animal fat with healthier vegetable oils must be achieved without adverse effects on eating quality, or reducing the shelf life in terms of colour or lipid oxidation. Therefore, the major aim of this study was to reduce the saturated fatty acid content of UK-style sausages by incorporating healthier vegetable oils without adversely affecting colour shelf-life, cooking losses, lipid oxidation or eating quality. A secondary aim was to develop a stable oil-based emulsion as a vehicle for adding the oil in such a way as to avoid excessive oil loss during cooking. The first part of the study investigated the emulsion stability of pre-formed emulsions prepared using soya protein, water and three fat types: pork backfat, rapeseed oil and high oleic sunflower oil. Stability was assessed using previously developed methodology in which samples were taken during bowl chopping at 2 The emulsions were made in the following ratios to give a batch size of 10 Six 5 Colour, lipid oxidation and cooking losses were measured on all 6 treatments. Sensory analysis and fatty acid composition was measured on treatments 1–4. The sausages to be analysed for lipid oxidation and colour were placed in styrofoam trays and overwrapped (in air) using a polyvinyl chloride film and stored at 4 Daily colour measurements were made during 14 Lipid oxidation was measured in quadruplicate for all the treatments on day 7 of simulated retail display using a slight modification of the distillation method of Three replicate raw sausages from each of 4 treatments (1–4) were analysed for fatty acid profile in duplicate. Fatty acid analyses were also conducted on a further 3 sausages per treatment cooked as described below. Individual sausages were blended in a food processor. The samples were hydrolysed, methylated and analysed by liquid gas chromatography using the method of Cooking losses were calculated on 24 individual sausages from each of the six treatments. Sausages, thawed overnight, were weighed and cooked using a pre-heated Tricity domestic grill on setting 4 (80% of full power) and turned every 2 To prevent sensory fatigue only sausages prepared with pork backfat and rapeseed oil emulsions were used in the sensory test (treatments 1–4). Sausages were cooked as described above. The ends of each sausage were discarded and the remainder was cut into 2 or 3 samples which were kept at 60 Results were analysed using MINITAB version 13.0 (MINITAB, PA, USA) and a general linear model (GLM) of analysis of variance (ANOVA). Cooking losses for pork backfat emulsions (1:5:5) were relatively low, < There were highly significant differences between treatments in fatty acid composition of both raw and cooked samples ( The total fatty acid content, a measure of the fat content, was about 12,000 Nervonic acid (24:1 n As expected, treatments 1 and 2 (sausages formulated with backfat) had about 38% SFA, 45% MUFA and 15% PUFA ( The fatty acid composition of treatments 5 and 6 (formulated with high oleic sunflower oil) was not measured. However, since sunflower has a similar SFA content, a higher MUFA and lower PUFA compared with rapeseed (see It is recommended that P:S ratios should be greater than 0.4 and n The total SFA contents were 4.5, 7.2, 1.8 and 4.8 The TBA values from the study indicated that even at day 7 not much lipid oxidation had taken place ( Lightness (L*), a*, b* and chroma all declined over the 14 There were significant differences between treatments in cooking loss, with mean values ranging from 9.8% (treatment 6) to 13.6% (treatment 2) ( There were no significant differences between treatments in eating quality or overall liking other then slight differences in firmness and particle size ( Generally, the values for the various attributes were within the range reported by The results suggest that it is possible to reduce the saturated fat content in UK-style sausages by replacing pork backfat with a vegetable oil using a soya-based pre-formed emulsion. The reduction that can be achieved is substantial and it can be achieved without increasing lipid oxidation or reducing colour shelf life, and without adversely influencing eating quality compared with sausages made with a pre-formed backfat emulsion. Replacing pork backfat also improves the important nutritional ratios, P:S and n The authors acknowledge the support from