Cr (VI) is one of the well-known toxic contaminant coming from leather tanning, metal finishing, textile industries etc. As per world health organization standard, limit for Cr (VI) in drinking water is 0.05 mg/l. In last few years, Metal organic framework (MOFs) based photocatalyst has find great interest for environmental remediation. In this work, titanium based MOFs NH2-MIL-125 and NTU-9 was integrated to make a hetero MOF NTU-9/NH2-MIL-125 (HMF) via refluxing method. It was characterized by XRD, TGA, FE-SEM, FT-IR, XPS, UV–vis (DRS) and PL etc. XRD indicates crystallinity and framework nature of all the synthesized MOFs. Thermal stability of HMF is improved to 520 °C in comparison to NTU-9. Diffuse reflectance spectra exhibit HMF having band gap of 2.2 eV absorbing up to 563 nm. BET surface area of NTU-9, NH2-MIL-125 and HMF were found to be 986, 1267 and 550 m²/g respectively indicating their microporous nature. In order to compare the photocatalytic activity, Cr (VI) solution was chosen a model wastewater. Because of more efficient charge separation, HMF is found to show better activity in comparison to both the contributing MOFs. Acidic condition favors the Cr (VI) reduction and HMF achieves 100% reduction within 90 min of visible light irradiation. In same time NTU-9 and NH2MIL-125 could exhibit only 35 and 55% reduction respectively. This study may give new direction to the study of hetero MOFs for environmental application.Heavy metal ions namely lead, cadmium, mercury, arsenic and chromium have emerged as major anthropogenic pollutant contaminating surface and underground water [ The conventional chemical reduction involves usage of reducing salts of iron and sulphur, however, sludge formation and its subsequent disposal is tedious and cost intensive. In retrospect, heterogeneous photocatalytic reduction involving semiconducting oxides, sulphides phosphates and nitrides is highly efficient, time saving and cost effective process [ In recent years heterostructure photocatalytic system involving MOF and semiconductor BiOBr/NH 2-aminoterephthalicacid, 2,5-dihydroxyterepthalicacid (H Synthesis of Metal organic framework Composite is possible by integrating two different MOFs. NH XRD patterns of as-synthesized MOFs were recorded on a Bruker D8 Advance powder X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA and DTG) was carried out using Q500 Hi-Res Analyzer in the range of 25 to 700 °C. NOVA 4000e (Quantachrome, USA) was used for N Activity of the as-synthesized MOFs was analyzed by studying the photocatalytic reduction of Cr (VI) to Cr (III). 200 ml of Cr (VI) solution of different concentration was prepared using ultrapure water and then transferred to the 250 ml double wall quartz reactor. 0.2 g of photocatalyst powder was suspended into the solution and then solution was stirred in the dark for half an hour to achieve adsorption equilibrium. 250 W high pressure mercury lamp was used as the light source. UV radiation was cut by supplying 2 M aqueous sodium nitrite solution through the inner jacket. 3 ml of reaction mixture was periodically withdrawn from the reaction vessel and centrifuged for the Cr (VI) analysis. Cr (VI) to Cr (III) reduction was monitored by taking UV–vis spectrum at 540 nm using 1,5-diphenylcarbazide as the colorimetric agent [ Powder XRD pattern of NTU-9, NH  The FT-IR spectra of NTU-9 presented in Photocatalytic reduction of hexavalent chromium is studied using visible light absorbing as-synthesized NTU-9, NH As the photocatalytic reduction of metal ions is considerably influenced by the solution pH, reduction of Cr (VI) is analyzed under acidic condition (pH 3), normal condition (pH 5) and alkaline condition (pH 8). Reduction rate of Cr (VI) is found to follow the order as pH 3 > pH 8 > pH 5. 10 ppm of Cr (VI) is completely reduced by HMF within 90 min interval under pH 3. Whereas, only 70% and 80% reduction is possible at pH 5 and 8 respectively, using HMF. Higher activity at pH 3 may be due the electrostatic interaction between negatively charged Cr Based on the above findings and previous reports a possible mechanism for the superior activity of HMF is illustrated in Efficient removal of Cr (VI) by the heterojunction MOF HMF without using sacrifical hole scavenger make it more viable option for real time application in wastewater treatment. Use of heterojunction MOFs in the memebrane bioreactors has the potential to increase its lifetime by removing the soluble microbial produts [ NH NA acknowledges Supplementary data Please see the supplementary data for the FE-SEM, PL spectra of as-synthesized MOFs and image of the reactants before and after the reaction. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: