The effects of growth temperature and reactor pressure on the microstructural and optical properties of InAlGaN quaternary epilayers grown on thick GaN buffer by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition were investigated. The addition of Al atoms at the optimized growth temperature of an InGaN layer resulted in deep level emission and in pyramidal shaped surface pits due to island growth caused by the low mobility of the deposited Al atoms in spite of the reduction of in-plane misfit strain and full width at half maximum from high-resolution X-ray diffraction. As the growth temperature increased and reactor pressure decreased, the broad deep level emission and the density of surface pits were greatly reduced and the band-edge emission of InAlGaN epilayers was intense. Surface pits originating from the vertex of threading dislocations under high misfit strain were greatly affected by lowering the growth temperature while the band-edge emission strongly depended on reactor pressure. Therefore, we found that the reduced reactor pressure and the increased growth temperature enhanced lateral growth and were effective in growing the InAlGaN epilayers of optically and microstructurally good quality.AlInGaN quaternary alloys have recently attracted much attention for the use of active layers in ultraviolet (UV) laser diodes (LDs) and high-brightness light emitting diodes (LEDs) It has been reported that improved luminescence intensity was obtained by using lattice-matched InAlGaN layers Many studies have performed the microstructural characterization of InGaN epilayers and InGaN/GaN MQWs grown on thick GaN buffer layers in detail In this study, we have grown high-quality InAlGaN quaternary alloys, which can be used as active layers of UV LEDs with the emission wavelength of 340–380 The epitaxial growth of InAlGaN quaternary layers was performed on Structural and optical characterization of InAlGaN epilayers was carried out by TEM, HRXRD, and PL. For the PL measurements at room temperature, we utilized a He–Cd laser operating at 325 The epilayers of InGaN, AlGaN, and InAlGaN grown on the thick GaN buffer inevitably induce the strain due to the lattice mismatch between GaN and epilayers. This strain is enlarged with the increase of the thickness of epilayers and Al or In composition and finally causes relaxation through the formation of several structural defects such as misfit dislocations, stacking faults, V-shaped pits, etc. (plastic relaxation) or formation of islands, surface undulation, etc. (elastic relaxation)  The growth temperature for high quality InGaN is 700–850°C depending on indium composition, while AlGaN growth was usually performed at over 1000°C In order to investigate the origin of the deteriorated optical quality, the microstructural characterization from the InAlGaN epilayer (IA1) was performed as shown in The possible origins of the island growth in the heterostructures can be explained as follows: (1) the mechanism produced by the segregation of the atoms with the same lattice constant for the diminution of the misfit strain at the interface (high strain energy dominant mode) and (2) the promotion of three-dimensional vertical growth of epilayers with small misfit strain caused by the slow mobility of the atoms deposited at lowered growth temperatures (kinetic energy dominant mode+little strain energy) ( To facilitate the two-dimensional growth into the For the efficient use of InAlGaN quaternary, independent variation of the band gap and the lattice constant should be allowed by the control of Al and In contents through growth temperature and reactor pressure. Because of the difficulty of In incorporation by the increase of growth temperature, however, pressure control is very important at some growth temperatures For the research on high-quality InAlGaN emitted at 340–380 This work was supported by grant No. R01-2002-000-00096-0 from the Basic Research Program from Korea Science & Engineering Foundation. The work by J.H. Lee was supported by grant No. R12-2002-058-01003-0 from the Center for Advanced Net Shape Manufacturing and Clean Processes of the KOSEF.