Purpose
                  Replantation of multidigit amputations is difficult to perform due to severe damage to the digits, prolonged operative time, and ischemia. This study aimed to report the clinical results of multidigit replantation.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective case series of 34 digits belonging to 12 consecutive patients who underwent multidigit replantation was conducted. Patients with injury in at least one or more amputated fingers proximal to the insertion of the flexor digitorum superficialis tendon were included. The mean follow-up duration was 18.1 months. The number of amputated digits, mechanism and zone of injury, survival rate, and clinical outcomes, including the range of motion, grip strength, and sensory recovery, at the final follow-up were reviewed and analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  The mean number of amputated digits per patient was 2.8. Complete survival was achieved in 27 of 31 digits (87.1%). The mean final percentage of total active motion of injured digits was 47.0%, and the mean percentage of grip strength was 45.9% of the contralateral uninjured side. The comparison between patients with two and three amputated digits showed that there was no significant difference in both survival rates and functional outcomes.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The results showed that both the survival rates and functional outcomes of multidigit replantation were as good as those of single-digit replantation, and there was no significant difference for outcomes between patients with two and three amputated digits. These results suggested that all multidigit replantations should be performed regardless of the number of injured digits or amputation zones.Multidigit amputations are a good candidate for replantation, This study is a retrospective case series of 34 digits of 12 consecutive patients (12 men) who underwent Statistical analyses were performed by using Student's Patients’ demographics are shown in Complete survival was achieved in 27 of 31 digits (87.1%) and complete necrosis was noted in 4 digits. Reoperation was performed for arterial thrombosis in 2 digits, reconstruction with thrombectomy and reconstruction by venous graft in 1, arterial reanastomosis in 1 digit, and both did not survive. Venous reanastomosis for postoperative venous insufficiency was performed in 1 digit, which survived. The complete survival rates, according to the mechanism of injury, were as follows: 7/8 (87.5%) in clean cut, 2/3 (67.7%) in blunt cut, 15/16 (93.7%) in crush type, and 3/4 (75.0%) in avulsion type. There was no significant difference in survival rate between clean/blunt cut injury and crush/avulsion injury (81.8% vs. 90.0%, This study investigated the clinical results of replantation of multidigit amputations and compared the survival rate and clinical results between patients with two and three amputated digits. The results showed that the survival rate of multiple replanted digits was high and there was no association between the survival rate and mechanism of injury. A half range of normal motion and good sensory recovery of surviving digits were achieved. The comparison between patients with two and three amputated digits showed that there was no significant difference in both survival rates and functional outcomes. In terms of survival rate, success rates of 80%–90% for most single-digit replantations Furthermore, the comparison between patients with two and three amputated digits showed that there was no significant difference in both the survival rate and functional outcomes in this study. These results suggested that the increase in the number of amputated digits was not associated with survival rate or functional outcomes in multidigit replantation. The functional outcomes of multidigit replantation were better than those of revision amputation In multidigit replantation, there were a few reports focused on surgical techniques. A retrospective case series reported a success rate of 87.5% in the structure-by-structure approach for four- or five-digit amputations. The improved surgical techniques for zone II–IV amputations, rigid internal fixation, Several limitations of this study should be acknowledged. First, the present study had a retrospective nature and small number of cases and no control group for single-digit replantation. However, current retrospective analyses of case series had potential importance because only a few case series on multidigit replantation focusing on surgical techniques have been reported. In summary, we performed a retrospective analysis of replantation of multidigit amputations, which include at least one or more completely amputated fingers proximal to the insertion of the FDS tendon. The survival rate and clinical outcomes of multidigit replantation were as good as those of single-digit replantation. The comparison between patients with two and three amputated digits showed no significant difference in both survival rates and functional outcomes, indicating that the increase in the number of replantation was not associated with outcomes. These results suggested that all multidigit replantations should be performed as much as possible regardless of the number of injured digits or amputation zone. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 