This study focusses on the gene expression profile related to a new rhBMP-2 carrier material, chitosan film. This film could be suitable for use as an osteoinductive coating of commercially available titanium implants. The developed material was characterized, biocompatibility was tested and the cellular response was extensively characterized by transcriptional expression studies. Finally, in vivo studies were carried out to confirm the osteoinductivity of the developed coating. Results show good material properties for cell adhesion and proliferation. Presented data show cellular differentiation to the osteoblastic phenotype due to rhBMP-2, with a 90% common transcriptional response between the control rhBMP-2 treatment and the developed chitosan/rhBMP-2 film. The growing surface also had an influence on the observed cellular response and was quantified as 7% of the total. These results indicate that both the growth factor and the material induce a cell response, but this is mainly driven by the osteoinductor factor. In vivo, new bone formation and early vascularization was observed around chitosan/rhBMP-2 coated titanium pieces implanted in mouse muscle. In contrast, control implants did not induce this reaction. This work, therefore, shows both in vitro and in vivo that chitosan/rhBMP-2 film is a promising osteoinductive coating for titanium implantable materials.Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are factors present in bone matrix which can induce de novo bone formation. For this reason, BMPs have been widely studied for possible clinical applications Application of BMP-2 for in vivo experiments is carried out by combining this factor with different materials such as autograft or allograft bone, collagen sponge, synthetic polymers, and others Chitosan is a suitable biodegradable biopolymer for covering complex surfaces. This copolymer of This research focuses on the development of an rhBMP-2 carrier chitosan coating, in order to improve oseointegration of implantable materials. In previous studies, we have shown that the developed coating film manufacture process does not inactivate rhBMP-2. We also reported that the film is enzymatically degradable and is able to deliver active rhBMP-2 adequately for regenerative purposes The aim of this article is the in-depth exploration of the in vitro cell response to developed chitosan/rhBMP-2 coating. To do this, different properties of the film related to cell adhesion and proliferation were studied. Then, the in vitro cell transcriptional responses to chitosan/rhBMP-2, chitosan film and rhBMP-2 were compared and finally the usefulness of this osteoinductive coating on titanium implants was confirmed in vivo.  Chitosan was obtained by heterogeneous hydrolysis of chitin isolated from shrimps ( A sterile 1% (w/v) chitosan solution in 50 Chitosan thickness was calculated as previously reported Chitosan films were formed as described. Film surface roughness was measured with a white light interference microscope (MicroXAM™ Optical Profiler). Roughness average data was reported in nanometers (DIN 4768 standard). Hydrophobicity of chitosan film was characterized by measuring the contact angle between the water droplets and film surface. A Hamilton™ microliter syringe was used to put a 5 Dry films were weighed and immersed in PBS at 37 C2C12 cell line (muscle myoblast, mouse, CRL 1772) was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Virginia). Culture was maintained with DMEM in high glucose, containing 10% fetal bovine serum plus antibiotics (100 Four experimental groups were used, which differed in treatment and growing surface: control group (C) with growing cells on cell culture treated plastic; BMP-2 activated cells group (B), growing also on the control surface; chitosan film growing cells group (CH); and, finally, a group consisting of cells growing onto chitosan/rhBMP-2 film substrate (CHB). All cellular assays were performed in the first four passages, in triplicate and in three independent assays. In all cases, cells were seeded at 10,000 Cells were seeded in 48-well plates and in a scheduled time course (12 Cells were seeded and cultured for 4 Cells were seeded and cultured 4 Activity of the rhBMP-2 protein on cells was evaluated through the colorimetric measurement of the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity. Cells were cultured for 4 Histochemical staining of the ALP activity was also tested as described by manufacturer (fast blue RR, Sigma–Aldrich) and hematoxylin was used as contrast staining. Images were obtained in an Olympus BX51 microscope. Cells were seeded, treated and cultured for 4 The transcriptional profile was analyzed with the use of the GeneChip Five micrograms of total RNA from each biological sample were used as starting material for all array hybridization protocols. These protocols were performed as described by the manufacturer (Affimetrix, Santa Clara, CA). For each treatment, three samples for independent assays were tested. Summarization and normalization of Affymetrix probe set data was done with the Robust Multiarray Average (RMA) software The data of (B), (CH) and (CHB) treatments were compared against the data of C2C12 control group (C). The ratios of gene expression between the different conditions were calculated as a quotient between the average of the individual signal data from both conditions. The statistically significant differentially expressed genes were determined with the use of a Bayesian estimate of the variance among gene measurements within an experiment using the Cyber-T statistics program For the comparison between experiments, genes showing changes in expression ⩾2-fold or ⩽−2-fold and Changes in the expression of selected genes were assessed by quantitative PCR with the use of the same RNA sample extracted for microarrays. First strand cDNAs were synthesized from 1 Amplification was performed using a total reaction volume of 20 Quantitative PCRs were run on a 7900HT Fast Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) with a denaturation step at 95 All animal handling and experimental procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Universidad Complutense, according to the guidelines for ethical care of experimental animals of the European Community. Implant grade titanium pieces were specially designed by Noricum S.L. to be implanted in the mouse back muscular tissue (6 The BALB/c type mice ( A microcomputed tomography (μ-CT) system (Vista CT) was employed for non-destructive 3D imaging of each sample before histological analysis. Samples were imaged with an X-ray tube voltage of 50 Samples were decalcified with 10% nitric acid for 3 To evaluate this biocompatibility in vitro, C2C12 cells were seeded on the chitosan film surface. Graphics shown in In order to study cell response to this coating acting as protein carrier, rhBMP-2 was incorporated into the film (CHB treatment). First, the amount of rhBMP-2 needed to obtain a cell response was studied. In order to obtain a global picture of cell response to the carrier material, an extensive transcriptional study of the cell-material response was performed, without and with rhBMP-2. Taking into account previously shown data, 500  To visualize all microarray data, regulated transcripts of different treatments were analyzed by hierarchical clustering and represented in heat maps (  In addition, all transcripts related to the CH treatment (71 probe sets corresponding to 54 genes) are represented in For a deeper microarray data analysis, gene ontology (GO) term study was performed. Using this tool, a table was generated, grouping GO terms related to cellular processes and arranging them according to treatments ( Also in Since the main effect of BMP-2 is inducing the differentiation of bone phenotype, all GO terms related to cellular development were also studied. In The microarray data analysis was completed with a KEGG pathway study which confirms the similarity between the statistically significant cell processes activated in B and CHB treatments (see To confirm the microarray results, a number of differentially expressed genes were selected to be analyzed by quantitative PCR. Five genes involved in bone development (Fmod  Finally, To test the in vivo behavior of developed implants, chitosan-coated titanium samples were implanted in BALB/c mouse back muscular tissue. Histological study of these samples is also shown in Chitosan is a polyelectrolyte with free amino groups that interact with weak acids, allowing its solubilization. This acidic solution can be used to wet a surface and, after a drying step, a film is formed on it. In previous studies, we used this property to form films on clinically available materials and to incorporate rhBMP-2 into them, in order to add osteoinductive properties to these materials In vitro assays were performed with C2C12 cell line. These pre-myoblastic cells have been widely used in BMP-2 response studies, due to its ability to de-differentiate from its myoblastic fate and evolve to an osteoblastic one upon the addition of this morphogenetic protein The time course study of the total protein content and MTS proliferation assay performed for C2C12 cells on both kinds of surfaces (control and chitosan film) is shown in the graphics in The incorporation of the rhBMP-2 into the chitosan film gives it osteoinductive properties. To check the osteoinductivity induced by this growth factor, ALP bone tissue marker was tested. ALP activity is commonly used as an early osteogenic marker and is related to matrix calcification process. Data shown in The overall data presented show that the proposed material is biocompatible and osteoinductive, even if the material employed as rhBMP-2 carrier for its local release has influence on both properties. Thus, a deeper understanding of the cell behavior was considered a key feature to clarify the convenience of this material on tissue engineering applications. In order to perform this study, global transcriptional studies were performed with microarray techniques, which provide extensive information on cell response to external stimuli. Assays of this type have been previously reported as valuable tools to find new tissue marker genes and to achieve a global overview of the differentiation process induced by the BMP-2 Therefore, the performed studies allow the understanding of how cells react to the material itself, to the applied growth factor alone and to the developed chitosan/rhBMP-2 coating. They also provide a more precise study of the contribution of the material and the growth factor to the cell behavior on the applicable coating. In this sense, the study of the CH/rhBMP-2 growing surface is interesting in order to check if there are major changes in it with respect to control rhBMP-2 treatment or with respect to those previously described in the literature for BMP-2 treated C2C12 cells In the initial data analysis ( To find out if this material influence modified the cell response to rhBMP-2, transcriptional response was analyzed, taking into account the GO. This tool groups the genes into understandable and analyzable terms, related to biological processes, molecular functions or cellular components. In B and CHB treatments, terms related to cellular processes and developmental processes show similar number of genes in all cases. In summary, and as previously reported This GO analysis was expanded by studying the cellular response only to the chitosan surface. These analyses show some cell response to growing on chitosan films, as could be expected from the performed biocompatibility assays. Although films allow cell adhesion and proliferation, and do not substantively modify cellular response to rhBMP-2, array data suggest that cells slightly recognize this surface as a foreign chemical structure, activating some mechanism in response to it. In fact, chitosan is obtained by chitin deacetylation, chitin being a structural polymer of the crustaceous exoskeleton. It is therefore a foreign structure for mammalian cells. These results were not appreciated in the GO analysis of the chitosan/rhBMP-2 treatment and in addition, Results also show that chitosan itself does not induce any kind of differentiation process in these cells. Chitosan has previously been reported as osteoinductive material when it is implanted in bone tissue or cultured with bone cells To test the in vivo behavior of developed osteoinductive implant coating, a preliminary study was performed. This part of the testing was not performed as a complete in vivo investigation, but as supporting of the obtained in vitro results. Thus, samples were implanted in mouse back muscular tissue. This location has several advantages. On the one hand, it was selected as the most similar to the in vitro cell culture used (C2C12 cells, isolated from mouse muscle). On the other hand, there does not exist in this location any kind of osteoblastic cells that can account for the expected bone formation. In fact BMP-2 is one of the short bone morphogenetic proteins group able to induce the formation of ectopic bone. This is one of the reasons why this model has been extensively used to test the BMP-2 osteoinductive activity, as previously mentioned To detect bone formation, both radiographic and histological techniques were used. Taking into account the presented GO study results related to the induction of vascularization, and also the importance of this process in bone formation, immunohistochemical studies related to this phenomenon were also performed. In addition, and taking into account previous in vivo assays performed by the group In vivo studies performed are compiled in The results presented show that the developed chitosan films have adequate properties for cell adhesion, differentiation and material coating purposes. As a cell growing surface, chitosan films allow cell proliferation, even if cells to some extent recognize it as a foreign chemical structure. As rhBMP-2 carrier material, in vitro, cell osteodifferentiation on these films was observed with no interference of the material in the cell response to rhBMP-2. In vivo, and as a titanium implant coating, the preliminary studies performed here show that these chitosan/rhBMP-2 films are osteoinductive in a mouse ectopic model. Overall, results show that chitosan/BMP-2 film could be considered as a promising osteoinductive material for implant coating purposes. This work was supported by the Ministerio de Sanidad (PIO-41048), Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia y Fondo Social Europeo (PTQ05-02-02498 and Fundación PCM) and MMA Fundación de Investigación Biomédica (Spain). Carolina Moreno Vicente thanks the MEC for a Ph.D. fellowship. The authors thank Dr. Jesús Ruiz-Cabello, Dr. Juan Jose Vaquero and Alejandro Sisniega for their assistance in μCT data acquisition and analysis. The authors also thank Rosa Pérez Díaz (Unidad de Genómica) for her technical support in quantitative PCR assays. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 