The main goal of the current study is to clarify the role of milling time, extra aluminum, porosity and microwave energy on ignition behavior of combustion synthesized Al2O3/TiC composite. In fact the present work deals with the microwave-combustion synthesis of Al2O3/TiC composite from Al, C and TiO2 materials using microwave heating. Taguchi robust design method of system optimization with L9 orthogonal array was used to determine the best level and the percent of contribution (%ρ) of each factor. In order to confirm the formation of Al2O3 and TiC phases, the samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction using Cu Kα radiation. The results showed that both Al2O3 and TiC are present in all samples. The crystallite sizes of produced TiC and Al2O3 are about 49–87 and 63–208nm respectively. Also the Taguchi approach proved that the milling time had the most influence on the ignition time (72.87%) and the stress stood in second place (23.55%). The power of microwave had the least influence on the ignition time. While the extra aluminum had the most influence on the combustion temperature (55.08%) and the stress stood in second place (25.92%).Alumina ceramics (Al Al The fabrication of Al According to literature survey done by the authors there are many articles focused on synthesis of alumina/titanium carbide composites using different heating sources Another approach focused on the effect of different parameters such as green density, extra aluminum and electric field on density of products. The results illustrated that the density of Al To the best of our knowledge and in spite of importance of role of both microwave energy and mechanical milling on combustion synthesize there are a few papers concentrated on the use of microwave energy to synthesize Al Besides since the interrelationships between the effective parameters are complex and the analysis of this process to optimize the factors is a time and labor consuming work and the analyses using conventional experimental methods are inefficient, Taguchi robust design method of system optimization with L In order to produce Al Al It has been empirically suggested that combustion reactions will not become self-sustaining unless Adiabatic temperatures for reactions with Primary mixtures were milled for 0.5 and 1 After milling the mixed powder was compressed under different stresses, i.e. 100, 150 and 200 The produced discs were exposed under 600 and 900 In order to confirm the formation of Al According to the Taguchi method, the standard orthogonal array, namely L The designed L Adiabatic temperature of reaction The XRD patterns of produced composites have been shown in There are three signals-to-noise ratios of common interest for the optimization of static problem The basic of definition of type S and type B are smallest is the best and biggest is the best respectively (Eqs.  Also 1 Also heating with 900 From the topside results, it is clear that there is a reverse relation between ignition time and combustion temperature. In other words, the factors that induce to increase the combustion temperature decrease the ignition time. Thus an increase in one of them causes to decrease the other. It is worth noting that Atong and Clark mentioned this reverse relation in their previous work The purpose of the analysis of variance (ANOVA) is to investigate which process parameters significantly affect the ignition time and combustion temperature. This is accomplished by separating the total variability of the   Al Ignition time and combustion temperature have an inverse relation, i.e. the factors that increase the combustion temperature decrease the ignition time. Ball milling time has the most influence on the ignition time (72.87%) and the stress (green density) stands in second place (23.55%). Extra aluminum has the most influence on the combustion temperature (55.08%) and the stress (green density) stands in second place (25.92%). Power of microwave has the least influence on both ignition time and combustion temperature. The authors wish to thank Mrs. M. Hasan Zade for her kind cooperation.