The effects of catalyst support shapes on their final strength and fragmentation behaviour are investigated. Uniaxial compression tests by diametrical loading of solid and four-holed discs with high-speed video recordings are employed to investigate strengths and pellet crushing behaviours. The combined finite-discrete element method (FDEM) is employed to simulate the effects of geometrical features and loading orientation on the pre- and post-failure behaviour of catalysts. A comparison with experimental results is also presented and the remarkable agreement in failure evolution and mode is discussed. A methodology to derive representative fragment size distributions from defined pellet shapes and material properties is introduced, providing a further tool to understand the strength and fragmentation behaviour of catalyst supports. The results suggest that fixed-bed reactors made with solid cylindrical catalysts will be more likely to be affected by pressure drops caused by the choking effect of a significant portion of fines than if it was made with catalyst supports with four holes. Two designs of four-hole catalyst supports sintered with different porosities have also been studied, showing different fragment size distributions and fines production. Characterisation of fines production for different catalyst support designs will improve prediction of reactor clogging and pressure drops.Particle breakage or structural damage to a pellet, within an accumulation or pack of bodies arises from the complex interaction between the stress state, environmental conditions, and micromechanical behaviours that are not yet well understood ( The catalyst pellets typically employed for fixed-bed reactors in steam reformers contain an active metal component supported on porous materials with a high surface area, e.g. alumina (aluminium oxide, Al Catalyst supports are exposed to various conditions that can compromise their structural integrity. During transport and while introducing catalyst pellets into reactor tubes, they are subjected to dynamic loads, such as vibrations and collisions with neighbouring particles and the container/reactor walls that can chip or break them into pieces. When in service, water might leak into the reactors, permeating the catalysts. Breakage then results from a sudden water expansion and vaporisation out of the pellets pores( The catalyst support ability of absorbing strains without crushing into small fragments is another key aspect to ensure their performance. For example, during start-up and shutdown cycles, the different thermal expansion properties between the reactor tube and ceramic pellet induces a radial contraction of each section of the catalyst bed. During each cycle, some of the catalyst pellets will rearrange their relative positions to accommodate the reactor contractions. Some pellets will be compressed to failure by the reactor tube and the neighbouring pellets. The size distribution of the fragments produced with this process is related to the catalyst shape and mechanical properties. The accumulation of these fragments can cause local clogging action and potentially increase pressure drops inside the tubes ( Significant recent advancements achieved in the manufacturing technology, including the new opportunities made possible by additive manufacturing (3D printing) allow the production of customised catalyst pellets with complex shapes and architectures. Currently, there are very few methods to asses the strength ( Previous work on comminution of minerals and ores has aimed at modelling fracture and fragmentation of multi-body systems of brittle highly irregular natural shaped particles for the improvement of the design of rock crushers. Discrete element methods (DEM) that handle the interaction between contacts can be adapted to include internal breakage of rigid particles using a range of approximate methods that allow the big ( The key features of the two-dimensional combined finite-discrete element FDEM code implemented in Solidity ( This work is organised with the following structure: in Section A summary of the mechanical experiments and numerical simulations that have been undertaken for the validation study is shown in Three sets of cylindrical samples with three different geometries were sintered with a reference alpha-alumina powder with an average granulate size in the 170–210 Uniaxial compression loading tests were performed on the two sets of discs with and without holes. Prior to testing, one side-face of each specimen had a random speckle pattern applied to the surface. The experiments were recorded with a high-speed video-camera (Vision Research Phantom v12.1 monochrome, maximum capture rate 16,000 frames/s at full-resolution of 1280 by 800 pixels, fitted with a 100 mm macro lens). The optical axis was set normal to the speckled side-face of the specimen. A high-speed video camera was used to capture the post failure behaviour and fragmentation of the samples during the test. The test consists of placing a pellet between two cylindrical plates and diametrically compressing it to failure, i.e. an indirect tensile test known as the Brazilian disc test when applied to solid discs. Since both solid discs and discs with holes are tested in this work, the more generic term ‘uniaxial compression’ is adopted. A monolithic cylindrical plate of aluminium alloy was placed centrally on the stationary base of the test rig (Instron model 5984 electromechanical test frame). An opposing cylindrical loading platen was mounted centrally on the vertically-moving crosshead of the test rig, below the load-cell. During the experiment, the stationary and moving cylindrical plates apply an increasing load to the sample through their flat circular base. The experiments were performed in displacement control, with a crosshead velocity of 10 mm/s. The test rig control software (Instron Bluehill 3) recorded load and displacement during each experiment, at 0.1 s intervals. The compression on the sample is applied by the two loading plates. These induce on the cylinders without holes a stress field with horizontal tensile stress which, according to a linear elastic model, has its highest value in the centre of the disc. The tensile strength can be calculated based on the two-dimensional elastic solution for a disc with two concentrated forces applied to its vertical extremes. It is then possible to express the horizontal tensile stress experienced by the specimen in the centre of the disc as a function of the applied load ( Assuming that failure occurs at the point of maximum tensile stress, i.e. at the centre of the disc, the Brazilian test formula Uniaxial compressive tests were also performed on 6–8 specimens from each of the two sets of four-hole cylinders. When the two hole centres lie directly in line with the loading points, this is the weakest orientation. Considering the angles between the line of the contact points and the symmetry axes of the discs created by the four hole locations, the weakest and the strongest orientations correspond to 0 The experimental results can be used to quantify the structurally modified ‘load to failure’, or more simply named ‘equivalent strength’ to highlight the differences in the two loading configurations (weakest and the strongest orientation of the holes), i.e. the maximum value of force that the specimen can support without breaking for a given configuration (orientation) of the load. The results from the other two sets of samples have shown a quite consistent relation between loading orientation, tensile strength and the equivalent strength of the pellets. When normalising the load at failure with the failure load of an equivalent solid cylinder of identical tensile strength and geometry but without holes, all the results converged to a value of about 2% for the weakest orientation (i.e. 1/50 of the cylinder strength without holes) and about 20% (i.e. 1/5) for the strongest orientation. In reconciling the remaining differences between strength reduction due to presence of holes, it is important to point out that the load values at failure have been affected by errors since the video recordings and load cell values were not sufficient to define the exact time and load corresponding to the primary failure of the samples. The Young’s moduli of the four-hole cylindrical samples were inferred by nanoindentations, with a Nanoindenter XP (MTS Instruments, UK). The apparatus has maximum load of 400 mN, load noise of The loading plates and the tested samples have been modelled with 2D FDEM simulations. Both tests and simulations have been performed on discs with and without holes. The two mesh discretisations are shown in Numerical simulations of the uniaxial compression tests on the disc with four holes have been carried out loading the specimens in different orientations, i.e. with respect to the angles between the line of the contact points and the symmetry axes of the discs created by the four hole locations. Loading orientations at intervals of 5 As was pointed out, since a value of fracture toughness was not available for the cylindrical samples, values for In Due to the limited number of specimens available and the difficulties in keeping pellets held in position with a precise hole symmetry orientation during the tests, catalyst pellets have only been tested in the neighbourhood of the weekest (0 As an extension to this validation study, the numerical simulations of the uniaxial compressive test on the four-hole pellets from Set 1200 and Set 1300 have been performed for different hole axes symmetry orientations.  A complex shaped pellet tested in a particular orientation might be met only apparently, as the peak load from the primary failure might be covered by a higher load peak, corresponding to the strength of the fragments and not the actual strength of the pellet. In An overview of the four-hole pellets fragmentation after primary and ultimate failure by uniaxial compression for different loading orientations is shown in The numerical results show that, given the combination of shape and hole symmetry orientation of the catalyst supports in their strongest orientations, a uniaxial compression generates a compressive stress concentration in the pellet core. At ultimate failure, this high compressive stress is released, generating shock waves and crack branching that break the pellet into small fragments and fines. This suggests that catalyst shapes that allow high concentrations of stress, although capable of withstanding higher loads in particular configurations, also tend to break into a larger fractions of fines. The fragmentation behaviour of spherical alumina supports has been investigated in a previous study ( Avoiding the accumulation of fine fragments is crucial for increasing the life-time of the catalyst charge and the reactor steel tubes. This can also help prevent costly operating problems. For this reason the characterisation of the fines produced during crushing of a particular pellet shape and the catalyst support material’s strength gives important insights into its performance as a catalyst support. Of course, there are other important aspects that have to be taken into account during the design of a catalyst support other than its fragility due to shape/structure and the ceramic strength itself, such as its surface area, porosity, packing properties, etc. that will all contribute greatly to flow rates pressure drop and reaction efficiency. For instance, a change in the catalyst support shape affects the final fixed bed reactor packing structure, and with a different catalyst porosity (which is related to catalytic activity) comes a change in strength properties of the ceramic itself. All of this has to be taken into account during design as it may result in poor performances. Different strategies can be adopted to improve the susceptibility of catalyst supports to the damaging type of fragmentation associated with a large ‘fines production’, such as by a stress-redistribution strategy for shape optimisation. In the event contact forces are sufficient for pellet breakage, the shape would then promote the production of only large broken pieces. This potentially important opportunity requires a little further explanation. To summarise the findings of this research presented above: (a) both quantitative data from numerical simulations and qualitative data from the experiments show that when a pellet is compressed in the direction of the holes (i.e. 0 Another option is to adjust the sintering process, e.g. by changing the powder size distribution, compaction pressure, firing temperature, etc., to modify the final porosity and strength of the catalyst support, maintaining acceptable levels of catalytic activity. In the present study, the same green pellets have been sintered with two different firing temperatures, producing catalyst supports with different porosities and therefore different mechanical properties. The catalysts from Set 1200 have a higher porosity and weaker mechanical properties than the supports from Set 1300. From a qualitative inspection of the pellet fragmentation it can be noticed that the pellets from Set 1200 are marginally but significantly more fragile (producing more fines) than the pellets from Set 1300. This is particularly noticeable when the pellets are subjected to load orientations close to the strongest hole orientation, i.e. 40 Currently, there are very few methods to compare the strength and fragmentation behaviour of complex-shaped catalyst pellets. For this reason, a methodology for the derivation of representative fragment size distribution curves for the design of catalyst supports from 2D numerical simulations is now introduced for the case of externally cylindrical pellet shapes. To develop the method to compare the fragmentation behaviour of axially symmetric catalyst supports in a reactor tube during thermal contraction, the following observations and simplifying assumptions are made. (i) Pellets with holes tend to be more vulnerable when compressed on a plane normal to their longitudinal axis. For this reason only the loads that are orthogonal to the pellets, axes are considered. (ii) The load transmission between neighbouring pellets is assumed to be higher for two opposite contact points. More complex contact configurations are therefore neglected. (iii) The catalyst pellets in a pack have random orientations and can be compressed by the neighbouring particles and the reactor tube walls with equal likelihood in all orientations. All the possible loading configurations experienced by the pellets in the reactor can therefore be represented by uniaxial compactions between 0  The effects of the catalyst support shapes on their final strength and fragmentation behaviour have been investigated. Numerical simulation results of uniaxial compressive tests on disc-like cylinders without holes have been presented. The contact force extrapolated from the numerical simulations has been favourably compared to the corresponding theoretically corrected experimental results. Video recordings from the corresponding experiments provide confirmation of the FDEM code’s ability, after calibrating fracture energy release rate for this material, to simulate Mode I fracture as observed in porous ceramic pellet loading tests. Uniaxial compression laboratory tests on four-hole pellets and high-speed video recordings have been used to estimate pellet strengths and pellet crushing behaviours. Numerical simulations have also been employed to simulate the effects of geometrical features (holes) and loading orientation on the pre- and post-failure behaviour of catalysts. The results have given important indications for the tests that are carried out for assessing the mechanical performance of pellets, showing that depending on how the uniaxial strength test is conducted there is a risk of a systematic over-estimation of the pellet strength in its strongest orientation of the holes. This aspect is important when uniaxial compression tests are used to evaluate the strength of pellets. Significant fracture propagation as seen in primary failure is revealed through numerical simulations in a manner that cannot normally be revealed through routine tests. A comparison with experimental results has been presented and discussed, showing the capability of FDEM numerical simulations to correctly represent the peak loads corresponding to primary and ultimate failure and the fragmentation behaviour of four-hole pellets. A stiffer test apparatus, with higher frequency load transducers and high-speed camera would have to be employed in future studies to improve the quality and the resolution of the experimental data during pellet fragmentation. A methodology to derive a representative fragment size distribution from defined externally cylindrical pellet shapes and material properties has been proposed, showing the different fragmentation behaviour of the tested catalyst supports. The presented results strongly suggest that a fixed-bed reactor made with solid cylindrical catalysts will be more likely to be affected by pressure drops caused by the choking effect of a significant portion of fines than if it was made with catalyst supports with four holes. Moreover, the two four-hole catalyst supports that have been analysed in this work produce similar fragment size distribution curves at primary failure, but after ultimate failure, catalyst supports from Set 1200 produce slightly larger fractions of fines, suggesting that they would be more prone to generate higher pressure drops. This type of analysis has the potential to promote further innovation in the fixed-bed reactor technology and extend the life-time of the catalyst charge and the reactor by providing important insights for the design of new catalyst pellet shapes and properties. The proposed methodology applied here to axially symmetric pellets, can be extended to any complex-shaped pellet with 3D FDEM simulations since 3D FDEM fracture models have also been developed. This will allow consideration of the range of contact forces active in a real multi-body pack, one not restricted to cylinders and their simplifying assumption that diametral loadings act towards the cylinder’s centre. Experimental data might be employed in future work to further validate the capabilities of the proposed methodology for the generation of fragment size distribution curves from simulation results. For example, digital image correlation methods might be used to separate the fragments and classify them into different categories according to their size ranges. Ideally, attention will be turned to 3D breakage simulations, where size distribution can be compared more easily with experimental results. Future research will be also undertaken to simulate the whole packed structure of catalysts in fixed-bed reactors, allowing the representation of more realistic pellet loading and tube filling conditions that can help in the study and reduction of damage caused by the crushing behaviour of catalyst supports. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors wish to thank James Bower for the nanoindentation tests and Daniel Curry for his help in sample preparation. This research was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) with a Case studentship in collaboration with Johnson Matthey and the Impact Acceleration Account grant (Ref: EP/R511547/1).