Eighty-five patients were reviewed 7 years after prospective randomization to bridging external fixation or plaster immobilization for treatment of a Colles’ type distal radial fracture. The Gartland and Werley score showed that most patients in each group had an excellent or good outcome and patient satisfaction was comparable and high in both groups. The fixator group had significantly less radial shortening (P<0.05). Despite a high level of radiographic malunion (50%) overall function, range of movement and activities of daily living were not limited. Twenty-five per cent of patients had minor radiological signs of post-traumatic arthritis although only one patient was symptomatic. We conclude that, in the long term, external fixation of distal radius fractures does not confer an improved outcome when compared to plaster immobilization.The volume of literature on the treatment of distal radial fractures is vast. It is frequently stated that this type of injury can be the cause of longstanding disability (McQueen and Caspers, 1988) and, if intra-articular, early onset of degenerative change in the radiocarpal joint (Knirk and Jupiter, 1986). Some surgeons advocate treatment by manipulation and plaster immobilization, (Golden, 1963; Smaill, 1965; Stewart et al., 1985), whilst others maintain that external fixation is superior, especially in cases of intra-articular fractures with comminution, (Cassebaum, 1959; Clyburn, 1987; Cooney et al., 1979; Howard et al., 1989; McQueen, 1998). Many recommend operative intervention as the only method to obtain anatomical reduction and some have proposed that the best functional result will only be achieved by obtaining as near an anatomical radiographic result as possible (Bacorn and Kurtzke, 1953; McQueen and Caspers, 1988). A prospective randomized study was carried out to compare treatment by manipulation and plaster immobilization with treatment by manipulation and application of a bridging dynamic external fixator. These patients were reviewed at a median of 7 years post-injury to reassess both anatomical and functional parameters, to assess the incidence of post-traumatic degenerative change and to ascertain patient satisfaction with the outcome of their injury. A consecutive group of 125 patients (age range 16–75 years) with dorsally angulated fractures of the distal radius, which required manipulative reduction (greater than 10° dorsal angulation or greater than 2 Group One patients (Pen) were treated by primary bridging external fixation (Pennig fixator, Orthofix All wrists were immobilized for 6 weeks and patients were reviewed at weekly intervals for 6 weeks and then at 3, 6 and 12 months. At each visit, standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were taken for the measurement of radial shortening, radial angulation and dorsal angulation. The measurements were all made by one senior author (AMN) using the techniques described by Van der Linden and Ericson (1981). A functional assessment, consisting of a range of wrist movements and grip strength (using Jamar gripmeter), was carried out by a dedicated physiotherapist at each review from 3 months. All the patients initially randomized into the trial were recalled at a median of 7.8 years (range 72–96 months) after initial injury. Each was assessed in a review clinic, using the same parameters that had been previously measured. Each patient had standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the affected wrist taken. From these, radial angulation, radial shortening, and dorsal angulation were measured and the degree of arthritic change was graded as minimal, moderate or severe (Knirk and Jupiter, 1986). All patients had their wrist movements and grip strength measured by a dedicated senior physiotherapist. Patients were also questioned about activities of daily living (turning doorknobs, taps, keys, carrying objects and any perceived functional difficulties and loss of wrist strength) and a Gartland and Werley (1951) score was calculated. Patients were also asked if they were satisfied with the end result of their treatment using a simple yes/no question on the patient questionnaire. Comparison was made to the range of movement and grip strength in the contralateral wrist and also to the measurements at 1 year to assess if each patient had deteriorated. One hundred and twenty-five patients were initially randomized into the study. At 7-year follow-up, 17 had died, four had moved away from the area and a further 18 were lost to follow-up. This left 86 fractures, 36 which had been treated with a Pennig fixator and 50 with plaster immobilization ( Radial shortening and radial angulation were significantly better in the Pen group compared to the POP group ( There was no difference between the two groups in terms of ranges of flexion, extension, pronation, supination and ulnar and radial deviation or grip strength ( When comparing the range of movement and grip strength in the injured wrist with the results obtained at 1 year there was not a marked deterioration. In fact, some patients had a better range of movement and grip strength at 7 years than they had at the 1-year review. This was most noticeable with extension and grip strength ( Few patients noted problems in their activities of daily living. Turning keys or taps was not a problem for 77 of the 85 patients. Picking up small objects and turning door handles without difficulty was reported by 68 of all those reviewed. Malunion was taken to be a residual dorsal angle of greater than 10°, or greater than 3 Eighty-one of the 85 patients treated by either method had an excellent or good Gartland and Werley score ( One patient treated in plaster had persistent symptoms due to reflex sympathetic dystrophy (pain and skin changes). No patient had required carpal tunnel decompression as a result of their injury. Thirteen patients (36%) treated with external fixators complained of unsightly tethered forearm scars at the proximal pin insertion sites. Two patients treated in plaster had extensor pollicis longus (EPL) tendon ruptures. One was treated with a tendon transfer, and the other patient refused operative treatment. One patient treated by a Pennig fixator has persistent weakness in his wrist requiring him to wear a wrist splint. A total of 16 patients (six Pen, ten POP) reported persistent pain in the wrist ( There was very little evidence of post-traumatic arthritis in this group of patients ( Colles himself in his original paper, based on observations without the benefit of radiographs, concluded that restriction in wrist movement following injury was not a long-term problem (Colles, 1814). “One consolation only remains, that the limb will at some remote period again enjoy perfect freedom in all its motions, and be completely exempt from pain: the deformity however, will remain undiminished through life.” To our knowledge, no other prospective randomized study has involved such a large number of patients with distal radius fractures who have been followed up for such a long period. Other authors have opted to randomize patients to external fixation if plaster immobilization has failed to hold the fracture reduction within the first 2 weeks of treatment (McQueen, 1998) or randomized small numbers into the different groups (Abbaszadegan and Jonsson, 1990; Jenkins et al., 1987; Roumen et al., 1991). This study has shown that external fixation can improve the radiological results of fractures of the distal radius compared to plaster immobilization. External fixation consistently gave better radiological results in terms of radial shortening and radial angulation although there was no significant difference in the amount of dorsal angulation. There were a third fewer cases of malunion in the fixator group compared to the plaster group and this was statistically significant. However, the differences in the median values were small and it could be argued that such small differences cannot accurately be measured on radiographs. The study could be criticised for using the Gartland and Werley score (Gartland and Werley, 1951) as an outcome measure as it allocates points for radiological changes even when the patient is asymptomatic and also allocates few points for pain. It does however include both subjective and objective assessments and defines minimum ranges of movement for activities. Achieving a more anatomical union did not convey any improved range of movement or functional ability in the affected wrists of the cohort of patients studied. It has been advocated that functional disability ensues if anatomical reduction is not achieved (Gliatis et al., 2000; McQueen and Caspers, 1988; Rubinovich and Rennie, 1983; Villar et al., 1987), though others (Dias et al., 1987; Smaill, 1965) have not found that anatomical reduction correlates with the eventual clinical outcome. There was no change in wrist function compared to range of movement and grip strength of the uninjured wrist or compared to the results in the injured wrist 1 year after the fracture. Patients were also questioned about specific everyday tasks at their 7-year review. Activities of daily living were not reported as problematic in most patients, with 90% having no difficulty with activities requiring wrist rotation and 80% managing pinch-grip tasks without symptoms. The Gartland and Werley scores for our patients are similar to that reported by Field et al. (1992) in their 10-year follow-up of patients following displaced Colles’ fracture. They reported 85% with an excellent or good result. In contrast, we found a much higher percentage of our patients were pain free: 80% versus 56% as found by Field et al. (1992). One of the stated complications associated with most intra-articular fractures is the development of post-traumatic arthritis. In the radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joint, the reported incidence of this is variable, though Knirk and Jupiter (1986) reported a radiological incidence of 65% in the group of young adults, which they followed for 6.7 years after intra-articular distal radius fractures. Kopylov et al. (1993) found only minor degenerative changes in 33% of patients and that the radiographic findings correlated poorly with symptomatic complaints. This is in keeping with our own findings of radiological changes of degeneration in 12 of 48 patients (14%) sustaining intra-articular fractures, only one of whom had symptoms at 7 years that may have been attributed to these changes. Although our results have shown that there is no correlation between radiological and clinical outcome, a nihilistic approach of leaving acute displaced fractures of the distal radius unmanipulated cannot be recommended. Although the degrees of malunion that we observed in this cohort did not adversely affect the clinical outcome, we feel that acceptance of larger amounts of displacement might result in poorer outcomes. We thus recommend that we should still strive for anatomical correction of the acute deformity. Our findings show that the radiographic result after distal radial fracture is significantly better if patients are treated by external fixation rather than by plaster immobilization. However, after 7 years, the outcome measures that the patient notices, such as range of movement and function, are no different between the two treatment methods.