This book, “Preparation and Characterization of Aluminium Hydroxides and Aluminas” provides a comprehensive review of the title subject, based primarily on the author's extensive research in the field over a period spanning from the 1950s to the 1990s. This edition is an expanded version of the author's earlier book published in 1996 entitled “Preparation of Aluminium Hydroxides and Aluminas”. As such, it extends the subject matter to include a wealth of information on the characterization of the compounds described in addition to the enormous amount of valuable detail on the preparative aspects from the first edition. The book offers the interested reader the rare privilege of direct access to original data and procedures, and even some of the thought processes, of an eminent scientist who has made a major contribution to an important field of knowledge over a long and distinguished career. The level of detail at times gives the reader the feeling of almost peeking inside the lab. book of a great experimentalist. This can lead to difficulties in following the trail, but for anyone wanting to know, for example, how to prepare any of the myriad of specific aluminium–oxygen compounds it is worth the effort. Certainly, the book provides an invaluable resource of practical information. This work is not intended to be a definitive review of all the work in the field, nor should it be. The sections that attempt to provide general overviews of areas not treated in detail – such as the section in Chapter 2 on aluminium ores and the section in Chapter 3 on the kinetics of aluminium hydroxide precipitation – tend to be somewhat dated and narrow. Such sections should be considered as contextual background rather than authoritative reviews, and the reader who expects to find complete or current reference lists will not be satisfied. The book is organised into twelve chapters. The first is a very brief Introduction, followed by a description of the aluminium hydroxides that are the subject of the preparative and characterization procedures that are the main subject of the work. In common with the majority of the book, this chapter contains intimate detail of measurements made in the author's own laboratories, with extensive tables of original results and reproductions of X-Ray Diffraction, Infra-Red and Thermo-gravimetry Analysis scans and so forth. The value of some of these figures is rather limited because they are generally quite small and lacking in detail, but they do provide a general overview of the main characteristics. The next chapter covers the preparation of crystalline aluminium hydroxides by seeded precipitation, carbon dioxide treatment of the solution, and ageing of gelatinous precipitates in a variety of ways. The mathematical descriptions of precipitation rates do not reflect modern thinking on the subject, but they are entirely adequate as a guide to the preparative processes being described. The fourth chapter describes the preparation of a surprisingly large number of different gelatinous aluminium hydroxides by an equally surprising variety of methods. The methods vary from simple precipitation by acidification of the solution, to preparation from solutions of organic aluminium salts, reaction with hexammine and hydrolysis of aluminium alkoxide. Chapter 5 describes the reactions of hydrolytic decomposition of sodium aluminate solutions. These are processes that are at the core of the Bayer Process that is universally used for the industrial production of aluminium hydroxide — the first step in the production of aluminium metal. The description of the Bayer Process is rather perfunctory, but is sufficient to provide context. The chapter provides information on a broad range of aspects of the nature and behaviour of sodium aluminate solutions, including the structure of the aluminate ion, the kinetics of seeded and unseeded precipitation, and some of the effects of organic impurities. It even compares the behaviour of gallium and zinc to that of aluminium — including the various ways of separating gallium from a predominately aluminate liquor. We then progress from the hydroxides to the oxides in Chapter 6, in which the structures of the various oxide forms are described in considerable detail. The formation of oxides by heating the hydroxides and salts is described for a great number of cases in the following chapter. It also details the complex phase changes involved in the transformations through stages of dehydration of hydroxides and transformations between oxides. Chapter 8 covers the dehydration of gelatinous hydroxides and transformations of anhydrous aluminas to α-alumina in more detail which is followed by a chapter on the thermal decomposition of aluminium salts. Having dealt exhaustively with the dehydration processes involved in the production of aluminas from hydroxides, the loop is closed in Chapter 10 with a treatment of the hydration behaviour of aluminas. The final two chapters cover a miscellany of structural and preparative details that were not covered in the foregoing chapters. In conclusion, this volume is an important addition to the bookshelf for practitioners in any field related to aluminium oxides and hydroxides, such as the production of alumina by the Bayer Process, the production of metal by smelting, the production of catalyst supports or fire retardants, or simply pure research on the structure and composition of aluminium-containing compounds.