High concentrations of iron represent a drawback in the hydrometallurgy of copper, since this metal cation could be co-extracted or entrained to the electrowinning step causing difficulties in obtaining pure copper. In this work, a pre-treatment step based on solvent extraction of iron using a hydrophobic imidazolium-based ionic liquid is proposed to overcome this drawback. The ionic liquid [bmim][Tf2N] was used as the diluent. The β-diketone TFA was used as the extractant. The results show that the combination extractant-ionic liquid is capable to remove iron(III) selectively from a pregnant leach solution (PLS) containing mainly copper(II) and iron(III) at low pH values. Furthermore, the use of this ionic liquid as diluent shows high extraction capacities. Finally, 97% of iron(III) can be stripped from the ionic liquid using a diluted solution of sulfuric acid (2M).Solvent extraction (SX) is an economical and widely used process in hydrometallurgy for the recovery of valuable ions from aqueous solutions after the leaching process. This technology has been used in large scale for the extraction of copper from a pregnant leach solution (PLS) ( In the hydrometallurgy of copper, the presence of iron is undesirable because in the SX of copper, iron could be co-extracted or entrained to the electrowinning step, leading to difficulties during the purification process. Iron could be removed by means of a selective precipitation forming goethite, jarosite or hematite ( Recently, ionic liquids have been proposed as potential replacements of those organic diluents in SX of alkali metals ( From these studies, the ionic liquids 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate [bmim][PF Thus, the main goal of this work is to achieve an efficient and selective removal of iron from an industrial pregnant leach solution provided by Antofagasta Minerals S.A. and a synthetic solution containing mainly Cu(II)/Fe(III) using the ionic liquid [bmim][Tf A pregnant leach solution (PLS) generated at Antofagasta Minerals S.A. mining company located in Antofagasta, Chile, was used for the solvent extraction experiments with 1,1,1-trifluoro-2,4-pentanedione (TFA). The concentrations of Cu(II) and Fe(III) as well as the pH of the PLS are summarized in The organic phase or so called ionic liquid phase was prepared from 1-butyl-3-methylimidizalium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([bmim][Tf The extraction stoichiometry was studied through dedicated experiments, which were carried out using buffer solutions prepared from potassium hydrogen phthalate, hydrochloric acid 37%, acetic acid (purity > A third step considered striping assays, where sulfuric acid with purity higher than 98.1% (J.T. Baker) was used to prepare stripping solutions. The synthetic solution was prepared using an analytical balance with a precision of ± The solvent extraction experiments were carried out in an open flask where the aqueous and ionic liquid phases were mixed and stirred for 40 The identification of the solvent extraction stoichiometry of each metal ion was achieved using solutions of copper and iron, which were prepared separately by dissolving the sulfate salt of copper or iron in a buffer solution containing potassium hydrogen phthalate 1.0 The effect of pH on the solvent extraction was examined using a synthetic aqueous solution containing 0.5 Finally, the stripping of the Fe(III) from the loaded ionic liquid phase was carried out. The concentration in this ionic liquid phase was obtained by mass balance. Thus, the phase separated from the previous extraction tests was put in contact with aqueous stripping solution with increasing concentrations of sulfuric acid at volumetric O/A ratio equal to 1.0 and stirred for 40 The extraction performance of the process can be quantified on the basis of the extraction percentage of the metal ion. Eq. On the other hand, the extraction stoichiometry was investigated for Cu(II) and Fe(III) by determining the extraction (%) as a function of equilibrium pH. There are three possible stoichiometries, which could be classified into cationic (acidic), anionic (basic) or solvating (neutral). Solvent extraction of Cu(II) using β-diketones as extractant has been previously reported ( Thus, by varying the Finally, selectivity  From Another important point is that the extraction of Cu(II)/Fe(III) as a function of the TFA concentration is similar in both PLS and synthetic solution and the effect of the other metal species listed in Finally, the initial Fe(III)/Cu(II) concentration ratio was about 4.7 in the PLS and after solvent extraction this ratio decreased to about 1.6. In this way, solvent extraction of iron using an ionic liquid as diluent could be a good alternative as a pretreatment process before SX/EW of copper. It is worth noting that the formation of a third liquid phase was not observed during the solvent extraction experiments, verifying that a phase modifier is not required to achieve the phase separation. This eliminates the need of introducing additional organic reagents.   Eq. On the other hand, The suitability of the chosen ionic liquid as diluent was analyzed in a set of extraction experiments with different A/O ratios. It is possible to obtain relatively high extraction percentage, which reaches 40%, even at high A/O ratios (5/1). Yoon and coworkers reported that some ionic liquids showed extraction efficiencies three times higher than hexane in SX of lanthanides ( In  From these results, it can be concluded that the pretreatment of a PLS loaded with iron and copper by means of a solvent extraction process using [bmim][Tf The selective solvent extraction of iron from an industrial PLS and a synthetic solution using TFA as the extractant and [bmim][Tf The extraction of iron was highly selective from solutions of pH Finally, a 2.0 The financial support of the projects