Batches of authentic industrial base metal refinery (BMR) and precious metal refinery (PMR) effluents containing large amounts of Ni, Cu and Fe ions and relatively small amounts of the valuable Pt, Pd and Rh metal ions have been treated with silica-based (poly)amine anion exchangers. In most cases, notably with the PMR effluents, the extraction of Pt and Pd appeared to be very effective, with recuperation of more than 95% from some of the effluents, while an increase in temperature was not necessary to obtain maximum metal ion uptake. Successive Rh extraction from the BMR effluents resulted in a maximum removal of 22% of the metal ions initially present. A higher percentage could not be reached apparently due to the presence of large amounts of competing sulphate and chloride counter ions. The removal of Rh from PMR effluents containing smaller amounts of other transition metal ions was somewhat more effective. Despite the large amounts of Ni, Cu and Fe in many of the tested effluents, no uptake of any of these metal ions has been observed. The platinum group metal (PGM) selectivity of these ion exchangers over the other transition metals has thus proven to be very high.The platinum group metals (PGMs: Pd, Pt, Rh, Ir, Ru and Os) are increasingly used in industry for various purposes, such as dental applications, in electronic and electrical devices, in jewelry and as catalysts, mainly automobile exhaust emission control catalysts One of our interests lies in the recovery of the PGMs as primary metals. Generally, they are extracted from ore process streams (leachates). This is a very challenging target, as the selective extraction of these precious metals from mainly acidic chloride solutions that also often contain large quantities of other transition metals is a very difficult task. A classical way to obtain the PGMs is by reduction of the metals followed by precipitation Ion exchange is a powerful tool to selectively recover very small amounts of metal ions from very dilute solutions. A high selectivity for Rh over other transition metals reported by us The research presented here has focused on the extraction of the most precious PGMs, Pd, Pt and Rh, from industrial base metal refinery (BMR) and precious metal refinery (PMR) effluents with the use of silica-based ion exchangers. The ion exchangers presented in this publication contain (poly)amine groups as functional groups. All reactions were performed under an argon atmosphere with standard Schlenk techniques. All reagents, solvents and the free ligands, i.e. 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propylamine, Solid-state Free ligand (1.7 mmol/g silica) was added to a suspension of silica in toluene (5–10 mL/g silica), and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 48 h. After filtration, the residual reagents were removed by washing with toluene (3×). The ion exchangers were further purified by refluxing toluene in a Soxhlet apparatus for 24 h and were subsequently dried at 50 °C in vacuo (200 mbar) until constant weight. Analysis found (calculated) for Analysis found (calculated) for Analysis found (calculated) for Fifty milligrams of ion exchanger was added to a solution of 5.0 mL of effluent and 20.0 mL deionized water. In this way, theoretically, all PGMs could be extracted by a single batch of ion exchanger. The suspension was agitated in polyethylene bottles mounted on a shaker for 24 h at room temperature, or at 65 °C using a water bath, to attain equilibrium. The samples were filtered, and the PGM content of the filtrate was measured. The residual ion exchangers were washed (three times) with deionized water, EtOH (absolute) and Et In the case of the doped effluents, a fixed amount of 3 mg RhCl For the successive extraction experiments The extraction extent (as a percent of total PGM present) was determined in two different ways: (1) measurement of the PGM content of the ion exchangers after treatment with the effluent; (2) measurement of the amount of PGM ions left in the effluent (filtrate) after contact with the extractant. The mass balance was always calculated to obtain a good idea of the reliability of the results, acquired with both methods. The amount of extracted Rh, based on the content of the ion exchangers (1), has always been found to be very similar to the amount based on the content of the filtrate (2). This is not the case for Pd and, to a much larger extent, for Pt. The amounts of extracted metal ions based on the content of the ion exchanger are much lower than those based on the content of the filtrate. This is the result of partial reduction of the Pd and Pt metal ions to M The possible contribution of the surface silanol groups to the extraction of Pd, Pt and Rh has been tested at under various acidic conditions (up to 5 M HCl). No significant uptake was detected. For the determination of the selectivity, the Cu, Fe and Ni uptake of the ion exchangers was investigated. The ion exchangers used for this investigation were obtained after a methanolysis reaction of the corresponding free ligand with silica, yielding ion exchangers with The BMR effluents that have been tested were tertiary leach liquor (TLL) and pressure vessel liquor (PVL), also called Nickel Leachate, and they contained very large amounts of other transition metals, with Ni (sulphate) concentrations over 100 g/L. As these effluents did not contain substantial amounts of Pd or Pt, only the Rh extraction was investigated. As depicted in Due to the fact that the amine groups in the ion exchangers are protonated under these acidic conditions Due to the relatively low sorption of the Rh-rich effluent TLL, an effort was made to improve the extraction percentage by successive extraction. A complicating factor in understanding the observed extraction behaviour is the fact that the contents of these very complex effluents is not fully known, which makes the determination of the PGM metal complexes difficult to know and predict. Since the other available effluents, which originated from different stages in the precious metal refining process, often contained considerable amounts of Pd and Pt besides Rh, the extraction of these precious metals was also determined. The characteristics of the tested different PMR plant effluents, Studies on the Pt sorption from effluent Very effective extraction has been obtained on effluent The order of ‘extractability’ has been established to be As both Pd(II) and Pt(II/IV) form similar complexes at relatively high chloride concentrations, namely [PdCl The extraction of Pd from the relatively ‘clean’ effluent The extraction of Pd is much less efficient for effluent The results obtained with nonacidic effluent The possibility of separating the PGMs from the other transition metals, Cu, Ni or Fe, is of course a very important issue. The uptake of these metal ions has therefore been investigated for all the effluents. No detectable adsorption of these transition metal ions, by the ion exchangers, has been observed with any of the effluents. Only upon increasing the temperature to 65 °C were a few milligram per liter of Fe, found to be extracted from the effluents that contained high concentrations of this metal ion. The fact that in most of the effluents, the other transition metals are present in high excesses (up to >100:1) over the PGMs, leads to the conclusion that these (poly)amine ion exchangers are very selective. The main reason for this behaviour is the difference in stability of the anionic complexes that the other transition metal ions and the PGMs form under acidic conditions. PGMs readily form very stable [MCl The extraction experiments of Pd, Pt and Rh ions from industrial base metal refinery (BMR) effluents and precious metal refinery (PMR) with silica-based (poly)amine ion exchangers have shown a very high selectivity for PGMs as no detectable amounts of the other transition metals (Ni, Cu and Fe) are adsorbed at room temperature, even though, in most of the tested effluents, these metal ions were present in high excess over the PGMs. An almost quantitative Pt and Pd extraction from some of the PMR effluents, which contained almost 200 mg/L of these metal ions, has been effected. The extraction of all the metal ions is less effective when high concentrations of counter ions are present. In summary, it is shown that highly selective and efficient extraction of PGMs with the presented ion exchangers is possible. The fact that (a) the ion exchangers originate from relatively inexpensive starting materials and (b) maximum extraction is obtained at room temperature, makes the application in a continuous system commercially feasible. This research has been sponsored by IOP (Innovation Oriented Research Programme, The Netherlands) Environmental Technology/Heavy Metals Cluster Separation, project number IZW97411. Mr. Louis Saayman is thanked for assistance with the ICP analyses. Dr. W. Buijs (DSM-Research) is kindly acknowledged for his suggestions and fruitful discussions. Mr. F. Lefèber, Mr. K. Erkelens and Mr. J. G. Hollander are thanked for the collection of the solid-state CP MAS