Genetic and pharmacological studies provided evidence that serotonin (5-HT) is an important signaling molecule for the development and the maintenance of mineralized tissues. However, how 5-HT takes part to the homeostasis of teeth and bone remains elusive. In the dental field, a major breakthrough comes from the identification of 5-HT but also dopamine (DA) as "damage" signals necessary for stem cell-based tooth repair. Pulpal stem cells express the overall functions of 5-HT and DA neurons including a definite set of functional 5-HT/DA receptors that render cells responsive for circulating bioamines. Upon tooth injury, activated platelets release bulks of 5-HT/DA that mobilize pulpal stem cells for natural dental repair. The contribution of 5-HT to bone metabolism is more documented with description of both anabolic and resorptive effects. By controlling the tissue-non specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), 5-HT2B receptors exert an anabolic function and a pivotal role in mineralization processes. Increasing our understanding of the role of 5-HT receptors in bone metabolism may pave the road for the development of therapeutic strategies towards skeletal-associated pathologies and ectopic calcification.Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) is a tryptophan-derived bioamine synthesized by neurons of the raphe nuclei in the central nervous system and gut enterochromaffin cells in the periphery, this last site accounting for 95% of 5-HT produced in the human body. In the brain, 5-HT acts as a neurotransmitter and mediates a wide variety of behavioral and physiological processes such as sleep, memory, cognition, appetite or mood [ At early stages of embryonic mammalian development, 5-HT of maternal origin [ Expression of the SERT and diverse serotonergic receptors has been evidenced at the mRNA or protein levels in osteoblast primary cultures, osteoblastic cell lines or RANKL-induced RAW264.7 osteoclasts as well as in tooth tissues [ In this review, we will highlight how the use of stem cell lines, which combine the capacities to maintain a stable immature phenotype and to recapitulate To rational the development of stem cell-based tooth regenerative strategies, a prerequisite is to define the intrinsic properties of odontogenic stem cells and to identify the physiological signals leading to the recruitment of those pulpal progenitors for reparative dentin formation upon tooth injury. Since the 2000's, odontogenic stem cells were isolated from the pulp of human permanent third molars that referred to as dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) [ In 2005, our laboratory isolated clonal cell lines from the first molar tooth germs of day 18 mouse embryos [ As human DPSCs that secrete diverse neurotrophic factors [ Surprisingly, we discovered that odontogenic stem cells have a dual serotonergic and dopaminergic identity [ A striking feature of A4 and H8 pulpal stem cells is the expression at the plasma membrane of the same specific subset of serotonergic and dopaminergic receptors. This includes the 5-HT Stem cell behavior is regulated by a local microenvironment referred as to “the stem cell niche”. This anatomic space includes (i) stem cells and (ii) stromal-supporting cells that interact with the stem cells via secreted factors and/or extracellular matrix (ECM), which allows the diffusion of mechanical and chemical signals [ The presence of a specific repertoire of serotonergic and dopaminergic receptors at the plasma membrane of odontogenic stem cells renders these cells competent to respond to both 5-HT and DA, and in particular to those circulating bioamines. In the periphery, 5-HT and DA are mainly stored in blood platelets. In platelets, 5-HT and DA contents are about 25,000 and 100–300 times higher than the concentration of free circulating 5-HT and DA in plasma, respectively [ Bone development, growth, remodeling and repair are highly regulated processes ensuring skeleton homeostasis. Despite considerable efforts to dissect the molecular pathways sustaining osteogenesis, the regulatory mechanisms governing collagen matrix mineralization still remain enigmatic. It is now clear that the serotonergic system contributes to bone metabolism [ The C1 tripotential mesoblastic cell line maintains a stable undifferentiated phenotype even in 10% serum. Upon addition of appropriate inducers, C1 cells engage at high frequency (>90%), in a mutually exclusive and synchronous manner, into the osteogenic, chondrogenic or adipogenic programs [ Pharmacological studies led to show that a functional 5-HT From day 5 to terminal differentiation, 5-HT In addition to its coupling to NOS, the 5-HT Although not an osteoblast specific enzyme, the tissue-non specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) is a key actor in bone mineralization that governs the inorganic phosphate (Pi)/pyrophosphate (PPi) ions ratio. The essential role of this glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored enzyme in mineral crystal formation has been evidenced in human patients with TNAP loss-of-function mutation [ This review reports some recent aspects of the implication of 5-HT and serotonergic receptors in mineralized tissues homeostasis. As concern dental tissues, tooth decay is one of the widest spread infections around the world (almost 100%). Root canal sealers used for endodontic treatments aim to eradicate bacterial infection and protect tooth against re-contaminations. These filling materials are not designed to preserve and/or mobilize resident pulpal stem cells for tooth repair. The identification of a dialogue mediated by 5-HT and DA between blood platelets and odontogenic stem cells provides a rational for the development of novel therapeutic strategies targeting pulpal stem cells and therefore enhancing natural tooth repair. Regarding the skeleton, the integrity of this dynamic tissue is ensured by a constant remodeling through the coordinated action of bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts. Although, it is becoming clear that the 5-HT system contributes to bone metabolism, the action of 5-HT on skeleton homeostasis is still controversed. A genetic approach developed by Yadav et al. revealed a low bone mass phenotype in mice depleted for TPH2, the brain TPH isoform. These data suggest that brain-derived 5-HT contributes to skeleton homeostasis through the hypothalamus by suppression of sympathetic tone [ The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was supported by