The evaluation of mastication is important to understand the masticatory behavior and diagnose feeding difficulties. The objective of this preliminary study was to verify if there is agreement between objective and subjective validated methods of chewing evaluation in a convenience sample which consisted of 32 adolescents (mean 15.5years), complete permanent dentition and free of tooth decay. The Quality of Masticatory Function Questionnaire with the Food-Mastication, Habits, Meat, Fruit and Vegetables domains was used in the subjective evaluation. The objective aspects consisted of maximum bite force (BF) and masticatory performance (MP) by mastication of cubes of test-material and sieving to determine the median particle size (X50) and distribution in the sieves (“b”), and by the colorimetric method using colorchangeable chewing gum. Data were submitted to exploratory analysis, normality test and correlation tests (Pearson/Spearman). The correlation between BF and X50 (r=−0.43; p=0.02) and between BF and MP chewing gum (r=0.53; p=0.002) was significant with large effect size. The MP evaluated by chewing gum correlated with X50 (r=−0.34; p=0.055), but not with “b” (r=−0.06; p=0.73), while “b” correlated only with X50 (r=0.52, p=0.002). No significant correlation was observed between the objective measures and the total score of the subjective evaluation; only a negative correlation was observed between “b” and Meat domain (r=−0.40; p=0.023). The objective methods showed moderate correlation with each other and no agreement between the objective and subjective methods was observed in this sample of healthy adolescents, emphasizing the importance of both aspects in the evaluation of masticatory function.Chewing is the first step in the process of digestion; it is defined as a sensory-motor activity, which process is complex and involves activities of the facial, elevator and suprahyoidal muscles and the tongue During chewing, food taste and texture are perceived and modulate the process; for ex., food hardness influences the masticatory force, activity and the amplitude of mandibular movements Because of its complexity, the evaluation of the quality of masticatory function may comprise many techniques that cover all aspects of chewing and, in general, are classified as objective and subjective methods. The subjective methods include those instruments intended to gather the patients' or study participants' ratings of their chewing experience and satisfaction Masticatory performance and efficiency are two different objective methods intended to examine the capacity to reduce the size of food particles by chewing for a standardized period, and the number of chews necessary to render food ready for swallowing, respectively Bite force and occlusal contact area have also been studied as objective parameters of mastication Very few studies are found in the literature which tried to examine the correlation between masticatory performance or efficiency and the subjects' opinion about his/her own mastication. This fact is probably due to the few number of validated instruments to measure the subjective aspects of mastication The hypothesis to be tested was that the evaluation of subjects' ratings of their chewing ability and satisfaction agree with objective measures of masticatory quality. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate and test the correlation between the scores of masticatory quality gathered from a validated instrument, maximum bite force and masticatory performance examined by sieving and colorimetric methods in a convenience sample of healthy adolescents. This study was approved by the Research and Ethics Committee of Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas (protocol n. 152/2014). The procedures and possible discomforts/risks were fully explained to the adolescent and their parents We selected a convenience sample of 32 healthy adolescents (13 females and 19 males, aged 14–17 Researchers conducted an interview with the adolescent to verify the medical and dental history. The inclusion criterion was the presence of permanent dentition (exception of third molars). The exclusion criteria considered factors that could compromise the masticatory evaluation, such as: presence of caries and/or tooth loss; periodontal disease (pockets The oral examination was performed using a clinical mirror with LED light and exploratory probe after oral hygiene instructions. Caries experience was determined by the number of decayed, missing, and filled permanent teeth (DMFT) and data on probing depth were obtained in accordance to the Community Periodontal Index Maximum unilateral bite force was obtained using a digital gnatodynamometer (model DDK, Kratos Equipamentos Ind. Ltda., Cotia-SP, Brazil. For more details, please visit: During the assessment, the participant remained seated, with the head in a relaxed position and the fork was placed between the maxillary and mandibular arches, over the permanent first molars. The adolescent was instructed and trained before biting with maximum force, and two measurements were made for each side of the dental arches (left and right), with an interval of 1 Masticatory performance was assessed using two methods: by the determination of the individual capacity of fragmentation of a test-material (Optocal) First, the adolescents chewed on 17 cubes of Optocal for 20 mastication cycles, monitored by the examiner. The fragmented particles were then expelled and after washing and drying, the particles passed through a series of 10 granulometric sieves with meshes ranging from 5.60 to 0.71 In the next day, the colorimetric method was performed with the subjects being asked to chew the color-changeable gum for 1 The gum base contains red, yellow, and blue dyes, citric acid and xylitol. The red dye is pH-sensitive and appears under neutral or alkaline conditions. As the pH inside the chewing gum is kept low by the citric acid, the color of the chewing gum remains yellowish-green before chewing. With the progression of chewing, the color of the chewing gum turns from yellowish-green to red because the yellow and blue dyes seep into saliva, and the red dye appears because of elution of the citric acid We used a self-applied questionnaire (Quality of Masticatory Function Questionnaire) which consists of 26 questions specifically related to the frequency and difficulty of chewing different types of foods in the last two weeks. This Canadian questionnaire was translated to Portuguese, adapted and validated previously The questions are distributed in five domains: Food-Mastication, Habits, Meat, Fruit and Vegetables, which have 5 Do you have difficulty chewing hard, raw fruits, without cutting them (e.g.: apples)? Do you have to drink while eating to facilitate swallowing? In general, is the food well chewed before being swallowed? Statistical analyses were performed using BioEstat 5.3 (Mamirauá, Belém, PA, Brazil) and SigmaPlot 13 (Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). An alpha level of 5% was considered. Shapiro-Wilk test showed that the distributions of the X When interpreting the answers of the questionnaire, it was observed that NA (not applicable) was checked by nine volunteers, and the missing values were changed by the median of the items' score for that domain, as previously described Because of their skewed distributions, X A correlation matrix was obtained for objective and subjective measures of mastication, using Pearson's (between objective measures) and Spearman's (between subjective measures) correlation tests for parametric and non-parametric data, respectively. The Cohen's The exploratory analysis in accordance to demographic and clinical data is shown in  No significant correlation was observed between total score gathered from the questionnaire and bite force and masticatory performance (objective measures) ( To our knowledge, this is the first study which employed validated methods to test the correlation between objective and subjective measures of mastication. Although preliminary, interesting findings showed that objective measures (both masticatory performance methods applied and bite force) correlated significantly between each other with large effect size. However, concordance between objective and subjective measures were absent. The maximum bite force is not usually applied during habitual chewing and because of the large number of devices and methodologies found in the literature, it has been criticized for not being easy to standardize and compare. An intraoral device was also proposed, allowing natural mastication without an increase in the vertical dimension In this study, bite force showed moderate correlation with both methods of masticatory performance evaluation (chewing gum and X The two types of masticatory performance evaluation showed agreement, that is, higher the degree of gum red color, lower the Optocal's median particle size. Optocal is a test-material which is not usual in flavor, taste and texture whereas chewing gum has the advantage of being routinely consumed, with good flavor and stability producing fast reliable results According to our results, there was no correlation between the objective measures and the scores gathered on a self-administered questionnaire, corroborating previous findings in edentulous subjects Previous findings gathered from simpler methods showed that self-assessed chewing ability and masticatory performance do not tend to correlate Taken together, the results suggest that there is no better method in the evaluation of masticatory function, but rather one evaluation complements the other. Chewing involves both physical and psychosocial aspects and, because of their complexity, all methods seem to be of importance in understanding the individuals' chewing function and behavior in her/his daily life, beyond its importance in the clinical point of view. Although interesting and new, this preliminary study found results that should be confirmed in a further study which includes patients undergoing oral rehabilitation to guarantee their external validity. In this preliminary study, objective methods showed a moderate correlation with each other, while no agreement between the objective and subjective methods was observed, emphasizing the importance of both aspects in the evaluation of masticatory function, in understanding the individuals' chewing behavior and during the treatment planning. The authors declare no conflict of interests. This study was supported by the State of São Paulo Research Foundation ( The authors would like to thank all study participants. Color scale was kindly provided by Prof. Eijiro Yamaga, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan. This study was supported by the State of São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP, SP, Brazil, n. 2014/24804-4).