Lead zirconate titanate (PZT) powders of molar composition 60/40 have been prepared by a chemical method starting from mixed metal nitrate (Zr4+,Ti4+,Pb2+)-polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution. The precursor powders were obtained by the complete evaporation of the mixed solution. Calcination of the precursors at 500−600°C/2h produced single phase PZT. The metal ion to polymer mole ratio have been studied with respect to the phase constitution, crystallite size, particle morphology, and dielectric properties. The precursor and heat-treated powders were characterized by TG/DTA and XRD analysis. The average particle sizes of the heat-treated phase-pure precursor powders were measured using TEM and a particle size analyzer. The results show that the process provides a technically simple route for the preparation of fine, homogeneous PZT powders at low preparation temperatures.Lead zirconate titanates (PZT) exhibit excellent electromechanical properties and are widely used as ultrasonic resonators, ceramic filters, high-power transducer, actuators, and so on Chemical synthesis has been used to fabricate ceramics with improved compositional homogeneity at lower densification temperatures. The advantage of chemical routes arises from the careful control of composition, which can be effected by mixing the constituents at a molecular level in solution. Over the last few decades, a number of chemical synthesis techniques Hirashima et al. A chemical method has been developed by the present authors PVA is widely used as a binder for green shaping of ceramic materials and decomposing exothermally at low ignition temperatures (500°C), leaving behind hardly any residue. This characteristic, together with water-soluble nature, has motivated the present study. The general objective was to achieve uniform distribution of the cations throughout the solution. It was assumed that there would be a little segregation of various cations that remain trapped in the evaporated mass. To achieve a homogeneous PZT is quite a complex process, with many variable experimental parameters affecting the final product. The amount of PVA used is important in the final agglomerate morphology and homogeneity, and sufficient water is necessary to ensure the homogeneous mixing of all components. Hydrous titanium oxide and zirconium oxide were slowly reacted with nitric acid to produce soluble titanyl and zirconyl nitrates. Details of the hydrous titanium oxide and hydrous zirconium oxide preparation from TiO Stoichiometric amounts of the individual metal (i.e., Ti (IV), Zr (IV), and Pb (II)) nitrates were thoroughly mixed in accordance with the PZT composition of Zr/Ti ratio 60/40 to form the stock solution. The pH of the stock was adjusted to 1 by adding nitric acid. Aliquot amount of the cationic stock solution was taken and heated (at 70°C). 10% (w/v) aqueous solution of PVA (Mol. wt. 1,25,00) was then added to the cationic mixture with thorough stirring. For the PVA variation studies, the metal ion to vinyl alcohol monomer unit of PVA mole ratio in the starting solution was maintained at 1:0, 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3. The experimental details for the four samples designated P Simultaneously recorded thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis (TG/DTA) studies of the precursor material were carried out at a heating rate of 10°C min Comparison of the various TG/DTA curves of the precursor powders obtained from the variation of metal ion–PVA mole ratios is shown in The DTA curves show that the thermal behavior of the precursor varied depending on the metal ion–PVA composition. In the sample P In the case of sample P X-ray diffraction of the powders revealed that the precursor materials were amorphous. Crystallization of the oxide phase initiated with the heat-treatment of the precursor powders at temperatures as low as 400°C/2h. Heat-treatment of the precursors at 500°C (2h) showed the formation of mixed phase in samples P The crystallite sizes of the heat-treatment powders were calculated from the X-ray broadening of the ‘d’ line, using the Scherrer equation The TEM micrographs reflect the basic powder morphology, where the smallest visible particles can be identified with the crystallite aggregates. This agglomeration could have occurred because of the highly reactive nature of the particles. The average particle sizes (given in The particle size distribution and the average particle size  As in normal ferroelectric, the dielectric constant (ϵ) of PZT increases gradually with temperature and attains a maxima (ϵ The final phase constitution, morphology, and the dielectric properties of the powders are affected by the amount of PVA present in the starting solution. The utility of the polymeric approach comes from the chemical interactions of the cations on the polymer chains, and the principal action of PVA in the preparation of precursor powders changes with the amount of PVA added. From the experimental results, the optimum ratio of PVA to metal ion was found to be 2 (i.e., precursor P To compare the results with the available reported data (in The dielectric constant of PZT (52/48) powders that were sintered at 900°C/6h in our study (9,210) and reported in other works by chemical method (8,483) Fine, homogeneous PZT powders have been prepared by the rapid evaporation of mixed metal nitrate-PVA solution followed by calcination of the evaporated mass. The study shows that the optimum condition is when the precursor is prepared from a solution containing a 1:2 metal ion:PVA mole ratio (i.e., precursor P The present route produced better quality PZT powders than those produced by solid-state route and consequently, it shows higher dielectric constant value under similar sintering condition. Further, the combustion of precursors was accompanied by the evolution of various gases (such as CO The authors are grateful to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India, for the financial assistance provided for carrying out the research work.