A binary mixture of α-aminophosphonic acid extractant 2-ethylhexyl-3-(2-ethylhexylamino)pentan-3-yl-phosphonic acid (HEHAPP, H2A2) and di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA, H2B2) in n-heptane was employed for the extraction and separation of rare earths (REs) from chloride medium. A remarkable synergistic effect was observed in the Lu(III) extraction by the mixture. The extracted species of Lu(III) was determined as LuH4Cl2A3B2. The separation factors of adjacent heavy REs, i.e. SF
                     Er/Ho, SF
                     Tm/Er, SF
                     Yb/Tm and SF
                     Lu/Yb, were of 1.45, 2.58, 2.77 and 1.77, which were much higher than those for other reported synergistic systems, suggesting that the mixture of HEHAPP and D2EHPA is a potential synergistic extraction system for the separation of heavy REs.With the increasing demand for high purity individual rare earths (REs) in the global market, the extraction and separation of REs has attracted considerable attention. Various extractants, such as acidic organophosphorus extractants ( Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) has been used extensively in the hydrometallurgical industry of REs since 1960s ( Up to now, although numerous synergistic extraction with D2EHPA ( 2-Ethylhexyl-3-(2-ethylhexylamino)pentan-3-yl-phosphonic acid (HEHAPP) was synthesized and purified as in our previous work (accepted for publication in J. Rare Earths). D2EHPA was provided from Luoyang Aoda Chemical Co., Ltd. (China) without further purification. Stock solutions of REs were prepared by dissolving the corresponding oxide (Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, China) with concentrated hydrochloric acid and diluting to the required volume with distilled water. The RE (III) concentrations were analyzed by titration with a standard solution of EDTA at pH Mixed REs solutions were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optimal 8000). IR spectra (KBr pellets) were recorded on a Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer. The extraction procedures were carried out as follows: equal volumes (5 The loaded organic phase was stripped by different inorganic acids (HCl, HNO A series of extraction tests were performed to study the synergistic effect on Lu As discussed above, compared with the sole HEHAPP or D2EHPA system, the mixtures of HEHAPP and D2EHPA exhibit enhanced extraction behavior toward lutetium. In order to investigate the possibility to separate the adjacent rare earths with this mixture, the extraction and separation of other rare earth elements were also studied. Separation factor, The further The extraction mechanism of Lu The value of log The extraction of REs from chloride medium with D2EHPA (H The relationship between the distribution ratio According to Eq. In the present study, the synergistic extraction of Lu The relationship between the distribution ratio In order to obtain the synergistic extraction stoichiometry of Lu Due to charge balance, two Cl The value of log To further evaluate the stability of the extracted species, the transformation of the extracted species of a sole extractant to that of the mixed one can be expressed as follows: The values of log For the further interpretation of the RE extracted complexes with the mixture of HEHAPP and D2EHPA, IR spectra of the extractants and the extracted complexes were recorded and some characteristic bands were given in The effect of temperature on the extraction of Lu The stripping of Lu The binary mixtures of HEHAPP and D2EHPA exhibit a remarkable synergistic effect on the Lu(III) extraction. The extraction mechanism was deduced by a slope analysis method and confirmed by IR analysis in detail. The extracted compound was determined as LuH This work was supported by