The flavour of a food or beverage is not perceived in a single event, but rather as a series of events experienced as the food is consumed. Recent methods in flavour research have taken account of this, and techniques have been developed to study flavour release in model systems (release cells or simulated mouths) and from the mouth or nose of assessors, while consuming foods. However, while there is agreement on the need in some cases for hydration or artificial saliva in simulated mouths, other parameters must be optimised on a case-by-case basis. Individual variability may still be a problem in breath analysis, and further work is required to determine the extent to which there are real differences in volatile profiles. The techniques of release cells and breath analysis must now be applied to provide data, which will allow flavour release to be modelled.The flavour of a food or beverage is not perceived in a single event, but rather as a series of events experienced as the food is consumed. When a food is taken into the mouth, flavour compounds must be released and must transfer to the receptors before there can be any sensation. For taste, the stimulating molecules must be in an aqueous phase and must transfer to the receptor cells of the taste buds on the tongue, and for smell, the volatile compounds must transfer to the gas phase and be carried to the receptor cells of the olfactory epithelium in the nose. The nature and intensity of the sensation are, therefore, affected not only by the quantities of flavour compounds present in the food, but also by all the processes of release and transfer. These might involve the structure and composition of the food, the temperature and pH of the mouth, saliva flow, the rate at which the food is broken down and mixed during chewing, transfer via the airways of the mouth and nose, breathing, swallowing, and losses due to adsorption on the surfaces of the airways In flavour research, an extract of the compounds responsible for the flavour must be prepared for analysis, but the method used for the preparation of the extract determines its composition These and similar methods provide measures of the compounds available as potential stimulants, and may not reflect accurately what is present at the receptors. Thus in some cases conventional headspace analysis has not provided data which corresponds well with the results of sensory analyses of the products. This could be the case for example when volatiles are formed by enzymatic or other reactions during consumption, when volatile release is controlled by hydration of the food in the mouth, or when variations in fat content of a food change the solubility of flavour compounds. Recent progress in flavour research has been towards the development of methods, which provide information on the concentrations of flavour compounds at or near the receptors A number of devices have been constructed which simulate in more or less detail the process of eating, but the borderline between dynamic headspace analysis and a simulated mouth is blurred. In conventional dynamic headspace analysis the volatiles from the food sample are swept from the headspace, trapped and analysed by gas chromatography (GC) In a flavour release cell or simulated mouth The time scale of some analytical procedures may be problematic, given the length of time a food item is likely to be in the mouth, and too long a time is likely to provide unrealistic results. Selected ion flow tube-mass spectroscopy has been used to follow evolution of volatiles from crushed onion, garlic and banana, but the relevance of the 15 min process to most foods is not obvious In some cases, it seems to have been assumed that the release cell represents an improvement on conventional headspace analysis, but sometimes comparisons have been made either with oral vapour or mouth sampling The collection process must be carefully judged to get a realistic volatile profile, preferably matched against sensory or other data derived from eating the food concerned. In one of the few explicitly optimised studies, homogenising strawberries for 10–30 s gave a headspace profile most like the volatile profile collected from the nose Other changes, such as addition of water or size reduction, occurring during eating might also affect volatile release. A hydration device has been added to a dynamic headspace sampler to study the effect of hydration on flavour release from biscuits for a time up to 5 min It has been difficult to investigate dynamic aspects of volatile release because the collection systems generally used do not have adequate sensitivity, but some degree of time resolution, typically of the order of 30 s, is possible using Tenax® traps The primary function of such release cells or simulated mouths is to analyse foods, and though they have provided useful data to aid understanding of what happens when food is eaten, they do not provide direct evidence of the processes in the mouth. Therefore, systems have been devised to allow sampling from the nose or mouth, on the assumption that this would represent better the volatiles, which reach the olfactory epithelium For analysis of food volatiles during consumption, two main approaches have been followed. These have been trapping on Tenax® or a similar material followed by chromatography, or direct input into a mass spectrometer via a suitable interface. Both methods have disadvantages, and compromises must be made. Trapping on Tenax®, as a derivative of conventional dynamic headspace analysis, has been used successfully to study flavour release in the mouth from a range of foods and model systems. Tenax® trapping was judged superior to direct input to a mass spectrometer and to cryogenic trapping for analysis of volatiles from mint sweets. Air sampled from the nose and mouth of the assessor and from a conventional headspace were all different Some degree of time resolution is possible using Tenax® trapping, but the time periods used tend to be rather long (typically 15–30 s) as a compromise between time resolution and sensitivity. There were large individual variations in mint sweet volatiles, and adequate sensitivity was difficult to achieve. The release rate of volatiles was shown to depend on the compounds’ properties The potential of a mass spectrometer to provide high sensitivity and rapid response has attracted considerable interest, but there have been continuing problems with devising a suitable interface. A membrane can be used to separate the volatiles of interest from air and water, but the response rate and selectivity of the membrane can be a problem Direct introduction of volatiles into a mass spectrometer would circumvent the problems of using a membrane, but the mass spectrometer used did not provide adequate sensitivity for volatiles from mint sweets A miniaturised conducting polymer sensor array with 6 elements has been used to obtain breath by breath measurement sampled from the nose There seems to have been relatively little interest in measurement of the release of taste compounds into the mouth, especially given the importance of salt and acid in many foods, and the public health concern with reducing the high salt content of the diet in many countries The time-resolved methods should ideally allow better correlation with sensory data, and particularly with sensory time-intensity data Release cells have been sufficiently robust to provide useful results Breath analysis is now a practical technique, though it still suffers from inadequate sensitivity for some foods. The mass spectrometry approaches provide rapid response for a high degree of time resolution, but there are still some limitations on the foods which can be used, and the inability of the most common system to distinguish between compounds giving the same molecular ion limits the complexity of the samples, which can be analysed. The trapping methods are much slower, but have the advantage that collected volatiles can be separated by chromatography. Variation between assessors may still be a problem, and further work is required to determine the extent to which there are real differences in volatile profiles. The techniques of release cells and breath analysis must now be applied to provide data which, in combination with an improved understanding of the physics of interactions of volatiles with other components of foods, will allow flavour release to be modelled.