The SAPO-34 catalyst was fine-tuned with zinc cations through a straightforward template-assisted ion incorporation (TII) process, without the necessary template pre-removal and the preparation of NH4-SAPO-34 intermediate, which is more facile, efficient and cost-effective than the conventional ion exchange process. The template-assisted zinc cations incorporated SAPO-34 catalysts were characterized by XRD, XRF, N2 adsorption-desorption, XPS, SEM, EDX, 1H NMR, respectively. Enhanced selectivity to ethylene and ratio of ethylene to propylene in MTO reaction are observed over the zinc cations modified SAPO-34 catalysts, due to the facilitated formation of lower methylbenzenes that favour the ethylene generation, as well as the increased diffusion hindrance originated from the zinc cations incorporation and the facilitated generation of aromatics compound.Light olefins including ethylene and propylene play vital roles in the petrochemical industry. The methanol-to-olefin (MTO) reaction, as a non-petrochemical route for the production of light olefins, with methanol produced from synthesis gas obtained by gasification of coal or biomass, has attracted great interests from both scientific and industrial field, due to the depletion of crude oil as well as the enormous world-wide market demand for light olefins To date, a plethora of strategies (e.g. the incorporation of hierarchical structure Recently, with the advantages of better metal dispersion, easy control of metal loading and simplicity in overall synthesis steps, the one-pot synthesis of Cu-SAPO-34 templated by Cu-amine (e.g. Tetraethylenepentamine (TEPA)) In our recent study, we demonstrated that the incorporated zinc cations via conventional ion exchange (CIE) process favour aromatic generation, the combined zinc cations accommodation and the facilitated aromatic formation introduce additional diffusion restriction for large-sized hydrocarbons, leading to increased selectivity to ethylene in MTO reaction The zinc cations modified SAPO-34 was prepared by template-assisted ion incorporation (TII) process and conventional ion exchange (CIE) process, respectively. For the TII process, the uncalcined SAPO-34 with the OSDA of triethylamine (TEA) (denoted as SP34) was stirred in 0.01 M Zn(NO For the CIE process, the uncalcined SAPO-34 with the OSDA of TEA (SP34) was calcined at 600 °C for 4 h to remove the OSDA. Then the calcined sample (denoted as H-SP34) was exchanged with 1 M NH Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained on a PANalytical X'Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer at 40 kV and 40 mA with Cu The chemical composition was determined with a Philips Magix-601 X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. The nitrogen adsorption-desorption was performed on Micromeritics ASAP 2020 at − 196 °C. The sample was degassed at 350 °C under vacuum for 6 h before the measurements. The total surface area was calculated based on the BET equation. The micropore surface area and micropore volume were evaluated using the t-plot method. The total pore volume was calculated from nitrogen adsorbed volume at the relative pressure of 0.99. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was record with Thermo ESCALAB 250Xi with monochromatic Al Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was conducted with cold field emission SEM Hitachi SU8020 equipped with a Horiba X-max silicon drift X-ray detector operated at an acceleration voltage of 20 kV. The solid-state NMR spectroscopy was conducted with a Bruker Avance III 600 spectrometer equipped with a 14.1 T wide-bore magnet using a 4 mm H-X magic angle spinning (MAS) probe. For 1H MAS NMR spectra, the samples were dehydrated at 400 °C at a pressure of less than 10 The MTO reaction test was performed in a fixed bed reactor under atmospheric pressure. The catalyst (1000 mg, 40–60 mesh) was packed in the center of quartz wool. The sample was pretreated under a Ar flow at 550 °C for 45 min and then the temperature was adjusted to 475 °C. A methanol solution with a CH The diffusion properties of probing molecule in the catalyst bed were evaluated with chromatographic method at 35 °C. The sample was heated from room temperature to 500 °C under a Ar flow for 1 h. Diffusion experiments were carried at 35 °C. Pulse containing ethylene (Ethylene 4.87%, He as the balance gas) was injected to catalyst bed for 0.6 s by switching a four-port valve, and the concentration of ethylene [ The amount of coke deposition in the catalysts after the MTO reaction was measured by thermogravimetry (TG) using a SDT Q600 analyzer. The catalysts were heated from room temperature to 900 °C under an air flow of 100 mL/min. The catalysts after methanol reaction at 475 °C for 2 min were kept isothermal in 150 °C for additional 30 min for complete removal of adsorbed water. The retained organic species in the catalysts after the MTO reaction were post-treated with the dissolution/extraction procedure and analysed with GC–MS. The catalysts were dissolved in a HF solution (20 wt%), the organic compounds were extracted with a CH As shown in Fig. S1, by contrast to H-SP-34 and Zn-SP34-CIE, the crystallinity of Zn-SP34-TII is maintained well, indicating the integrity of the texture property after the TII process. In addition, no diffraction peaks can be detected for ZnO crystallites (JCPD = 31.6°, 34.2°, 36.1°) The bulk chemical compositions of as-prepared samples are analyzed with XRF. As shown in Table S1, zinc cations can be incorporated into the sample with OSDA of TEA via TII process, indicating that the small template molecules (e.g TEA) relative to the CHA cages are beneficial for the TII process, and no severe diffusion restriction during the incorporation of the metal cations into the crystals is observed, which is in consistence with our previous study The influence of the ion exchange time and number of times are further studied. With the increase of exchange hour and the increased number of times (Twice), the incorporated zinc amount just increases slightly, from 0.74 wt% of Zn-SP34-TII-2 h to 0.79 wt% of Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T, indicating that satisfying zinc amount can be incorporated via TII process in quite short a time. Furthermore, no phases related to ZnO crystallites are observed over Zn-SP34-TII catalysts with the increase of exchange hour and the increased number of times, though the crystallinity of Zn-SP34-TII decreases slightly (Fig. S2). The textual properties of the as-prepared samples are analyzed with nitrogen adsorption-desorption. As shown in XPS is employed to investigate the electronic interaction between nitrogen atoms in the OSDA and Zn cations based on the binding energy (BE) shift of N 1 In addition, based on the interaction of zinc cation and the nitrogen atoms of TEA template, the proposed coordination structure of the zinc species in the uncalcined Zn-SP34-8h-T is provided in Scheme S1. The Zn ions are coordinated with the nitrogen atom in TEA template in addition to three oxygen atoms in the CHA frame-work and two water molecules XPS is further employed to confirm the chemical state of Zn species in Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T ( As shown in The Si enrichment and the resulting Zn enrichment near the external surface were further confirmed by the EDX analysis (Fig. S3). Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T was ground severely so as to expose the inner part of crystals, and the EDX analysis of the ground sample is provided. As shown in the EDX analysis along the scan direction, the relative ratio of P to Al maintains constant basically, while the relative ratios of Zn to Al and Si to Al decrease gradually from the external surface to the inner part of the crystals, indicating that the Zn species and Si species are relatively enriched in the sublayer near the external surface, while the structural elements such as P and Al are basically homogeneously distributed throughout the crystals The influences of the ion exchange factors (exchange hour and number of times) of the TII process on the catalytic performance in MTO reaction were investigated. Methanol conversion over H-SP34 and Zn-SP34-TII with different exchange hour and number of times was performed at 475 °C with WHSV of 2 h The catalytic performance of methanol conversion over H-SP34 and Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T was further deeply discussed. As shown in As shown in the products distribution and ratio of ethylene to propylene ( In previous studies, the improved catalytic performance over SAPO-34 catalysts modified with metal species is usually ascribed to the optimization of acidity. As shown in the In general, a heterogeneous gas-solid catalytic reaction involves the following steps, the adsorption of reactants in gas phase on solid surface, the surface reaction of adsorbed species, as well as desorption of generated products to the gas phase. Thus the intracrystalline mass transport of the generated products out of the CHA cavity in SAPO-34 catalysts plays a vital role in the MTO reaction. Chromatographic method is adopted to investigate the impacts originated from the zinc cation incorporation and coke deposition on the diffusion property of probing molecular (e.g ethylene) in the catalyst bed. The residence time distribution (RTD) of ethylene was calculated according to Where As shown in Furthermore, shorter residence time and sharper RTD profile are observed over Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T-2 min compared with H-SP34-2 min, indicating that the probing molecules encountered increased diffusion hindrance over Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T-2 min. Therefore, it is deduced that the generated products encounter markedly severer diffusion restriction during the diffusion path from CHA cages to the gas phase over Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T-2 min than H-SP34-2 min. It is widely accepted that the bulky hydrocarbons (e.g propylene, C4, C5 and C6) exhibit relatively lower diffusivity than the counterparts with small molecular size (e.g ethylene) Moreover, sharpest and most narrow RTD profiles are observed over the catalysts with highest selectivity to light olefins (H-SP34-HS, Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T-HS), implying the direct penetration of the probing molecular in the catalyst bed via intercrystalline diffusion. And the relatively sharper RTD profile over H-SP34-HS compared with Zn-SP34-TII-8h-T-HS might be related with different coke amounts, which will be discussed in the following part. As shown in the relationship between coke amount and selectivity to light olefins ( The deposited coke species in samples after reaction of 2 min were extracted and analyzed by GC-MS ( The SAPO-34 was modified with zinc cations through a straightforward template-assisted ion incorporation (TII) process, without template pre-removal and the preparation of NH The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. We are grateful to the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 