Ultrasonic techniques are non-destructive and easy to apply, both for site and laboratory conditions. In rock engineering, sound velocity (SV) techniques have increasingly been used to determine the dynamic properties of rocks. The SV of a rock mass is closely related to the intact rock properties and measuring the velocity in rock masses interrogates the rock structure and texture. The important influencing factors are rock type, mineralogical composition, rock texture and structure, grain size and shape, density, porosity, anisotropy, porewater, confining pressure, temperature, weathering and alteration zones, bedding planes, and joint properties (roughness, filling material, water, dip and strike, etc.). The aim of this study is to determine the mechanical and physical properties of carbonate rocks using The SV testing method determines the velocity of propagation of elastic waves in laboratory conditions. ISRM The SV measurement was conducted on five core samples of Marble factories and quarries in the Adana, Afyon, Elazığ, Hatay and Mersin regions of Turkey were visited and block samples were collected to fulfill the objective of this research. During sampling, rock types having no bedding planes were selected to eliminate any anisotropic effects on the measurements. The name, the location and the class of the collected rocks are given and shown in The samples of rocks were tested in the Mining Engineering laboratory of Çukurova University for determination of statistical relations with the mechanical and physical properties. A minimum of eight samples was used for each test, after they were prepared in line with the ISRM Suggested Methods. After determination of the physico-mechanical properties, as shown in The results of SV, uniaxial compressive strength, Young's modulus and density of the rocks were analyzed using the method of least squares regression. The equation of the best-fit line, the 95% confidence limits, and the correlation coefficient ( The results of regression equations and the correlation coefficients are given in Relatively high correlation values between SV index and uniaxial compressive strength of Data from each test were used in the developed empirical equations to estimate the uniaxial compressive strength ( The study indicates that the uniaxial compressive strength ( The equations are practical, simple and accurate enough to apply and are recommended for use in practice.