A process to remove and recover cadmium from wastewater has been developed which includes solvent extraction and supported liquid membrane transport for Cd(II) using Cyanex 923 as an extractant/carrier. The influence of acid and chloride ion concentration on the extraction of Cd(II) was studied. In acidic medium, the appearance of a third phase was observed and the limiting organic concentration for Cd(II) in 5 and 10% Cyanex 923/Exxsol D100 at different concentrations of H+ ions were determined. The effect of aliphatic and aromatic diluents on the extraction and permeation of Cd(II) in neutral and acidic medium was studied and permeation coefficients were evaluated, together with the influence of third phase and pore size on transport of Cd(II) through microporous membrane. It was found that the appearance of a third phase in acidic medium could be avoided by using an aromatic diluent. In order to improve the stability of supported liquid membrane and to scale up for continuous operation, the performance of hollow fiber strip dispersion (HFSD) technique for the extraction/recovery of Cd(II) from acidic as well as neutral chloride media was examined. This study emphasizes the potential of a HFSD system to be a part of sustainable wastewater treatment technologies, enabling the separation/recovery of cadmium.Cadmium is an environmental pollutant due to its toxicity, but it is widely used in different industries such as metallurgy, electroplating, pigmenting, nuclear industry and in the fabrication of Ni-Cd batteries. Moreover, due to the large consumption of this metal, it is expected that production of cadmium from secondary sources and the recycling of Ni-Cd batteries will become essential — not only for environmental reasons, but for economic ones as well. Cadmium normally enters water systems through industrial discharges and hence its removal from wastewaters requires the development of effective methods for the separation of cadmium from other commonly associated metals. Cyanex 923 is a mixture of various trialkyl-phosphine oxides that has gained prominence as a metal extractant during the last decade because of its high selectivity and hydrolytic stability. But it is rarely used in wastewater treatment due to inherent drawbacks of solvent extraction such as loading limitations, losses of metal ions in interfacial third phases and difficulties to recover from trace level concentrations. Liquid membrane configurations such as flat sheet supported liquid membrane (FSSLM) and hollow fiber supported liquid membrane (HFSLM) techniques have drawn more attention towards cadmium separation ( The aim of the present work is to investigate the feasibility of the HFSD system for the recovery of Cd(II) from acidic and neutral chloride medium. In order to fulfil the above objective, the effect of H Cyanex 923 was obtained by Cytec Canada Inc. and used as extractant/carrier. Cyanex 923 is a mixture of four phosphine oxides with the general formulae R For the extraction studies, equal volumes (10 ml) of the aqueous phase containing 1 g/L of Cd(II) and organic phase (10% Cyanex 923 in Exxsol D100 (v/v)) were shaken using a mechanical shaker at room temperature (22 The limiting organic concentration (LOC) i.e., the highest metal concentration that can be achieved without phase splitting, was determined by equilibration of equal volumes (10 ml) of organic phase and acidic aqueous phase containing 100 mg/L Cd(II) and 1 M Cl After allowing phase separation, the concentration of Cd(II) was determined in the aqueous phase and the corresponding concentration of cadmium in the organic phase was calculated by mass balance taking into account the volumes added to both of the phases. The concentration of acid in the equilibrated aqueous phase was determined by titration with standard sodium hydroxide solutions using phenolphthalein as an indicator. The supported liquid membrane experiments were carried out in a two-compartment permeation cell where the source phase (200 ml) was separated from the receiving phase chamber (200 ml) by a supported liquid membrane having an effective membrane area of 10.7 cm The stability of the supported liquid membrane has been improved by a strip dispersion technique, where the 5% (v/v) Cyanex 923 in Exxsol D100 as an organic carrier (100 ml) is dispersed in the distilled water (strip solution: 300 ml) in a mixer with the stirring rate at about 600 rpm. The pseudo emulsion formed is recirculated from the mixer to the tube side of hydrophobic membrane module with the flow rate of 23 l/h, providing a constant supply of the organic solution to the membrane pores and the aqueous feed phase (1100 ml) was recirculated through the shell side at the flow rate of 28 l/h. A low pressure difference (about 0.05 bar), between the aqueous feed solution side ( In order to better understand the transport behaviour of Cd(II) through the membrane, it was necessary to perform some preliminary liquid–liquid extraction studies. Therefore, liquid–liquid extractions were carried out using Cyanex 923 as an extractant with the Cd(II) in acidic and neutral chloride medium. The effect of [Cl Third phase formation in solvent extraction is observed when, at high metal and/or mineral acid loading of the organic phase under suitable experimental conditions, the organic phase splits into two layers — the light layer containing most of the diluent and little extractant and metal; and the heavy or “third” phase containing a high concentration of extractant and metal and little diluent. This phenomenon is well known and has been observed in many systems (  Back extraction of the cadmium from loaded organic phase in acidic as well as neutral chloride medium was examined; and in order to make further recovery of cadmium from the stripping phase easier, water was selected as the most feasible strippant. The stripping of Cd(II) extracted from neutral 1 M Cl The results of solvent extraction studies using 10% Cyanex 923 in two different diluents of varying nature can be seen from Studies were carried out with different Cd(II) concentrations in the neutral chloride medium and the results in Experiments were also conducted to evaluate the effect of carrier concentration in the liquid membrane. When the concentration of Cyanex 923 was varied in the range of 5–20% (v/v) in Exxsol D100, the permeability coefficients were linearly dependent on the carrier concentration in the neutral chloride medium ( Other experiments were conducted through FSSLM for effect of pore size on the transport of Cd(II) using two different pore sizes i.e. 0.45 and 0.22 µm of the same polymeric support in neutral 1 M Cl The different extraction behaviour of Cd(II) in aliphatic and aromatic diluents ( The data obtained through FSSLM, shows that the permeation coefficients at low concentration of Cd(II) and Cyanex 923 with two different diluents in acidic chloride medium were almost the same ( The feasibility of the HFSD system for recovery of Cd(II) at low concentration from neutral chloride medium was studied. The chloride concentration in the aqueous feed phase was varied in the range of 0.2–1 M and it was found that cadmium transport increases with [Cl Similarly, the transport behaviour of Cd(II) in acidic chloride medium using 5% Cyanex 923 in Exxsol D100 as a carrier was studied and the percentage of Cd(II) in the feed and strip phase of the HFSD system as a function of [H From All three systems have been studied to know their individual aspects at laboratory scale. Initially, the liquid–liquid extraction study was carried out in order to understand the attainment of the equilibrium between two phases. Further studies were performed with FSSLM to understand the transport behaviour of Cd(II) through a microporous membrane. SX is widely used with macro concentrations of metals on industrial scale, but it is difficult to utilize for the recovery of metal ions at low levels of concentration. On the other hand, FSSLM is well known for its failure on industrial scale due to poor stability and semi-continuous process mode operation. Therefore the HFSD system has been found to be suitable with long life for industrial scale application. Direct comparison between SX, FSSLM and HFSD could not be made in the present investigation due to their varied interfacial contact area/volume ratio used. However, certain features such as equipment used, volume handled, mode of process operation and range of the concentration for each process has been summarized in The extraction as well as the rate of transport of Cd(II) through a supported liquid membrane using Cyanex 923 is controlled by both H Although the third phase appeared in acidic chloride medium, the rate of transport of Cd(II) was faster than in the neutral chloride medium with the hollow fiber strip dispersion (HFSD) system. This new configuration of supported liquid membrane was found to be rapid with stable life. Results obtained from this study provide improved insights into the HFSD system for the clean-up of cadmium contaminated streams. Hence, it is possible to utilize this technique for separation/recovery of Cd(II) from neutral as well as acidic chloride medium using an aliphatic diluent and water as a stripping phase from waste effluent. This work has been financed by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Education (MEC) (Ref. CTQ2005-09430-C05-02). The authors acknowledge the financial support of DGR, Generalitat de Catalunya (Ref. 2005SGR00934). N.S. Rathore acknowledges the financial support of Generalitat de Catalunya (contract Beatriu de Pinos 2005BP-B1-10265). A. Leopold acknowledges the Spanish Ministry of Science and Education (MEC) for the fellowship received. Also, Cytec Canada Inc. and ExxonMobil Chemical Europe Inc., Belgium are gratefully acknowledged for supplying the materials.