The goal of this present contribution is to show how to tailor the toughness of ZrO2–Al2O3 composites based on tuning the ZrO2 matrix composition when all sintered under identical conditions. Commercial co-precipitated ZrO2 starting powders as well as a range of experimental ZrO2 powder mixture grades, obtained by mixing of 3mol% Y2O3 co-precipitated ZrO2 with Y-free monoclinic ZrO2, were used for the fabrication of yttria-stabilised tetragonal zirconia (Y-TZP) composites with 20wt.% (28vol.%) Al2O3 by means of hot pressing in vacuum at 1450°C for 1h. The microstructure and mechanical properties are also compared with the commercial ZrO2–20wt.% Al2O3 ceramic. The observed difference in obtained toughness is explained in terms of the yttria content, the yttria distribution, and the residual stress due to the presence of the Al2O3 particles. Transformation toughening is observed to be the major toughening mechanism. The inhomogeneous Y-distribution and reduced overall yttria content, established by the “mixing route”, is found to result in an increased toughness of the newly developed composites up to ∼10MPam1/2, which is just double than the commercial ZrO2–20wt.% Al2O3 ceramic. Based on our research results, a simple route to tailor the toughness of the TZP–Al2O3 composites is proposed.The stress induced transformation of tetragonal zirconia in the crack tip stress field is a well established toughening phenomenon, widely exploited in the development of technical ceramics Heuer et al. investigated the stability of the tetragonal ZrO Shi et al. observed that the fracture toughness increased with increasing alumina addition to an Y-TZP matrix up to a maximum toughness of 13 Recently, the densification of unstabilised ZrO In this paper, the fracture toughness of Y-TZP composites with 20 The zirconia powder grades used in the present investigation are summarised in 50–100 The density of the ceramic specimens was measured in ethanol, according to the Archimedes method (BP210S balance, Sartorius AG, Germany). The elastic modulus of the ceramic samples was measured by the resonance frequency method. The resonance frequency was measured by the impulse excitation technique (Grindosonic, J.W. Lemmens N.V., Leuven, Belgium). Microstructural investigation of the phase assemblage was performed by means of SEM (Philips XL-30-FEG), X-ray diffraction (XRD, Seifert 3003-TT) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA, Jeol JSM-733). The EPMA (equipped with a Si–Li energy dispersive detector, EDS) analysis has been done with a probe size of around 100 The volume fraction of the m-ZrO In order to reveal the grain size of the constituent phases, polished samples were thermally etched in air during 20 The Vickers hardness ( A representative microstructure of the hot pressed ZrO XRD investigation revealed that the t-ZrO In EPMA measurement of the yttria content in the hot pressed microstructure of the co-precipitated T3 and the powder mixture based TM2 grade monoliths is shown in The basic mechanical properties of the obtained ZrO The indentation fracture toughness of both the Y-TZP monoliths and composites hot pressed at 1450 The interesting result is that the toughness can be considerably increased in both the TZP monoliths and composites by lowering the overall yttria content. The experimental results show that the “mixing route”, in which pure monoclinic ZrO The toughness of the experimental T3A and the commercial T3YA material are comparable and around 5 In this section, the observed variation in mechanical properties, in particular the toughness of the obtained ZrO In view of the fact that t-ZrO The residual stress in the multiphase composites is developed due to the mismatch in the E-modulus and the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) among the constituent phases. Due to the lower CTE of Al Looking at In one of our recent work on the ZrO From the above, it can be concluded that the overall yttria content and the yttria distribution are also the important factors in determining the toughness of the ZrO A significant outcome of the present work is that the toughness of Y-TZP based composites with 20 Fully dense Y-TZP composites with 28 The addition of alumina causes tensile residual stress in the zirconia matrix of the composites, resulting in an increased transformability of the ZrO Other microstructural variable contributing to increased transformation toughening in the composites are the broad and inhomogeneous yttria distribution in the microstructure, established by the “mixing route”. B. Basu would like to thank the Research Council of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in Belgium for a research fellowship.