Mechanical milling of ductile metals and alloys into fine powders is difficult to achieve due to particle agglomeration. Even though cryogenic milling and/or wet milling can lead to substantial reduction of particle size, the production of fine powders from ductile metals and alloys is a difficult process. The current study deals with the milling of Mg and examines alternative processing methods that would yield an efficient size reduction. Two methods were studied; milling with MgH2 addition, and milling the powders pre-deformed by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP). The study showed that both methods are successful in preventing particle agglomeration resulting in a significant reduction in particle size. Equal channel angular pressing has the advantage that could be applied to all metals and alloys whereas milling with hydride could only be applied to metals forming their own hydride. It is concluded that, of the two methods, milling with hydride addition is a more effective method of size reduction.Powder particle size may be controlled at the production stage via adjustment of the relevant parameters, but for most purposes it is necessary to further process the powders to finer sizes. This is often achieved by milling. In ceramics and intermetallics, milling leads to an efficient size reduction yielding particles that are sub-micron in size. In ductile powders, however, the milling in addition to particle fragmentation, involves particle welding which often results in particle agglomeration Mg or Mg based alloys in the form of fine powders are essential for hydrogen storage purposes. Of necessity, such processes are to be carried out in dry conditions. In this study, two methods of dry milling are investigated: milling with MgH Material used in this study was Mg powder (Alfa Aeser) with a median size (d A die used for ECAP processing of Mg powders is shown in Powders milled with MgH Of the two methods under investigation in this study, first milling with MgH For the alternative method of pre-deformation with ECAP, samples were subjected to four passes through the die shown in Results reported above show that both methods; milling with MgH It should be noted that the median particle sizes obtained with Mg powders milled in the presence of MgH Results reported above clearly show that the average particle size decreases with increasing volume fraction of MgH In this study, milling of Mg powders was examined using two methods; milling with MgH Both methods; milling with MgH Milling with MgH It is worth emphasizing that with the hydride route, there is no loss of volume since hydride, having served as a milling agent, could be dehydrogenated and converted back to the metallic state. Thus the route makes use of the total volume. It may also be worth pointing out that the route with equal channel angular pressing could be applied to all metals and alloys whereas milling with hydride could only be applied to metals forming their own hydride, i.e. if the full use of the total volume is to be made.