This paper reports the results obtained by studying the ion-exchange properties of a new solvent impregnated resin (SIR), which was prepared by impregnation of quinizarin (1,4-dihydroxyanthraquinone, QNZ) on Amberlite XAD-16 after nitration of the benzene rings present in its structure. The sorption behavior of Th(IV) and U(VI) on/in the modified SIR was compared with that of the SIR prepared via the conventional method. It was observed that sorption capacity and sorption rate of the modified SIR are significantly greater than the conventional one. The modified SIR was then applied to the extraction of Th(IV) and U(VI) ions at the presence of many co-existence metal ions. The results obtained denote on successful application of this new SIR to analysis of natural water samples spiked to Th(IV) and U(VI) ions.Langmuir constant related to the free energy of sorption (L total concentration of both exchanging species (M) the equilibrium concentration of metal ion in the bulk solution (mg total concentration of both exchanging species in the ion exchanger (M) diffusion coefficient in solution phase (m pore diffusion coefficient (m D–R constant related to mean sorption energy (J pore diffusion constant (s Freundlich constant indicative of the relative sorption capacity of the SIR (mmol rate constant for film diffusion weight of SIR per liter of solution (g Freundlich constant indicative of the intensity of the sorption D–R constant (mol the amount of metal ion sorbed at any time the amount of metal ion sorbed per unit weight of SIR at equilibrium (mmol Langmuir constant; theoretical maximum sorption capacity (mmol universal gas constant (J particle radius (m) correlation coefficient temperature (K) time (min or s) fractional attainment to equilibrium at time ‘ D–R constant (g liquid film thickness (m) Thorium and uranium are important elements in view of nuclear energy production but create some environmental difficulties. It is well known that both the metal ions cause acute toxicological effects in mammals and their compounds are potentially carcinogen In contrast with the liquid–liquid extraction, which results in huge environmental problem due to toxic organic diluents, solid phase extraction technique using eco friendly materials has been widely used in the preconcentration/separation of trace and ultra trace amounts these ions Recently, application of impregnated resins has been proposed as a technological alternative to the other functionalized chelating resins In our earlier communication, we have reported the synthesis of a solvent impregnated resin containing quinizarin (1,4-dihydroxyanthraquinone, QNZ) and its analytical properties for some heavy metal ions All the reagents used were of analytical grade and except Th(IV) and U(VI) salts were supplied by E. Merck, Darmstadt, Germany. Stock solutions of Th(IV) and U(VI) were prepared at concentrations of 1.0 In order to remove each type of impurity, which may be found with the fabricated beads, Amberlite XAD-16 beads (10 2.0 The sorption isotherms of Th(IV) and U(VI) ions on/in both types of the SIRs were obtained using the batch technique at the pH of maximum uptake (pH 6.00) and temperature 298 Exact weighed portions (0.04 Both conventional and modified SIRs were packed separately into the analogous columns with internal diameter of 0.4 The eluents obtained from each type of the above treatments were transferred to 10-mL volumetric flasks containing 1.0 Similarly, the eluents were transferred to 10-mL volumetric flasks containing 0.5 Amberlite XAD-16 is an adsorbent based on polystyrene divinylbenzene-copolymer. It has excellent physical resistance, hydraulic characteristic and thermal stability. In addition, it benefits from high porosity, low polarity, and the largest surface area (825 It is clear that substitution of –NO To investigate the other benefits of the modified resin, more studies were carried out using both types of the SIRs. Usually, the SEM micrographs are used to observe surface morphological change of the adsorbent materials during the preparation process. The ability of the resins beads before and after the impregnation process to extract Th(IV) and U(VI) from weakly acidic solutions was investigated within the pH range of 2.0–8.0. Typical experiments were carried out with 0.5 The effect of ionic strength on the sorption processes was also studied at the presence of sodium nitrate within the concentration range 0.01–0.5 Generally, a solute encounters with a finite distribution between both the liquid and solid phases at the sorption equilibrium, which can be described by many isotherms and adsorption models can be used to fit the observed experimental data and determining the model parameters. Sorption isotherm is a functional expression that correlates the amount of solute adsorbed per unit weight of the adsorbent and the concentration of a solute in bulk solution at a given temperature under equilibrium conditions. Also, it is an important physicochemical feature for the evaluation the sorption capacity and sorption energy of an adsorbent To conduct the equilibrium sorption studies, exact weighed portions of 0.05-g of both types of the SIRs were kept in contact with aliquots of 100-mL of buffered solutions containing Th(IV) or U(VI) over the concentration ranges of 1.0 The Langmuir isotherm is valid for monolayer sorption due to a surface of a finite number of identical sites and expressed in the linear form as the following equation  The Freundlich isotherm can be applied to non-ideal sorption on heterogeneous surfaces as well as multilayer sorption Obviously, the greater values of 1/ Another equation used in the analysis of isotherms was proposed by Dubinin and Radushkevich The  By considering the results obtained from the triple models, it is realized that the sorption process obeys the Langmuir model owing to the higher linearity and correlation coefficients obtained for Langmuir equation in comparison with the Freundlich and D–R isotherm models. The fact that the Langmuir isotherm fits the experimental data satisfactorily may be owing to homogenous distribution of extractant molecules or active chelating sites on the polymeric surface of the resin beads, since the Langmuir equation assumes that the adsorbent surface is homogenous and the sorption is monolayer First, the sorption of interested metal ions was studied at different agitation speed, ranging from 0 (without stirring) to 400 To evaluate the uptake rate of Th(IV) and U(VI), sorption capacity of the SIRs were monitored in various shaking times. From Generally, the metal ion sorption onto the impregnated resins can be considered as a heterogeneous reaction between solid and solution. The sorption process can be defined by three steps: mass-transfer through the liquid film surrounding the resin beads (called external mass-transfer, or film diffusion), diffusion through the particle pores (called pore diffusion), and finally a chemical reaction with the functional groups. Among them, the chemical reaction is being considered very fast in most cases. Inevitably, the first two steps can be the rate-controlling step, either singly or in combination. Therefore, for finding the rate-controlling step and explaining the nature of sorption process, kinetic studies were carried out using Homogenous Particle Diffusion Model (HPDM), which is a widely used kinetic model for describing the metal sorption data obtained from the various SIR systems If liquid film diffusion controls the sorption rate, the following analogous expression can be used: In Eqs From the reusability point of view, the stability of SIR is of crucial importance and the adsorbed metal ions should be easily desorbed without destroying the SIR under the operation conditions. To find the convenient eluent for desorption the metal ions from the SIRs, various types of acid solutions including nitric, sulfuric, and hydrochloric acid were examined at different concentration values. The treatments involve stirring aliquots of 100-mL solution of 1.0 To test the SIR stability, both the prepared SIRs were subjected to several loading and elution batch operations. The conditions employed for the study were: 0.05 For extraction of metal ions of interest using the columns packed with the of SIRs, several parameters, which influence on the performance was studied. These important parameters consist of sample and eluent flow rates, concentration of the eluent and enrichment factor. The effect of sample and eluent flow rates on the extraction process were respectively examined in the flow rates range of 0.5–7 and 0.5–3.5 For quantitative elution, HCl at various concentrations and volumes was examined. The experiments showed that these metal ions can be eluted thoroughly from the columns using 5 The enrichment factor was studied in treatment with a series of solutions containing fixed amount of the examined metal ion (5 By considering the above investigations, it was evident that applicability of the modified SIR is significantly better for extraction of these metal ions. Hence, in treatments with aliquots of 1000-mL of the solutions, the Th(IV) and U(VI) contents were extracted with the column packed with the modified SIR and then subjected to the determination processes. The calibration curves were linear in the ranges 2.5 To evaluate the analytical applications of the recommended procedure, the effect of some foreign ions which may interfere with the determination of these metal ions was examined. For this purpose, fixed amounts of metal ions of interest (6 The proposed method was applied for determination of metal ions of interest in spring, well and tap water samples collected from areas of Kashmar, a city in Iran, Khorasan Rasavi province. The water samples for such determinations were filtered through a membrane filter with a pore size of 0.45 The newly synthesized resin combined the benefits of chemical functionalized resins with impregnated techniques. The synthesis was initially progressed to nitration of the benzene rings present in backbone of resin before the impregnating process. This treatment gave rise to obtain an impregnated resin with considerable better properties in comparison with the conventional prepared SIR. The modified SIR exhibited some benefits such as faster rate of equilibrium, higher capacity and sorption rate. It could be recycled much more times than the conventional SIR without any lowering its sorption capacity. The results obtained show that the modified SIR has good potential for trace enrichment of Th(IV) and U(VI) ions. It combines efficient separation of these metal ions in the presence of various interfering ions with their spectrophotometric determinations. It is highly useful in the analysis of natural water samples since the modified SIR has negligible affinity for alkali and alkaline earth metal ions.