The recovery of uranium from nuclear industrial effluent has been studied using laboratory column and polymeric ion exchange resin. The industrial effluent, at pH around 10, contains uranium (40mg/L), ammonium (80g/L) and carbonate (170g/L) and cannot be discharged without previous treatment. Uranium is in the form of uranyl quadrivalent complex anions [UO2(CO3)3]4−. The resin IRA 910 U was employed for its specific application for uranium extraction. Adsorption was carried out at flow rate of 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0mL/min, which corresponds to a retention time of 10, 5.0 and 2.5min, respectively. The use of ion the exchange technique makes the recovery of more than 98% of the uranium possible. Elution was carried out with ammonium carbonate solutions and also with the diluted effluent. The eluate contained uranium ranging from 2.4 to 2.7g/L. The solution eluate might be recycled back into the process with the advantage of saving this valuable metal.The nuclear fuel cycle consists of a great number of different mineral-chemical processes. Some of them produce liquid effluents with significant concentrations of uranium. For example, the precipitation process produces the uranyl ammonium tricarbonate (TCAU), a yellow solid. This yellow cake feeds the fluidized bed furnace and is converted into UO In a previous study, In the present study, strong base ion exchange resin has been used to recuperate the uranium from a nuclear industrial effluent. This industrial effluent contained uranium around 40 A commercial strong base resin, type II, Rohm and Haas IRA 910 U, consisting of a polystyrenic matrix, specially developed for the extraction of uranium and with a capacity of 1.0 The industrial effluent was supplied by INB (Brazilian Nuclear Industry). The solution was heated until boil during 6 Trials were carried out in a glass column which operated with the industrial effluent after carbonate removal, at a flow rate of 1, 2 and 5 Uranium was determined by both neutron activation and energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry techniques. The neutron activation analyses consist of exposing a chemical element to a neutron flux producing a new radioactive nuclide. At our laboratory the irradiation is performed in the Triga Marki IPR-R1 reactor. The radioactive nuclide measurement was carried out after two days of cooling based on The adsorption performance of the resin for service in column was evaluated by means of adsorption or loading curves as shown in Saturation volume is the volume fed until the uranium concentrations in the feeding and column effluent solutions are equal. These points are shown in Elution was carried out with concentrated carbonate solutions that offered the advantage of recycling the eluate to the industrial circuit. Carbonate has an adverse effect on adsorption and, therefore, is an effective eluting agent. The use of diluted industrial effluent as eluant was also assessed. The industrial effluent, which contains 170 The other eluants were not so efficient, presenting a slower elution rate with a long “tailing-off” period required before elution is completed. The results also showed that the increase in carbonate concentration from 0.5 The resin was efficient for uranium removal from nuclear industrial effluent. The uranium loading capacity was greater than 40