Objective
                  The aim of this study is to induce mineralization of collagen by introducing phosphate groups onto type I collagen from eggshell membrane (ESM) by treating with sodium trimetaphosphate (STMP). This strategy is based on the hypothesis that phosphate groups introduced on collagen can mimic the nucleating role of phosphorylated non-collagenous proteins bound to collagen for inducing mineralization in natural hard tissue.
               
                  Method
                  The collagen membrane was phosphorylated by treating it with a solution of STMP and saturated calcium hydroxide. The phosphorylated collagen was subsequently exposed to a mineralization solution and the pattern of mineralization on the surface of phosphorylated collagen substrate was analyzed. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), field emission electron microscopy (FESEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and microhardness test were used to characterize the collagen substrate and the pattern of minerals formed on the collagen surface.
               
                  Results
                  The FTIR and EDX results indicated that the phosphate groups were incorporated onto the collagen surface by treatment with STMP. During the mineralization process, the plate-like mineral, octacalcium phosphate (OCP), which was initially formed on the surface of ESM, was later transformed into needle-like hydroxyapatite (HAP) as indicated by the SEM, FESEM, EDX and XRD findings. The microhardness test displayed significant increase in the Knoop hardness number of the mineralized collagen.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Phosphate groups can be introduced onto type I collagen surface by treating it with STMP and such phosphorylated collagen can induce the mineralization of type I collagen.It has been well established that type I collagen as a template plays an important role in the biomineralization of hard tissues such as bone and dentine, however non-collagenous proteins are required for the deposition of hydroxyapatite (HAP) on the collagen matrix Saito et al. ESM, located in the innermost layer of the eggshell, is composed of three layers: the outer membrane (OM), the inner membrane (IM) and the limiting membrane (LM) sequentially surrounding the egg-white Fresh chicken eggs from the Singapore local supermarket were gently broken, and IM and LM were manually removed from eggshell. After immersing the eggshell in 1.5 The treated and untreated collagen membranes with STMP were fixed on plastic plates (15 FTIR spectra of the samples were recorded in transmission mode using an infrared spectrophotometer (SHIMADZU 8400S, Japan). All spectra were recorded between 400 and 4000 XRD measurements were carried out on a XRD-6000 X-ray diffractometer (SHIMADZU, Tokyo, Japan) with Cu K The morphology and microstructure of collagen from ESM and mineral crystals on its surface were observed using scanning electron microscopy (JSM-5600LV, JEOL, Japan) with a beam voltage at 15 In order to evaluate the mechanical property of mineralized collagen, the microhardness of samples, in terms of Knoop hardness number (KHN) was measured using a microhardness tester (FM-700, Future-tech Corp. Tokyo, Japanese) with a Knoop indenter using a static load of 50 FTIR spectroscopy was used to identify the phosphorylation of collagen and formation of calcium phosphate mineral. The morphology of collagen fibers and mineral on their surface are shown in The EDX analysis confirmed the presence of phosphorus on the surface of collagen fibers after STMP treatment and the content was 0.76% (wt.%). The molar ratios between calcium and phosphorus contents of the mineral crystal in XRD was used to identify the mineral phase in this study. The KHN of control and mineralized samples were 21.8 In a previous study The initial process of mineralization includes homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleations. The latter involves the formation of nuclei on the surface of a template (foreign surface) in aqueous medium In the mineralization process, octacalcium phosphate (OCP) was initially formed on the surface of collagen and then transformed into HAP as indicated by EDX and XRD results. This is because the formation of OCP in solutions supersaturated with respect to both OCP and HAP needs to overcome lower surface tension compared with HAP, even though HAP is more thermodynamically stable Measuring hardness is a reasonable method of examining the mineral content of teeth and during remineralization changes in the microhardness of dentin is directly related to its mineral content In this study, chemical modification of type I collagen can provide an alternative strategy for mineralization of collagen. Compared with the role of phosphorylated non-collagenous protein This methodology may provide a new strategy to treat the diseases related to mineral loss from collagen substrate such as dentine caries. In clinical practice, softened dentine due to demineralization is a problem in the conservative treatment of decayed teeth. Usually, dentists favor removing softened dentine completely on the theory that softened dentine is invaded or infected dentine Phosphate groups can be introduced on non-soluble type I collagen from ESM by treatment with STMP to induce mineralization of collagen. This mimics the nucleating role of the phosphorylated non-collagenous proteins binding to collagen The authors wish to acknowledge the funding support from the