This four volume treatise provides, most certainly, an excellent comprehensive work of reference. Volume 1 covers the fundamentals and gives a survey of the different fuel cell systems with electrocatalysis forming the topic for volume 2. The last two volumes are parts 1 and 2 of ‘Fuel cell technology and applications’. The format for all of these volumes is of a series of individually authored chapters, 24 in volume 1, 50 in volume 2 and 96 in volumes 3 and 4. Nearly 300 authors from 19 countries contributed to these chapters with the majority, not surprisingly, coming from the USA. The terminology of The theoretical fundamentals of electrocatalysis are covered in volume 2 which also deals comprehensively with the processes and reaction mechanisms involved in the different types of fuel cells. The final two volumes detail the current state of development of materials, systems, practical applications and prospects for fuel cells. Advantages and disadvantages of fuel cell systems are discussed in the context of energy requirements and environmental constraints and considerations. Hydrogen generation, hydrogen storage, the polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell system (PEMFC), alkaline fuel cells (AFC), phosphoric acid fuel cells (PAFC), direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC), molten carbonate fuel cells (MCFC), solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC), portable systems and propulsion systems are all considered and described in detail. This work of reference is surely best described as a treatise. It does not, and indeed was never intended to, provide light bed-time reading but it does provide an admirable up-to-the-minute state of the art source of informative data and descriptions of fuel cell technology. It is well presented with a commendable uniformity of style despite the multitude of contributing authors. The text is in clear type and the books are well illustrated and referenced. The reproduction of the diagrams and figures is excellent and the binding appears to be substantial, as it must be if the books are to stand up to the hard usage that can be expected if they are used as intended. At £895, the books are not likely to be bought by individuals but I would highly recommend their purchase to scientific libraries and to R&D groups involved in the development of fuel cell technology.