Adsorption isotherm relates the gas storage capacity as a function of pressure at constant temperature. In this paper, adsorption isotherm of two dry borehole samples was constructed in the laboratory using the manometric method. Isotherm was measured for two gases, i.e., CH4 and CO2 to pressure up to 8.4 MPa. Before the construction of sorption isotherm, coal was characterized by proximate, ultimate and petrographic analysis. Coalbed gas content of these two samples was found 2.29 m3/t and 2.75 m3/t. SEM images were obtained for the pore size distribution of coal using pore image analysis. Prediction of coalbed methane recovery from CH4 adsorption isotherm showed that these coalbeds are under saturated. CO2 isotherm was constructed to estimate enhanced coalbed methane (ECBM) recovery. Volume wise CO2/CH4 sorption ratio was found 2.09 times to 2.75 times respectively. This paper presents the interpretation of isotherm data to find the recovery factor of methane production from Jharia coalfield.Methane is always present in coal and contributes to serious safety hazard in coal mining Jharia coalfield is the main contributor of producing prime cooking coal from Barakar formation in India. Coal petrographic and petrochemical studies are the main factors to characterize the coal for the isotherm studies Two freshly retrieved coal samples from exploratory boreholes of Jharia coalfield were sealed into the gas content canister and cautiously transported to the laboratory for further analysis. Therefore, samples have been referred to as J/01 and J/02. Sample description was given in Proximate analyzer (APA-2) was used for the proximate analysis by ASTM Freshly exposed samples were sealed in the canister, and the “Direct method” for the in situ gas content measurement was followed Pore size distribution (PSD) is used to characterize the pore. PSD effects adsorption and transportation of gases through coal Adsorption study was carried out in the indigenously fabricated set-up as shown in Adsorption isotherm experiment using manometric method is a three steps procedure. Before placing of coal in the sample cell, reference and sample cell volume was measured according to the procedure outlined below. After keeping the coal sample in the sample cell, void volume was measured. Calibration of the experimental setup was done according to the dual gas expansion method where For the second step, nonadsorbent (glass marbles) was introduced in the sample cell, and step 1 was repeated. Now, where Solving Eqs. Thus, Eqs. Volume adsorbed at particular pressure was evaluated by Eq. Once Volume adsorbed was known, then the graph between CBM reservoir contains less amount of gas than its maximum adsorbed amount, therefore designated as under saturated. In under saturation, first coal reservoirs are dewatered to reduce the reservoir pressure. Once pressure is reduced up to critical desorption pressure ( Petrochemical and petrographic of coal samples were shown in Amount of gas desorbed from coal samples was measured over a week. Graph between cumulative desorbed gas and the square root of time was plotted for the early few hours. Gas content with lost, desorbed and residual gas was shown in Pore characterization was done with SEM images of the coal samples. SEM Images were adequately threshold with ImageJ software, and PIA was utilized for the pore size distribution in the coal samples. SEM and threshold images were given in Graphs for calculating Langmuir constants were given in From the  Isotherm for CH Adsorption Isotherm of the two coal samples was constructed to predict the methane recovery from Jharia coalfield. The gas content of the collected coal samples was very low, and it was analyzed through adsorption isotherm curves that recovery factor was around 38% and 15% for the analyzed coal samples and it cannot be produced economically through primary prediction technique. An analyzed coal sample was found undersaturated by 75–83%. Secondary recovery technique can be used for the enhancing coalbed methane recovery from the selected coalfield. This study gives the primary knowledge on construction of AI based on coal characterization. In this paper, we adapted the new technique to characterize the pore structures of coal.