Aortic stenosis (AS) is the most common valvular disease and presently, the only available cure is the replacement of the aortic valve. It is imperative to get a better understanding of the mechanisms associated with AS in order to develop novel therapeutical tools. The regulation of phosphate (Pi) handling is crucial during calcification of the aortic valve. An association between the Pi transporter, SLC20A1/Pit1 and calcification has been established. Several studies have demonstrated that apoptosis is involved in the mineralization process. Our hypothesis is that Pit1 acts as a regulator of aortic valve calcification by altering signaling pathways involved in cell survival and cell death. Gene profiling demonstrate that Pit1 is expressed in interstitial cells of human aortic valves. Exposure of cultured vascular interstitial cells (VICs) to Pi induces a strong increase in Pit1 expression. Treatment of VICs with an inhibitor of Pi transporters, phosphonoformic acid (PFA), prevents the Pi-induced Pit1 increase. In addition, Pit1 knock-down by using siRNA reduces mineralization in VICs. Comparative analysis of normal and calcified human valves shows that Pit1 is over expressed in the later. The expression of Pit1 correlates with the severity of the disease (aortic valve area and transaortic gradient). Exposure of VICs to Pi induces a reduction of mitochondrial membrane potential and cytochrome C release leading to cell death. Treatment of VICs with PFA inhibits Pi-induced apoptosis. Importantly, treatment of VICs with Pi modulates Akt1 mRNA levels. Moreover, PFA treatment and Pit1 knock-down, restore Akt1 mRNA levels in presence of Pi. Analysis of human valves demonstrates that levels of Akt1 mRNA are decreased in calcified versus normal valves. Furthermore, Akt1 protein levels and phosphorylation are decreased in VICs following Pi exposure. Over expression of Akt1 prevents Pi-induced mineralization of cultured cells. These results demonstrate for the first time that the Pi transporter, Pit1, is over expressed in calcified valves. Rise in Pit1 levels impedes on Akt1 signaling, therefore increasing apoptosis level. This study contributes to a better understanding of the effect of local Pi handling on mineralization of the aortic valve.