Cemented tungsten carbide balls (hereafter abbreviated as WC balls) are commonly applied in grinding of wasted tool steel for reuse owing to their extraordinary surface hardness (89.5 HRA) and high density (14.5 –14.9 g/cm3). In this study, grinding tests were conducted with WC balls on quartz ore to estimate comminution kinetics. Compared with steel balls, they provided high breakage rates, lower energy-specific breakage rates, and finer breakage distributions due to their high density. Simulations were conducted using an energy-based population balance model. The simulated results demonstrated that WC balls had higher throughput for coarse particles and lower energy efficiency for fine particles. Subsequently, a preliminary criterion for ball selection was established and indicated that WC balls could be substituted for steel balls to certain particle size ranges.The micro-mechanism of ball grinding is considered to be a loose-bed comminution Milling performance is positively correlated with the collision intensity which is determined by the collision frequency and the impact energy per collision coordinately However, the density of balls does affect the grinding efficiency. Powell (1991) assumed that if the geometric characteristics of mill shells, liner designs, and operational conditions were prescribed, the charge motions were theoretically determined by ball size distributions, regardless of densities Kelsall et al. (1973) conducted grinding kinetics tests using equicylinders with density ranging from 2.8 to 9.5 g/cm Based on the aforementioned findings, it is of significance to examine various types of grinding media with high density in order to achieve optimal grinding performance. Tungsten carbide balls (hereafter abbreviated as WC balls) are mainly applied in comminution of wasted tool steel for recycling. The balls are composed of WC powder which are cemented by 6–8% cobalt with powder metallurgy processing In order to investigate the potential of WC balls in ore grinding processes, this study conducted grinding kinetics tests on quartz ore in a batch ball mill. A comparison was made between WC balls and steel balls to estimate their grinding kinetics and then simulations were used to assay their grinding efficiency. This study will provide preliminary feasibility guidelines for applying WC balls in ore grinding operation. The modern comminution theory basically presents three grinding kinetics parameters as follows:  Selection function  Herbst and Fuerstenau (1973) proposed that the correlation between  Breakage function  In this study, the evolution of particle size distributions in batch milling was described with an energy-based population balance model as follows   Energy efficiency relates to some measures of the output of specific energy imparted into a grinding process Energy efficiency can be defined as follows  In this study, throughput indicated time-based efficiency, and was defined as follows: In this study, the throughputs are maximized ones, and these could be obtained under grinding conditions which provide the maximum specific power. This study’s grinding tests were conducted on a Φ18 × 30 cm batch mill with four lifters with 1 cm height located inside. The mill’s rotational speed could be varied between 105% and 40% of the critical speed (100 rev/min) using a variable transmission. A sensor between the motor and the mill provided the values of the rotational speed and torque of the mill to a computer system in real time. The configuration is shown as The material used for this study’s grinding tests was quartz ore composed of around 94% quartz, 3% feldspar, 2% dolomite, 1% mica. The ore samples were prepared using a jaw crusher, roller crusher, and vibrating screening machine until the desired particle size intervals were obtained. Grinding balls were selected as shown in Moreover, in this study, the Φ20 steel balls had the identical centrifuge to the Φ20 WC balls and thus they are assumed to have the same charge motion and collision frequencies; the Φ25 steel balls differed slightly from the Φ20 WC balls in regard to mass per ball to provide similar impact energy but fewer collision frequency. Eq. The following size intervals were tested in this study: 3360–2830 μm; 2830–2380 μm; 2380–2000 μm; 2000–1680 μm; 1680–1180 μm; 1180–850 μm; 850–600 μm; 600–425 μm; 425–300 μm; 300–210 μm; 210–105 μm; and 105–0 μm. The grinding conditions were as follows: the mill speed was 64% of the critical speed; the ball load was 30% of the mill volume; and the particle load was 100% of the interstitial spaces of balls. Then, the In the present study, in order to verify the results obtained from Eq. The Meticulous screening analyses was conducted on the 1 min grinding products with size intervals of 425–600 μm and 850–1180 μm, as described in For estimating the grinding efficiency, it was strenuous and impractical to conduct multiple grinding tests on mono-size feeds in order to realize the exact reduction ratio of 2. Therefore, since the values of It should be mentioned that Moly-Cop Tools replaces the net power Therefore, when conducting the simulations, the values of The grinding conditions were determined in order to provide a maximum specific power, as previously discussed in In this study, the steel balls exhibited first-order grinding kinetics in all size intervals as supposed to be, and so do the WC balls. An example is shown in The observed correlations between Instead of being constant, the superiority of the Φ20 WC balls over the Φ20 steel balls was largely related to coarse particle sizes, though the former had the same collision frequency but almost twice impact energy as the latter. It could be explained by Vogel-Peukert model, a model derived from Weibull’s distribution to describe correlation of fracture probabilities with impact energy and particle size in single impact test Meanwhile, the superiority of the Φ20 WC balls over the Φ25 steel balls had maximized at approximately 1400 μm, and then decreased with particle size, as presented in The observed correlations between The observed correlations between Similar to the correlations between The breakage function It was observed that the differences were not distinct in breakage function due to variations in the density of the media. For either size interval, the In principle, breakage distribution is decided not only by the strength characteristics of broken material, but also by the intensities of impact loads Verification tests were conducted and the results are presented in The specific power values were obtained under the different grinding conditions, as detailed in This study conducted simulations under the determined optimal grinding conditions in order to calculate the energy efficiency. As detailed in The grinding time Therefore, energy efficiency was likely to be determined mathematically by By comparing the results presented in The throughputs are presented in It is difficult to decide whether the WC balls or steel balls are ideal grinding media by assaying their energy efficiency or throughput separately. Therefore, a preliminary criterion is proposed as following: If both the energy efficiency and throughput of the Φ20 WC balls are higher, they should be selected as the grinding media undoubtedly. However, if the Φ20 WC balls’ energy efficiency is lower, but its throughput higher, the selection should be decided by the indicator Δ The ΔT/ΔE also varied with the feed particle sizes, as presented in In accordance with this criterion, the Φ20 WC balls can substitute for the Φ20 steel balls when feed containing lots of particles larger than 600 μm, and substitute for the Φ25 steel balls when feed sizes are concentrated within 800–1500 μm range. Besides uncertainty of the media consumption in ore grinding against the high price, WC balls cannot be manufactured as large as steel balls. They are made of WC powder cemented with Co powder by sintering process. Therefore, the strength decrease with ball size, due to more defects and flaws within the body, which is a law in fracture mechanics In the present study, although the WC balls had high density, they were still subjected to the first-order grinding kinetics and As an option for grinding media, WC balls exhibited high throughput, especially for coarse feed. However, low energy efficiency was observed, particular in regard to fine feed. In accordance with the criterion for grinding media selection, it was deduced that the WC balls could be used to substitute for the steel balls of the same size to coarse particles, and substitute for the steel balls with the same mass per ball to medium-sized particles. Therefore, WC balls could be used in coarse grinding processes to increase throughput without necessity of installing another ball mill. Due to more flaws and defects occurring within a ball as its size increasing, the maximum size of WC ball was normally 50 mm and could be raised up to 70 mm by adding more Co. Moreover, the indicator of energy efficiency used in the study was invariant with grinding condition, hence it could ideally assay the effects of different grinding media on milling processes. The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Jianyuan Liu for sharing his insight in regard to comminution theory and Mr. Dailin Li for manufacturing the testing device. This research is sponsored by Innovation Project (