This paper presents the numerical and experimental investigation conducted on thin T300/epoxy carbon fibre laminates with multiple cutouts subjected to in-plane loads. Numerical and experimental analyses on the stress distribution around one central opening have been extensively presented in the literature. As a continuation of these studies the survey proceeds in this work with the analysis of the stress distribution in the area between two notches set in different configurations with respect to the load applied on carbon fibre laminated composites. The distance at which there is a minor or no interaction between the two discontinuities has been sought and it has found to be primarily dependent on the laminate lay-up and the diameter of the notch.During the last decades, considerable attention has been paid on composite materials due to their excellent properties for aerospace and aeronautical applications. The analysis of composite laminates containing through the thickness openings has been a subject of considerable concern especially for their application in mechanically fastened joints. Among many significant contributions to the case of open-hole composite thin plates a first model of failure was proposed by Whitney and Nuismer Backlund and Aronsson Chang et al. In addition to the aforementioned works, till date, the amount of information present in the literature is enormous on the behaviour of composite plates with a central opening. Numerous ingenious efforts are made from the computational and analytical point of view. However, experimental, analytical and numerical studies on orthotropic materials with multi-cutouts are still very limited. The focus of the analysis presented in this paper is posed on the research of the interaction effects of two holes in carbon fibre laminates. Particularly, the study has been developed to seek the distance at which two notches do not interfere with each other so that the analysis can always be reduced to the open-hole case. A methodology for correlating the laminate failure with the notches interaction in different geometrical configurations is the consequent objective of this analysis to provide a helpful tool for design considerations. Following the guidelines of some works briefly reviewed the effective stress concentration factor re-definition is given for laminates with multiple cutouts. The results are presented for two different laminate lay-ups. For the analysis, a home-made FEM code, COMP, was developed within the framework of the classic laminated plate theory (CLPT). The numerical analysis of the stress distribution around one and multiple notches in composite laminates has been accomplished by using the FEM code COMP written in Fortran 90 for solving plain stress/strain problems on symmetric composite laminates. The solution is given for each lamina belonging to a specific stacking sequence and the stress–strain contour plots are obtained according to one of the failure criteria implemented in the code. The code is written within the framework of the classical laminated plate theory. In this paper plane, bi-dimensional geometries with through the thickness notches in different configurations are analysed. For each different model the domain is meshed into iso-parametric elements. The results from the analyses conducted on four nodes elements mesh are presented here. For the cases under study, the models can always be reduced to infinite plates with notches centred with respect to the width of the geometry that satisfies Kirchhoff’s hypothesis. Due to symmetry half or a quarter of the model for each configuration is solved. Moreover, the mesh of the geometrical domain is a parameterized mapped mesh of quadrilateral elements optimized in a series of convergence tests. In other words, to homogenize and compare the numerical results for any given configuration, the elements of the mesh that gives the fastest convergence of the results in the open-hole case have been parameterized around the hole. In this way we were able to reproduce the same mesh for any different model given by varying the notch diameter, the distance between the notches and their configuration with respect to the direction of the load applied. Therefore, different results induced by changes of elements shape around the holes were limited. The mesh that satisfies such a condition is found to be similar to the one presented in the aforementioned Tan’s works. In conjunction with the numerical modelling an experimental campaign has been performed on T300/epoxy quasi-isotropic and orthotropic laminates with two holes. Hence, the strength of the material in the presence of multiple notches and its failure modes have been observed and used for the validation of the numerical survey. The failure criteria chosen and implemented in the finite element code are the maximum strain, maximum stress, Tsai Wu and Tsai-Hill criterion. The notch strength is computed here according to Tsai-Hill’s criterion. This criterion has been specifically selected in this work for being the most conservative in the lamina tension–tension domain among the most recent failure theories. The problem under consideration also does not take into account of interplies delamination. In this work the methodology followed for seeking the critical distance rather than its optimal value that of course is a function of the material in use, the real application and the loads on the structure, is here provided. The advantage of obtaining results in good agreement with the experiments by using a home-made code that requires very limited computational capabilities is also a key feature of the present research. Further work focused on implementing a progressive failure in three-dimensional problems and better detailing the failure conditions by choosing the most suitable failure criterion which combines the needs of matching at best the specific material behaviour in use and the loads on the structure would represent a step forward into components design optimization. Two geometrical configurations are usually considered in placing fasteners for mechanical joints: holes in a row perpendicular to the direction of the applied load or aligned with it, as schematically presented in A previous numerical analysis on the stress distribution and the behaviour of the stress concentration factor in case of samples with one central opening subjected to in-plane load was first conducted on two different carbon fibre laminates, [0°/±45°/90°] These results are fully included in the investigation outlined in this paper where the effects of the proximity of two notches on the strength and stress distribution within the same laminates are presented. In this study, the stress concentration factor is still evaluated as a function of the distance between the two holes and their diameter. The analysis includes the cases of open-hole geometries when the distance between the notches is great enough to avoid the superposition of their effects. The FEM code COMP used to compute the structural analysis for open-hole samples adopts the same criteria for meshing the model domain in geometries with two notches. Among all the models created for the numerical investigation, two examples are presented in Two extreme cases are also studied as cases of interest: infinite distance between the two holes, i.e. single notch and one notch with elliptical shape which becomes the case of interest when the distance between two holes approaches zero, Fig. 3. More precisely, The stress concentration factor and the notch strength resulting from the numerical analysis are calculated according to the definitions given in It is well known that 0° lamina are mainly designed to bear the longitudinal stress Therefore, for better understanding how the notch affects each lamina, in this work we evaluate the trend of the stress concentration factor and notch strength for each ply in its local coordinate system as a function of the holes diameter, their reciprocal distance and laminate lay-up. By doing this, the influence of the discontinuity on each single lamina can be highlighted. The laminate stress concentration factor, instead, was determined according to the procedure that follows. The results are then generalized. The analytical value of the stress concentration factor for the laminates under study has been found according to the literature in case of open-hole geometries. For an infinite, balanced and symmetric orthotropic plate with a circular central opening the stress concentration factor is given by It can be noticed how the behaviour of By defining The determination of the numerical value of the laminate To calculate This section presents the numerical results obtained for the first geometrical configuration shown in The first analysis has been conducted on geometries where the ratio between the diameter of the notch, The significance of such results has been pursued experimentally. Different [0°/±45°/0°] These experimental results will be presented along with the stress distribution around the discontinuities in the last section of this work. The isotropic case is represented in these graphs by the dashed black curve when The differences with the isotropic cases presented by both [0°/±45°/0°] The first outcome of the present analysis is that the laminate lay-up seems the major variable that affects the results and in fact a substantial difference is seen when comparing the trend of the curves obtained for the two different laminate stacking sequences.  Concluding, within quasi-isotropic laminate, 0° plies are subjected to higher stress so that the stress concentration factor is higher if compared to the same orientation belonging to the [0°/±45°/0°] The positive effect of the presence of the 90° layers is then observed. The decrease of the stress concentration factor of the entire laminate is in fact noticed. However, it must be considered that the advantages of the presence of these plies are limited by the lower value of the stress bearable before the FPF (first ply failure) is reached. The results of the second configuration shown in The following numerical simulations have been carried out on geometries with In Of notice is that the notch strength varies from 6 when Finally, Concluding by using these plots the distance between two holes to avoid superposition of edge effects can be found for each laminate. In the following sections the methodology to correlate this previous analysis to the overall laminate strength will be described. The definition of effective stress concentration will be given for multi-notched composite plates. For this aim the experimental strength of laminates with multiple notches in different configurations was found. Quasi static tensile tests were performed on T300/epoxy [0°/±45°/0°] As part of the experiments, one sample was instrumented with two strain gages glued on opposite faces of the specimen and centred with respect to the position of the two notches, In In This result is significant for the subsequent aim of the present analysis. In fact, since the difference between experimental and numerical results remains limited also after the FPF, even if the numerical model does not predict the failure of the laminate, the comparison between the results can also be made in terms of ultimate failure load. Precisely, the interaction effects of the two notches can be evaluated with respect to the laminate strength. For this purpose, following the works present in the literature More precisely, each point of these plots has been obtained by averaging the experimental values; the scatter of the results estimated by the standard deviation is also presented. It can be noticed how the nearer the holes are, hence for growing values of Here, the plots have been obtained by comparing the values of the stress concentration factor given by the numerical results obtained on [0°/±45°/0°] In other words, since the theoretical stress concentration factor is given by the higher punctual value at the hole boundary, while the effective stress concentration factor is an averaged experimental result, the difference between the two values is considered here. Particularly, it is of notice that this difference increases with the increase of the Afterwards, the values obtained for Of notice is the finding that the numerical curves fit with a good approximation the experimental results performed on samples with holes of 3 and 4 The curves have been normalized so that a critical distance The failure modes and crack propagation observed The contour plots are presented only for holes with diameter of 3, 4 and 6 The contour plots are given for both [0°/±45°/0°] The following figures give the distribution of Although the simulations of the stress distribution and notches interaction depict the status of the material at the first ply failure, a certain correlation between the [0°/±45°/0°] From these pictures it can also be said that the outermost 0° plies appear significantly damaged after the tests when dealing with small values of The same considerations also apply to the case of notches with a diameter of 6  A quarter of the model geometry is finally shown in In this paper the investigation of the interaction between two holes set in different configurations with respect to the load applied on carbon fibre laminates is presented. The numerical analysis of the stress distribution in-plane stress assumption and within the laminated plate theory framework has been conducted on two symmetric laminates, [0°/±45°/90°] The purpose of the analysis is posed on seeking the minimum distance at which no superposition of notch effects within the area between two near holes can be stated. The numerical results show that in [0°/±45°/0°] Moreover, significant is the result that the presence of the 90° lamina lowers the local stress concentration factors in non-0° plies although the failure occurs in quasi-isotropic stacking sequence at lower stress with respect to the [0°/±45°/0°] Finally, tensile tests has been performed on [0°/±45°/0°] This work was partly supported by the Italian Government; MUIR National Project 2002. It has been described how the strain in the area between two notches set in a row orthogonal to the direction of the load externally applied has been measured by two strain gauges glued on opposite faces of the same sample at the same location. This methodology followed the successful investigation previously conducted on the case of open-hole sample which is here reported Three strain gauges of 6