Segregation of particles due to difference in either size or density was studied in a continuous fast fluidized bed of 69mm ID and 3.65m height [1]. Binary feed mixtures of either flotsam-rich or intermediary or jetsam-rich mixtures were utilized for the study. The influence of the operating variables on the particles segregation was examined. All the considered feed mixtures, showed similar segregation effect even though the fluidization behavior of the binary mixtures differ [1,2]. Empirical correlations were suggested for the entrainment of solids and purity of the top and bottom products for all the three categories of binary feed mixtures considered. The optimum gas velocity for maximum separation of the lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles is identified. The effect of the operating variables on the identified optimum gas velocity and optimum purity/recovery is presented.coefficient defined in Eqs. flow rate of bottom particles (kg/h) diameter of the particle (μm) flow rate of overhead particles (kg/h) flow rate of the feed particles (kg/h) height of the column (m) feed inlet height from the distributor (m) recovery of the particles minimum fluidization velocity of particles (m/s) terminal settling velocity of particles (m/s) superficial gas velocity (m/s) factor defined in Eq. weight fraction of particles in the bottom product weight fraction of particles in the top product weight fraction of particles in the feed particle density/size ratio sphericity of the particles density of the particles (kg/m lighter/fine flotsam particles heavier/coarse jetsam particles The separation of binary mixture of particles by physical methods depends upon difference in properties of the solids. The important physical methods of separation used in the mineral process industries are: (1) mechanical separation (screens, jigs, fluidized beds), (2) magnetic separation (high gradient, open gradient) and (3) electrical separation (electrodynamic, triboelectric). Mechanical separation involves the response of the particles to drag force of the fluid and either gravitational or inertial or centrifugal force Separation of particles can be done in a variety of process equipments. Equipment selection depends upon the properties of the material, the required purity, recovery and the process economics. Among gravitational type separators, fluidized bed based devices is the best which provides substantial advantages over other equipments when separation of heterogeneous mixtures into cleaner fractions of large quantities The fluidized bed separator can be used to remove lighter/fine particles from the binary mixture of solids while the main charge is merely suspended in a fluidized state. Fluidized bed air separators employ the principles of air drag, gravity and particle inertia, which depend upon particle size/density. The main forces acting on the elementary volume of the bed are gravitational forces which periodically compress it and hydrodynamic forces which expand it. The particle size, shape, and density, the fluid density and viscosity, the operating and design variables have an effect on the separation of the particles. An analysis of literature suggest that the investigation on quantification of the segregator in terms of purity and recovery of lighter/fine and heavier/coarse is not available in case of continuous fast fluidization. In addition, correlations to predict purity and recovery are not reported. The single particle terminal settling velocity is the decisive parameter, which affects solids segregation in the fluidized beds Both lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles appear in the bottom flow and only lighter/fine particles reports to the top flow, which occurs at, lower operating gas velocity. Both lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles appear in the bottom flow as well as top flow at intermediate gas velocity. Both the lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles appear in the top flow and no lighter/fine particles reports to the bottom flow at higher gas velocity. Only lighter/fine particles report to the top flow and only heavier/coarse particles report to the bottom flow happens at ideal gas velocity. The idea is to find the ideal gas velocity so that all the lighter/fine particles entering the fluidized bed overflow as the top product while all the heavier/coarse particles discharge as the bottom product. When the density/size of the lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particle is wider the terminal settling velocity of the particles gets wider and the ideal gas velocity is reachable. When the particles size/density ratio is close to one it is not possible to reach the ideal gas velocity. In such cases the maximum separation of the particles occurs when the maximum amount of the lighter/fine particles reports to the top product and maximum amount of the heavier/fine particles reports to the bottom product. The optimum gas velocity is the gas velocity at which maximum separation of the particles is occurs. The optimum gas velocity not only depends on the particle size or particle density but also on the operating variables such as solids feed rate, solids feed composition and feed inlet height. The present study draws attention to the particles segregation of binary system in continuous mode of operation with the objective of understanding how the recovery of both the flotsam and jetsam particles and the purity of top and bottom products are influenced by the operating conditions. The operating variables tested were gas velocity, solids feed rate, feed composition, feed inlet height, particle size distribution, and particle size and density ratio. The aspects studied were the entrainment rate (kg/h) and discharge rate (kg/h), mass fraction of top and bottom products and bed pressure drop (mbar). The present work is designed to sort out the existing discrepancies and to fill up the gap in the research in the area of continuous fast fluidization technique. Present study provides an apparent illustration of the continuous segregation phenomena of flotsam-rich, intermediary or jetsam-rich binary feed mixture of solids using gas–solid fast fluidization. The work identify the optimum conditions for maximum separation of the lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles and analyze the effects of the operating variables such as solids feed rate, feed composition, feed inlet height and particle size ratio on the identified optimum gas velocity and optimum purity/recovery of the particles. The experimental set-up used and the experimental procedure employed in the present study is described in first part of this communication Three categories of particle feed mixtures have been examined in the continuous fast fluidized bed of varying density or size. First category has less composition of heavier/coarse particles in the feed mixture (flotsam-rich), second category of segregation has more concentration of heavier/coarse particles in the feed mixture (jetsam-rich) and the third category is the intermediary feed mixtures. Each category of mixture exhibited different fluidization behavior A set of 1500 runs was performed to study the segregation of three categories of binary mixture of solids specifically, flotsam-rich, intermediary and jetsam-rich feed mixtures of solids of varying density and size in continuous fast fluidized bed. The influence of variables such as gas velocity, solids feed rate, feed composition, feed inlet position, particle size distribution and particle density/size ratio was studied to estimate the entrainment rate, discharge rate and, purity and recovery of the lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles. The purity of lighter/fine flotsam particles in the top product ( (1 Although the exit concentrations presented above are a measure for design based on purity specifications, measure of recovery with operating conditions is additionally essential to analyze the performance of the separator. Recovery of flotsam particles ( Recovery of jetsam particles ( The operating gas velocity strongly affects the quality of the products to be separated There is a threshold gas velocity beyond which the purity of lighter/fine particles in the top product is found to be dropping. The carryover of heavier/coarse particles to the top flow from the bed beyond the threshold velocity makes the concentration of lighter/fine particles in the top product to drop. The threshold velocity is found to decrease with increase in the solids feed rate. This makes a clear statement that the carryover of the heavier/coarse particles along with the lighter/fine particles occurs even at lower gas velocities for higher solids feed rate. For achieving maximum purity the fast fluidized bed has to operate below the threshold velocity.  Complete recovery of the lighter/fine particles is obtained only when all the lighter/fine particles in the feed reports to the top flow. At a given solids feed rate, there is a threshold gas velocity above which the recovery of lighter/fine particles is maximum. For obtaining maximum recovery of lighter/fine particles the system has to be operated just above the threshold velocity. The threshold gas velocity increases when the solids feed rate or the concentration of heavier/coarse particles in the feed increases. Finally it is concluded that for a given solids feed rate and feed composition, recovery of the lighter/fine particles increases whereas the recovery of the heavier/coarse particles decreases with the increase in the gas velocity. Similar result is noticed in the gas–solids bubbling fluidized beds Solids feed rate is one of the important parameter in continuous fluidized beds  At higher solids feed rate and higher operating gas velocity, the holdup of the solids inside the bed is less. The carryover of solids from the bed is more. Consequently more heavier/coarse particles report to the top flow along with the lighter/fine particles due to increase in the formation of the particles clusters  The recovery of heavier/coarse particles is found to be decreasing with increase in the solids feed rate. At very low operating velocity, the recovery of heavier/coarse particles from the fluidized bed is less due to severe slugging in case of density segregation. But when the bed is in turbulent regime, the recovery of heavier/coarse particles is complete The study of the effect of feed composition on purity and recovery is important since the settling velocities also depend on the composition of solids. The classification driving force is proportional to the feed composition The effect of the feed composition on the purity of top and bottom products is studied for flotsam-rich, intermediary and jetsam-rich mixtures and shown, typically, in The effect of feed composition on the recovery of fine particles and coarse particles is shown, typically, in The separation of particles in the continuous fast fluidized bed depends on the feed inlet position since the residence time of particles depends on feed inlet position When the feed inlet height is close to the distributor, the amount of lighter particles reporting to the bottom product along with the heavier particles is found to be higher. Since the settling heavier particles confine some lighter particles along with them to the bottom flow. So the purity of heavier particles is lesser when the feed inlet height is close to the distributor as presented, typically, in When the feed inlet height is far from the distributor, the amount of heavier particles reporting to the top product is more. It is well known that by increasing the feed inlet height the free board height decreases. The recovery of heavier particles decreases with increase in the feed inlet height as presented, typically, in The upward moving particles from the bottom dense bed collide with the particle's cloud created close to the feed inlet, by the feed flowing into the column from the hopper, slows down the lighter particles. The recovery of lighter particles and the purity of heavier particles are found to be lesser for a certain feed inlet ( For the flotsam-rich feed mixture, the results confirmed that a better effectiveness of particle separation is attainable while the particles are fed at the mid-lower position of the bed. It is also understood that for a continuous process, a high feed inlet is not economically feasible for many practical applications because it includes conveying cost for lifting the amount of solids to be separated continuously. Chyang et al. The particles size/density ratio is the major variable which affects the separation of any binary mixture of solids It is well known that when the particle size ratio is one, no separation of solids possible for the homogeneous mixture of solids. With increase in the particle size/density ratio, the separation of solids increases Fluidized beds with widely sized particles commonly undergo segregation and results in bed de-fluidization. The operation of fluidized beds with heterogeneous mixture of particles with wide size distribution is very sensitive to the operating conditions. Experiments were conducted to find the size distribution of the particles collected in the top and bottom products for lignite-marcasite system with size range of 100–1000 Based on the experimental data, correlations are developed for the continuous fast fluidization for different category of feed mixtures of the present study. The relationship of the entrainment rate, purity of top product and purity of bottom product with the system variables are expressed for density and size segregation of solids as follows: Fractional entrainment: Purity of lighter/fine particles in the top product: Purity of heavier/coarse particles in the bottom product: The entrainment of solids increases with increase in either gas velocity or solids feed rate or particle density/size ratio and decreases with increase in either feed inlet height or concentration of heavier/coarse particles in the feed for all the category of feed mixtures in the range selected for the present study. The calculated exponents Purity of the top product decreases with increase in either gas velocity or solids feed rate and increases with increase in either concentration of lighter/fine particles in the feed or feed inlet height to a certain level or particle density/size ratio as per the experimental observations for all categories of the feed mixtures. The calculated exponents Purity of the bottom product increases with increase in either gas velocity or concentration of heavier/coarse particles in the feed or feed inlet height or particle density/size ratio and decreases with increase in solids feed rate for all categories of the feed mixtures as per the experimental observations. The calculated exponents The discharge rate of solids can be calculated by drawing material balance for steady state operation. Recovery of the lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles can be calculated using Eqs. The operating conditions that allow the best separation of two solids are found by relating the purity of the products and recovery of the particles. To achieve complete separation both the purity of products as well as the recovery of particles should be one. At higher gas velocity, purity of the top product is less whereas the recovery of lighter particles is more and vice versa for lower gas velocity. Always there exists an optimum operating gas velocity corresponding to the point of intersection of the two lines. At this point, both the recovery of lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles and both the purity of top and bottom products are maximum. The corresponding gas velocity is identified as the optimum gas velocity. At the optimum gas velocity, the purity of products and the recovery of particles are same for top product as well the bottom product. Therefore the optimum gas velocity can also be obtained by equating the purity of products and recovery of particles using Eqs. While operating closer to the optimum gas velocity, it is noted visually that most of the heavier/coarse particles entering the column sink down and the lighter/fine particles are pushed up by the heavier/coarse particles in the dense phase into the dilute phase. The upward moving gas applies additional force on the moving lighter/fine particles and carries them easily to the overflow. Few heavier/coarse particles rising from the dense bed slows down in the freeboard and sinks back into the bed close to the wall of the column and reaches the bottom flow. In general, there is always a trade-off between quantity and concentration. Large the quantity of lighter/fine particles, poor the purity of lighter/fine particles in the top product. The quantity of heavier/coarse particles in the bottom product decreases as the result of increase in gas velocity. The gas velocity at which fluid beds particle classification can also be best performed depends on the demand. If a certain purity of the top layer is demanded, the gas velocity should be chosen in agreement with that demand The optimum operating gas velocity is the velocity at which the optimum purity/recovery exists. It is obvious from the figures that the optimum purity/recovery for maximum separation is decreasing with increase in the solids feed rate for the mixtures selected for the present study. Increase in solids feed rate decreases the concentration of the lighter/fine particles at the top product and heavier/coarse particles at the bottom product for density and size segregation of solids  From the figures, it is evident that the optimum purity/recovery is higher when the lighter particles concentration is more in the feed mixture. But the observed trend varies marginally in some cases depending upon the category of the feed mixture selected for the present study. This crops up due to the dissimilarity of particles fluidization behavior due to the variation in the particles concentration   The optimum purity/recovery increases with the increase in the particle size ratio. With increase in the particle size ratio the terminal settling velocity of the particles becomes wider and the particle segregation increases Segregation of binary mixtures of solids in a continuous fast fluidized bed mainly depends upon the particles density and size. Density and size segregation of binary mixture of particles was experimentally studied for flotsam-rich, intermediary and jetsam-rich feed mixtures. The different sets of data obtained for the flotsam-rich, intermediary and jetsam-rich feed mixture showed identical trends even though the fluidization behavior of the mixture varies The gas velocity is the key parameter which affects the segregation of binary mixture of solids. The optimum gas velocity for maximum separation of the lighter/fine and heavier/coarse particles is identified for various operating conditions. The effect of the operating variables on the optimum gas velocity and optimum purity/recovery is presented.