In this work, it was aimed to select and propose a feasible as well as an applicable method, or series of methods, for the extraction of zinc and lead that are present in the disposed Çinkur leach residues having 12.43 wt.% Zn, 15.51 wt.% Pb and 6.27 wt.% Fe. After determination of the components of the residue, acid leaching and brine leaching were performed to reclaim Zn and Pb sequentially. Acid leaching experiments were done for Zn extraction by controlling acid concentration, reaction duration, reaction temperature and pulp density (solid/liquid ratio) as parameters. At the optimum conditions, 150 g/L H2SO4 at 95 °C for 120 min with a pulp density of 200 g/L, 71.9% of initial Zn content was extracted. For Pb extraction, brine leaching experiments were conducted on the secondary leach residue obtained after primary H2SO4 leaching. In brine leaching trials, NaCl concentration, pulp density, reaction duration, reaction temperature and effect of HCl addition were chosen as parameters. Pb extraction up to 98.9% was attained on laboratory scale after 10 min of treatment, at 300 g/L NaCl concentration, 95 °C, pulp density (50 g/L) with 30 ml/L HCl addition.Zinc and lead are the most important nonferrous metals after copper and aluminum ( During its operation, Çinkur, has produced an estimated amount of one million tones of residues with a preliminary chemical composition of 11–13% Zn and 15–17% Pb in mass ( Depending on the origins and metal contents, such as iron/steelmaking flue dusts, leach residues, secondary materials of similar nature have been suitably processed to reclaim their valuable contents ( Leach residues in general have already been an interest to both mineral engineers and metallurgists. To gain Zn and to increase process economy as well as to obtain a Pb-rich concentrate for Pb production diverse upgrading, beneficiation and treatment methods have been studied by various researchers ( Chemical extraction studies of the metals commonly separated the metals and individually dealt with each other in both pyro and hydrometallurgical techniques. Zn, for instance, was extracted from the residues by hot sulphuric acid digestion ( Having obtained the representative samples of LR from waste stockpile, depending on their raw material origins, residues were classified as TLR, produced from local carbonate ores, and ILR, produced from imported concentrates. Afterwards, leach residues were chemically analyzed and blended by a ratio of TLR/ILR: 9, in mass according to the present amounts in the Çinkur stockpile. This blended mixture (BLR) was used in all experiments. During the leaching experiments Also, a water cooled condenser was attached to the system to avoid evaporation losses at high temperatures. The stirring rate was kept constant at a setting of two, which corresponded to 250 rpm. All chemicals were of high quality, reagent grade Merck chemicals and de-ionized water was used throughout the experiments. Chemical analyses on undissolved solids were performed by dissolving them in HF added aqua regia at elevated temperatures. Leach liquors and obtained solutions were chemically analyzed in Perkin-Elmer model 2380 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS). X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) analyses of the solids were done by Rigaku D/MAX2200/PC, while energy dispersive SPECTRO iQ II was used for X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) analyses. Samples of TLR, ILR and BLR were subjected to detailed analyses before the leaching experiments. Chemical content and physical state of the residues were investigated by AAS, XRF, XRD and Thermo Gravimetric Analysis (TGA). The chemical composition of the residues are given in Investigation by XRD showed that BLR compounds were lead sulphate (PbSO After the chemical analysis, homogenously mixed, dried and pulverized BLR sample was physically characterized to determine particle size, bulk density and specific gravity. At the end, bulk density of the BLR was found to be 0.94 g/cm In the light of the preliminary chemical–physical characterization, and previous researchers' results, the most promising leaching agents have come out to be hot sulphuric acid for zinc and sodium chloride for Pb. Thus, the experiments were performed by using these aqueous solutions at different experimental conditions. Conditions and results of the various water and acid leaching experiments are tabulated in In water leaching experiments, reaction duration and temperature, in a range of 60–180 min, 25–95 °C, were selected as parameters by fixing the pulp density at 200 g/L. As can be seen from the results, temperature and reaction duration have not been effective parameters on the metal extractions. While Pb dissolution was negligibly low, therefore was not given. The highest Zn extraction was found as 18.4% after 60 min. at 95 °C. It was considered that Zn extraction was restricted by the existence of the only water soluble compound ZnSO Since water leaching did not yield an acceptable value, the following experiments were performed in acidic solutions where the individual effects of temperature, acid concentration, reaction duration and pulp density were evaluated. Dissolution reactions for zinc ferrite (ZnFe Among the effective factors, initial sulphuric acid (H The results, which are presented in At this point, metal dissolution must be considered simultaneously concerning process metallurgy and economy. If higher Zn uptake is desired, higher acid concentrations can be selected; however, the dissolution of excessive Fe must be considered very carefully, as dissolved Fe introduces new problems in the zinc electrowinning stage. Apart from this, the available acid supply in actual production line, i.e. spent electrolyte had an average acidity of 150–200 g/L. Therefore, 150 g/L initial acid concentration was chosen as the fixed acidity for the following experiments. Since the extractions of metals can be improved at prolonged periods of leaching, it was intended to find such relations for this residue too. Thus, the leaching tests were carried out between 60 and 1920 min. During these tests, sulphuric acid concentration, pulp density, and reaction temperature were maintained at 150 g/L, 200 g/L, 95 °C, respectively. According to the results of experiments illustrated in The reaction temperature was varied in a range from 30 °C to near boiling point temperature of 95 °C while keeping acid concentration, pulp density and reaction duration constant at 150 g/L, 200 g/L and 120 min, respectively. As seen in Apart from temperature, duration and concentration, the effect of pulp density on Zn extraction and Fe dissolution was investigated with three different solid–liquid ratios, and given in After the sulphuric acid leaching experiments, it can be said that Zn and Fe extractions increased analogously, but in order to minimize Fe removal expenses at solution purification stage, acid concentration and reaction duration had to be limited by compromising with Zn extractions. Therefore, it can be claimed that the optimum conditions that resulted in 71.9% Zn extraction and 49.0% Fe dissolution, were 150 g/L H After the optimum hot acid leaching trial, the zinc extraction value obtained was about 72%. Since, 18% of the zinc extraction originated from zinc sulphate heptahydrate determined by water leaching, the remaining 54% extraction of zinc came from zinc ferrite. On the basis of this calculation, the quantity of sulphuric acid used in the acid leaching experiments was approximately twice as much as the stoichiometrically needed. It was also determined that after acid leaching, the amount of secondary leach residue was about 30% lower in weight as compared to the original. Hot sulphuric acid leaching experiments yielded a reasonably high Zn extraction with accompanied Fe dissolution. However, Pb concentration in the secondary leach residue was not practically raised to an acceptable extent that was as high as 40% for the already installed Çinkur Pb plant. Consequently, this study was further extended to convert the Pb content of newly formed secondary waste into extractable form. Among the previous studies NaCl ( In brine leaching, NaCl concentration, pulp density, reaction temperature, reaction duration, and HCl addition were chosen as parameters to be studied. For investigation of NaCl concentration on Pb extraction, six different concentrations from 50 g/L to 350 g/L were tested at the following constant conditions; Pulp density of 50 g/L, reaction duration of 15 min and reaction temperature of 25 °C. Researchers ( From the results, given in Habashi ( Having seen that the high temperatures and solvent concentrations had profound effects, several experiments were performed for the determination of the suitable reaction duration, at the predefined conditions of 300 g/L brine (NaCl) concentration, 95 °C of reaction temperature and 200 g/L of pulp density. From Following the NaCl concentration trials, experiments were done with varying pulp density in which temperature and NaCl concentration were chosen as 25 °C, 300 g/L, respectively for a reaction duration of 30 min. The results of these tests, given previously in To overcome this limitation, it was thought that an increase in the activity of Cl As a result, on laboratory scale the optimum conditions for brine leaching showed that the maximum Pb extraction was 98.9% which could be obtained when the parameters were kept as 300 g/L for NaCl concentration, 95 °C for reaction temperature, 50 g/L for pulp density and 10 min for reaction duration with the addition of 30 ml/L HCl. Meanwhile, under these conditions, Zn and Fe were further dissolved in the solution about 8% and 5%, respectively. The final residue was analyzed for Zn, Pb and Fe contents, and its composition was determined as 5.81%, 0.53%, and 6.62%, respectively. The XRD patterns of blended LR, secondary LR and final LR are given in In the light of physical, chemical and mineralogical investigations and general literature survey, the blended leach residue of Turkish LR and Iranian LR displayed a complex nature and contained 12.43% Zn, 15.51% Pb and 6.27% Fe. Having defined the characteristics, as the process economy is the basic limitation for production, hydrometallurgical treatment methods were assessed in order to find the optimum extraction conditions of zinc and lead. Water leaching experiments were ended with insufficient zinc extractions in the order of 18% at different duration and temperature which led to hot sulphuric acid treatment of blended leach residue. By hot acid leaching 71.9% of Zn was taken into solution at the optimum conditions of 150 g/L H A further step using NaCl was evaluated for brine leaching of the secondary leach residue. The optimized conditions for brine digestion, that gave 98.9% Pb extraction was found as 300 g/L NaCl, 10 min, 95 °C, 50 g/L pulp density and 30 ml/L HCl addition. The simplified process flow, given in This research was supported by the Research Foundation of Middle East Technical University.