A solvent extraction application consisting of two-sequential solvent extraction circuits to separate the nickel and cobalt from a synthetic sulphate leach solution which simulates a typical Caldag lateritic leach solution was conceived and experimentally explored. The first circuit allowed the simultaneous extraction of most of the nickel (98%), cobalt (98%) and manganese (94%) with 20% neodecanoic acid (Versatic 10) and 5% tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) in ShellSol 2046 at pH7.2 together with substantial amounts of calcium (65%) and magnesium (12%). Three stages of scrubbing at pH5.6 using diluted sulphuric acid solution allowed the removal of most of the magnesium (90%) and substantial amount of calcium (16%). Complete stripping of nickel, cobalt, manganese, magnesium and calcium was achieved at pH0.75. This loaded strip solution was the feed for the second circuit. The use 15% bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) and 5% TBP in ShellSol 2046 allowed the extraction of most of the cobalt (94%) and manganese (98%) at pH5.0 but with substantial co-extraction of magnesium (41%) and calcium (40%) and a minor amount of nickel (3%). A two-stage scrubbing of this loaded organic with cobalt (20g L−1) solution was performed. Magnesium, calcium and nickel were completely displaced with cobalt. Most of the manganese (93%) was removed from the organic. Complete stripping of the cobalt and manganese in the scrubbed organic phase was achieved at pH1.0. Therefore, nickel (94%) and cobalt (91%) were totally separated from the feed solution. In addition, slope analyses were carried out to determine the nature of the extracted complexes of the nickel and cobalt with each extractant. Based on the experimental results, a flowsheet for the separation process is presented.In hydrometallurgy of laterite nickel ores, solvent extraction (SX) has been an important separation technique to enrich the nickel and its primary by-product, cobalt. This is because SX is currently the only proven commercial technique to separate the two chemically-similar metals from the pregnant leach solution (PLS). Therefore, SX operation is preferred if separate high purity products of the nickel and cobalt are targeted. Currently, commercial methods for hydrometallurgy of laterite nickel ores, depending on the downstream processing, is categorised as mixed hydroxide precipitation (MHP), mixed sulphide precipitation (MSP) and direct solvent extraction (DSX). The MHP and MSP processes involve intermediate precipitation of the nickel and cobalt and thus require transport and further processing steps involving re-leaching of the precipitate. The nickel and cobalt in the leach solution are then separated via SX to eventually obtain the maximum value of each metal. In the DSX process, on the other hand, the nickel and cobalt are separated directly from the PLS. This process, therefore, has the potential to lower the capital and processing costs for the production of each metal as a separate high purity product since it circumvents four separate processing units: precipitation, solid-liquid separation, re-leaching and another solid-liquid separation. The first commercial DSX process was used in the now decommissioned Bulong Nickel Operation (Bulong) in Western Australia. The Bulong process consists of two SX circuits wherein cobalt, zinc, copper and manganese were separated from nickel, magnesium and calcium using bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid, Cyanex 272, in the first circuit and nickel was separated from magnesium and calcium using neodecanoic acid, Versatic 10, in the second circuit. Bulong encountered a number of technical issues in their early operation which have been reviewed in details by The second commercial DSX process is used in the Goro Nickel Project (Goro) in New Caledonia which is the only operating plant with DSX to date. The Goro process relies on the use of bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) dithiophosphinic acid, Cyanex 301, to separate both the nickel and cobalt from manganese, magnesium and calcium. The nickel and cobalt are then separated by the use of an amine extractant. Cyanex 301 is currently the only commercially-available extractant that allows complete separation of nickel and cobalt from the three impurities but the extractant is prone to metal-catalysed degradation by air and extracts the nickel and cobalt too strongly ( The use of synergistic solvent extraction systems (SSX) has been gaining considerable interest. Many studies have been carried out by various investigators using a mixture of two or more commercially-available extractants and reported synergistic effect toward the nickel and cobalt ( In the present study, the use of two SX steps using Versatic 10 and Cyanex 272 in the first and second step, respectively, to carry out SX of the nickel and cobalt from a partially neutralised atmospheric leach solution of Caldag laterite nickel ores, i.e. after iron (< Synthetic sulphate solutions that simulated those produced in Caldag, following the partial neutralisation step for the removal of iron, aluminium and chromium from the PLS by limestone, were prepared by dissolving analytical grade salts of NiSO The extractants Versatic 10 (Industrial Grade) was kindly provided by Momentive the Netherlands and Cyanex 272 (Industrial Grade) was purchased from Cytec Australia. TBP (≥ All extraction, scrubbing and stripping experiments were carried out in a 200-mL glass reactor immersed in a temperature-controlled water bath. The temperature of the solution was maintained at 40 The aqueous solution pH was controlled by small additions of NaOH (5 A series of solvent extraction tests were carried out with Versatic 10 concentrations in the range of 5–20% (v/v) and 5% TBP (v/v) in ShellSol 2046. To remove magnesium and calcium from the loaded organic solutions, scrubbing tests were carried out using the loaded organic solutions generated from the extraction tests at previously determined optimum conditions. The loaded organic solutions were subjected to scrubbing with diluted sulphuric acid solution at pH Stripping of the loaded organic solutions obtained from the scrubbing tests at the determined optimum conditions (pH The loaded strip solution was subjected to solvent extraction tests using Cyanex 272 concentration in the range of 5–20% (v/v) and 5% TBP (v/v) in ShellSol 2046. Although nickel extraction was very low with 15% Cyanex 272 and 5% TBP system under the determined optimum conditions, a substantial amount of manganese (98%), calcium (21%) and magnesium (30%) were co-extracted with cobalt. Consequently, scrubbing is required to ensure the high purity of the final cobalt product. The loaded organic phase for the scrubbing test was prepared by loading the organic solution (15% Cyanex 272 and 5% TBP in ShellSol 2046) at an A/O ratio of unity and pH The scrubbing tests were carried out at an A/O ratio of unity as well. The co-extracted nickel, manganese, calcium and magnesium were contacted with a cobalt salt solution containing 20 The loaded scrub organic was subjected to stripping using diluted sulphuric acid solutions at pH The extraction of reaction for a divalent cation, such as Ni The equilibrium constant, Taking logarithm of Eq. The plots of log Based on the experimental results obtained in the experimental campaign, a flow sheet was proposed for the extraction and separation of nickel and cobalt from Caldag laterite leach solution ( It has to be noted that the amounts of calcium co-extraction in each extraction circuit was relatively high but the amounts of calcium ions in the final streams of nickel and cobalt were still sufficiently low for electrowinning of each metal. For example, the designed calcium content in the Bulong's nickel electrolyte solution was 150 A two-sequential solvent extraction circuits to extract and separate the nickel and cobalt from a synthetic sulphate solution which simulates a typical Caldag lateritic leach solution was carried out. The nickel (98%) and manganese (94%) were simultaneously extracted using 20% Versatic 10 and 5% TBP dissolved in ShellSol 2046 at pH Sait acknowledges the