A numerical procedure about nonlinear flow in three-dimension discrete fracture networks was developed by solving the Reynolds equation and Forchheimer equation using the Galerkin method. The numerical simulation results of three intersecting models were compared with experimental data and a good agreement was observed. Based on further applications of the model to fracture networks with the consideration of Barton’s and Chen’s empirical model, it was found that nonlinear fluid flows in fracture networks could be appropriately described by the Forchheimer equation. The smoother the fracture surfaces and the greater the connectivity of the fracture network are, the lower the hydraulic gradient for the onset of nonlinear flows is.Quantitative estimation of permeability of fractured rock masses is an important issue for various engineering applications, such as geothermal energy extraction, oil and gas production, hydraulic engineering, CO The most well-known mathematical models to describe the nonlinear flow through a single rough-walled rock fracture are the Forchheimer and Izbash equations: There are two crucial factors that control the permeability of fractured rockmasses. One is the conductivity of fractures and the other one is the connectivity of the fracture network However, Berkowitz The nonlinear flow phenomenon in fractured rockmasses under a high pressure gradient is less recognized. Kosakowski and Berkowitz Although many studies on fluid flow in DFNs have been conducted, research on nonlinear flow behaviours is still limited. In the present work, an advanced numerical procedure has been developed to address the nonlinear problem of flow through 3D DFNs. The organization of the paper is as follows. In Rock fracture systems can be inferred from mapping of rock outcrops, boreholes or tunnel faces A 3D DFN model in this work was generated with the aforementioned assumptions and methodology using the code developed by Zhang and Yin In this study, the fracture network was discretized with triangular mesh using the mesh generation code in ANSYS. Though the triangular mesh for finite element method (FEM) has a lower computation accuracy compared with the quadrilateral one, it has better flexibility and accuracy for geometrical representation. Therefore, triangular elements are used in our FEM analysis. The fluid flow within a fracture can be described by the Reynolds equation instead of the Navier-Stokes equations Two boundary conditions need to be considered in the solution domain. The first boundary ( where In order to solve the nonlinear problem of flow through 3D DFNs, the Galerkin method is adopted. Eq. According to the Galerkin method, the formulation can be rewritten as: Using the Lagrange interpolation function: The preconditioned conjugate gradients (PCG) method is used to solve the large-scale sparse system of linear equations in each nonlinear solution iteration step. During the solution process, the 3D global coordinates of each element should be converted into 2D local coordinates based on fractures. The transformation procedure is described in Appendix B. A C++ program was developed to implement the above mentioned methods to model the nonlinear flow through 3D DFNs. The workflow of the computation is illustrated in To verify the proposed method, three 3D fracture network models were established. The numerical simulation results of the models are compared with published experimental results by Liu et al. Model I has a domain dimension of 500 mm × 500 mm × 5 mm (see Model II has a domain dimension of 200 mm × 100 mm × 100 mm. Fractures 1–4 dip at an angle of 60° and fracture 5 is horizontal. The apertures of the fractures are 0.30 mm, 0.60 mm, 1.00 mm, 0.60 mm and 0.30 mm, respectively ( Model III has a domain dimension of 500 mm × 500 mm × 5 mm, containing 49 fractures as shown in The relative errors of the simulation results compared with experiment ones are plotted in To systematically investigate the nonlinear regimes of flow through complex 3D DFNs, a number of flow simulations were conducted using the proposed method. Eight 3D DFNs are generated for a square domain with an edge length of 100 m. The number of fractures in the fracture models ranges from 100 to 750 ( For the flow simulation, according to suggestions by Oda Percolation theory for fractured media makes extensive use of dimensionless density to quantify the degree of fracture connectivity. The dimensionless percolation density is independent of absolute fracture and domain size For 3D fractured media, and The Fracture surface roughness plays an important role in the permeability of fractured rock masses Note that  Twelve different hydraulic gradients (1.0e−5, 1.0e−4, 1.0e−3, 5.0e−3, 8.0e−3, 1.0e−2, 5.0e−2, 1.0e−1, 3.0e−1, 5.0e−1, 8.0e−1 and 1.0) are applied in each of the eight 3D DFNs. The simulation results for the relationships between hydraulic gradient Overall as  To reveal the reason why the flow behaviour varies with DFN geometry, the effects of dimensionless percolation density On the other hand, at certain For DFNs, Eq. The overall transmissivity of the system,  To quantitatively evaluate the nonlinearity of fluid flow in DFNs, a factor where The variations in This study explores the nonlinear behaviours of flow in 3D DFNs. A finite element formulation combing Reynolds equation and Forchheimer equation was proposed, and the direct iteration method was used to solve the system of nonlinear equations. The effects of fracture network connectivity and fracture surface roughness on nonlinear flow regimes in 3D DFNs were analyzed. Based on the study, the following main conclusions can be obtained: The hydraulic tests of four intersecting fractures, five intersecting fractures and multiple intersecting fractures were used to validate the accuracy of the proposed numerical method. It was demonstrated that the maximum difference between the numerical and experimental results is 18%. The good agreement indicates that the proposed numerical method is capable of analyzing the nonlinear flow behaviours in rock fracture systems. Forchheimer equation fits well the results of nonlinear flow in 3D DFNs with different connectivity and fracture surface roughness. High fracture surface roughness can easily produce preferential flow paths, i.e., higher channeling effects, even when there is a good connectivity in the DFN. Both the linear coefficient Due to the effect of nonlinear flow, as the hydraulic gradient increases, the transmissivity of DFNs gradually decreases. For all eight DFN cases examined in this study, the transmissivity increases with increasing percolation density, but decreases with the increasing fracture surface roughness. Both the fracture network connectivity and fracture surface roughness play important roles on the nonlinear flow characteristics in 3D DFNs. The transition from linear flow regime to nonlinear flow regime occurs at a lower hydraulic gradient in DFNs with smoother fracture surfaces and lower fracture connectivity. The critical hydraulic gradient ranges from 0.001 to 0.5. This study has attempted to explain the effects of geometrical characteristics of DFNs on the nonlinear flow behaviours in fracture networks. Further studies will be necessary to focus on the applicability of the proposed method on representative element volume (REV) size and permeability tensor, taking into account the nonlinearity of flows within discrete fracture networks. This research was financially supported by the A nonlinear system of equations can be written as: Assuming initial solution Repeat the above-mentioned process, the when The transformation from global coordinate system to local (fracture) coordinate system is necessary for obtaining element transmissivity matrix. In the local coordinate system, the origin is at the centre of the fracture surface, and the positive direction of