Spodumene is a lithium aluminium silicate which can exist in α, β and γ modifications. Phase transformations of spodumene concentrate from the beneficiation plant in Greenbushes, Western Australia, were studied under a conventional method of heating. Spodumene concentrate was heated in a muffle furnace at 800, 850, 900, 950, 1000, 1050 and 1100°C for 10, 20, 30 and 60min in order to evaluate the effect of temperature and heating time on the amount of α-spodumene converted to β-spodumene, and also to assess the possibility of γ-spodumene formation. Structural changes were first observed after heating at 950°C for a minimum of 30min. Lower temperatures or residence times did not result in evident phase change while higher temperatures or residence times increased the extent of the phase change. At 1100°C and for times longer than 10min, the transformation from α-spodumene to γ and β-spodumene was complete. It also resulted in volumetric expansion of the sample and change of colour from beige to ice white. X-ray diffraction spectra and scanning electron microscope images also provided evidence of γ-spodumene formation from 950°C up to 1100°C. Samples were analysed in order to investigate changes in their physical properties. The results revealed that specific surface is directly related to the amount of β-spodumene which forms at higher temperatures. On the other hand particle size and specific gravity reduced with formation of more β-spodumene.With the increasing manufacturing of lithium-ion batteries, the demand for lithium sources especially lithium minerals has grown significantly in recent years. Among these minerals, spodumene is the most abundant and hence it has been subject of several recent studies. Spodumene has three crystalline modifications: (i) α-spodumene which is the naturally-occurring structure and a member of pyroxene group ( The effect of the transformation of α-spodumene to β-spodumene on the extraction process for a spodumene ore has been investigated by The feed material for this study was a sample of high-grade spodumene concentrate obtained from the beneficiation plant at Greenbushes mine ( The calcination of spodumene was achieved using a conventional laboratory muffle furnace, Modutemp 9.6 The chemical composition of the spodumene concentrate was determined by means of X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry with a Panalytical AXIOS WDXRF, except for Li Mineralogical characterisations of the spodumene concentrate and the calcined samples were obtained by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, which was conducted using a GBC Enhanced Multi-material Analyser (EMMA). The XRD instrument was operated at a voltage of 35 The KBr pallet method was used to perform Fourier transform infrared The particle sizes in the spodumene concentrate and calcined samples were determined using a Microtrac flix S3500 laser sizer. The surface areas of the feed concentrate and selected calcined samples were estimated using Brunauer, Emmett and Tellet (BET) surface area analysis carried out using a Micromeritics Tristar II surface area and porosity analyser. Finally, the specific gravity (SG) of selected samples was determined by applying the Archimedes’ principle in a volumetric flask with deionised water as the medium. The chemical composition of the feed sample (spodumene concentrate) is given in  FTIR spectrum of the spodumene concentrate is presented in Spodumene concentrates heated at 800, 850 and 900 While a minor shift in a peak is a sign of internal stress, the XRD patterns for the calcined samples produced at 950 As the temperature was increased further, the peaks related to β-spodumene appeared more prominent while the peaks related to γ-spodumene were still noticeable even after heating at 1100 The XRD patterns of spodumene calcined at 1100 At 1100 Crystal structure schematics of the three spodumene polymorphs approximately to scale are given in The visual changes taking place as result of heat treating the feed concentrate at different temperatures and times can be analysed from the SEM images given in The SEM and XRD observations of the samples treated at 1100 Also, the thermal conductivity of spodumene becomes lower at higher temperatures whilst γ- and β-spodumene have lower heat conductivity compared to α-spodumene ( The spodumene concentrate and samples of the material taken after the calcination at different temperatures and times were analysed for particle size and to determine P80. During the initial 10 At 950 The results of BET surface area analyses of spodumene concentrate and samples produced by calcining at different temperatures for 30 and 60 It is apparent that with increase in temperature, the apparent surface area increases from 0.1 The specific gravity (SG) of the spodumene concentrate and samples produced by calcination at different temperatures and times is given in The samples treated at 800 The transformation of spodumene from α- to both γ- and β-spodumene was observed following conventional heating above threshold temperatures and residence times. At temperatures lower than 950 The authors would like to thank Talison Lithium Pty Ltd for providing the spodumene concentrate sample that was used in this study.