Leaching is an important process in hydrometallurgical operations. This process is used to extract metals from the ores by dissolving them in a lixiviant. It is desired that the leaching method is able to provide high extraction rate at minimal capital and operational costs. There are many parameters that can affect the leaching efficiency and thus, the process of selecting a leaching method is complex. In this study, the use of Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) method to select an appropriate leaching method for Caldag lateritic nickel ore has been performed. The application of AHP is assisted with the use of ExperChoice® 2000 Software. The results shown that heap leaching (HL) is the most attractive leaching method with a rating of 0.592, followed by atmospheric leaching (AL), and high pressure acid leaching (HPAL) with ratings of 0.293 and 0.115, respectively. In addition, sensitivity analyses have been applied to investigate the impact of the main criteria on the alternative leaching methods. It was found that HPAL can be selected when economical main criteria decreased from 76.1% to 16.3%.There are three leaching methods currently applied for the hydrometallurgical extraction of nickel and cobalt from lateritic nickel ores, namely high pressure acid leaching (HPAL), atmospheric acid leaching (AL) and heap leaching (HL). Each process has its own advantages and disadvantages. The main advantages of HPAL are that the process requires much lower acid consumption, higher nickel and cobalt recoveries and faster dissolution kinetics than the other two methods. The main advantages of AL are that it requires lower capital and energy costs than HPAL but able to provide comparable nickel and cobalt recoveries. Meanwhile, HL requires the least capital and energy costs among the three processes and produces clear leachate solution for downstream processing circumventing the need of a solid-liquid separation unit. This process, however, provides the least metals recoveries among the three, requires long leaching duration, inventory and cycle management ( Selection of a leaching method for an ore is a function of many parameters and hence, a multi criteria decision making (MCDM) method can be used to aid the decision making process. This is done by evaluating a number of feasible alternatives using multiple choices of criteria and diverse criterion priorities to determine the most attractive alternative over all criteria. Selection of the most appropriate leaching method is a multi-criterion and multi-objective decision bound by a set of constraints. In this paper, we use Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) to evaluate the three leaching alternatives. This method is a systematic approach developed by Recently, applications of decision-making techniques in mining operations have been performed by various researchers. For instance, the AHP method has been used to select mine equipment by The first pilot-scale heap leaching application was performed by European Nickel in 2004. A close circuit system was chosen. The system was based on leach liquor metal concentration build-up in pond via recirculation of the pregnant leach solution (PLS) over freshly prepared ore. The process neutralized acid and eliminated any extracted nickel and cobalt lost prior to mixed hydroxide precipitation (MHP) process. The process aided the reduction of acid consumption and water usage, and the lowering of limestone consumption in the partial neutralisation unit. Acid concentration of the solution was adjusted to be 75 The high pressure acid leaching experiments were performed in an autoclave with 2 Bench scale atmospheric leaching tests were carried out in a 250 The AHP is one of multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) method that assists a decision-maker facing a complex problem with multiple conflicting and subjective criteria such as location or investment selection and projects ranking ( Pair-wise comparison matrix will be constructed based on the numerical value of the criteria, and the numerical data of each criteria, e.g. operating temperature, pressure, and extraction percentage, can be used directly in the matrix. When the numerical data is available, the pair-wise comparision matrices for minimization and maximization of problems can be constructed using Eq. The eigenvector method is used to calculate the relative weights of the elements in each pair-wise comparison matrix. The relative weights of matrix  It is essential to identify the factors that influence the selection of a leaching method. Three main criteria were identified as Leaching parameters, Extraction and Economical, each with specific sub-criteria. The main criteria and sub-criteria for the selection are summarized in The main aim of this study is to define which leaching method is the most compatible. The leaching method selection problem is divided into a hierarchical structure ( From the results summarized in Alternatives were compared pair-wise with respect to each of the sub-criteria. The outcome is shown in The performance graph ( Sensitivity analyses are performed by decision makers to analyse the elasticity of the final decision. The final priorities of the alternatives are highly dependent on the weights attached to the main criteria which are based on the subjective judgements of the decision maker. Small changes in the relative weights can cause major changes of the final ranking, and given the subjective nature of the judgment, the stability of the ranking under varying criteria weights must be tested. Sensitivity analysis is therefore performed based on scenarios that reflect alternative future developments or different views on the relative importance of the criteria. Through increasing or decreasing the weight of individual criteria, the resulting changes of the priorities and the ranking of the alternatives can be observed. Senstivity analysis hence provides information on the stability of the ranking and can be used to determine the impact of the main criteria on the alternative leaching methods. For this purpose, the weights of the important criteria are separately altered, simulating weights between 0% and 100%. One of the most important properties of ExpertChoice® 2000 Software is that it can provide the sensitivity analysis on the problem. The main criteria and dynamic sensitivity are shown in This paper has demonstrated the application of the AHP technique in hydrometallurgical operations. It was seen that it is possible to select the most appropriate leaching method in a more scientific way using the AHP. The method is flexible and transparent, and also easy to apply by decision makers. In the presented AHP model, three alternatives (i.e. HL, HPAL and AL) were evaluated with reference to three main criteria and sub-criteria. The evaluation revealed that decision makers pay more attention to economical main criteria than other two main criteria. The AHP results show that HL is determined as the most appropriate leaching method for the lateritic nickel ore. In addition, the AHP results were analysed using sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analyses show that the rankings of alternatives transform from HL to HPAL when the economical main criteria decreases from 76.1% to 16.3%. Based on the software results, HL was selected as the most attractive leaching method for Caldag lateritic nickel ore. We thank Nilufer Kursunoglu, a PhD Candidate in Mining Engineering from Eskisehir Osmangazi University, for her valuable contribution and for proofreading the manuscript.