The present study was designed to assess the effects and underlying mechanism of two poly(P) compounds, sodium triphosphate (STP, Na5P3O10) and sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP, Na15P13O40~Na20P18O40) on osteoblastic differentiation of human periodontal ligament cells (PDLCs) and osteoblasts in vitro, and bone formation in vivo. Differentiation was assessed by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, mineralization, and mRNA expression for marker genes. To examine the osteogenic potential to regenerate bone, the critical-sized mouse calvarial defect model was utilized. Incubation of PDLCs and osteoblasts with STP and SHMP resulted in a dose- and time-dependent increase in growth, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, mineralization and mRNA expression for marker genes. STP and SHMP increased phosphorylation of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), Akt, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK). Treatment with the mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, attenuatted STP- and SHMP-induced osteoblastic differentiation. Micro-CT and histologic analysis showed that STP significantly increased new bone formation in calvarial defects, compared with SHMP and control group. Collectively, this is the first study to demonstrate that STP and SHMP promotes the osteoblastic differentiation in vitro, whereas STP only stimulated bone repair in vivo. Therefore, STP may be useful therapeutic approach for the regeneration of bone or periodontal tissue.Regeneration of the periodontium including periodontal ligament (PDL), cementum and alveolar bone, is a major goal in the treatment of teeth affected by periodontitis ( Intracellular kinase signaling plays an important role in many biological functions including cell differentiation ( Inorganic polyphosphates [poly (P)] is a linear polymer formed by phosphate (P The aim of this study was to investigate the effects and molecular mechanism of STP and SHMP on Immortalized human PDLCs transfected with human telomerase catalytic component were provided by Prof. Takashi Takata (Hiroshima University, Japan) ( The cells were seeded at 1×10 ALP activity was measured using p-nitrophenyl phosphate (3 Cells transfected with 30 Mineralization of extracellular matrix was determined by Alizarin-red staining. Briefly, after 14 days, cells were washed with PBS, followed by fixation in ice cold 70% ethanol for at least 1 Total RNA was extracted from the cells using a TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. A total of 1 Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (25 PBS-washed cell layers were lysed in 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.2 For mRNA quantification, total RNA was extracted using the RNAqueous kit and the cDNA was synthesized 1 μg of total RNA using High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using a LightCycler 1.5 Systems (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Thermocycling conditions consisted of an initial denaturation of 10 Female 6- to 8-week-old ICR mice (Samtako The mice were anesthetized, and a 5-mm-diameter calvarial critical-sized defect was created on each side of the calvarial bone using a dental bur attached to a slow-speed hand piece with minimal invasion of the Dura mater. The critical-sized defects in mice were randomly divided into 3 groups to receive the following implants: (1) sham-surgery (empty) controls ( μCT was performed at Advanced Institutes of Convergence Technology (Genoss Co., Ltd., Gyeonggi-do, Korea). Micro-CT data of calvaria were acquired on a Skyscan 1173 scanner (Bruker-microCT, Kontich, Belgium). Scanning was carried out at 75 Tissues were decalcified in 10% EDTA for 14 days, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at 5 All values are expressed as means±standard deviations. Comparisons between groups were analyzed via In order to determine whether the poly(P) affected growth and osteogenic differentiation, the PDLCs were treated with various concentrations (0.02– 0.5 To investigate whether poly(P)-induced osteoblastic differentiation is of broader significance for cells involved in bone repair, the effects of poly(P) was examined in human osteoblasts ( Since three molecules have been identified as central regulators of extracellular PPi and Pi levels, ie, tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), nucleotide pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase 1 (NPP1), and ankylosis protein (ANK), whether these mRNA expression levels were affected in poly(P)-treated PDLCs examined. SHMP and STP increased TNAP, NPP1, and ANK mRNA as well as production of pyrophosphatase level in PDLCs ( To gain insight into the molecular mechanisms by which poly(P) induces osteogenic differentiation, phosphorylation of AMPK, Akt, and mTOR, and MAPK in PDLCs were examined. As shown in To further test whether poly(P) may affect osteoblastic differentiation of PDLCs by modulating mTOR signaling, PDLCs were treated with poly(P) in the presence of the mTOR inhibitor such as rapamycin ( To investigate whether knockdown of mTOR expression affects poly(P)-induced osteoblastic differentiation, cells were transfected with mTOR siRNA and scrambled siRNA for 48 To evaluate the osteogenic potential of poly(P), bone regeneration STP is the most commonly used in the industry, accounting for 80% of the phosphates added ( In the present study, osteoblastic differentiation of PDLCs and osteoblasts was examined at the molecular level without exogenous osteogenic inducers such as dexamethasone or BMP2 added to the culture medium. Osteoblastic differentiation was determined by measuring several markers for osteoblastic phenotype including early marker (ALP, ON), middle-stage marker (OPN), and late-stage marker (OCN and calcium deposition) ( Extracellular matrix (ECM) mineralization is a highly regulated process and osteoblasts and their derived matrix-vesicles (MVs) accomplish this by expressing Pi-transporters for Pi uptake and regulators of inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi) metabolism ( The mTOR is a highly conserved serine/threonine protein kinase that integrates nutrient availability and hormone/growth factor signaling to regulate the growth, and differentiation ( Because the STP and SHMP were shown to induce osteoblastic differentiation and mineralization polyP can be cleaved by exopolyphosphatases, which hydrolyze polyP chain ends to form orthophosphate (Pi) and do not act on ATP, but a strong preference for long-chain polyphosphate. Exopolyphosphatases are found in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and have a very low affinity for polyP molecules with less than 15 phosphate monomers. polyP can also be hydrolyzed by Although it remains to be elucidated how polyP is cleaved In summary, this study was the first to demonstrated that STP and SHMP promotes osteoblastic differentiation in PDLCs and osteoblasts via AMPK, Akt, mTOR, and MAPK signaling pathway. STP showed superior bone regeneration The authors declare no competing financial interests. This work was supported by the