Barium titanate samples prepared through solid-state reaction have been analysed by X-ray diffractometry and thermoluminescence (TL) methods to ascertain their capability for usage as high gamma dose dosimeter for industrial and scientific applications. Exposure to gamma radiation doses from 60Co was varied between 1 and 9kGy. The glow curves obtained showed emission peak temperatures lying between 480 and 530K and were found to be dose dependent. The emission peak temperature for each dose was found to shift towards high temperature as the dose increased indicating a non-first order kinetics, which could be attributed to the creation of deep level defects, caused by the irradiation. The reproducibility tests carried out on the samples showed that the sample preparation as well as the TL response of the barium titanate under gamma irradiation is reproducible and under acceptable limit. The dose response curve showed a good linearity over the dose range examined. The fading characteristics indicated that the TL spectra alter with storage time after irradiation and this has been attributed to the creation of traps of different energy level by irradiation and clustering effect leading to tunneling.Accurate monitoring of highly energetic radiations is desirable in industrial, medical and food radiation processing where an accurate measurement of the absorbed dose can be critical for an effective outcome. In such cases, solid-state thermoluminescence (TL) dosimetry method is indispensable. It can even be extended to environmental monitoring in such places as irradiation facilities and nuclear power stations Barium titanate (BaTiO In terms of other methods of characterisation, extensive study has been carried out on defect structure in barium titanate. In general, defects in perovskite-type crystals are of two different types: one that maintains stoichiometry (Schottky) and the other that changes stoichiometry. Since this study concerns undoped barium titanate, the defect structures are those that maintains stoichiometry and of particular importance to this study are the works of Serrano et al. The aim of the present work is therefore to use high dose gamma irradiation to study the thermoluminescence glow curve characteristics of BaTiO Barium titanate pellet was prepared from a mixture of barium oxide (BaO) and 99.9% pure titanium dioxide (TiO Irradiation of the barium titanate (BaTiO Typical X-ray diffraction pattern of the samples prepared under the conditions described above is shown in The TL glow curves of BaTiO Now let us consider the influence of preheating. The effect of preheating on irradiated specimen is to deplete the defect states at shallow levels with the consequence that the glow curve shifts towards high temperature as the preheating temperature increases since further thermoluminescence signals has to be obtained from deep level traps. The result of the effect of preheating on the glow curves of BaTiO Next, we consider the effect of irradiation on the specimen The origin of the traps created in BaTiO Intrinsic Schottky defects in BaTiO Defect creations through rupturing of chemical bonds in Ti–O plane in the distorted perovskite structure below the Curie point can be understood if we compare the cubic and the tetragonal structures of BaTiO The F-centres are electrons trapped at a negative ion vacancy. Upon irradiation, the ion is removed to leave the vacancy, which subsequently traps an electron. It has been observed that the F-centre creates an energy level within the band gap situated around 1.1 Since there is a strong possibility that these defects are present in BaTiO In order to be able to understand the nature of the traps formed in BaTiO Various reproducibility tests have been employed in the literature, some of which include the irradiation of samples with the same weight at a constant dose and then determine the standard deviation A material meant to serve as a dosimeter for high gamma doses must have its response to be directly proportional to the irradiation dose. This means that the response versus dose curve must be linear. For this observation to be feasible, samples of barium titanate were subjected to different irradiation doses and the corresponding TL responses determined. The result is presented in Fading characteristic is one of the major parameters that can be used to estimate the importance and the efficiency of a radiation detector. This is imperative in that it may take a little while before access to the BaTiO In order to study this effect, eight samples were given the same test dose of 9.08 The effect of storage time on the TL response of BaTiO Dosimetry application of BaTiO The authors wish to appreciate the contribution of the following personnel to the success of this study; Dr. G.A. Osinkolu (CERD, OAU, Ile-Ife), Dr. B. Babatope (Physics Department, OAU, Ile-Ife, Nigeria), Mr. Alo (Materials Science and Metallurgical Engineering Department, OAU, Ile-Ife, Nigeria) and the personnel of Princeton Institute for Science & Technology of Materials where the XRD analyses of the samples were carried out.