The hydrometallurgical processing of complex concentrates represents an ecologically attractive alternative with respect to classical pyrometallurgical technologies. The leaching of gold from a mechanochemically pretreated CuPbZn complex sulfide concentrate of Slovak origin using ammonium thiosulfate was studied. Physicochemical transformations in the concentrate due to mechanical activation have an influence on the rate of extraction and the recovery of gold. It was possible to achieve 99% gold recovery within 45 min for a sample mechanically activated at an energy input of 403 kWh t−1. Only 54% of gold were recovered from the as-received concentrate in 120 min. Mechanical activation proved to be an appropriate pretreatment for this CuPbZn concentrate before extraction of gold into thiosulfate leaching solution.Sulfides are a considerable natural resource of gold that occurs in a wide range of forms. It may be physically included in the ore, present within the sulfides as finely dispersed submicroscopic particles (invisible gold) or chemically bonded in both solid solutions and compounds Chemical, biological and physical pretreatments are applied to the sulfide concentrate, with the aim of changing the chemical composition and/or particle size of the gold-bearing sulfides, thus facilitating the subsequent leaching Alkaline cyanidation continues to be the dominant method in hydrometallurgy for gold dissolution The use of thiosulfate as a gold leachant represents an alternative method The dissolution step in ammoniacal thiosulfate solution is an electrochemical reaction and is promoted by the presence of cupric ions The aim of this work was to examine the possibility of recovering gold from a CuPbZn concentrate using ammonium thiosulfate leaching. A mechanochemical pretreatment was applied in order to determine its effect on the recovery of gold. A gold-bearing copper–lead–zinc complex sulfide concentrate from Banská Hodruša (the Svetozár vein), Slovakia, was selected as a model material for testing the effect of mechanochemical pretreatment on the subsequent thiosulfate leaching of gold. The chemical composition of the concentrate was as follows: 353 g t Mineralogical analysis Mechanical activation was performed in a stirred ball mill (attritor) Molinex PE 075 (Netzsch, Germany). The volume of the grinding chamber was 500 mL. The concentrate was separated into 50 g samples, which were milled with 200 mL of water using 2000 g of 2 mm steel balls as the grinding media. The mill was operated at 600, 1000 and 1200 min The specific surface area The particle size distribution of the ground concentrate was measured by a laser beam scattering in a Helos and Rodos granulometer (Sympatec, Germany). The mean particle diameter was calculated as the first moment of the volume size distribution function. X-ray diffraction traces were measured using a DRON 2.0 diffractometer equipped with an Fe The effect of mechanical activation was assessed using the increase in the X-ray-amorphous portion of mineral compared with the nonactivated (reference) sample, which is assumed to correspond to 100% crystallinity The leaching was investigated using a 1000 mL glass reactor into which 500 mL of leaching solution (0.5 M (NH The leaching kinetics were least squares fitted to the kinetic equation Mechanical activation induces significant changes to the surface as well as the bulk structure of sulfide minerals The particle size distribution for the as-received concentrate and for a sample mechanically activated at an energy input The trace of the copper–lead–zinc sulfide concentrate (as-received sample) is shown in The fractional amorphization of the mineral components of the concentrate was calculated by   The plot in The physicochemical changes of CuPbZn concentrate due to mechanical activation have an influence on both the rate of extraction and the recovery of gold from this gold-bearing concentrate when leached with ammonium thiosulfate. It was possible to obtain 99% gold recovery after 45 min leaching of an activated sample, which compares very favourably with 54% recovery from the as-received concentrate in 120 min. The leaching of gold from concentrate has shown some dependence on the degree of amorphization of PbS and ZnS. The consumption of energy during grinding has an influence on the structural disordering of the gold-bearing sulfides and this is evident in the thiosulfate leaching. Thiosulfate leaching is nontoxic and has more rapid kinetics for gold solubilization than classical cyanide leaching. This work was supported by the Slovak Grant Agency for Science (grant no. 2/2103/22).