Three kinds of novel environmentally benign and high-efficiency crude oil demulsifiers were prepared using methoxy polyethylene glycol (MPEG) to modify alkylated carboxymethyl chitosan (ACMC). Structures of the demulsifiers were confirmed using FT-IR and 1H NMR, and the relationship between surface tension and concentration was tested. Demulsification performance was investigated using the bottle test method with oil-in-water (O/W) emulsions that were prepared in lab conditions. The demulsification efficiency was as high as 79.1 %–84.9 %, and the possible mechanism of the demulsification process is discussed. Results show that MPEG-grafted ACMC (MPEG-ACMC) has a promising application as a demulsifier for dealing with emulsified O/W crude oil.In the process of oilfield exploitation, enhanced oil recovery (EOR) technologies play a key role for meeting energy demands ( Emulsion has a series of serious consequences on the transportation and processing of crude oil. These consequences include corrosion of equipment and valves ( At present, demulsification methods that are used in the petroleum industry and academia institutions for crude oil emulsions mainly include physical ( The demulsification mechanism of demulsifiers is quite complicated, and there are no demulsifiers that can break call kinds of crude oil emulsions ( Chitosan (CTS) is one of the main natural polymers that can be degraded completely by microorganisms ( Currently, domestic demulsifiers for O/W emulsion are causing increasingly serious environmental pollution and irreversible secondary pollution ( The aim of this research was to prepare a series of MPEG-grafted alkylated carboxymethyl chitosan (MPEG-ACMC) demulsifiers, to characterize their molecular structures, and to assess the demulsification properties on simulated crude oil samples. Effects of molecular structure, surface properties, and concentration of demulsifiers on demulsification behaviors were investigated. It is expected that this work will provide theoretical guidance to develop new environmentally benign natural polymer-based demulsifiers and be beneficial for developing the oil exploration industry. CTS (M For the preparation of alkylated CTS, readers are referred to the method of Dai et al. ( Hexylated chitosan (HCTS) and octylated chitosan (OCTS) were produced in a similar manner, and each was a pale yellow powder. For the preparation of alkylated carboxymethyl chitosan (ACMC), readers are referred to the works of Miao et al. ( Hexylated carboxymethyl chitosan (HCMC) and octylated carboxymethyl chitosan (OCMC) were produced in a similar manner. Each was a white water-soluble flocculent solid. Preparation of MPEG-COOCH Synthesis of MPEG-grafted hexylated carboxymethyl chitosan (MPEG-HCMC) was as follows: 0.542 g (1 mmol) of HCMC, 50 mL of dimethyl sulfoxide, and 0.138 g of potassium carbonate were added to a three-neck round bottom flask. Within 10 min, MPEG-COOCH MPEG-grafted butylated carboxymethyl chitosan (MPEG-BCMC) and MPEG-grafted octylated carboxymethyl chitosan (MPEG-OCMC) were produced in a similar manner. The synthetic route for producing MPEG-grafted alkylated carboxymethyl chitosan (MPEG-ACMC) is shown in A solid sample was prepared using the KBr pressed-disk technique, and the infrared spectrum was measured over the wavenumber range of 4000∼500 cm The instruments required for the experiment were dried and were connected with a device. Crude oil emulsion (100 mL) and toluene (50 mL) were dried with molecular sieves and then added to a 1000 mL round bottom flask with zeolite. The mixture was slowly heated within the initial 0.5−1 h to prevent a large loss of water, which can be caused by bumping. The temperature was controlled so that the condensate remained less than 3/4 of the volume of the inner tube of the condenser, and distillation was held at a constant dripping rate of 3–5 drops per second while the liquid slowly boiled. The mixture was continuously heated at a certain temperature until no significant water was visible in the measuring device except for in the receiver. The moisture content of the crude oil ( The contents of asphaltene, wax, and colloid in crude oil play an important role in the physical properties of crude oil. Physical parameters of the crude oil samples from China Petroleum & Chemical Corporation were tested, and the results are shown in The surface tension of the solution of demulsifiers at various concentrations was measured using the platinum plate method at 25 °C with an Automatic Surface & Interface Tensionmeter Model A101 (Kino Industrial Co., Ltd.). Crude oil and cyclohexane were uniformly mixed in a mass ratio of 1:2 for the preparation. Cyclohexane/crude oil, Tween-60, and deionized water were weighed in a 300 mL beaker at a mass ratio of 10:10:80 and emulsified with a high-speed disperser (Model: XHF-D, manufacture: Ningbo Xinzhi Biotechnology Co., Ltd.) for 5 min at 2500 r/min. The whole system became a yellow-brown solution. The emulsions that were obtained were quite stable, and there was no obvious separation between the oil and water phases after 72 h ( The residual oil content of the emulsion after demulsification was determined using a Shanghai Yuanfang Instrument Co., Ltd. UV-9000S ultraviolet spectrophotometer. The residual oil content was used to evaluate the demulsification efficiency of MPEG-ACMC. Crude oil emulsion (20 mL) and demulsifier solution (5 mL) was added to a 25 mL colorimetric tube. The water sample at the bottom of the colorimetric tube was determined at different times, temperatures, and concentrations. The absorbance at a wavelength of 520 nm was measured using an ultraviolet spectrophotometer ( Infrared spectra of CTS, BCTS, HCTS, and OCTS are shown in Infrared spectra of HCTS and HCMC are shown in Infrared spectra of MPEG-COOCH Infrared spectra of MPEG−HCMC and HCMC are shown in  The Successful demulsification is highly dependent on the surface activity of the demulsifiers ( As seen in The demulsifier molecules had hydrophilic groups (such as polyethers and carboxyl groups) and hydrophobic alkyl chains. The opposite effects of these two groups caused the CTS-based demulsifier molecules to align on the air-water interface. Hydrophilic groups tend to extend into the aqueous phase, whereas hydrophobic groups tend to leave the aqueous phase. Thus, a layer of demulsifier molecules accumulated on the surface, resulting in decreased surface tension. The surface of the aqueous solution could no longer continue to aggregate demulsifier molecules when the demulsifier molecules reached saturation. Then, hydrophobic groups inhibited aggregation of demulsifier molecules on the oil-water interface. As a result, demulsifier molecules started to aggregate in the aqueous solution to form a simple micelle, and the interaction between the amphiphilic groups of the demulsifier molecules reached a dynamic equilibrium. Hence, the surface tension tended to remain unchanged ( Optical microscopy (Shanghai Caikang Optical Instrument Co., Ltd.) was used to observe microscopic changes in the crude oil emulsion before and after demulsifying with MPEG−HCMC. Microscopic graphs of samples under 500X magnification are shown in Plots of demulsification efficiency versus time are shown in There is a large amount of −OH and -NH Plots of demulsification efficiency of MPEG-BCMC, MPEG−HCMC, and MPEG−OCMC versus temperature are shown in Plots of demulsification efficiency of MPEG-BCMC, MPEG−HCMC, and MPEG−OCMC versus demulsifier concentration are shown in Fig. 6 (c); measurements were at 50 °C, pH of 7, and contact time of 100 min. Demulsification efficiency of the demulsifiers gradually increased with an increase in concentration. At the same concentration, demulsification efficiency was in the order MPEG−HCMC > MPEG-BCMC > MPEG−OCMC, and this is consistent with the surface tension trend seen in Under the influence of hydrogen bond and van der Waals forces, the hydrophilic groups of the emulsifier molecules entered the water phase, and the lipophilic groups entered the oil phase. This led to the formation of a layer of an interfacial film that was composed of emulsifier molecules at the oil-water interface. The viscoelastic interfacial film prevented the coalescence and separation of oil droplets, and this resulted in the high stability of O/W emulsion ( The possible demulsification mechanism of the CTS derivative demulsifiers is illustrated in Three kinds of novel environmentally benign and high-efficiency crude oil demulsifiers (MPEG-BCMC, MPEG−HCMC, and MPEG−OCMC) were prepared in this work. The relationship between surface tension and the concentration of the demulsifiers was determined. The surface tension of the solution was minimized. When the CMC values were 9.16 × 10 We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled. This work was supported by the