The separation of rare earth elements, cobalt and nickel from NiMH battery residues is evaluated in this paper. Analysis of the internal content of the NiMH batteries shows that nickel is the main metal present in the residue (around 50% in weight), as well as potassium (2.2–10.9%), cobalt (5.1–5.5%), rare earth elements (15.3–29.0%) and cadmium (2.8%). The presence of cadmium reveals that some Ni–Cd batteries are possibly labeled as NiMH ones. The leaching of nickel and cobalt from the NiMH battery powder with sulfuric acid is efficient; operating variables temperature and concentration of H2O2 has no significant effect for the conditions studied. A mixture of rare earth elements is separated by precipitation with NaOH. Finally, solvent extraction with D2EHPA (di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid) followed by Cyanex 272 (bis-2,4,4-trimethylpentyl phosphinic acid) can separate cadmium, cobalt and nickel from the leach liquor. The effect of the main operating variables of both leaching and solvent extraction steps are discussed aiming to maximize metal separation for recycling purposes.The secondary battery nickel–metal–hydride (NiMH) is commonly used as power source in electronic devices like mobile phones, computers and hybrid electric vehicles (HEV). The main parts of this battery are: a cathode made of nickel coated with nickel hydroxide; an anode made of a hydrogen storage alloy based on mischmetal (mainly cerium, lanthanum, praseodymium and neodymium) and nickel including substituents; a separator between the two electrodes made of fine fibers (usually polyamide, polypropylene fleece or gauze); an electrolyte typically KOH; a metal case; and a sealing plate provided with a self-releasing safety vent. Such structure is similar to that of Ni–Cd batteries. In fact, these two batteries have very similar operating voltage but, in comparison to the Ni–Cd ones, the NiMH batteries do not contain cadmium and they have about twice the energy density of the Ni–Cd batteries. Because of such advantages, NiMH batteries have constantly substituted the Ni–Cd batteries. For instance, in the market of mobile phones, the use of Ni–Cd batteries decreased from 63.8% to 44.4% during this decade, those of lithium ion batteries increased from 8.4% to 27.3% whereas the use of NiMH batteries were kept practically constant at 28.0% As the need for electronic devices grows worldwide, the consumption of batteries is expected to increase in the coming years. Therefore, the continuous development of recycling battery technologies may contribute to economical and environmental aspects as pointed out by several research works with various types of batteries such as Zn–C, alkaline, Ni–Cd, NiMH and Li-ion The experimental work adopted in this study consisted of the following steps: (i) previous treatment, including classification of batteries by type (as suggested by a previous study NiMH batteries (50% cylindrical and 50% prismatic batteries) from different manufacturers (Nokia, Motorolla, Siemens, Ericsson, etc.) were used in this study. Plastic and metallic cases were firstly removed according to the manual procedure depicted elsewhere The leaching experiments were carried out by taking a given volume of H The aqueous solution used in the subsequent tests was obtained by leaching the NiMH powder in the following conditions: two stages, [H Suitable volumes of the aqueous (leach liquor) and organic phases were contacted in a glass reactor for 5 After manual dismantling of the NiMH batteries for the separation of both plastic and metallic cases, the internal content of batteries was weighted before and after drying at 60 Regarding to the chemical composition, X-ray fluorescence analysis indicated the predominance of nickel species in the internal content of NiMH batteries, as well as small amounts of cobalt, zinc and manganese. The presence of rare earth elements cerium, lanthanum, praseodymium and neodymium was also identified. Such result was confirmed by X-ray diffraction analysis as shown in Scanning electronic microscopic analysis of the powder of NiMH batteries shown in The metal composition of NiMH batteries including and excluding the metallic cases is shown in NiMH batteries are normally classified into AB The leaching of nickel, cobalt and cadmium from the NiMH battery powder with sulfuric acid was found to be quite efficient for the operational conditions investigated. In fact, such metals were easily leached in one single stage resulting in a deep green aqueous solution due to the presence of nickel which represents around 50% of the leached material. The main effects of the studied operating variables are summarized in No significant effect was verified for the studied range of temperature; cobalt, nickel and cadmium were leached around 95%, 82% and 84%, respectively, in one single step ([H The increase on the concentration of H No significant effect was identified for the operating variable concentration of H The effect of S/L ratio affected positively the leaching of nickel only (it increased from 60% to 83%, stabilizing at S/L Based on the operating conditions investigated in this study, around 80–85% of nickel and 95–100% of cobalt can be leached from the NiMH powder in one single stage. Similar results were obtained elsewhere In order to produce the leaching liquor for the subsequent study, the powder of NiMH batteries was leached according to the conditions schematically shown in As the pH of the leach solution was near zero, it was raised to pH 2.5 by addition of NaOH in order to precipitate the rare earth elements and also obtain a suitable solution for the subsequent solvent extraction tests. The solution was filtrated and 26 Preliminary solvent extraction tests with the filtered solution at changing pH values resulted in quite viscous organic phases at pH The effect of pH on the extraction of cadmium, cobalt and nickel with cationic extractants D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 is shown in In order to remove cadmium in a selective way, the undiluted liquor ([Ni]  NiMH batteries (AB After dismantling operation for the removal of plastic and metallic cases, the internal content of NiMH batteries was comminuted and submitted to several analysis including XRD, XRF, SEM-EDS, AAS and EDX. Nickel was found as major metal component, around 50% in weight, predominantly as Ni, NiO, Ni(OH) Leaching with sulfuric acid was considered efficient for the dissolution of metal content of NiMH battery powder. Cobalt, nickel and cadmium were easily leached from the powder; around 80–85% of nickel and 95–100% of cobalt was leached from the NiMH powder in one single stage. No significant effect has been identified for the operating variables concentration of H A mixture of rare earth elements can be separated from the acid leach liquor by precipitation with NaOH. In this study, a dense white precipitate was obtained thus corresponding to 50% removal of rare earth elements. Solvent extraction with D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 was found adequate to separate cadmium, cobalt and nickel from the leach liquor. In terms of selectivity factors, the removal of cadmium over cobalt is maximized at [D2EHPA] Authors acknowledge Dr. Carlos Antonio de Morais (CDTN) for the EDX analysis, Cytec for the kind supply of Cyanex 272 and CNPq for financial support.