Wear by slurry abrasion is a potential problem in engineering components subjected to particulate flow. The life of the components under slurry abrasive wear situations is primarily decided by operating conditions and the materials properties. Martensitic steels are widely used for abrasion resistant applications. The present work reports slurry abrasion response of hardfacing martensitic steel under a wide range of experimental conditions. The response data is generated using systematic and simultaneous variation of test parameters. The experiments were performed using silica sand slurry with different slurry concentration, particle size, sliding distance and load. The results of the investigation suggest that slurry concentration had relatively stronger effect than normal load. The wear volume loss exhibited an increasing trend with increasing severity of test parameters. An empirical equation is proposed to describe the interactive effect of the test parameters, abrasive particle properties and material property. SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) studies revealed different morphology of the worn surfaces which was attributed to mild to severe slurry abrasion test conditions.Martensitic steels are being used as cost effective materials for wear and abrasion resistant application chiefly because of their greater hardness and relatively higher toughness as compared to high chromium cats irons, which exhibit excellent abrasion resistance The abrasive wear properties of carbon steels by way of change in hardness and microstructure by heat treatment have been investigated in the past by many researchers. The quenched and tempered carbon steel with martensitic microstructure showed 1.5–2.0 times better slurry abrasion resistance as compared to pearlitic microstructure The wear properties of steels reinforced with second phase particles has been investigated in the past. In general it was observed that the wear resistance of steels is influenced by morphology of carbides inter lamellar spacing and properties of abrasive particles, test conditions and mechanical properties of steels and material properties Wear by slurry abrasion occurs in extruders, slurry pumps, coal water slurry nozzles and pipes carrying slurry of minerals and ores in mineral processing industries. The wear resistance of components used under slurry abrasion conditions is governed by the severity of the operational parameters, and properties of the abrasive particles in the slurry medium. The interactive effect of these parameters decides wear life of the components under actual service conditions. The weld hardfacing is one of the economic methods to improve wear life of industrial components. The wear behaviour of steels with martensitic microstructure, obtained either by heat treatment or casting has been investigated in the past under two body or three body dry abrasive wear situations. A little data is available on slurry abrasion response of weld deposited (hardfaced) martensitic steel. The interactive effect of test conditions and abrasive particle properties on wear rate of hardfaced martenstic steel has not been investigated. There was no attempt made by previous researchers to obtain quantitative correlation between wear properties of hardfaced martensitic steels as a combined function of test parameters and abrasive particle properties. The objective of present work is to investigate slurry abrasion response of weld deposited martensitic steel. The slurry abrasion response data generated by a suitably designed experimental plan consisting of systematic as well as simultaneous variation of test parameters and particle properties was used to formulate quantitative relationship between wear loss and severity parameter. The material selected for the present investigation was iron–carbon–chromium alloy steel deposited on mild steel plate (0.19 carbon) with dimensions of 200 The specimen for metallography was prepared using standard metallographic technique. The polished specimens were etched with 2% Nital for observations of microstructure. The microstructure consisted of martensite and carbides and is shown in The slurry abrasion wear tests were performed using slurry abrasion test apparatus (Ducom make, India) using silica sand abrasive (hardness The method of slurry abrasion testing is reported elsewhere The effect of slurry concentration and normal load on slurry abrasion volume loss of hardfaced martensitic steel is shown in The present investigation reports wear behaviour of hardfaced martensitic steel under different experimental conditions. The volume wear loss exhibited increasing trend with slurry concentration, normal load and the sliding distance. The magnitude of increase in volume loss was, however different in each case. It can be concluded from Under actual service conditions, the engineering components are subjected to slurry abrasion situations with different severity, which is influenced by operational parameters (load, velocity), properties of abrasives particles (hardness, size, shape, fraction of abrasives in slurry). The severity of slurry abrasion condition is generally represented by wear constant In the present work the two different approached were used. The first approach was to evaluate the effect of individual test parameters like load, slurry concentration and sliding distance on slurry abrasion volume loss. The second approach was aimed at studying the effect of simultaneous variation of applied load, slurry concentration, sliding distance and abrasive particle size on slurry abrasion behaviour of hardfaced martensitic steel. In the present work the size of the abrasive particles is also incorporated in the ‘Test Severity Parameter’ (TSP). To assess the simultaneous variation of test parameters, and properties of abrasive particle and material hardness, the volume loss SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) investigations on abraded surface revealed significant differences in morphology of the surfaces. Under benign experimental conditions, the abraded surface was relatively smooth and shallow grooves were observed on the worn out surface and material was predominantly removed by ploughing mechanism. The lip of work hardened material still attached to the groove edges can be observed in The ratio of hardness of abrasive particles to that of the surface has been included in the Eq.  The slurry abrasion response of hardfaced martensitic steel was investigated by systematic and simultaneous variation of test parameters. The volume wear loss of hardfaced martensitic steel increased with slurry concentration, normal load and the sliding distance. The magnitude of increase in volume loss was, however different in each case. The volume loss exhibited relatively greater dependence on slurry concentration than normal load. Increasing severity parameter resulted in significant increase in wear volume loss under the given test conditions. The dependence of wear volume loss on Test Severity Parameter was expressed by the equation, The difference in morphology of the abraded surface was attributed to the differential severity of the test conditions. The important mechanisms of material removal were ploughing, micro cutting and indentation. With increasing severity of test conditions, material removal occurred predominantly by micro cutting mechanism. The authors are grateful to Director, VNIT for providing necessary facilities in carrying out this investigation. The authors are grateful to Diffusion Engineers Limited for providing samples for the present investigation. The thanks are due to Mr. K.M. Manapure and Mr. Kapil for their assistance during experimentation and SEM work.