It has already been shown that sono-electrodeposition can be used to coat activated carbon fiber cloth (ACC) with calcium phosphates (CaP) and we recently demonstrated that cathodic polarization at −1 V/Hg/Hg2SO4 was the best parameter to obtain a carbonated calcium deficient hydroxyapatite (CDA) coating with optimal uniformity and homogeneity. In the present study, we investigated whether this technique was suitable to dope this carbonated CDA coating by partial substitution with another bivalent cation such as strontium. We show here that a strontium-substituted carbonated CDA coating can be produced and quantitatively controlled up to at least 10 at.%. In this range we demonstrate that the presence of strontium does not modify either the textural or the structural properties of the carbonated CDA. Owing to the well-known effect of both carbonated CDA and strontium in bone formation, the biocompatibility of ACC coated or not with carbonated CDA or with strontium substituted carbonated CDA was tested using primary human osteoblasts. Our data revealed a positive and dose-dependent effect of strontium addition on osteoblast activity and proliferation. In conclusion, we show here that electrodeposition at −1 V is a suitable and easy process to incorporate cations of biological interest into CaP coating.The structure of the bone mineral phase is similar to that of nanocrystalline calcium phosphate (CaP) apatites [ Interestingly, calcium ion (Ca), with an ionic radius of 1.00 Å, can be easily substituted in the apatitic structure by strontium, which has an ionic radius of 1.18 Å [ As for the synthesis of doped CaP, several methods can be used such as sol-gel [ In a previous work, the sono-electrodeposition process was optimized for the coating of activated carbon cloth with calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite [ The substrate consisted of an activated carbon fiber cloth (ACC) referred to as FM50K. The FM50K prepared from a viscose precursor was supplied by the Zorflex® Company. Prior to its use, the ACC substrate was washed with boiling distilled water using a Soxhlet® extractor to remove any traces of contaminants coming from the activation and carbonization steps leading to its manufacturing. After 12 h of washing, it was dried at 70 °C under vacuum. The xSr-CaP coating (×being the strontium ratio in the electrolyte) on ACC was obtained by sono-electrodeposition under cathodic polarization. The electrolyte consisted of a mixture of calcium nitrate tetrahydrate Ca(NO The characteristics of the ACC substrate and the xSr-CaP coatings were analyzed using several techniques. Elemental analysis (weight %) of C and O were determined using a Flash 2000 (CHON-S) analyzer (Thermo Scientific France). The porosity was characterized by N The xSr-CaP coating morphology and thickness were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM-Hitachi S4500) operating at 5 kV. To determine the microtexture of the xSr-CaP coatings, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were acquired with a TEM-PHILIPS CM20 operating at 200 kV. For sample preparation, 1 mg of coating was scraped from the carbon surface, dispersed in ethanol and sonicated for 30 s; a droplet of the suspension was deposited on an amorphous carbon coated copper grid (Electron Microscopy Sciences). Ca/P and Ca + Sr/P atomic ratios were determined by Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) analysis performed in SEM at 10 kV and in TEM at 200 kV. The atomic ratios were calculated from the intensities of the Ca peak (Kα Ca = 3.691 keV), P peak (Kα P = 2.015 keV) and Sr peak (Kα Sr = 14.164 keV) present in the SEM-EDS or TEM-EDS spectra. The strontium concentration present in xSr-CaP coatings was measured by microwave plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (MP-AES) using a 4200 MP-AES Agilent Technologies. For that, the material (ACC/xSr-CaP) was immersed in a 35% nitric acid solution (Sigma Aldrich®) for 3 h. Supernatant containing the xSr-CaP was diluted to a concentration of 0.5% nitric acid to prevent the formation of oxides. The solution obtained was sprayed into a nitrogen plasma which reached the temperature of 5000 °C. At this temperature, the atoms in the nebulized sample were dissociated, atomized, ionized and excited. The emitted photons were measured using optical detection at the characteristic wavelengths of the elements of interest (λCa = 393.366 nm and λSr = 407.771 nm) in order to quantify the elements of interest in the liquid solution by comparing the signal measured with the calibration curve. The chemical composition of the xSr-CaP coatings was analyzed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Spectra were acquired in transmission mode using a Nicolet 6700 spectrometer on KBr pellets in the range of 4000–400 cm The crystallographic structure of the xSr-CaP coatings was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), using an INEL diffractometer (CSP120), working at 40 kV and 30 mA (Cu K Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments were performed on a Bruker Avance I spectrometer operating at a magnetic field of 7.0 T ( The human primary osteoblasts were purchased from PromoCell (Heidelberg, Germany). They were expanded on plastic culture flasks in complete medium constituted of in α-MEM medium (LONZA, Emerainville, France) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (EUROBIO, Courtaboeuf, France), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 U/mL streptomycin (Gibco Thermo Fisher Scientific, France), 2% ultraglutamine (LONZA) and incubated at 37 °C under 5% CO Cell viability was assessed using the fluorescent assay LIVE/DEAD™ Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit (Life Technologies SAS, France). At each endpoint ACC patches were gently washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated at room temperature with PBS containing 2 μmol/L calcein-AM and 4 μmol/L ethidium-homodimer-1. Calcein-AM is a nonfluorescent cell-permeant fluorescein derivative, which is converted by cellular esterase activity into cell-impermeant and highly fluorescent calcein. Calcein accumulates inside live cells having intact membranes, which results in a green fluorescent signal. Ethidium-homodimer-1 enters dead cells with damaged membranes and undergoes a 40-fold enhancement of fluorescence upon binding to their DNA, leading to a red fluorescent signal. After 20 min incubation, the ACC patches were put onto a glass slide, covered with a coverslip and viewed under a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Observer Z1 with FITC filters and Texas Red) equipped with FITC and Texas Red filters. The number of live and dead cells was estimated using the ImageJ Software. Quantification of strontium rates in The ACC material is made of twisted carbon fiber threads and the threads are knitted to form a flexible material ( FM50K exhibits a narrow pore size distribution centered around 1 nm, with mainly ultramicropores of <0.7 nm and micropores of 0.7 to 2 nm. A negligible amount of mesopores (2 to 50 nm) is observed, representing <20% of the total pore volume ( The chemical and textural characteristics of FM50K are reported in SEM micrographs show the occurrence of similar morphologies for xSr-CaP coatings deposited by sono-electrodeposition, independently of the strontium ratio present in the electrolyte ( TEM characterization did not reveal any difference in microtexture between coatings without ( The composition of the coatings was investigated by both SEM and TEM-EDS analyses. For all samples, the measured (Ca + Sr)/P molar ratio is 1.4, independent of the Sr content and significantly lower than that of the electrolyte solution (1.67). For the 5Sr-CaP coating, SEM and TEM-EDS analyses indicate a strontium concentration of 4.1 ± 0.6 and 3.0 ± 0.5 at.%, respectively. For the 10Sr-CaP coating, SEM and TEM-EDS measurements give a Sr content of 6.8 ± 0.8 and 6.6 ± 0.8 at.%, respectively. These values are in good agreement with those obtained by MP-AES (2.9 ± 0.5 and 5.5 ± 0.4 for the 5Sr-CaP and 10Sr-CaP coating respectively). It can be concluded that Sr concentrations of 5 and 10 at.% in the electrolyte solution lead to Sr contents of about 3 and 6 at.% in the xSr-CaP coating, respectively ( In order to better understand the effect of strontium incorporation on the chemical composition of the hydroxyapatite phase, FTIR analysis of non-doped and strontium-doped CaP coatings (samples respectively named 0Sr-CaP, 5Sr-CaP and 10Sr-CaP) was performed ( Characterization of the crystallographic structure of FM50K ACC without and with xSr-CaP coatings was performed by X-ray diffraction and the corresponding diffractograms are given in For the undoped CaP coating, the XRD diffractogram shows that the main diffraction peaks are located at 2θ = 26.08°, 32.00° and 33.15° corresponding respectively to (002), (211) and (300) reflections of the hexagonal hydroxyapatite (HA) structure (JCPDS no: 74-0566). Indexation of all diffraction peaks confirms the occurrence of only calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite (CDA) as unique crystalline phase. For the two strontium-doped coatings (5Sr-CaP and 10Sr-CaP), the XRD diffractograms are similar to that of the 0Sr-CaP coating, excepted that a shift of the main reflections towards lower 2θ° values is observed when increasing the amount of strontium incorporated in the coating ( Further structural investigation of the xSr-CaP coatings was performed using solid-state This assignment is supported by 2D Fluorescence analysis showed that human primary osteoblasts exhibited a fusiform shape along the ACC fibers ( After 4 days, cell proliferation was observed on all materials, except on FM50K (from 46 ± 10 to 32 ± 11 cell/mm In the present study, FM50K activated carbon fiber cloth was chosen as a working electrode for its specific characteristics and properties, such as conductivity, hydrophilicity due to the presence of acidic groups on the ACC surface, and multi-scale porosity. We hypothesized that microporosity and hydrophilic properties would allow high ACC impregnation in aqueous electrolyte and that electrical conductivity would be optimal for CaP coating by sono-electrodeposition. Our results established that FM50K-ACC was an appropriate substrate to obtain a uniform CaP coating with possible strontium substitution. The synthesis of strontium-substituted CaP coatings led to the expected final strontium range, It was relevant to analyze and then to compare the morphological, chemical and structural characteristics of the coatings, with and without strontium. Firstly, it is shown that strontium incorporation (<10 at.%) does not modify the morphology and microtexture of xSr-CaP coatings. This leads to a uniform thickness (estimated around 1.5 μm) and a plate-like morphology. In TEM, whatever the materials, the coatings consist in lamellar nanocrystals which size is ranging from a few tens to a few hundreds of nanometers. Secondly, FTIR, XRD and solid-state NMR analyses reveal that the xSr-CaP coatings consist of carbonated CDA nanoparticles with an ordered apatitic core and a disordered hydrated surface layer. XRD data highlighted variations of cell parameters of the hexagonal crystallographic structure: This incorporation mechanism is expected to lead to different Sr release rates in solution or The originality of the present study concerns the incorporation of a strontium cation into a biomimetic apatite coating deposited on conductive ACC material by sono-electrodeposition. This process is an interesting and efficient technique to deposit a strontium-substituted carbonated CDA coating on a carbon fiber cloth. A single crystalline Sr-CaP phase is obtained, in which calcium and strontium cations occupy similar positions in the apatitic lattice. The substitution of calcium by strontium ions, having a different ionic radius and electronegativity, leads to slight structural modifications of the CDA phase but does not modify the nanocrystal organization or the microtexture of the CDA coatings. The coatings display a plate-like morphology consisting of lamellar nanocrystals of carbonated CDA. The structure of the nanocrystals comprises an apatitic ordered core and a non-apatitic disordered and hydrated surface layer, typical of a biomimetic apatite. After hybrid material synthesis and characterization, cell viability assays were performed on human primary osteoblast cells, cultured on the carbon fiber cloth substrate without and with xSr-CaP coatings. As these materials show a strong affinity with human primary osteoblasts, the incorporation of strontium in the CDA phase structure has a beneficial role on cell proliferation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the The authors are grateful to K. Beck for mercury porosity, R. Nehmé for assistance in MP-AES experiments, A. Richard for the SEM images, F. Warmont for the TEM images and E. Verron for calculating the hydroxyapatite lattice parameters.