Modern classification of flotation reagents is based on the function of a particular reagent. On this basis, reagents are divided into collectors, frothers, regulators, and depressants. Collectors are a fairly large group of organic chemical compounds, which differ in chemical composition and function. The basic purpose of the collector is to select form a hydrophobic layer on a given mineral surface in the flotation pulp and thus provide conditions for attachment of the hydrophobic particles to air bubbles and recovery of such particles in the froth product. Frothers are heteropolar surface-active compounds that lower the surface tension of water and have the ability to adsorb on the air bubble–water interface. Their presence in the liquid phase increases the film strength of the air bubbles, thus providing better attachment of hydrophobic particles to the bubbles. Activators, depressants, and pH regulators are often referred to as modifiers or regulators of the flotation process. The main purpose of these reagents is to modify the action of the collector on mineral surfaces and as a consequence govern the selectivity of the flotation process. In the presence of regulators, the collector only adsorbs on particles that are targeted for recovery. Modern classification of the reagents is based on the function of a particular reagent. On this basis, reagents are divided into collectors, frothers, regulators and depressants. Several thousands of chemicals were either tested or suggested as flotation reagents. Nowadays, there are only a few hundred of these reagents that are extensively used in flotation.  According to the ability of collectors to dissociate in water, they can be divided into distinct groups.    Quinoline in acid pH forms ions, which have poor frothing properties: On the basis of the effectiveness of frothers at different pH values (i.e. the pH at which the frother is most effective), they can be divided into: The acidic frothers are chemicals that belong to two basic groups: phenols (cresol, xylenol) and alkylsulfonates (surfactants). The most important group of frothers is the neutral type of frothers. These frothers are divided into the following groups: cyclic alcohols, aliphatic alcohols, alkoxy paraffins and glycols.  In some cases, a regulator reacts directly with the mineral surface (copper sulfate with sphalerite) and provides conditions for interaction of this mineral with the collector. These reagents are known as The third group of modifiers is pH regulators. The purpose of these is to regulate the ionic composition of the pulp by changing the concentration of the hydrogen ion in the pulp. Consequently, this results in improvement in collector interaction with the selected mineral and reduces collector interaction with undesirable minerals. The pH regulators can also be depressants at the same time (e.g. lime and some organic acids).   Anionic polyelectrolytes dissociate in water into complex polymer anions and simple cations (Na Cationic polyelectrolytes dissociate into polymer cations and anions (Cl Amphoteric polyelectrolytes are polymers that contain both anionic and cationic groups. Non-ionic polymers contain polar groups without attached an anion or cation.