Reduction roast–ammonia leach process developed at NML for extraction of valuable metals from manganese nodules yielded low cobalt recovery (56%), although copper and nickel recoveries were >90% (Jana et al., 1999b). With an aim to increase the cobalt recovery, a modified NH3–(NH4)2CO3 leaching flow-sheet have been developed for treatment of reduced manganese nodules. The major steps of this flow sheet are: (i) wet grinding cum preconditioning of reduced nodules in concentrated ammoniacal liquor in presence of surfactant, (ii) precipitation of Fe and Mn from the preconditioned liquor by air purging, and (iii) leaching of the residue from the preconditioning stage. This paper describes the optimization studies of each of the above steps in bench scale for maximum metal recoveries. The role of surfactant (during preconditioning) and the need for S/L separation after the preconditioning stage for better Co recovery are highlighted. Bench scale trials under optimized conditions yield about 95% Cu, 94% Ni and 80% Co recovery. Based on the bench scale results, large scale leaching campaigns (10kg/batch) under lock-cycle mode were also carried out, which gave quite encouraging results with average metal recoveries Cu 92.5%, Ni 91.5% and Co 71.3% in seven cycles.Poly metallic sea nodules or manganese nodules contain several valuable metals such as Cu, Ni, Co, Mn, Zn, Mo, etc. Global estimated reserve of manganese nodules is about 500 Metals in manganese nodules are present as their oxides/hydroxides; the major matrices being Mn(IV) oxides and goethite containing Cu, Ni, Co, etc. ( Manganese nodules were collected from National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa, India. The as received nodule samples were homogenized, crushed, ground and sieved to obtain 100% less than 100 Bench scale preconditioning (wet-grinding) and leaching experiments were carried out inside 1 Wet grinding of roast-reduced sea nodule pellets in concentrated ammoniacal solution is essential to liberate nickel and cobalt from various alloy phases formed during reduction roasting ( In the earlier leaching flow-sheet developed at NML, after wet grinding, the slurry was taken for 1st stage leaching in the presence of air/O Wet grinding of roast-reduced sea nodule pellets was carried out in concentrated ammoniacal liquor in presence of anionic surfactant to minimize the adsorption losses of cobalt. The surfactant used in the present study is an inorganic salt and cheaply available. The solid–liquid ratio (pulp density) during preconditioning is an important parameter in the modified leaching flow-sheet from the scale-up point of view. The pulp density during preconditioning was varied from 50 to 25% (S:L ratio 1:2 to 1:4) at fixed NH Due to high ammonia concentration during preconditioning, appreciable amount of Fe (mostly Fe The residue obtained after solid–liquid separation of the preconditioned slurry was subjected for leaching in NH After establishing the conditions for each three steps (pre-conditioning, iron precipitation and leaching) of the modified leaching flow-sheet ( The modified leaching scheme, which under optimized conditions found to gave satisfactory metal recoveries. However, this scheme has two main out-put streams; one obtained after pre-conditioning followed by iron precipitation step and another after leaching ( An improved NH Authors are thankful to the