Commodity producing corporations have trillions of dollars in outstanding debt. Thus, the recent fall in commodity prices raised concerns about sustainability and systemic risks. Using a global sample (2003- 2015) we measure how corporate bonds react to the underlying commodity price. On average a 10% change in the commodity moves yields-to-maturity by only 15 basis points. This is just a tenth of the sensitivity of stocks returns. Nonetheless, bond sensitivity to commodities is significantly stronger for smaller, leveraged and less profitable firms. Also for short maturity bonds. The type of commodity price change matters too. Sensitivity to price drops is at least five times stronger than to increases. Transitory price changes matter for shorter maturities and leveraged firms. In contrast, longer maturities react more to permanent commodity variations. When firms use hedging derivatives, bonds are less sensitive to all price variations. Hedging mitigates the amplification of commodity shocks, as in Shiller (2008). In conclusion, while debt finance deteriorated with the commodity bust, it hardly dried-up.The debt of commodity producing companies is a relevant share of the corporate bond market. According to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), in 2014 there were $1.4 trillion in outstanding corporate bonds. This estimate is only for the oil and gas sector, which has also an additional trillion in syndicated loans (see Taking these aspects into account, various reports have raised some concerns both about the sustainability of this debt and about potential systemic impacts ( These previous assessments were about risks in sovereign and bank debt. But so far there are no measurements of the effect of commodity swings on corporate bonds. Magnitudes of this This paper measures the effect of commodity price changes on the cost of debt for commodity producers. The sensitivity of a security to an underlying product-market fundamental is now a standard analysis for Measuring the response of a bond to changes in its product-market fundamental has some obvious identification challenges. For example, if one uses a company’s revenues or profits as measures of these fundamentals, it may well be that these were caused by financial markets (i.e. changes in financial distress) or by third factors. In short, one would prefer exogenous movements of product-market fundamentals. Using a sample of global bonds between 2003 and 2015 we find that bond yields react to the underlying commodity price in a statistically significant way. But this average magnitude hardly points to an overreaction or a drying-up of finance for these firms. A 10% change in a commodity’s price has an average impact on yields of around 15 basis points (bp.) in the opposite sense. This elasticity of −0.015 for bonds is an order of magnitude smaller than a similar elasticity computed for stocks returns (in the opposite sense, of course). Given the baseline corporate yield to maturity (henceforth yield), this represent 2,5% increase in the cost of financing or 5% increase in the spread between the corporate and the sovereign bond. This average elasticity masks important heterogeneity and asymmetry. Most of the effect comes from falling prices, with a 10% drop commodity prices increasing yields by more than 50 The sensitivity to commodity prices is stronger for bonds of shorter maturity, being twice as much as for those maturities above average. Smaller companies and those with high leverage are also more sensitive. This helps understand that the attributes of commodity companies in the high-yield bond market are in fact more sensitive, helping to rationalize the spike in the high-yield spread in 2016. But it is important to note the role of hedging. Firms that have above median use of hedging instruments display a much lower sensitivity of their bonds to the underlying commodity prices. In fact in many estimates we could not reject the null hypothesis of zero effect among hedged firms. In addition to being a relevant exogenous shock, commodity prices offer another interesting possibility for study the reaction of commodity bonds. Sometimes commodities show relevant differences between the spot price and its expectation for the long run. This variation helps disentangle whether the bond market reacts more to the short-run profitability or to the long-run fundamentals (see As outlined before, our estimates could also matter for real effects in this industry, beyond financial markets. Some commodity sectors can have excessively amplified investment cycles because of time-to-build, as in oil or copper (see The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section Our data set starts with bond-level and firm-level information from Thomson Reuters SDC and Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ. These are also the sources for country-level bonds and ratings from S&P. We use quarterly data as baseline. In some robustness tests we replicate calculations for yearly changes (see Appendix). We use International Monetary Fund (IMF) definition of commodity indexes. Quarterly commodity prices and expectations for future prices come from World Bank. We first match the primary industry of each firm with one of the seven IMF indexes of commodity prices: aluminum, coal, copper, gold, iron ore, energy, and metal. We define commodity producers as firms that extract natural resources and produce raw commodity materials. We use outstanding bonds as of December of 2015 in both domestic and international markets, issued in different currencies, including equity and non-equity issuer firms. We drop bonds with missing values for information required to estimate all the bond-level control variables suggested by previous studies ( We merge the data from all sources and then winsorized variables, dropping the top and bottom 1% of each variable. The final sample is an unbalanced panel of 8774 bond-quarter observations from 449 bonds and 118 commodity producing firms, between 2002 and 2015. On average we observe each bond for slightly less than 5 years. The average time to maturity in the sample is 14 years. Bonds are mainly issued in US Dollars, by US firms of oil & gas and mining. Important for our identification, different commodities experience different changes. The commodity-quarter variation allows us to get differential shocks for different industries within the same country and currency. This differentiates us from the previous literature. Before jumping into the empirical analysis it is instructive to think of the value of the bond as a type of put option. There are at least two aspects that could matter for the sensitivity of the bond to the commodity price.. It is worth noting that our empirical strategy would estimate a weighted average of the sensitivity of each of the bonds, which are located in different regions of the support of Finally, one has to take into account that commodity prices have significant persistence, as in a martingale (e.g. random walk) or as a mean-reverting process. For the bond pricing we follow We also introduce bond and firm level variables to our model. The expected signs relate to standard structural models of default (e.g. A salient feature of commodity companies is that firms can hedge part of their product-market risk using derivatives. Hedging reduces the required return on bond yields ( We later include hedging also as a moderating factor, when we split the sample. Following Our initial parameter of interest is the average commodity price elasticity of the corporate bond yield ( All specifications on To correct for any currency effect − like exchange rate depreciations − in columns 4–6 we re-estimate the previous models with an interacted country-time-currency fixed effect. The fact that the estimated elasticity is almost unchanged ( As mentioned before, sometimes one may not care about the effect on bond yields, but on the corporate spread between each bond and a country’s sovereign bonds of the closest maturity. To deal with that concern we have at least two lines of defense. First is that including the closest sovereign yield as a control in columns (2) and (5) has almost no impact on the estimated elasticities. Second is that in columns (7) to (10) we include additional interacted fixed effects that incorporate maturity. Columns (9) and (10) even use the 4-tuple country-time-currency-maturity, which encompasses any plausible variation coming from country-specific movements in the yield curve for sovereign securities as well as concerns about a potential “flight to quality”. The point estimates for the elasticity of interest almost did not change, and any difference across specifications was statistically insignificant. It is also reassuring that the estimated coefficients for control variables in To benchmark the quantitative relevance of commodity prices we also look at the ratio of the point estimates in We run various types of additional tests. In some of them (not reported) we exclude variables that might be correlated with prices (i.e., Tobin’s Q or Cash Flow) and find somewhat larger effects but of a similar magnitude. This is consistent with coefficients almost unchanged between column (1) and (2) of A reader looking at As an additional robustness test, we use spreads instead of the bond’s yield. Following previous studies ( Even if yields are likely stationary − unlike commodity prices −, as robustness we also regress changes in yield (columns 3–6) and changes in spread over the sovereign yield (columns 7 and 9). Columns 3 and 5 show a significant effect between 3 and 5 Having established the robustness of the average effect, Bonds of less than median maturity in column (1) are almost twice as sensitive to commodity prices as longer-term bonds (column 2). Estimated elasticities are 0.020 and 0.012 respectively. Smaller firms are more than twice as sensitive as smaller ones (difference p Almost all the effect of commodity prices on yields come from firms that have less than median positions in hedging derivatives, with an elasticity of 0.017 (p This relevance of hedging in mitigating the response of bond yields seems relevant when comparing the recent events of downgrades of commodity companies vis-à-vis the more systemic cases of mortgage-backed securities in 2007–2008 and the fall in the funding for telecoms around 2002. These were markets in which the derivatives to protect against fluctuations were less developed than in commodities (see Shiller, 2008). This matters because in financial markets risks are more disruptive when they are least expected and harder to hedge. We will explore more about hedging when looking at the long vs short-term changes in prices in Section So far we have estimated a moderate average elasticity of bond yields to the underlying commodity price, showing that the effect can be amplified by some firm or bond characteristics. However, commodity markets offer an interesting possibility to explore how heterogeneous types of price changes can have differential effects. This is important for stress tests, because many times these activities are referred to a drop in the price underlying real asset. Moreover, in our setting these stress tests could be conducted for a shock that is expected to be transitory or for changes that are expected to be more permanent. Below we explain our methodology and results. One central question is whether the relation between commodity prices and bonds yields comes from investors concerned about current ability to pay or, alternatively, from the company’s long-term expected solvency. If commodity prices are exactly a random walk, then all changes would be permanent and this distinction between long and short run prices of a commodity cannot be identified. However, there is relevant evidence that prices of commodities like oil or copper tend to be mean-reverting instead of a martingale (e.g. To conduct our inquiry, we follow All estimates of Eq. (3) in But beyond this average effect, it is worth dissecting which types of firms are more sensitive to permanent vs. transitory changes.  In contrast, the effects of arguably transitory price changes are more salient in specific cases. In columns (1) and (2) we compare different maturities. While both bond maturities have similar sensitivities to permanent price shocks, the more indebted companies react disproportionally to short run price shocks. Their elasticity is twice as large as the average effects of Section Firms with more leverage and lower profitability are in fact more sensitive to this short run fluctuations in price (see columns 4 and 6). From columns (9) and (10) we again conclude that hedging positions mitigate the sensitivity of bonds to commodities, as we saw before. Still, among relatively un-hedged companies the sensitivity is higher for transitory than for permanent changes in commodity prices. We finally extend the previous analysis to explore asymmetries in the direction of change. This is obviously important since bond securities are by design sensitive to the downside of the company and because stress tests tend to worry about downsides in the prices of real assets. In fact, columns 3 and 4 show a highly asymmetric reaction of bond yields to movements in the spot commodity prices. Bonds are five times more sensitive to a drop in commodity prices than to increases (elasticity of −0.052 vs. −0.011; p-value of difference <0.05), meaning that a 50% drop in the spot price, as the one suffered by oil, could imply 2,5 percentage points of additional funding cost. Again, these are relevant magnitudes. But they are hardly a dry-up of finance for the average firm in the industry. Columns (5) and (6) further split the spot commodity price differentials into the above mentioned transitory and permanent expectations, but each one of them interacted by a dummy variable to separate price increases from drops. Results show again that most of the effect comes from price drops. But in addition we find that bonds appear more sensitive to permanent expectation for commodity prices drops than for a drop that is expected to be transitory (elasticity of −0.078 vs −0.056). We replicate the previous analysis using changes in bond yields on the left hand side ( Summing up, the sensitivity of bonds to commodity fluctuations comes from price drops rather than increases. And drops expected to be permanent may have a somehow stronger effect, depending on the specification. In the Appendix we show that investment grade bonds are more precisely related to permanent changes in prices, while non-investment grade bonds appear more influenced by transitory components of price changes. Our estimates of relatively moderate effects apparently contrast with the effects on banking stability found by Our main goal in this paper was to explore how bond yields reacted to commodity price changes. Complementary, as benchmark for magnitudes, here we estimate the sensitivity of the total stock returns to changes in the commodity’s price. As mentioned, this is more standard in the literature. The effect is more than an order of magnitude larger for stocks than for bonds. Estimates on Both the BIS and the IMF expressed concerns about the bust in commodity prices. They argued this bust could impact the trillions of outstanding debt of commodity producers. Moreover, others worried this could parallel previous collapses in real assets, like when US housing prices impacted mortgage backed securities around 2008. But this parallelism not only needs a large shock to the underlying commodity price, it also needs a large sensitivity of the bond to this price shock. We find that transitory commodity changes impact only shorter maturities and firms with high leverage. In contrast, bonds of longer maturities react more to permanent price changes. Overall, hedged firms are much less reactive to either type of price changes. Hedging by itself is also associated with lower the cost of bond financing. Our findings suggest that the availability of hedging plays a relevant role in mitigating risks, consistent with the view of Our results and methods matter for stress tests of debt exposed to commodity risk. Importantly, our local average treatment effect comes from variation across commodities. While useful for identification, it cannot directly speak to cases in which all commodities commove. Analyzing the total effect of such aggregate shock on bond yields requires a general equilibrium approach. This is left as avenue for future research. See See See See See See See See See