Background
                  Navicular fractures (NF) are uncommon. The purpose of this study was to compare results of operative (ORIF) and non-operative (NOT) treatment in NF.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective analysis was undertaken on patients diagnosed with NF between March 2002 and June 2007 at a Level I teaching trauma centre. Clinical outcome consisted of functional ability and complications.
               
                  Results
                  Eighty-eight patients with 90 fractures were identified including 56 males and 32 females with a mean age of 38 (range 17–72) and body mass index of 28.2 (range 18.7–48.9). Twenty-one of 90 (23.3%) injuries were isolated. Ten of 90 (11.1%) injuries were open. Treatment was 49/90 (55%) NOT and 41/90 (45.6%) ORIF. 11/41 (30%) ORIF required bone grafting. Complications included one ipsilateral deep vein thrombosis, one avascular necrosis, one nonunion, seven infections (two deep and five superficial), and 56 cases of secondary osteoarthrosis (SOA). ORIF had significantly more SOA (χ
                     2
                     =0.000). Secondary surgery was 25 hardware removals (16 for irritation, five for prominent or broken plates), nine arthrodeses/-plasties, two debridements for infection, and one tarsal tunnel release. Pain was present at final follow up in 39/90 (43.3%) feet. Work status was 64 without restrictions, 17 with restrictions, and 5 did not return to work. Sixty-two of 88 (69%) patients were able to wear normal shoes, which were related to return to work without restrictions (ρ
                     =−0.508, p
                     =0.000). Inability to return to previous work was related to pain (ρ
                     =−0.394), SOA (ρ
                     =−0.280), and poor reduction quality (ρ
                     =−0.384) with significance at p
                     <0.01. Increased BMI (>35) related to pain (ρ
                     =0.250) and poor reduction quality (ρ
                     =0.326) at a σ
                     <0.05.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Despite modern surgical techniques, operative treatment of displaced fractures is at high risk for complications. Obesity, pain, and secondary osteoarthrosis determine shoe wear, return to function, and employment status.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level III.With an incidence of 0.45% of all fractures, midfoot fractures are uncommon This was an IRB approved, retrospective, cohort study of non-operatively and operatively treated NF at a Level I teaching trauma centre. Five fellowship trained orthopaedic surgeons performed all operative procedures. Consecutively treated patients were identified by Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes 28450, 28456, and 28465 for NF that had initial treatment from March 2002 through June 2007. Inclusion criteria were radiographically diagnosed NF, skeletal maturity, and initial treatment at the study institution. Exclusion criteria were stress fractures, unavailable radiographic images at injury and at final follow-up, and follow-up of less than three months. Age, gender, body mass index (BMI), comorbidity index (CMI) When non-operative treatment was elected, patients remained toe-touch weight bearing in a splint, short leg cast, or Foot Ankle Support (DonJoy, Vista, CA) for ten to twelve weeks. Progressive weight bearing was initiated for those with isolated injuries based on radiographic and clinical assessment indicating healing and maintenance of reduction. As needed with associated injuries, weight bearing progression was delayed until other injuries warranted. Patients were instructed to begin range-of-motion (ROM) exercises at home and organized physical therapy for weight bearing, gait, ROM, and conditioning. Radiographic and clinical evaluation was recorded during follow up at 2, 6, 12, 26, and 52 weeks. A dorso-medial incision was carried out centred over the tarsal navicular. The extensor hallucis longus tendon and the neurovascular bundle were retracted and protected. The NF was identified. Fracture edges and articular fragments were cleaned and refined keeping as many soft tissue attachments to the fracture fragments as possible. With the aid of a temporary spanning 2.5 The initial postoperative splint was changed to a short leg black splint (PFS Med, Eugene, OR) at two weeks and was worn protectively for eight to ten weeks with non-weight restrictions. Smooth pins and screws passing essential joints were removed before weight bearing or joint movement was begun. External fixators were removed after ten to twelve weeks during an outpatient clinic visit. Spanning internal plates were removed at twelve weeks during an outpatient operative procedure. If radiographic and clinical assessment indicated healing, progressive weight bearing was started. Radiographic and clinical examinations were recorded during follow-up at 2, 6, 12, 26, and 52 weeks. All interval standard radiographic images of anterior–posterior (AP), oblique (OBL), and lateral (Lat) and/or a CT scan were retrospectively reviewed in a blinded fashion by one of the authors not involved in patient care. Radiographs were used to assess the degree and direction of displacement, degree of comminution, MCF alignment, presence of associated injuries, adequacy of reduction, presence of avascular necrosis (AVN) and non-unions, time to healing, and degree of secondary osteoarthritis (SOA). Furthermore, the injury images were utilized to compare and contrast current classification systems (AO/OTA 1996 & 2007 Adequacy of reduction was assessed from immediate postoperative radiographs based on a modification from Kuo et al. Pain was recorded as present or absent at final follow up. Functional pain and activity results were rated as good, fair, or poor Fixation failure, AVN SOA was graded based on a modification from Arntz et al. Data analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS One-hundred and ten patients met inclusion criteria. Twenty-two were excluded because of skeletal immaturity (6), inadequate follow up (34) or incomplete radiographs (8). Sixty-two patients with a total of 64 NF remained for further analysis.  Talar injuries was related the inability to return to previous level of activity ( Treatment consisted of 49/90 (54.4%) NOT and 41/90 (45.6%) ORIF. Primary external fixator application was performed in five cases, which underwent ORIF after soft tissue swelling resolved. Four primary arthrodeses were performed. Operative treatment is provided in   Complications are outlined in Twenty-two of 41 (53.7%) patients who had ORIF also had secondary surgery for implant removal due to local irritation (16/41), breakage (3/41), and prominence (2/41). No significant difference was found in the rate of plate removal when comparing 2.0–2.7 Acute fracture treatment of the tarsal navicular is still controversial. Non-operative treatment should be performed if articular displacement is less than 2 The “ideal classification” considers fracture severity and serves as a basis for treatment and evaluation of the results The navicular bone forms a functional unit with the talus, calcaneus, and cuboid at the midtarsal junction The overall complication rate as displayed in Strengths of this study are related to a consecutive series of navicular fractures with five orthopaedic fellowship trained surgeons. The surgical technique was well described and was reproducible. The limitations of this study are related to the inherent issues in the retrospective nature of data collection at a single Level I teaching trauma centre. Major confounding factors must be considered to allow a deeper understanding of the interplay between the specific variables, treatment, and outcome. Severity of injury represents one potential confounding factor. Furthermore, patients were followed until healing for an average of 21 months. The attrition of some patients may be a limitation, but the statistical analysis showed no difference in baseline demographic data. The patients in this study outnumber the patients of all other known published studies combined. To strengthen these findings, a prospective study is warranted. Extrapolation to general orthopaedic surgeons may be limited. Non-operative treatment is feasible for non-displaced fractures. A high suspicion for associated injuries and medial column instability should guide decision making. In displaced fractures, operative treatment is recommended and three different surgical strategies have been presented. Realignment and anatomic reconstruction is desired. In most circumstances sole ORIF leads to sufficient stability. An internal bridging device allows stable fixation and, while buttressing the medial column, minimizes loss of fixation. Indications are severely comminuted fracture patterns and instability of the adjacent joints. Furthermore, despite satisfactory reduction and high rate of union, fractures of the navicular bone have severe impact on long term clinical and functional outcome. McKeever Navicular fractures are uncommon and usually are associated with other injuries. Operative intervention is enhanced with bone grafting to support impacted fracture fragments. Despite alignment and anatomical restoration, secondary arthritis and pain are common. More severe injuries have worse results. Reduction quality relates to pain and return to function. None declared.