The beneficiation of oxidized coal is difficult to achieve by conventional flotation with oily collectors. Oxidized coal samples were prepared by the peroxide solution oxidation and a new type of oxygenated polar compound collector (CC) and a powerful blending frother (BF) were used to intensify oxidized coal flotation in the present study. The effects of the CC and BF on the froth stability and flotation performance (i.e., recovery and selectivity) were investigated. The results show that only 44.51% recovery with 9.71s dynamic froth stability index (DFS) was obtained for oxidized coal flotation by using conventional diesel and octanol as the collector and frother, respectively. Lots of oxygen functional groups (−OH and C-O) were introduced after peroxide oxidation indicated by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, leading to poor hydrophobicity and low flotation recovery. An optimal separation result with 76.24% oxidized coal recovery and 19.43s DFS was obtained using the CC combined with octanol, which was attributed to the hydrogen bonding between the hydrophilic sites on coal surface and polar oxygen functional groups in CC. An identical DFS (19.43s) was obtained using conventional diesel combined with the BF, while with only 21.38% recovery. Diesel did not sufficiently render the coal hydrophobicity and as a result only a small amount of coal particles was collected by attaching to bubble surface in pulp phase. The Fuerstenau upgrading curves show that both the maximum recovery and the best flotation selectivity could be obtained using the CC combined with octanol.Coal is the main fossil fuel used in many countries and may be the largest contributor to industrial growth, accounting for almost 70% of primary energy consumption, particularly in China. In recent years, with the depletion of high-quality coal resources and the complication of geological conditions, low-grade coal, such as oxidized coal refuse, has been reconsidered for use and is becoming an important resource. The demineralization upgrading of low-grade coal to obtain available clean fuels has attracted increased attention in the field Froth flotation is an effective separation method for fine coal cleaning and upgrading that is based on the differences in the surface hydrophobicitied of organic matter and mineral matter Numerous methods have been employed to intensify oxidized or difficult-to-float coal flotation, such as the use of new types of collectors; particle surface pre-treatment using grinding, ultrasonic, microwave, and thermal methods; bubble surface modification; and high-efficiency flotation process design. The addition of surfactants or oxygenated functional groups to oily collectors can significantly enhance the oxidized coal flotation yield because of hydrogen bonding between the polar part of the coal surface and the new reagent To date, little attention has been given to frothers and their potential effect on oxidized coal flotation. Frothers are used for froth generation and to facilitate air dispersion into fine bubbles, which contributes to a high flotation recovery rate and good kinetics Froth structure and stability plays an important role in determining flotation recovery and grade. It is well accepted that poor froth stability is incapable of getting a satisfactory flotation recovery and grade. However, it doesn't mean that a high flotation recovery can be obtained definitely with good froth stability. Froth flotation is a complex system and the final recovery is the result of the interaction of many factors such as properties particles, reagents, bubbles, froth stability, and solution. Based on previously summarised the literature review, a new type of oxygenated polar compound collector (CC), a mixture of diesel and aliphatic acid, and powerful blending frother (BF), a mixture of octanol and aliphatic acid salt, were used to enhance oxidized coal flotation. The effects of the CC and BF on froth stability and flotation performance were examined in this study. Oxidized coal samples were prepared using the peroxide solution oxidation method and the surface functional groups were characterised using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and XPS before and after oxidation. Fine high-metamorphosed anthracite coal samples were collected from the coal storage yard of the Xuehu Coal Preparation Plant in Yongcheng City, Henan Province, China. Samples that were smaller than 0.25 FTIR (Nicolet is5, Thermo Scientific) was used to identify the functional groups of the coal and flotation reagents in the wave number range of 4000–400 Flotation is a type of interface separation technique. Interfacial properties play a crucial role in bubble–particle interaction sub-processes. Recently, XPS has emerged as an advanced interface chemistry analysis tool and has been used extensively in flotation and energy engineering applications. In the present study, an XPS system (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, America) with Al Ka radiation (hv Column flotation tests were carried out at an 80 The froth structure and stability play important roles in determining the flotation product grade and separation efficiency In Eq. The Fuerstenau upgrading curves were used for the characterization, comparison, and analysis of the whole separation selectivity. These curves have proven to be very useful in the analysis of the de-ashing and desulfurization of coal flotation results Preliminary tests to determine the effective bubble size for column flotation were carried out using the following series of ceramic sparger diameters: 120–80 Oxidized coal samples were prepared by the peroxide solution oxidation method, and the effect of oxidation on the flotation DFS and performance were examined. The results are shown in To identify the surface chemistry changes that occurred, the surface functional groups were characterised by FTIR before and after oxidation. The FTIR spectrums of raw coal and oxidized coal are shown in To obtain more comprehensive information about the coal surface before and after oxidation, XPS experiment was conducted. The XPS wide energy spectrums of raw coal and oxidized coal are shown in The C1s peaks of the fresh and oxidized coals are shown in CC and BF were used to intensify the oxidized coal flotation. The effect of different reagent combinations (i.e., CC with octanol, diesel with BF, and CC with BF) on DFS and recovery of oxidized coal flotation are shown in To evaluate the flotation selectivity of different reagents combinations, the Fuerstenau upgrading curves analysis was conducted. Assuming that The Fuerstenau upgrading curves of different reagent combinations for oxidized coal flotation are shown in A new type of oxygenated polar compound collector (CC), a mixture of diesel and aliphatic acid, and powerful blending frother (BF), a mixture of octanol and aliphatic acid salt, were used to intensify oxidized coal flotation. Lots of oxygen functional groups (− This research was supported by the