Strontium pyrophosphate, Sr2P2O7, was synthesized by solid-state synthesis method; the product was co-doped with copper-silver (Cu–Ag), copper-indium (Cu–In) and manganese-praseodymium (Mn–Pr) oxides (CuO, MnO, In2O3, Pr6O11 and AgNO3) by solid-state reaction method. The variation of dopant concentrations was investigated from 0.5 to 15% by weight. In addition to these processes, chemical characterizations of samples and the investigation of thermoluminescence (TLD) properties of strontium pyrophosphate with and without dopants were conducted. For the characterization; powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) were implemented for phase purity of samples. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to determine whether the bond structures were affected from the doping or not. Thermoluminescence (TLD) analyses were conducted on strontium pyrophosphate doped with different amounts of dopants for the first time. Glow curves showed that intensities were affected by different amounts of dopants. It can be concluded from that strontium pyrophosphate doped with 7% MnO and 1% Pr6O11 had the most powerful peak intensity around 160°C and dosimetric property for promising application.Thermoluminescence (TLD) can be defined as the emission of light from a semiconductor or an insulator when it is heated due to the previous absorption of energy from irradiation ( There is relatively less amount of research upon thermoluminescence of pyrophosphates. Miyoshi and Yoshino have prepared calcium pyrophosphate, Ca During the production of Sr In order to obtain 5 The solid-state doping technique was used in the doping process. In this study, experiments were divided into four groups. In the first group, 3%, 5% and 7% by weight CuO and 0.5%, 1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, 5%, 10% and 15% by weight In For doping, all amounts of the materials were weighed and next, they were mixed and ground in an agate mortar. The samples were transferred to porcelain crucibles and were put into furnace and heated up to 950 To characterize the crystal structure of synthesized strontium pyrophosphate and the doped samples, the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were established. For these measurements, Rigaku MiniFlex X-ray Diffractometer with a radiation source of CuKα was used. According to previous studies, 2 As is clear from the illustrations in In In Strontium pyrophosphate doped with different amounts of Cu, Mn, Ag, In and Pr oxides by solid state synthesis method and the thermoluminescence glow curves of samples were analyzed for the first time. According to the X-ray diffraction pattern, increase in the amount of all metal oxide dopants lowered the two significant peaks of strontium pyrophosphate at the 2 The authors are grateful to Prof. Dr. Necmeddin Yazıcı from Gaziantep University, Turkey for his patience and kind help during the TLD measurements.