A processing plant costs many millions of dollars to build and operate. The success of this expenditure relies on the assays of a few small samples. Decisions affecting millions of dollars are made on the basis of a small fraction of the bulk of the ore body. It is therefore very important that this small fraction is as representative as possible of the bulk material. Special care needs to be taken in any sampling regime and a considerable effort in statistical analysis and sampling theory has gone into quantifying the procedures and precautions to be taken. The final sampling regime adopted however is a compromise between what theory tells us should be done and the cost and difficulty of achieving this in practice. A measurement is considered to be accurate if the difference between the measured value and the true value falls within an acceptable margin. In most cases however the true value of the assay is unknown so the confidence we have in the accuracy of the measured value is also unknown. We have to rely on statistical theory to minimise the systematic errors to increase our confidence in the measured value. Checks can be put in place to differentiate between random variations and systematic errors as the cause of potential differences. A The A series of measurements can be precise but may not adequately represent the true value. Calibration procedures and check programs determine accuracy and repeat or replicate/duplicate measurements determine precision. If there is no bias in the sampling regime, the precision will be the same as the accuracy. Normal test results show that assays differ from sample to sample. For unbiased sampling procedures, these assay differences are not due to any procedural errors. Rather, the term “random variations” more suitably describes the variability between primary sample increments within each sampling campaign. Random variations are an intrinsic characteristic of a random process whereas a systematic error or bias is a statistically significant difference between a measurement, or the mean of a series of measurements, and the unknown true value ( The most important parameter for a population is its average value. In sampling and weighing the   Due to random variations in the mass of each primary increment the weighted average is a better estimate of v, the unknown true value, than the arithmetic mean. The variance, and its derived parameters such as the The term Consider a binary mixture of quartz and hematite particles with approximately 10% hematite. Samples are taken and the number of hematite particles are counted to obtain the percentage of hematite in the sample.  For two samples, the The classical formula for the calculation of the variance is: The standard deviation, σ, is the square root of the variance. The coefficient of variation (CV), is a measure of precision and is numerically equal to: Variance values from a sampling procedure with a binary mixture of mineral particles is given in  In practical applications of sampling bulk solids we compromise by collecting and measuring unknown parameters on gross samples, and by reporting Other convenient measures for precision are confidence intervals (CI) and confidence ranges (CR). 95 That is, if we repeat a particular experiment 100 In the draft Australian Standard, DR00223, for estimating the sampling precision in sampling of particulate materials, a confidence interval of 68% is chosen [ Fortunately, we don’t need to repeat a measurement one-hundred times if we want to determine its 95% confidence interval, either for individual measurements or for their mean. Applied statistics provides techniques for the calculation of confidence intervals from a The most reliable estimate of σ The 95 Representing large bodies of minerals truly and accurately by a small sample that can be handled in a laboratory is a difficult task. The difficulties arise chiefly in ascertaining a proper sample size and in determining the degree of accuracy with which the sample represents the bulk sample. In each case the accuracy of the final sample would depend on the mathematical probability with which the sample represents the bulk material. The probability of true representation increases when incremental samples are taken while collecting from a stream, like a conveyor belt for solids and off pipes for liquids or slurries. Several methods have been put forward to increase the probability of adequately representing the bulk minerals [ K is usually referred to as the sampling constant (kg/m In mineralogical sampling the dimension of the largest piece (d  The liberation factor, P When a large amount of sample has been collected it has to be split by a suitable method such as riffling. At each stage of subdivision, samples have to be collected, assayed and statistical errors determined. In such cases the statistical error for the total sample will be the sum of the statistical errors during sampling (σ When the sample is almost an infinite lot and where the proportion of mineral particles has been mixed with gangue and the particles are large enough to be counted, it may be easier to adopt the following procedure for determining σ Then the standard deviation of the proportion of mineral particles in the sample, σ  The standard deviation of the entire sample is given by Regular samples were required of the feed to a copper processing plant, having a copper content of about 9%. The confidence level of estimation was required to be 0.1 From the data, d Since the confidence interval required is equal to ± 0.1 2σ = 0.1/9 or σ = 0.011/2 = 0.00555 Again from the data d As the ore contains chalcocite (Cu i.e. The copper content of Cu   The mineralogical composition factor, m, can now be calculated from K = 0.5 M Thus the minimum sample size should be 131 Note the importance of not rounding off the numbers until the final result. If σ is rounded to 0.0055 then M A composite sample of galena and quartz was to be sampled such that the assay would be within 0.20% of the true assay, of say 5.5 Step 1 Determine σ To determine N it is necessary to find σ  To determine the value of σ From the table, corresponding to a probability of 0.99, the value of the deviation from the standard unit is 2.576. i.e. Substituting in Hence the mass of sample necessary to give an assay within the range 5.5 ± 0.20 Where variations in density of individual particles and their composition occur, the following considerations may be adopted to provide the sample size [ Divide the material into n density fractions, ρ Consider the mass percent of the i Consider A For sampling a mixture of two components (mineral and gangue) the proportion of particles in the ij fraction would be;  For a multi-component system the principles developed in the above A nickel sulphide ore mineral (pentlandite) has an average particle size of 1 The lot has to be sampled so that it would assay ± 0.15 Step 1. As the stipulated probability is 0.99  Step 2. Estimate P Step 3. With known P and σ, N can be estimated using the equation Now follow Theoretically, unbiased gross samples can be obtained by collecting a sufficiently large number of single particles from a sampling unit. If each particle has a finite chance of being selected for a gross sample, and if this probability is only a function of its size, then this collection of particles will constitute an unbiased probability sample. In the practice of sampling bulk solids, such a sample collection scheme is highly impractical. Therefore, we collect groups of particles for primary increments. Sampling experiments that are based on the collection of a series of small and large increments from a large set of particles, demonstrates that the precision of a single increment sampling regime is a function of the number of particles in a primary increment. As a matter of fact, the formula for the variance of a binomial sampling unit, var(x) = N.p.q, shows the fundamental relationship between probabilities (p, q), the total number of particles in an increment (N), and thus its mass, and the precision for the parameter of interest. Hence, the precision of a single increment is essentially determined by its mass. The binomial sampling experiment in which p = 0.095, and q = 0.905 (q = alternate binomial probability = 1 − p), can be used to set up a table in which the precision of a primary increment is given as a function of the average number of particles in an increment. In Since these ranges are based on properties of the binomial distribution, their values are obviously independent of particle size. For a bulk solid with a certain density, its top size determines the mass of a primary increment. Top size is defined as the 95% passing sieve size.  The top size of a bulk solid is a measure of length. The mass of a particle is a function of its volume and specific gravity and ultimately a function of its mean diameter or length. The mass of a primary increment then can be defined in terms of the number and mass of particles from the top size range. If no other information is available, then an acceptable rule of thumb is to collect primary increments with a mass equal to 1,000 Experience and theory are embodied in a number of national and international standards on sampling of particulate materials where the sampling regimes are defined in terms of the total number of increments, and the average mass of a primary increment. It is generally accepted that a primary increment should contain no less than one-thousand (1,000) particles. In the standard on sampling of iron ore (ISO TC102), the minimum mass for primary increments is specified in relation to the top size, and in The minimum mass for a primary increment should preferably be defined in terms of the volume of a particle from the top size range. Once the mass for a primary increment is selected either in accordance with applicable standards or on the basis of the previous guidelines, or determined by the critical design parameters of a mechanical sampling system, the required number of primary increments remains to be defined. Too few increments will result in too low a precision while too many would unnecessarily increase the costs for sampling and preparation. Most standards for bulk solids contain simple formulae to calculate the required number of increments for a consignment from a given number for the unit quantity (usually 1,000   For consignments larger than this unit mass of 1,000  In a well-balanced sampling regime the variance of sampling and the variance of preparation should be of the same order of magnitude. Dividing a consignment of bulk solids into lots, collecting, preparing and assaying samples from each lot, and reporting composite assays for the consignment, impacts significantly on the precision of the final result. The variance of preparation and analysis may easily become a limiting factor for the precision of a sampling regime. If we solve n, the number of primary increments, from the simplified formula for a sampling regime of only one gross sample per consignment and a single measurement in the final analysis sample, it follows that [ The denominator of this formula may easily become a limiting factor for the total precision of sampling regimes since it shows that: n → ∞ for var(pa) → var(t)  Suppose that we have a consignment of 1,000 A precision of ±10% of 65.0% Fe is equivalent to ±6.5% of this iron content, and results in a standard deviation of, 6.5/2 = 3.25 for a total variance of 3.25 In this case, a sampling regime of 1 primary increment of 2 For a precision of ±1.0 For an iron assay precision of ±1.0 If a greater iron assay precision of ±0.25 These results show that the assay of this particular type of ore cannot be determined with a precision of ±0.25% at affordable costs because the variance of preparation and analysis rapidly becomes a limiting factor for the total precision.  When it is impossible to achieve the desired precision by testing a single gross sample from a lot (eg. The number of increments is impossibly large) then it is necessary to divide the lot into a number of sub-lots, n The total number of primary increments for the whole lot then becomes n Calculate the number of increments required in the sampling of silica in iron ore for a desired overall precision of 0.1, if increment standard deviation is 1.5 and the preparation and assay standard deviation is 0.095. If the lot is divided into say 8 Therefore 32 primary increments are required per sub-lot for a total of 8 When small amounts of sample are removed from a lot at random and combined to form a composite sample, the problem is to ascertain the incremental amounts and number of increments which would represent the bulk within specified limits. Each individual sample will have an assay equal to, more or less, the true value. Assuming that a normal Gaussian distribution will be obtained if the assays were plotted against frequency, the probability that the assay will be within permissible limits will be given by: Now if A is the average assay and A The standard deviation of the entire sample, σ, is related to σ Substituting the values of σ and σ The application of this method of estimating n is illustrated in 10 samples were taken from a heap of copper ore each weighing 2 The final sample should assay within ± 5% of the true value with a confidence of 99%. Estimate the number of increments. Step 1 Average assay = (A Standard Deviation, σ Step 2 For the probability P = 0.99 (given) and using h = 2.576 Step 3 Calculate the value of h in terms of n where, K = 0.05, A = 2.65 and σ i.e. Step 4 Hence 61 increments have to be taken whose weight would be 61 When mechanical samplers are employed, the samplers are designed to cut into and withdraw from a stream of travelling material at a predetermined frequency and speed. Cutters could operate linearly or rotate within the stream to be sampled. A schematic design of a linear cutter is illustrated in Its operation depends on: Cutter opening Stroke length Cutter speed The rule of thumb for cutter openings is:  The stroke length is adjusted to cover the width of the conveyer belt where the stream consists of dry solids, or the width of the stream where liquids or slurries have to be sampled. The amount of sample (M) cut from any stream by a linear cutter is given by: For a feed rate expressed as kg/s, a cutter speed in m/s and a cutter opening in m, the mass M, is in kilograms. The rotary type of cutters ( If ω is the rotational speed (rpm) of the cutter then the cutter speed, S When the leading edge of the cutter reaches the centreline of the discharging conveyor or stream, cos θ = 1, therefore conditions for d To determine the quantity of sample taken by the arc cutters, it is necessary to know the cutter angle, α. This may be supplied by the manufacturer for a predetermined position of the cutter or it can be calculated from the following relation: The mass of sample of solids, M, recovered per rotation can be computed from a known flow rate of mineral, M M  V NOTE: Usually d = 2/3 radius R, of the cutter Dolomite was carried to the bunkers of a blast furnace at the rate of 200 Step 1 Using rule of thumb, the normal cutter opening = 3 Step 2 Using Sample mass per cut = Step 3 Mass of sample cut in 10 Precious metal deposits sometimes contain very low concentrations of discrete metallic particles as in the case of gold deposits. Extra care is therefore needed to collect a representative sample. If it is assumed that the ore comprises of free particles of uniform size then, N, the number of particles required is given by: The number of particles per gram, N’, is related to the material density (ρ The mass of sample, M to be taken can be given as: Gy’s method of sampling and determining the minimum mass of sample is also applicable in this case. Based on Gy’s method, Eames [   When sampling to determine the grade of a large body of material, the sample of 94 A nomograph may be drawn up from theory by rearranging Taking the logs of both sides of The use of the figure is illustrated in the following example. A sample of 94 To stay within the specified sampling accuracy, a sampling regime similar to  To derive a sampling nomograph, An alternative graphical method is to plot sample mass (M) vs top particle size (d This can be achieved in the following manner: From Gy’s formula; Thus for a given value of K and sampling accuracy, this relationship will yield a straight line of slope 3 when plotted on log-log graph paper (  To the right of the line, the sample mass is less than the minimum and the sampling variance is high and unacceptable. To rectify the situation, either the mass has to be increased or the particle size, d, has to be decreased to bring the sampling regime back to the left of the safety line. A family of lines of equal variance can be constructed, each parallel to one another ( Iron ore was sampled before stock piling with a stacker. One hundred samples taken from the stacker-conveyor showed a standard deviation in the iron assay of ± 0.5 Run-of-Mine iron ore was conveyed on a conveyor belt and sampled at regular intervals. The sieve analyses and Fe distribution obtained at different sampling frequencies gave the following results: The specific gravity of the ore was 5.5 and that of the gangue material was 2.55. Determine the minimum mass of sample required to represent the Run-of-Mine ore. A pile of gold tailings was augured to sample the dump. A 5 In a metallurgical test, the quality of feed was monitored. Four operators and three similar test equipment were employed. Material lost in the feed after each operation in each test was: Estimate the variance due to operator and experimental error. A mechanical sampler was used to sample a stream of iron ore conveyed on a 1.5 The mass of sample cut per minute The minimum mass of sample required to represent the Fe level of the ore. The average assay of a gold sample was 200 The mass fractions and distributions of a mixture of sphalerite, chert and middle fractions were determined and the results tabulated below. Compute the size of sample that should be taken such that its assay may be within 0.2% of the true assay, say 5% with a probability of 0.99. A gold ore was crushed in a jaw crusher down to 3 Three stages of crushing and one stage of riffling were required to get a bauxite ore to the laboratory for testing. The first stage of crushing produced 100 Estimate the minimum mass of the sample that should be taken to represent the ore after each stage. 10 samples were randomly taken from a 5000 lot of pyrolusite (MnO Data: The total standard variance was 0.39 A rotary arc cutter sampler was used to cut samples of a mineral conveyed by a conveyor belt. The sample cutter was placed 75 Estimate: The cutter angle required The quantity of sample taken per cut