Failures of fully grouted bolts due to the combination of tensile and shear loads are commonly observed, but the bolting mechanism is not clearly revealed. Direct shear tests were conducted on three groups of specimens with different bolting angles or grout strengths, and shear loads, shear displacements and bolt strains were measured. The deflecting shape, the bending angle and the failure characteristic of the bolts were described in detail. The relationship between the shear load and the shear displacement was analyzed, and the internal forces were determined according to the bolt strains or the shear displacement of the joint. The test results show that the bolting angle and grout strength play significant roles in influencing the bolt contribution. With increasing the bolting angle, the bolt contribution rises first and then reduces, and they obey a parabola relationship. Particularly, the contribution of the bolt is less than its ultimate tensile load by a large margin when the bolt steeply intersects the rock joint. A higher shear contribution will be mobilized in a weaker grout. It is also observed that the failure of the bolt occurs at the bolt-joint intersection rather than at the two plastic hinges.Fully grouted bolts were continually used as a main support tool of rock mass stabilization in civil and mining engineering more than a century. In the past, fully grouted bolts were usually characterized as pure tension elements to support the unstable rock block, and the bolting mechanism and their performance under traction were deeply studied In recent years, a number of experimental investigations were conducted to evaluate the mechanical performance of fully grouted bolts subjected to tensile and shear loads. Bjurstrom In addition, Ludvig Therefore, there are clear needs for refinement of the understanding of the shear behavior of fully grouted bolts by the tests. In this work, direct shear tests were conducted on three groups of specimens with different bolting angles or grout strengths and shear loads, shear displacements and bolt strains were measured. The deflecting shape, the bending angle and the failure characteristic of the bolt were described in detail. The relationship of the shear load and the shear displacement was analyzed and the internal forces were determined according to the bolt strains or the shear displacement of the joint. Failure modes of fully grouted bolts subjected shearing was also discussed. To simulate the traction and shear states of a fully grouted bolt in jointed rock mass, as a case shown in Concrete is commonly used as an ideal model material to simulate the intact rock. Compared with natural rock masses, concrete blocks are easily fabricated, shaped and controlled to meet laboratory test requirements. In this study, testing samples consist of two concrete blocks and the size for each block is 400 mm × 400 mm × 200 mm. The lower block was firstly cast in a wooden mould with a PVC tube fixed through the center of the joint surface and intersecting with the joint plane at a given angle, as shown in The bolts are smooth round steel bars, of which the mechanical parameters were presented in Three groups of shear tests were performed as shown in A given normal load was applied on the sample by the vertical jack, and before that, the dial indicators and strain gauges were reset. At the early stage of shearing, the shear load was applied with an interval of 0.5 kN by the horizontal jack. After the bolt reached the yielding state, the load step was controlled by shear displacement. Finally, failure of the bolt occurs once that the shear load decreased with increasing the displacement. At each loading step, the deformation monitoring data should be stable and recorded before next load was exerted. For observing failure characteristic of the bolt, the samples were sawed along the shear loading direction after tested.     During the shearing process of the bolted rock joint, the applied shear load and the associated shear displacement were recorded. The curves of the shear displacement and the shear load with different bolting angles and grout strengths were, respectively depicted in As shown in  As frictional effect exists on the joint plane, it is complicated to directly interpret the bolt action. Bolt contribution is usually adopted for evaluating the increment of the shear resistance of the bolted joint By using the above expression, the curve of the bolt contribution against the bolting angle was obtained as shown in   Strain monitoring of group 3 was carried out to evaluate the deformation behavior of the bolts. The corresponding point in side B would be in an opposite stress state while one point in side A is in traction or contraction, which reflects the deflecting feature of the bolt under shearing. There exists a point of contraflexure of the bolt, which is identical to the theoretical model by Liu and Li While the shear displacement is small as shown in It can be judged from Although it is possible for the two points of contraflexure of the bolt to develop into plastic hinge points, failure of the bolt occurs at the intersection point of the bolt and the joint rather than the points of contraflexure as shown in As shown in For the case of that failure occurs at the intersection point of the bolt and the joint, namely the point of contraflexure, the following failure criterion must be met As the bolt contribution   As observed from the above shear test results, the broken of the bolts are all located at the bolt-joint intersection, regardless of different bolting angles or grout strengths. Ferrero For a bolt subjected to shearing, the relationship between the axial force In the shear test for group 3, nine points (a pair of strain gauges attached at side A and side B of each point as depicted in Combining Eqs. Based on Eq. For the shear force The shear force The relationship of the shear force Combing the equations represented respectively by the shear force and axial force in Clearly, the relationship between the axial force and shear force obtained above is not a universally applicable formula, on the one hand, only limited tests undertaken, and on the other hand, the strain behavior of the bolt in plastic hardening and failure stages was not properly captured due to the strain gauges attached on the bolt surface were easily damaged. Besides, taking the value of the axial force at point 5 as that at the bolt-joint intersection may bring about errors. Experimental investigations have been carried out to study the shear behavior of fully grouted bolts with different bolting angles or grout strengths. The main observations and conclusions can be drawn as follows. It is clearly observed that the bolt near the rock joint bends drastically at failure and the deflecting deformation of the bolt is antisymmetric with respect to the joint, which indicates that the failure of the bolt is attributed to the combination of the axial and shear forces acting in the bolt rather than the axial force or shear force acts separately. The bending angle and the transverse deformation length of the bolt rise with increasing the bolting angle but decrease with ascending the grout strength. However, the angle between the fracture surface of the bolt and the joint plane almost keeps constant while the bolting angle varies. Due to the deflection of the bolt under shearing, the cross section of the bolt contains a tensile zone and a compressive zone. In the elastic stage, the axial force acting in the bolt can be calculated according to the different value of the maximal tensile stress and the maximal compressive stress of the cross section which can be measured by strain gauges. In the case of the bolt steeply intersecting the joint, the axial force at the intersection of the bolt and the joint is very small in the initial shear stage and then increases with the shear displacement in an exponential form. Besides, it was found that two points of maximal bending moment formed in the bolt and about several times of the bolt diameter away from the joint surface. Although two failure modes including tensile-shear failure at the bolt-joint intersection and tensile failure between two maximal bending moment points were proposed in literature and 50 MPa of the uniaxial compressive strength of rock was recommended by Ferrero With increasing the bolting angle, the bolt contribution rises first and then reduces, and they obey a parabola relationship. To take advantage of the bolt potential, therefore, it is suggested to set the bolting angle moderate inclining with respect to the joint surface (bolting angle 40°∼50°). A marked decrease tendency of the bolt contribution with increasing the grout strength. Specifically, the bolt contribution firstly decreases sharply with increasing the grout strength but, when the grout strength reaches a certain value (about 50 MPa, for the case in None. We wish to acknowledge the financial support by the