Background
                  The treatment of complex femur fractures poses a significant challenge. Even with current advancements and the various implements available for the fixation of femoral fractures, results are often disappointing. This study sought to identify problems associated with and examine results of modular proximal femoral replacement. Outcomes were evaluated in two groups of patients: those receiving primary modular proximal femoral replacement for fractures and those treated with salvage arthroplasty for failed internal fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  Twelve patients who had received modular proximal femoral replacement as primary treatment for proximal femoral fractures were evaluated along with nine patients treated with salvage proximal femoral replacement for failed internal fixation. After the surgical procedure, patients were evaluated at regular follow-up intervals and contacted by phone at the conclusion of this study. Patient functional results were evaluated using the Merle D'Aubigne hip rating scale, which measures pain, motion and ambulatory status. Routine radiographs were also obtained at each patient visit.
               
                  Results
                  On average, patients who received modular proximal femoral replacement as the primary surgery for their femoral fractures enjoyed a high-level functional result and had few complications. Subjects who received salvage femoral replacement had a less optimal outcome and experienced more complications. Nonetheless, final post-operative MDA score was significantly increased from pre-operative levels.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Modular proximal femoral replacement is a viable option in the primary fracture or revision setting, and has been shown to have a reasonable outcome, especially when the nature of initial injury is taken into account.Despite the current advancements in biomechanics, and the vast array of implements available for internal fixation, the treatment of complex proximal femoral fractures is fraught with difficulty and results are often disappointing. Patients who exhibit more pressing traumatic injuries, complex medical issues preventing prompt surgical intervention, or cognitive/physical co-morbidities that hinder early mobilization are further predisposed to developing severe complications in the post-operative period. Prior research has explored the use of proximal femoral replacement for the salvage of failed total hip arthroplasty, oncologic processes, periprosthetic femur fractures and infectious problems. Currently, there are no studies in the orthopaedic literature evaluating the results of primary prosthetic replacement and outcomes in patients who receive modular femoral replacement as salvage for failed internal fixation. Furthermore, due to the small numbers of subjects and methodological disparities in previous studies, there is a lack of consensus in the literature regarding the efficacy and role of proximal femoral replacement in treating complex femoral injuries. This study endeavored to evaluate functional results in patients who received modular proximal femoral replacement as the treatment for their proximal femur fractures as well as patients treated with similar prostheses as revision for failed internal fixation. The investigators hoped to demonstrate that proximal femoral replacement is a viable treatment option for orthopaedic surgeons dealing with complex proximal femoral fractures. Between 1991 and 2004, 21 patients received 22 proximal femoral replacements as treatment for their complex proximal femoral injuries at Akron General Medical Center. Twelve patients received 13 modular proximal femoral replacements as primary treatment for their proximal femoral injuries ( Of the patients treated, 1 died intra-operatively, 1 was lost to follow-up after 2 A similar protocol was developed to evaluate the outcomes of patients treated with modular proximal femoral replacements as salvage for failed internal fixation of proximal femoral fractures. Between 1991 and 2004, 9 patients were treated by one or both surgeons in this study with 9 proximal femoral prostheses for failed osteosynthesis of hip fractures ( One patient passed away 2 One author (A.J.S.) was responsible for reviewing hospital charts, office notes and post-operative function data sheets to evaluate functional status and assign respective scores. When possible, the patient and/or their caregivers were also interviewed by phone. This study received approval from the institutional Investigational Review Board (IRB). Twelve modular proximal femoral prostheses in 11 patients composed the primary replacement group. The mean follow-up time in this group was 44 Overall, there were four complications in three patients. One patient sustained pneumonia and dislocated the prosthesis in the immediate post-operative period. The dislocation was treated with closed reduction and there were no further instances of instability in this patient after 44 Of the 11 patients in the primary replacement group, 8 were classified as having a good result or better according to the Merle D'Aubigne scale ( Nine proximal femoral prostheses in 9 patients were included in the revision group. These patients received their femoral replacements as salvage procedures for failed internal fixation of proximal femoral fractures. All patients in this group completed a satisfactory post-operative course and healed their proximal femoral replacements. The mean follow-up time ( Among subjects in the revision group, there were five complications in three patients. One patient suffered hardware failure, with loss of integrity of the cable grip attaching the greater trochanter to the prosthesis. This occurred 7 There was one instance of deep infection involving the femoral component. This occurred 6 Of the 9 patients in the revision group, 3 were found to have a good result or better according to the Merle D'Aubigne scale. Three patients were classified as having a fair result, 1 patient had a poor result and 2 patients were determined to have a bad result ( Most patients in the revision group sustained catastrophic failure of their initial osteosynthetic constructs with hardware failure appreciated in every instance. Due to such substantial failure, 6/9 patients in the revision group presented with a pre-operative MDA score of 0. The average pre-operative MDA score was 3.77/18 and this was improved to an average final MDA score of 12.5/18. Complex proximal femoral fractures pose significant challenges to orthopaedic surgeons. Severely comminuted fractures and injuries with significant loss or devitalization of tissues may not be amenable to standard techniques of internal fixation and, even if osteosynthesis is achieved, the patient's overall result can be unsatisfactory. Intertrochanteric fractures treated with standard internal fixation devices demonstrate a failure rate of 3–12% The primary goal of surgical intervention for hip fractures is restoration of function and insertion of a durable, stable construct. In the vast majority of these cases, adequate primary fixation can be achieved with the use of locked plates, sliding hip screws or cephalomeduallary constructs such as the gamma nail. In certain instances, however, complex proximal femoral fractures do not lend themselves to successful treatment with standard modes of fixation. If such options for internal fixation are recognized to be suboptimal prosthetic replacement may provide a reasonable alternative. Although some researchers have reported on the use of primary prosthetic replacement for the treatment of complex femoral injuries, most investigations have focused on the use of hip arthroplasty or proximal femoral replacement as salvage for failed internal fixation. None of these investigations, however, were able to evaluate results of both primary proximal femoral replacement and salvage arthroplasty for complex proximal femoral fractures. This study obtained results for two groups treated by the same orthopaedic surgeons and approximated each other in terms of average age, co-morbidities and intermediate range follow-up. The subjects in our primary replacement group achieved good functional results and had few complications while patients in the revision group had less optimal outcomes ( Additionally, this study addressed a patient population similar in age to other investigations reporting outcomes of femoral replacement for complex fractures. Advantages to the use of proximal femoral replacement include early restoration to immediate ambulation and full weight-bearing status, decreased risk of complications associated with prolonged immobilization as well as fracture failure, non-union or collapse. Disadvantages of the procedure include a theoretically larger, technically challenging surgery, an increased risk of infection and overall cost-effectiveness of the procedure. While the majority of hip fractures are amenable to standard modes of internal fixation, primary proximal replacement may be considered for complex, comminuted peritrochanteric fractures (OTA 31A2.2/.3) in elderly patients who are relatively healthy (ASA 2 or less). While cost remains a concern in these situations, there is little known regarding the economic repercussions of multiple surgeries and prolonged hospitalization. This study was a Level IV retrospective analysis based on cases treated with prosthetic replacement by two attending orthopaedic surgeons. As a result, the study suffers from methodological difficulties inherent to retrospective investigations. This study was also limited by a small sample size with diverse demographic characteristics. Despite these limitations, however, this investigation was able to document results with a validated outcome instrument. Based on presented findings, it would appear that proximal femoral replacement may have a role in the treatment of certain complex proximal femoral fractures, especially in individuals with significant osteoporosis and comminuted fracture patterns. Primary modular proximal femoral replacement may be a practical option to prevent complications associated with hardware failure, allow early weight bearing and improve overall patient function while revision modular replacement can play a role in the treatment of patients who have failed initial internal fixation. The treatment of complex femoral injuries is a difficult problem facing orthopaedic surgeons, especially in patients who are osteoporotic or have multiple medical co-morbidities. Standard modes of internal fixation may not be suitable for these injuries, increasing complication rates and adversely affecting outcome. Modular proximal femoral replacement of the fractured proximal femur is a viable option, and has been shown to have a reasonable outcome as a primary or revision prosthesis, especially when the nature of injury is taken into account. None of the authors involved in this work have any financial or personal relationships with other people, or organizations, that could inappropriately influence (bias) this study. None. This study received approval from the institutional Investigational Review Board (IRB).