A novel flotation cell was used in which hydrophobic particles act as film breakers and sink through the froth as concentrate, while hydrophilic particles are supported by the upward flow of froth and are recovered as a top product tailings. Experimental results on density tracers showed that the behaviour of particles (within the size range tested) in the froth phase of the cell is primarily dependent on the mass of a particle. In general, the higher the mass, the steeper is the trajectory of the particle in the froth, i.e., an increase in particle mass results in an increased recovery to the concentrate. The contact angle on the particle surface has only a secondary influence on the overall particle trajectory, in that an increase in the equilibrium contact angle will result in an increased recovery. However, the particle contact angle has very little influence on the behaviour of large, high-density particles, as well as small, low-density particles.
                  Particles will therefore only separate on the basis of contact angle as long as their mass is between an upper and lower critical value. Any particle with a mass greater than the critical value will fall through the froth irrespective of the contact angle. Similarly, the upward force component acting on a particle with mass less than the lower critical value will dominate the force balance. The particle will therefore remain supported by the froth, irrespective of the particle contact angle and bubble film rupture time. For particles within these mass limits, the effect of the contact angle increases with a decreased mass.
                  It was further concluded that these mass limits are dependent on the operating conditions of the cell as well as the particle shape. The particle shape determines the mass to cross-sectional surface area ratio (M/A
                     0). Where particles therefore have the same mass, the M/A
                     0 ratio would govern the particle trajectory. The higher the M/A
                     0 ratio, the more particles would be recovered to the concentrate, while a decrease in the M/A
                     0 ratio would result in flatter particle trajectories in the froth, thereby increasing the probability of a particle reporting to the tailings. A mathematical model provides an understanding of the interrelationship between the various parameters.It was shown previously ( This paper starts by describing the results obtained during wettability experiments using wax particle coatings. These results are followed by extensive results on the behaviour of particles of various shapes, densities and contact angles under the various operating conditions. The results are presented in the form of bar charts divided into three regions, corresponding with the percentage recovery to the concentrate, middlings and tailings respectively. The Apart from these results, particle trajectories are also predicted by the model. The purpose of these plots is to compare the model output to the actual experimental results. Conclusions as to the validity of the dynamic model are then drawn based on these trajectories. This paper primarily describes the experimental results of the reverse froth flotation cell for test density tracers with varied characteristics under the controlled operating conditions as shown in Density tracers of various sizes, specific gravities and shapes were used in the tests. The density tracers were obtained from either the De Beers Industrial Diamond Division or purchased from a United Kingdom based manufacturing facility of Van Eck and Lurie. All tracers were manufactured from a high-density plastic with inert surfaces. The surface area, volume, calculated mass and mass-to-surface-area ratio of each particle type are given in The following operational procedure for the flotation cell was established: The conditioning tank was filled with the desired amount of demineralised water and the thermostat was set to control the water temperature at 25 °C. The desired amount and type of frother was then added to 1 l of demineralised water in a cylindrical flask and stirred at 700 min The diluted frother mixture was then added to the conditioning tank. Next, the pH was adjusted with either hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide solution to the desired level (usually pH 7), and the mixture was allowed to condition for a further 10 min. Following the conditioning of the aqueous phase, the recycle compartment of the cell was filled to approximately 70 mm above the desired operational level. While filling the cell, the air flowrate in both sub-compartments A and B was set to a low level (in order to prevent the aqueous phase from entering the air lines). Sub-compartments A and B refer to Fig. 1 in The air flowrate in sub-compartment B was then set to a level where a froth bearing was created for the horizontal froth belt from sub-compartment A. Once the froth bearing was created, the air flowrate in sub-compartment A was set to the desired level. As soon as the desired liquid level was reached in the cell, the recycle pump was switched on and the aqueous phase recycled. During the run, the aqueous phase reporting to the pump sump via the middlings and tailings compartments was either recycled to the conditioning tank or to the feed compartment. The cell was run at these settings for a minimum period of 20 min in order to obtain a stable froth bed and operating conditions. The water level in both the cell and the pump sump was manually controlled via valves installed on the cell discharge and pump sump discharge. This inevitably resulted in the cell level oscillating during operation. However, the oscillations were small and did not cause localised froth bed disturbances. Once a stable froth bed was obtained the test run was commenced. Density tracers were manually fed onto the froth bed from a plate attached to the feed end of the cell. Tracers reporting to the tailings or the middlings were separated from the aqueous phase by screens placed on the outlet of these compartments, while particles reporting to the concentrate (sub-compartments A and B) were recovered at the completion of a run during the draining of the cell. In order to prevent liquid from entering the air lines, the air flowrate was turned down only after the cell was drained. Three methods were used to determine the average density of each size fraction of the density tracers: (a) density bottles were used to determine the average density of 10 particles at a time, (b) a helium pycnometer was used to determine the average density of a batch of particles, and (c) each density and size fraction was split into five sub-fractions and the average density of each sub-fraction was determined by weighing the fraction and recording the volume of water displaced in a grade B burette. To study the dynamic behaviour of particles with various degrees of wettability in the froth phase of the cell, it was necessary to modify the surface properties, or wettability, of the particles. The candle wax coating ( The water concentration at a {x,y} position in the froth is used to calculate the air hold-up at that specific position ( In order to investigate the effect of the various operating conditions on the particle trajectories in the cell, the behaviour of cubic density tracers of 2.1 mm side length, under the five operational conditions (see The behaviour of the 2.1 mm cubes under operating condition #1 is shown in The model proposed by The effect of increasing the liquid-froth interface on the recovery of 2.1 mm cubes is shown in The 2.1 mm cubes also follow the trends as predicted in an earlier sensitivity analysis ( Increasing the air flowrate in sub-compartment A (operating condition #5), results in virtually all particles reporting to the tailings, except for the high contact angle particles (see By comparing the simulator output ( In order to determine the effect of particle size on the behaviour of coarse particles in the cell, two different particle shapes, each with two different particle sizes were investigated under operating condition #3. These were: (1) cubic particles of 3.05 and 2.01 mm, and (2) rod shaped particles of 1.04×3.38 and 1.04×1.98 mm (  Based purely on these experimental results, no insight is gained into the influence of particle size on the trajectories of particles in the froth. The simulation model also confirms this. As predicted under operating condition #3, little classification of particles occurs, corresponding to the test results of the 3.05 mm cubes. As predicted by the model, under operating condition #5 (see By comparing Similar trends were noticed with cylindrical particles of the same diameter, but different lengths. Two cylindrical particle sizes were investigated: (1) 1.04×3.38 mm and (2) 1.04×1.98 mm ( From This again indicates that particles will only separate on the basis of contact angle as long as the particle mass is between an upper and lower critical value. For cubic particles the limits were approximately between 25 and 76 mg. For cylindrical particles, however, these limits are approximately 19 and 37 mg respectively. It is therefore recognised that the mass limits are dependent on: (1) operating conditions, i.e., bubble film thickness, surface tension, aeration rates and bubble size, (2) particle shape, and (3) particle size. The particle trajectories, as predicted by the dynamic models and corresponding to the experimental conditions of From Eq. (32) in Based on visual observation of the behaviour of flat-shaped particles in the cell, it was observed that flat particles re-orientate upon breaking the bubble films so that the particle is floating with its smallest cross-sectional area facing downwards (i.e., almost to assist the particle in falling through the froth). By comparing cubic and flat particles (essentially cubes that have been cut in half), the effect of particle mass can now be investigated for particles with similar Two such comparisons were made between: (a) 3.05 mm cubes and 3.05×3.05×1.52 mm flats, and (b) 2.1 mm cubes and 2.1×2.1×1.05 mm flats ( The experimental results for the flat particles with dimensions 2.1×2.1×1.05 mm are presented in Under operating condition #3, the model output for different shape particles is shown in The  The experimental results showed that the behaviour of coarse particles in the froth phase of the cell is primarily dependent on the particle mass. In general, the higher the particle mass, the steeper its trajectory in the froth. In addition it was shown that particles would separate on the basis of contact angle as long as the particle mass is between an upper and lower critical limit. Outside of these limits, the force components acting on the particle will dominate the particle behaviour. Recently, The financial support of De Beers Industrial Diamond Division, the former Foundation for Research Development in South Africa and the Australian Research Council is gratefully appreciated.