In this study, refuse mudstone, ground granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBS) and red mud were used as the precursor materials for geopolymer. Water glass was used as the alkaline activator for polymer synthesis and standard sand was used as the aggregate in the polymer composites. A series of laboratory tests including unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests, Brazil tensile strength (BTS) tests, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) tests were carried out for mechanical and microstructural analysis. The coupled influence of the content of refuse mudstone (P) and the content of alkaline activator (Q) was investigated. Results show that it is feasible to synthesize geopolymer using refuse mudstone, GGBS and red mud. The produced geopolymer composites could have the highest UCS of 23.48 MPa (P = 30% and Q = 25%) and the highest BTS of 2.98 MPa (P = 30% and Q = 10%). Due to the inactive crystal phases in refuse mudstone, the UCS of geopolymer composites was increased and the strain at the UCS (εUCS) was increased. The influence of Q on the UCS and εUCS was not evident and it was affected by P. Similarly, the influence of P and Q on the BTS of geopolymer composites was also found to be dependent on each other. Compared with cemented paste backfill composites, the relatively high strength and small permeability of geopolymer composites originated from its compact microstructure. The influence of P and Q on the geopolymer composites was also confirmed by failure mode analysis and SEM analysis at the micro-scale.Ordinary Portland cement (OPC) has been extensively used as the binder material in civil and mining industries, such as within concrete Geopolymer is synthesized from those materials that are rich in silica (SiO Geopolymer is also advantageous in that it can recycle waste materials as useful binders. A vast number of studies have been performed to investigate the feasibility of industrial by-products as the precursor materials of geopolymer. Till now, much industrial waste has been proven to be suitable for geopolymer synthesis, including ashes Refuse mudstone is the by-products from the blasting operation in open-cut mining. It is often located at the top of the coal seam, which needs to be stripped and disposed in the adjacent dump Although the use of waste materials for geopolymer synthesis has been studied to a certain degree, the synthesis of geopolymer from refuse mudstone, GGBS and red mud has not been well investigated. Thus, this approach regrading the feasibility of refuse mudstone, GGBS, and red mud based geopolymer to recycle solid wastes and reduce cement consumption is certainly worth exploring. The mechanical and microstructural properties of geopolymer composites were investigated using unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests, Brazil tensile tests, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) tests. The effect of refuse mudstone content and sodium silicate (SS) content was also studied. This study extends recent efforts to recycle solid wastes as the precursor materials for geopolymer and can provide guiding significance for both the academia and industry. The refuse mudstone was sampled from the refuse dump in Datangbaoli open-cut mine, Inner Mongolia, China. After being transported to China University of Mining and Technology (CUMT), it was crushed and ground to ensure the particle diameter is less than 1 mm. The refuse mudstone was then dried at 100 ℃ for 24 h. GGBS was obtained commercially, which undergoes 24 h’ dry at 100 ℃ and 10 min’ crushing. The red mud used in this study was obtained from Shangdong Aluminium Industry Co. LTD, Zibo, China. A series of crushing, grounding and seizing operations were conducted on the red mud to obtain the homogeneous red mud samples. All aforementioned materials were analyzed for grain size distribution (GSD), oxide compositions and mineralogy/morphology. The GSD was investigated using a BT-9300HT laser analyzer, the oxide composition was analyzed using X-ray fluorescence (S8, TIGER) and the mineralogy/morphology was investigated using X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, D8 ADVANCE).  In contrast to the XRD of refuse mudstone ( The ISO standard sand (with a SiO Geopolymer was synthesized using refuse mudstone, GGBS and red mud with the water glass being used as the alkaline activator. In the following, the mixture of refuse mudstone, GGBS and red mud is referred to as the geopolymer solid mixture (GSM). To investigate the influence of refuse mudstone, the content of refuse mudstone within the GSM (denoted as P) was varied from 30% to 70% with a 10% interval. The GGBS to red mud ratio was fixed at 7:3. Moreover, the content of alkaline activators was also changed according to the GSM (denoted as Q at 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and 30%). For the geopolymer composites, the water content, including water in the solution, was fixed at 0.5 and the GSM: sand was fixed at 1:1. Thus, a total of 25 experimental scenarios were investigated in the current study. Each experimental scenario was conducted in three times and the average was used for analysis. The mixing proportion of the experiments is provided in Table S1 of the The GSM was mixed homogeneously using the mixer before adding the alkaline activator. Then the alkaline activator was mixed with the GSM for 3 min. After that, standard sand was added to the mixture, followed by another 3 min’ mixing. The mixture was cast into plastic molds (diameter = mm and height = 100 mm). The prepared molds underwent vibration for 1 min and placed in the curing box (temperature = 20 ± 1 ℃ and humidity >90%). All specimens were cured for 28 days before mechanical and microstructural testing. Unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests were conducted in accordance with ASTM C39. The MTS-815 hydraulic pressure servo machine was used. The specimens were loaded in a displacement way. The strain-rate was selected to be 0.02 mm/min until the failure of specimens. The axial deformation and stress were recorded using a data acquisition system as the specimen was loaded. Brazil tensile strength (BTS) tests were conducted using the YAW-300C hydraulic servo machine. The procedures suggested in ASTM D 3976 were followed during the BTS testing. Briefly, the specimens were placed on their sides to ensure the long axis was perpendicular to the load direction. Then, specimens were loaded at a constant loading rate of 100 N/s. The tensile stresses at the failure of specimens were considered as their corresponding BTSs. SEM tests were performed using a Quanta 250 SEM analyzer. The fractured specimens from the UCS tests were impregnated in an EPO-TEK 301 epoxy resin to preserve the microstructure. After that, the specimens were ground, lapped and polished with caution and coated with a layer of gold-palladium. Finally, the prepared specimens were placed in the vacuum chamber of the Quanta 250 for SEM analysis.  The influence of P on the UCS of geopolymer composites could be analyzed as follows. In contrast to GGBS and red mud, the mineralogy in refuse mudstone is crystalline. However, the reactive phases in geopolymerization process are mainly amorphous phases The influence of Q on the UCS and ε With the decrease of Q, the change of UCS was not identical for difference P values. For example, the UCS of Q = 30%, Q = 25%, Q = 20%, Q = 15, and Q = 10% was 17.87 MPa, 18.14 MPa, 23.86 MPa, 23.45 MPa, and 22.80 MPa, respectively, at P = 30%. It seems that the UCS was increased first followed by a slight decrease. However, the UCS was changed to 16.21 MPa, 16.16 MPa, 14.37 MPa, 14.84 MPa, and 17.79 MPa at P = 50%, implying the UCS was decreased first and then increased. Similar conclusions could also be obtained for the influence of Q on the ε The Q influence on the geopolymer composites is mainly derived from the following mechanisms. For one thing, an increase of Q represents more water glass content to activate the precursor materials. More atoms will be dissolved in the aqueous solution and the geopolymerization process is enhanced     It can be seen that the microstructure of geopolymer composites was compact. The geopolymer gel was able to connect solid particles and seal the void spaces in the composite system. The overall porosity was greatly decreased due to the geopolymerization process, leading to a relatively high UCS. Also, the compact microstructure of geopolymer composites was the reason for its low permeability. Compared with geopolymer composites, the microstructure of CPB composites had a large number of pores or voids, leading to the relatively low strength and high permeability. SEM was also used to analyze the fracture of geopolymer composites. As discussed before, the amorphous phases are more reactive than the crystal phases in the geopolymerization process. In the current study, the amorphous phases were mainly contributed by the GGBS and red mud, especially GGBS as shown in  The microstructural analysis was also performed on geopolymer specimens after the BTS tests with similar conclusions obtained. The microstructural analysis confirmed the mechanical properties at the micro-scale and provided potential reasons for the influence of P and Q. In the current study, the mechanical and microstructural properties of geopolymer composites were investigated. The geopolymer composites were synthesized with a mixture of refuse mudstone, GGBS and red mud, which was activated using the water glass solution. A series of UCS, BTS and SEM tests were conducted to explore the mechanical and microstructural properties under the coupled effect of refuse mudstone content (P) and alkaline activator content (Q). Based on the results obtained in the current study, the following conclusions can be drawn: The geopolymer composites could achieve the highest UCS of 23.48 MPa (P = 30% and Q = 25%) and the highest BTS of 2.98 MPa (P = 30% and Q = 10), indicating it is viable to use refuse mudstone, GGBS and red mud for the synthesis of geopolymer. The content of refuse mudstone had a significant influence on the stress–strain curves of geopolymer composites during the UCS tests. The ductility of geopolymer composites was increased with the increase of P. Generally speaking, the UCS was decreased while the ε The influence of Q on the UCS and ε The influence of P and Q on the UCS and BTS of geopolymer composites was supported by the failure mode analysis. With the increase of P, more connected cracks were observed during the UCS and BTS tests. In contrast, the influence of Q on the failure mode of geopolymer composites was not clear and evident. Compared with CPB composites, the microstructure of geopolymer composites was compact, leading to the relatively high strength and small permeability. SEM analysis confirmed the mechanical properties at the micro-scale and provided potential reasons for the influence of P and Q. In the future, systematic durability tests (i.e., water permeability test, adsorption tests, accelerated acid tests, and rapid chloride permeability test) should be carefully conducted before the industrial utilization of the proposed geopolymer.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financially supported by the The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: