Nature materials constituted with organic and inorganic components have hierarchical structure and superior performance. Although a variety of techniques have been developed to mimic microstructure and properties of natural mineralized materials, facile and rapid fabrication of large-size bulk materials with high calcium content under ambient conditions still remains a major challenge. Here, we present a feasible and versatile route to a highly mineralized material with an in situ preparation method where gelation and mineralization occur simultaneously. Meanwhile, hierarchically ordered hydrogel microstructures are formed during the gelation, and controllable inorganic gradient distribution forms along with mineralization spontaneously. With the achievement of high mineral content by the assistance of urea, this fabrication route is facile and efficient, only taking several hours to complete the gelation and mineralization, and large-scale materials are prepared readily. This chitosan matrix-directed mineralization represents a rational and promising strategy for fast fabrication of highly mineralized material with hierarchical structure on a large scale, and the chitosan-based mineralized material has great potential for applications in bone repairing and tissue engineering.A wide range of organic-inorganic hybrid materials have been produced by nature with sophisticated structures and superior performance. Among these natural biological materials, nacre of mollusk shell has attracted considerable attention from material scientists and engineers ( The design of hierarchical structure derived from biological structures is expected to provide a feasible path to develop excellent structural materials ( Gradient materials have broad application prospects in many fields. The teeth, joints, and bones made of functionally gradient materials enable the smooth transition of inorganic material to the organic material, ensuring the integrity of material bonding, and making the material light in weight, good in toughness and high in hardness. The present work reports a feasible synthetic route to a high-calcium-content mineralized material that forms sophisticated hydrogel microstructure during Through However, in order to satisfy the conditions of Transparency was applied to test the critical value of urea dosage in different systems, and factors influencing this value are manifold. When [m(CS):m(CaCO Introduction of urea or other organic compounds proves to be the most effective way to eliminate precipitates arising from high calcium content, while it is of equal significance to confirm whether the stability effect of urea can last during the whole process of There are two main reasons of urea eliminating precipitates in high calcium content chitosan solution. Firstly, the introduction of urea contributes to an increase in the total volume of the system ( Based on the above experiments and discussion, thiourea seems to be the most effective additive to eliminate precipitation in our system. However, thiourea has certain biological toxicity and can cause physiological reactions such as a goitrogenic effect (enlargement of the thyroid gland). And urea has good biocompatibility and the human body produces urea during the metabolic process. Thus, urea is chosen as the material aims at applications in biomedical field. We developed a rapid and versatile process to produce a mineralized material by an In living organisms, bio-macromolecules or organic matrices can regulate inorganic crystallization, including nucleation, growth, phase transformation, orientation and assembly, affecting its morphology and even polymorph ( The cross-section of chitosan-based hybrid material shows some typical structures, including orientation structure and multi-layer structure ( The morphology of calcite crystals in hydrogel prepared by using Ca(CH It is obvious that a large number of calcite spheres and clusters of spheres appear near the top surface, while there are gradually decreasing numbers of them away from the surface, and the size of each single sphere decreases from top to bottom at the same time ( The morphology of the samples prepared by coagulation baths with different In two-step method, when Two main reasons are responsible for the precipitate elimination effect of urea and other organic compounds. The introduction of additives increases the volume of the solution and the distance between macromolecular cations and chloride ions, which can alleviate electrostatic interaction to a certain extent. More importantly, the formation of hydrogen bonds between urea and chitosan plays a vital role. Urea can be proton donor as well as acceptor, and its ability to form hydrogen bond with macromolecules is strong, decelerating the formation of inter/intramolecular hydrogen bonds among chitosan chains ( The distribution of inorganic content in hybrid materials is not uniform ( Considering the facts that inorganic substances are formed The reason of calcium ion enrichment and eventually inorganic gradient distribution may be local concentration difference caused by the ordered gelation process. When the calcium ions get close to the sol-gel interface, they are converted into sediment, and the local calcium ions concentration decreases, and then the calcium ions below migrate upwards under the concentration gradient. The ion migration is sufficient when We present a simple yet versatile Chitosan (CS) raw materials: 1) M NaOH, urea, acetic acid, anhydrous sodium carbonate, anhydrous calcium chloride, calcium acetate, monosodium phosphate, guanidine hydrochloride, acetamide, thiourea and ethylenediamine were all purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Fluorescein iso-thiocyanate (FITC) was purchased from Sigma Chemical Company. Fluorescein iso-thiocyanate-labelled chitosan (FITC-CS) was prepared following the preparation procedure reported in literature ( Firstly, chitosan/calcium ions solution was prepared. Chitosan solution was formulated; anhydrous calcium chloride or calcium acetate powder, as the source of calcium, was added to pure chitosan solution to form mixture solution, and the added amount was calculated by the mass ratio of chitosan to calcium carbonate corresponded to calcium ions content, denoted by [m(CS):m(CaCO We prepared hydrogels in single-sided opening mould. The preparation can be divided into “two-step” and “one-step” method. The detailed procedures of “two-step” method are as follows: above-mentioned solution was poured into single-sided opening mould, and the mould was immersed in coagulation bath containing 10.0 wt.% NaOH until fully gelated; then it was transferred to conversion bath containing 5.0 wt.% Na Calcium hydroxide/chitosan hydrogel was prepared without conversion treatment; the conversion bath of calcium phosphate/chitosan hydrogel was 5.0 We studied the critical amount of urea Light transmittance was measured by WGT-S Haze and Luminous Transmittance Instrument at room temperature. The size of cuvette used was 10 mm × 40 mm × 40 mm. Hydrogel formation rate was calculated by gelation time and gel thickness. The reaction started as soon as the mold was immersed in the coagulation bath. The gel thickness was the distance between the initial gel layer and the gel-sol interface, and was determined by a vernier caliper. Coagulation baths we used were X-ray powder diffraction tests were carried out by Bruker AXS D8 Advance X-ray (40 kV, 34 mA, Cu K Thermo gravimetric analysis of hybrid materials was carried out by Perkin Elmer, Pyris 6 TG analyzer with a heating rate of 20 °C min Samples were sliced as the method shown in We detected the concentration of calcium ions during gelation with atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Sample 1 was chitosan/calcium solution without gelation, while sample 2, 3 and 4 were sampled during gelation. Several parallel samples were prepared and gelated, and we suspended gelation when their gel thickness reached 1/4, 1/2 and 3/4 of the mould respectively; then the gel layers were separated from unreacted solution and abandoned, and the remaining solution was tested. Samples were only immersed in coagulation bath without conversion bath treatment. All samples were prepared with critical urea amount and [m(CS): m(CaCO Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and confocal laser scanning fluorescence microscope (CLSM) were adopted to analyse the morphology of hydrogel samples. For SEM observation, hydrogel samples were freeze-dried and gold-sprayed for conductance. While in CLSM studies, hydrogel samples were prepared with FITC-CS and kept wet during observation. HITACHI S-4800 SEM and Leica TCS SP5 CLSM were used for above-mentioned observation. This work was financially supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: