Introduction
                  This is a prospective study that verifies the usefulness of retrograde intramedullary nailing (IMN) combined with ‘independent’ compression bolts in the management of type C (AO/OTA classification) fractures of the distal femur.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Within a period of 4 years, 17 patients (mean age of 54 years) with intra-articular fractures of the distal femur (type C according to AO/OTA classification) were treated with retrograde IMN and compression condylar bolts. The patients followed an early mobilisation and weight-bearing protocol.
               
                  Results
                  All fractures healed in a mean time of 14.78 weeks with no incidences of malunion, nonunion or infections. No secondary failure of fixation occurred. Partial weight bearing was initiated in average 6.35 weeks postoperatively whilst full weight bearing in 14.6 weeks. The patients regained full extension and 117.22° of mean flexion of the knee joint while the mean New Oxford knee score was 42.05.
               
                  Conclusions
                  In the treatment of type C fractures of the distal femur, the combination of retrograde nailing and ‘independent’ compression condylar bolt (inserted prior to the nailing) provided a strong fixation that facilitated uncomplicated outcomes and uneventful early mobilisation.Complex intra-articular fractures of the distal femur (type C according to the AO/ASIF classification) As a result, the non-operative treatment has been abandoned and, over the last few decades, intra-articular fractures of the distal femur are treated surgically, regardless of the age of the patient. Open or closed plating techniques and intramedullary nailing (IMN) have been the treatment options with the minimal invasive plating osteosynthesis (MIPO) and retrograde nailing to dominate, as both methods offer biological fixation and enhanced biomechanical properties. The present prospective study was based on the hypothesis that compression bolts can secure the inter-condylar fracture, in the reduced position prior to the insertion of the nail. Stable fixation of the condylar fracture will allow accurate selection of the site for the entrance hole, uncomplicated opening with the penetrating awl, uneventful reaming and nail insertion ( Between January 2006 and February 2010, 17 patients (nine men and eight women) with 18 closed, non-pathological intra-articular fractures of the distal femur were treated in our department with retrograde IMN and compression bolts. One patient suffered bilateral inter-supracondylar fractures. The median age was 54 years (range, 26–85 years). Fourteen injuries resulted from motor vehicle accident, while three from simple fall. According to AO/OTA classification, The patient is positioned supine on the operating table under general or spinal anesthetic. A radiolucent support is positioned underneath the fractured distal femur to keep the knee joint in 30–40° of flexion, while the theatre table allows radiographic imaging of the whole leg (up to the hip joint). The other leg is elevated to allow undisturbed access to the injured femur. If not already in situ, a 5-mm Steinmann pin is introduced in the proximal tibia to facilitate reduction of the fracture through traction, applied during the operation, by an assistant. If there is intra-articular displacement, traction and external manipulation manoeuvres can lead to reduction. If displacement persists, a large reduction forceps or a pelvic clamp can be used percutaneously, to facilitate reduction ( Eleven fractures were treated with the supracondylar nail (SCN, Stryker, Germany) whilst the seven last cases with the T2 supracondylar nail (Stryker). Compression bolts (Stryker) were used in all cases for the fixation of the inter-condylar fracture prior to the insertion of the nail. In seven cases, bolts were inserted through the nail as well, either because of severe osteoporosis or because of the fracture comminution, for additional stability. Fifteen fractures were reduced percutaneously with the use of a heavy pointed forceps while in three cases reduction of the intra-articular fracture was performed by open means with a small incision that did not extend beyond the condylar area. In two cases, medio-lateral ‘blocking’ screws were used to optimise the closed reduction of the supracondylar part of the fracture. Freeze-dried bone graft was used in two initial cases with significant medial comminution while its use was abandoned to all subsequent cases, regardless of the fracture pattern, as we felt that bone graft was not necessary in acute fractures that were treated by closed means. The three patients who had sustained ‘floating’ knee injuries underwent nailing to both femoral and tibial fractures through the same incision ( Postoperatively, knee mobilisation was initiated on the second postoperative day under physiotherapist supervision. Patient's mobilisation was encouraged simultaneously with touch weight bearing. Five patients were not able to follow this protocol because of accompanying injuries. Patients with C1 or C2 fractures without concomitant injuries were encouraged to start partial weight bearing between 4 and 6 weeks, once early callus formation was noted and they proceeded to fully weight bearing by 10–18 weeks. Patients with C3 type of fracture ( Patients were followed up in the clinic for clinical and radiological examination at 4–6-week intervals until fracture consolidation occurred and the range of motion of the knee joint was considered satisfactory. The fracture was considered united when bridging callus and elimination of fracture lines were noted on X-rays and the patient could fully weight bear without discomfort. The overall functional outcome was assessed with the New Oxford Knee score at the final follow-up. In addition, the range of movement (ROM) of the knee joint was measured and patients’ subjective opinion or complaints were recorded. Mean operation time was 96 Apart from the two patients with severe head injury, all others returned to their pre-injury routine activities. No complaints were recorded concerning knee joint or skin irritation because of the compression bolts. None of the 17 patients wanted to have the metalwork removed. Patients’ characteristics and functional outcomes are described in Intra-articular fractures of the distal femur were treated in the past with surgical techniques that were based on the concept of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). To the best of our knowledge, our series is the first prospective study that evaluates the combined use of retrograde IMN and ‘independent’ compression bolts in the treatment of type C distal femoral fractures, according to AO/OTA classification. In previous relevant studies, Selection of a ‘short’ or ‘long’ nail depends on fracture configuration and extension towards the femoral diaphysis. Whenever the fracture pattern allowed positioning of the most distal from the two proximal locking screws at least 3–4 The combined use of compression bolts and retrograde nailing allowed early mobilisation of the knee joint and the patient. Moreover, it permitted early weight bearing. It is characteristic that the mean time for partial and full weight bearing for all patients was 6.35 and 14.6 weeks, respectively. The mean time was even lower for patients with no co-morbidities (5.14 and 12.6 weeks) and even lower for patients with C1 and C2 type of fractures and no co-morbidities (4 and 11 weeks). The time to weight bear in our series was found to be better than previous series, Limitations of our study include the small number of patients and the lack of a control study group treated with an alternative technique. However, type C distal femoral fractures are not frequent and, therefore, a prospective study that could include substantial number of patients or prospective organisation of a comparison study does not appear a realistic project for a single trauma centre. Furthermore, apart from presenting our experience with the management of type C distal femoral fractures, we aimed to present our proposal regarding the use of the compression bolts not only as a supplementary distal locking option but also as “independent” fixation tool. We believe that the present study reinforces the usefulness of retrograde nailing in the treatment of complex intra-articular fractures of the distal femur. It appears that fixation of the condyles with an ‘independent’ compression bolt prior to nail insertion offers significant advantages. However, our proposal should be verified with additional clinical and biomechanical studies for definitive conclusions and future perspectives. The authors of this manuscript have no financial or personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work, to disclose.