The scaled boundary finite element method (SBFEM) coupled with the finite element method (FEM) for the simulation of the interaction problem between the elastic plate structure and the multi-layered unbounded elastic soil is first developed in this paper. First, the whole system is subdivided into three sub-domains, including the semi-infinite far-field system, the near-field sub-domain, and the plate structure. The far field of the soil is modeled by utilizing the modified scaled boundary finite element method with a scaling line instead of the scaling center used in the traditional SBFEM. In the traditional SBFEM, only the boundary is discretized with surface elements, so the spatial dimension is reduced by one, and the final governing equation can be solved analytically in the radial direction of the scaled coordinate system, and it can exactly meet the infinite domain problem. The stiffness matrix of the three-dimensional (3D) near field is obtained using the standard FEM. The SBFEM is also applied in order to simulate the deformation characteristics of the plate structure based on the 3D elastic equation without introducing any assumption of the thin plate theory, and the high-order spectral element is introduced in order to discretize the middle surface of plate so that the complicated curved boundaries can be better represented. Then, according to the principle of the degree of freedom matching at the same node, the global stiffness matrix of the plate-soil system can be obtained by coupling the stiffness matrices of the sub-domains at the far-field/near-field interface, as well as at the plate/near-field interface. Thus, the response of the whole system under the external load can be solved naturally. Four numerical examples, consisting of a square plate resting on an isotropic soil, multi-layered soil with weak and thin interlayer, a plate with a different geometrical shape and a square plate with a hole, are provided in order to validate the accuracy and versatility of the proposed formulations.Soil-foundation interaction is an important problem in the design of foundation structures in large civil engineering projects. The foundations of lifeline projects, such as nuclear power plants, dams, and high-rise buildings, can be regarded as plate structures. Therefore, the study of the interaction between a plate and soil is of great significance for engineering practice. Over the past decades, there has been a large amount of significance research work in the literature dealing with the simulation of the interaction between plate and soil. The plate-soil interaction problem can be studied using analytical approaches. For examples, Mehmet et al. In addition to analytical methods, the finite element method (FEM), the boundary element method (BEM), the finite difference methods As mentioned above, the plate-foundation interaction problem has been well investigated by many researches. However, in order to overcome the difficulties in coupling the plate and soil together, a simplified foundation model, such as Winkler foundation or two-parameter foundation, has been introduced by most of the published papers mentioned above, which may cause the foundation to be inaccurate. However, relatively few publications have reported on plates resting on multi-layered soil, which are widely used in practical engineering. Thus, this paper aims to numerically study the interaction problem between the plate structures and the 3D soil layer, and both the plate and the layered medium are simulated by introducing a semi-analytical approach called the scaled boundary finite element method (SBFEM) In this paper, based on the works included in References A plate resting on 3D multi-layered soil that is infinite in the horizontal direction is illustrated in The basic equation of the 3D theory of elasticity for the Cartesian coordinates Applying the matrix representation of Hooke’s law, the stress-strain relationship can be expressed as In this paper, to facilitate the derivation of formulas, the relevant descriptions of the plate structure are consistent with the descriptions presented in References The detailed description and the derivation process of the SBFEM governing equation for the far field are similar to those described in As illustrated in By introducing the Jacobian matrix The transformation of the differential operators in Eq. Applying the method of weighted residuals to derive the weak form of the differential in Eq. Introducing the coefficient matrices For the solution of the static stiffness matrix of the far field, an eigenvalue problem is introduced that represents the most significant difference between the proposed formulations and those presented in Reference From Eq. Then the second derivative of the displacement can be further obtained By placing Eqs. Introducing the dependent variables In order to solve the first order ordinary differential equation Then the general solution of or in a component form For the unbounded far field, the displacement must be a finite value at infinity, i.e., At the boundary However, the external force By combining Eqs. The stiffness matrix of the near field Substituting Eq. In Eq. Referring to the references Then the final SBFEM governing equations in displacement with respect to the radial coordinate axis As shown in Eq. The first-order ordinary differential Eq. At the bottom surface When Similarly, combining Eqs. Substituting Eq. Eq. In order to couple the static stiffness matrix between the soil system and the plate structure, the stiffness of the near field is first condensed to the interface between the near field and the plate. Eq. In Finally, the plate structure is considered as the research object. Thus, the plate-soil interaction problem can be formulated as Substituting Eq. As a result, the displacement of a plate that is resting on the 3D unbounded layered soil under the external loads can be calculated. In this section, four different numerical examples are presented by employing the proposed formulations for the investigation of the interaction problem between the plate structures and the 3D multi-layered soil. A square plate resting on an isotropic soil layer is considered as the first example in order to verify the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed approach with the known analytical solution, which is presented in Reference In practical engineering, a weak and thin interlayer, in which both the thickness and the material parameters are relatively small, often appears in a multi-layered soil system. In this example, the effect of the weak and thin interlayer on the response of a three-layered soil-plate system is investigated. Three influence factors, including the Young’s modulus, the thickness, and the location of the weak and thin interlayer are taken into account. The plate, with the length and width First, the response of a plate on multi-layered soil with different Young’s moduli of the weak and thin interlayers was considered. The parameters of the soil are presented in  In summary, a weak and thin interlayer produced a negligible effect on the response of the plate-soil system, especially when the material parameters are relatively small and the range of action is relatively big. Thus, building structures on soil with weak and thin interlayers should be avoided in practical engineering. The deformation responses of plates with different geometrical shapes supported on the layered soil due to a uniformly distributed external load employed at the top surface are studied in this example. The square, circular and elliptical plates with areas of The deflections along the axle wires of the plates are obtained for different geometrical shapes, and the results are illustrated in For the last example, a square plate with a hole, resting on layered soil, is addressed. The same parameters for the plate and soil layer as in In this example, the maximum values of the deflection are obtained at the points A, B and C as presented in In this study, the interaction problem between the plate structures and the 3D multi-layered unbounded soils is investigated by coupling the SBFEM and the FEM. The entire system was divided into three sub-domains, that is, the far field, the near field, and the plate structure. Both the plate and the multi-layered far field are simulated using SBFEM, while the stiffness matrix of the near field is obtained using the traditional finite element method. Then the static response equation with respect to the displacement is established by coupling the sub-domains together based on the principle of the degree of freedom matching at the same node. The accuracy and efficiency of the proposed formulation are demonstrated by comparing the results of the limiting cases with the analytical solution. Several numerical examples are also parametrically investigated based on the present scheme, in which the weak and thin interlayers, the geometrical shape, and the hole were taken into account. The numerical results show that the weak and thin interlayers produce a negligible effect on the response of the plate-soil system, especially when the material parameters were relatively small and the range of action is relatively big. At the same time, the holes and the geometrical shapes of the plates also give rise to a significant influence on the response of the system. This research was supported by Grants 51779033 and 51409038 from the