Cassiterite, the principal ore of tin, contains a considerable amount of niobium and tantalum, which are rejected in the tin smelter slag. Therefore, the tin slag should be considered as an important source of niobium and tantalum, particularly when the reserves of the principal ores of these two metals, are very limited in nature. Because of the increasing demand and very high value of these two metals, it has been necessary to develop a suitable process to recover niobium and tantalum from tin smelting slag. In view of certain advantages of chloride metallurgy, the authors have carried out some studies on chlorination of tin slag by gaseous chlorine in presence of carbon, hydrochloric acid leaching and chlorination by carbon tetrachloride vapor, at a comparatively low temperature and partial pressure, to recover the metal values, particularly niobium and tantalum. In this paper, based on thermodynamics and kinetics of these chlorination processes, the recovery of Nb and Ta and some associated metals has been briefly described and discussed. Based on the findings of the chlorination studies made, some further investigations for recovering niobium and tantalum from tin slags have been suggested.The use of metallurgical residues as an alternative raw material has been the subject of several studies ( The metallurgy industry has been a continuous focus in terms of generating gaseous emission, liquid effluent or solid residue and, therefore, has improved its waste treatment as well as has put an effort in developing new recovery processes. There are several examples mentioned in the specialized literature to be applied in the steel making ( The present work would not have enough space to cover all these initiatives and then will be concentrated on the studies carried out by the authors and colleagues on chlorine processes applied to a variety of tin slags. In that context, this paper will describe the slag main characteristics as well as some thermodynamics and experimental results related to the studied chemical reaction and their conversion levels. Cassiterite is the most important tin bearing mineral and it is characterized, usually, by the presence of elements such as tantalum and niobium in its crystalline structure. During the extraction and refining stages of the tin production, the great part of such elements migrates for the final slag of the industrial process. Also, depending on the raw material composition, of the cassiterite itself and of the factory operational conditions, the slags will be generated with different compositions. Such slags can already be considered as an eventual and important source of such refractory metals as tantalum and niobium. The presence of zirconium can also happen in consequence, for example, of the zirconite existence in the original raw material. It is interesting to observe a certain similarity among those identified by D, E and F. On the other hand, it can be noticed that the niobium and tantalum oxides composition can oscillate between 23.0% (maximum) and 1.3% (minimum), respectively, as well as the presence of zirconium oxide can either be not characterized or to be relatively high. Titanium dioxide is present in all different samples and also brings a certain recovery interest. Microscopy studies indicated that niobium and tantalum tend to associate with calcium, sodium and/or titanium in segregated areas where the iron content is below than its average in the whole sample. It is also identified vitreous and non-vitreous phases. The A, B, C and D slag samples were subjected to experimental investigation through different chemical methods in order to study the recovery possibilities of the refractory metals and the results are presented as well as discussed in this work. The chemical processing of the slag can be characterized by an attempt of either to increase the tantalum and niobium content in a new material or to recover these elements through reactions based on roasting and/or leaching. A typical example of the first hypothesis involves the implementation of preferential reduction reactions of part of the slags in order to generate a new material mainly constituted of iron, tantalum and niobium. In this case, it is of fundamental importance to submit to high temperatures a defined mixture of slag, iron and a reducing agent such as carbon. The obtained alloy would make possible the use of the recovered refractory metals.  On the other hand, the recovery of the refractory metals can be tried through roasting or leaching reactions. In the hydrometallurgy case, it is well known that HF is a reagent with great dissolution efficiency while the HCl can be used as a selective reagent, increasing the tantalum and niobium oxides content in the remaining solid. In respect to roasting operations  In function of the exposed discussion, the selected experimental procedures were leaching with HCl and chlorination roasting using Cl The leaching was carried out in a 500 The chlorination tests were conducted at independent and different apparatus. The results with the slag C is described in reference ( The experiments with carbon tetrachloride were accomplished in a dedicated device which is described together with the experimental procedure in references ( The samples utilized in all chlorination tests were in the agglomerate form. The slag and the residues obtained after chlorination were analyzed by atomic absorption and X-ray fluorescence as well as X-ray diffraction, optic and electronic microscopy seeking to identify the composition and the present phases, respectively. A sample of the slag A was submitted to HCl leaching as previously described. It was observed a slag weight dissolution of 57% accompanied by a 93.5% iron solubility in respect to the initially iron content. In function of those results it was calculated that 95.5% and 93.9% of the niobium and tantalum oxides remained insoluble, respectively. It was also observed a significant increase in the TiO Although the recoveries of the oxides of interest are relatively high, the obtained material can still not be characterized as attractive, unless it was considered for further composition enhancing through posterior chemical treatments. The slags identified as A, B and C were submitted to carbochlorination roasting at temperatures that oscillated in the range between 600 It was observed that, since a minimum percentage of reducing agent (carbon) was kept in the initial mixture, this operational variable does not significantly influence the conversion levels of the oxides present in the slag. Discreet exception for this evidence is materialized in the chlorination tests carried out in the inferior levels of temperature. Both temperature and reaction time are the most important variables in terms of determining the oxides conversion levels. For example, 30 Aiming a comparison among the behavior of the mentioned slags (A, B and C) when submitted to the carbochlorination roasting process and considering the previous observations, the following discussions will be taken to effect on the basis of the experimental results obtained for runs carried out at 800    Initially, it is interesting to observe that the percentage associated with the total weight loss in the experiments with the slag A tends to be significantly smaller than those obtained for the other slags. Such fact is due to the use of charcoal, which presents a larger volatiles percentage in its structure when compared to pure graphite and due to a major participation of oxides whose formed chlorides present high boiling points such as Ca and Mg. It is also noticed that this slag possesses the highest Fe The slag reacted percentage is obtained after removal of the non-volatile chlorides and calcination. In this case, it can be noticed ( The formation of non-volatile chlorides is also responsible for a sample weight increase in the chlorination initial moments, indicating that their reactions tend to be faster in comparison to the others chlorides formation. Such fact results in a discreet increase of the Nb The results presented in Through the experimental results it was also possible to observe that the oxides are transformed into chlorides in different rates. For instance, for the slag A, while calcium oxide reacts rapidly, the silica reaction is much slower. In the case of TiO Experiments with carbon-tetrachloride were carried out with the slag D in the temperature range of 510 and 650 A kinetics approach was developed including a mechanism proposition for the initial and final chlorination periods. Besides the effect of both temperature and time of reaction on the conversions levels it was observed a significant influence of the slag particle size and also of the carbon-tetrachloride partial pressure. For example, the granulometry decrease from −100, +140  It can be observed that for 35.0% of the slag reacted, the conversion levels of the refractory metals oxides are about or greater than 80.0%. It is also interesting to call attention for the fact that, within the applied experimental conditions range, the maximum weight loss obtained for the slag was 38% (−200, +270 In function of factors that are out of this work purpose the carbon-tetrachloride large scale use should only be considered after some complementary considerations. Tin slags generated by different industries, in different moments, are characterized by the presence of refractory metals oxides, whose composition can vary significantly, in particular, in the Nb Microscopic characterizations of the slags indicate the presence of a vitreous silicate complex phase and a dissemination of a calcium–sodium–niobium–tantalum content compound. These niobites–tantalites, under certain experimental conditions, were found to be inert to the applied chlorination agent such as HCl, Cl The HCl leaching showed a relative selectivity but it has not generated a material with attractive characteristics in comparison to the existent composition range of the original slags. An acid leaching of the tin slag A can dissolve most of the iron increasing the Nb and Ta pentoxide content from 3.3% and 4.1% to 7.2% and 8.4%, respectively. Chlorination roasting, in the presence of a reducing agent, makes possible the recovery of all the metal value oxides. The experimental results indicate that, for any of the available tin slags, a 40 The reaction of the various oxides present in the tin slags occurs to different extend in the following sequence. Slag A: Ca The carbon-tetrachloride roasting can also react with tin slags and transform a significant amount of their refractory metal oxides into volatile chlorides. Finally, it is important to point out that, although it seems reasonable the use of the chlorination method for the recovery of refractory metals from tin slags as their chloride and oxy-chlorides mixtures, it is the fundamental importance a study that defines the further chemical processing of this mixture. For such, it should be taken in consideration the nature of the desired final product and its possible uses.