This paper presents the results of research on mechanical activation of raw talc in a high-energy speed rotary mechanoactivator. The results of research on effect of mechanically activated talc on the degree of recovery Fe2O3 by hydrometallurgical method are also presented. The process and mechanism of mechanical activation in this type of mechanoactivator were achieved by impact.
                  The variable parameters of the mechanoactivator operation were: rate of rotor revolutions (n
                     0
                     =10,000 and n
                     0
                     =20,000rpm), circle sieve mesh (80, 120, 200 and 500μm) and the current intensity. The following parameters of the dry mechanical activation process were studied: mechanical activation time, rotor speed, mechanoactivator capacity and specific energy consumption. The mechanically activated powder was examined by application of differential thermal and thermogravimetric analyses, analysis of the degree of mechanical activation and the specific surface area as well.
                  According to the obtained results, the highest rate of mechanical activation was obtained with a nominal mechanoactivator load. The degree of mechanical activation increases with increasing the rate of rotor revolution, circle sieve mesh size and with the increasing mechanoactivator load. It was shown that high-grade talc concentrate with low content of Fe2O3 can be obtained by physical-chemical process. A new approach for obtaining high-grade talc concentrate was achieved trough mechanically activated talc effect on the degree of recovery of Fe2O3 by hydrometallurgical process.In industrial conditions the advanced materials must comply with certain quality standards. The special requirement of advanced materials is the size, in which case the requirements reach a nanosize range. Due to low mill capacity (kg/h) and high energy consumption, production of particles in ultra-fine size range is an extremely difficult and expensive process. Due to these facts, the optimal ratio Talc is non-metallic raw material with exceptional physical–chemical characteristics, which is virtually irreplaceable in many industrial applications. The general applications of talc are found in production of paints, ceramics, cast products, rubber, cables, paper, lead, pharmaceutical products, insecticides, herbicides, as well as in civil engineering, military industry and other areas (totalling over 80 applications). The fundamental characteristics of minerals of talc are: white color, softness, greasiness, refractoriness, proneness to fragmentation, etc. These characteristics make talc minerals attractive for using. The conventional method for talc processing (comminution, classifying, and flotation) cannot always provide a high-grade talc concentrate. Despite this fact, the conventional method can satisfy the requirements in industries such as: ceramics, chemistry, pharmacy, cosmetics, paints and varnishes. This problem can be partly overcome by introducing the process of mechanical activation by application of different types of mechanoactivators. During the last decade, the ultra-fine grinding method used in different types of mechanoactivators such as: stirred media mill, jet mill, planetary mill, vibratory mill, and mortar mill was studied intensively. It was known that the grinding and sonication treatments could modify intrinsic characteristics of material. In this case, the special attention was paid to evaluation of possible changes during ultra-fine grinding process It was shown that the parameters such as: hardness, crystallographic structure, and Young's Modulus directly affected breakage mechanism of the dolomite and talc phase. These parameters have experimentally demonstrated mechanochemical effect of dolomitic talc during fine grinding process in a mortar grinder. Also, mechanochemical treatment can improve the amorphization of talc and it is greatly favorable to the subsequent leaching Hydrometallurgy is an area suitable for successful verification of the knowledge accumulated by mechanical activation of minerals. In these processes, the introduction of a mechanical activation into technological cycle significantly modifies the subsequent operations Another significant factor is the mechanical activation in a planetary mill and stirred ball mill, as the pre-treatment of subsequent concentration methods, aimed at improving dissolution of mechanically activated olivine and indium-bearing zinc ferrite for carbonate purposes and sulfuric acid, respectively. In this case, mechanically activated contact surface area of the particles is crucial for diffusion-controlled reactions. At the same time, mechanical activation process was considered carefully as possible pre-treatment method for mixtures of different minerals such as: talc and magnesium carbonate, as well as for the formation of forsterite The investigations of the mechanical activation of dry talc were realized in four series of experiments. A representative sample of raw talc from the bed “Bela Stena” (middle Serbia) was used as the initial material. It has been estimated that there are 85,000 The primary crushing of the representative sample of raw talc was performed in a closed cycle which consists of the jaw crusher (output opening size 10 The essential minerals are talc and chlorite, while other minerals are magnetite, quartz and carbonates (Mg, Fe). The basic physical–chemical characteristics of raw talc sample were determined by standard laboratory procedure. The following values were achieved: density The mechanical activations were realized in high-energy-speed rotary mechanoactivator “Retsch ZM-1” The high-energy-speed rotary mechanoactivator “Retsch ZM-1” consists of a rotor made of high alloyed steel. The diameter of the rotor ( The mechanoactivator “Retsch ZM-1” can operate either continuously or discontinuously, if it is in conjunction with vibrating feeder. Reduction of course particles is being performed by dynamic counterbalance of material between the rotor and the circle sieve. The rotor cogs are formed as triangular prisms. Each of prismatic cogs is placed on its basis, while one of its sides is turned towards the circle sieve. This shape of cogs enables the stream of air and powder material. Between the rotor cogs and circle sieve there is a tolerance of 1 The process of kinetics was analyzed through the changes in the particle size distribution, respectively the specific surface area, with the time of mechanical activation. The analyses of the mechanical activation products were realized using different instrumental techniques. For detailed powder characterization (determination of the particle size distribution, the mean diameter and specific surface area of the particles) “Coulter-Electronics-Coulter Multisizer” was used. A simultaneous thermal analyzer “STA-409 EP” was used to define the thermal and thermogravimetric characteristics of the samples. X-ray structural analysis was utilized for the determination as well as observation of the phase composition of the refractory drivers. For this purpose, the X-ray diffractometer “PW-170” was utilized. The spectrochemical analysis was utilized for observation and determination of the chemical properties. For this purpose the spectrum analyzer “BOMEM MB-100 FTIR” was applied. During all experiments in all series, the process parameters of dry mechanical activation were observed: mechanical activation time ( For the characterization of the mechanical activation products the following relevant parameters were studied:        According to the kinetic model, the results obtained can be described by Rosin–Ramler–Sperling exponential function and equation Change in the size of the mean diameter of grain ( In accordance with the described exponential function, it can be noted that the mean diameter of grain ( The exponential function can be described by the following equation: In the case where the parameter ( Dependence between the parameter Solving differential equation (Eq. Further integrating, The equation in the following form is obtained: Using Eqs. The values of process parameters, technological parameters and parameters measured to observe the mechanical activation process and evaluate the quality of the mechanical activation products are given in It was noted that the current intensity increases from 1.20 to 4.00 According to the results presented in In accordance with reduction of the mechanical activation time and rotor speed ( Therefore, it could be concluded that by increasing the circle sieve mesh size, rate of rotor revolution and mechanoactivator load, the mechanical activation rate, as the main characteristic of mechanical activation kinetics, also increases. By applying the equation (Eq. The next investigation carried out was aimed at obtaining high-grade talc concentrate with low iron content (Fe The talc concentrate sample was examined by application of thermal, thermogravimetric, IC spectrochemical and X-ray diffraction analyses. The results of the X-ray, DTA, TGA and IC analyses of the talc concentrate sample are shown in The X-ray analysis indicates the presence of talc minerals, while the presence of other minerals in the talc concentrate sample was not observed (  The IC spectrum analysis of the present series shows broad and weak absorption in the range from 600 to 800 The bands of around 1090 The results of IC spectrum analysis indicate the presence (absorption) of hydrous magnesium carbonate on the surface of talc minerals. According to the results obtained in this investigation of the kinetics of the mechanical activation of talc in high-energy-speed rotary mechanoactivator, where mechanical activation is realized by impact, the following conclusions were made: Good liberation of talc particles was achieved by this type of mechanoactivator. Also, the surfaces of talc particles were well activated for the subsequent leaching treatment. The application of the mechanical activation process as pre-treatment method, was shown to directly affect the increased degree of concentration. The mechanical activation rate, as the main characteristic of mechanical activation kinetics, increased with increasing the circle sieve mesh size, rate of revolution and load of the high-energy-speed rotary mechanoactivator. The best results were obtained with a nominal mechanoactivator load. The optimum values of the process and technological parameters were defined. Based on these values, the mechanical activation products were determined. In accordance with the obtained results and derived mathematical equations, the kinetic model is provided. This model could be used for optimization and automation of mechanical activation process in high-energy-speed rotary mechanoactivator. The results obtained in this investigation of mechanical activation contribute to the interpretation of appearances and process arising during talc mechanical activation in this type of mechanoactivator. Also, these results may be useful for the introduction of these processes into practice. The iron content in concentrate was obtained in the standard range. Ignition loss of around 5% and 98% of pure talc indicated high-grade talc concentrate. The presence (absorption) of the hydrous magnesium carbonate on the surfaces of talc minerals can be explained by the fact that the talc-magnesium rocks are part of the composition of the bed “Bela Stena”. It can be concluded that the introduced mechanical activation process can significantly improve the degree of recovery either by hydrometallurgical process or by combination with other concentration method. This indicates one new approach for obtaining of high-grade talc concentrate. These investigations were conducted under the Project 33007 and 34006 funded by the