A new constitutive model is proposed for the description of induced anisotropic damage in brittle rocks. The formulation of the model is based on relevant results from micromechanics consideration. The distribution of microcracks is approximated by a second-order damage tensor. The effective elastic properties of damaged material are derived from the free enthalpy function. The evolution of damage is directly related to the growth of microcracks in different space orientations. The volumetric dilatancy due to sliding crack opening is taken into account. The model is extended to the description of creep deformation in brittle rocks. The time dependent deformation is seen as a consequence of the sub-critical propagation of microcracks due to stress corrosion process. The proposed model is applied to a typical brittle rock, the Lac du Bonnet granite. A general good agreement is obtained between numerical simulations and experimental data.total strain tensor Cauchy stress tensor deviatoric stress tensor fourth-order elastic compliance tensor of undamaged material average radius of initial cracks critical value of crack radius at failure state unit normal vector of crack crack radius in the orientation normal displacement jump through crack shear displacement jump through crack crack compliance of cracked solid crack density function crack number in the unit volume elastic enthalpy of cracked material second-order damage tensor damage related irreversible strain tensor fourth-order elastic compliance tensor of damaged material normal stress applied to crack normal projection of deviatoric stress tensor to crack equivalent tensile force applied to fictitious crack uniaxial compression strength of rock uniaxial tensile force of rock number of integration points in space orientation weight coefficient for numerical integration scheme In many rock engineering applications (civil engineering, oil industry, mining engineering and geological storage of nuclear waste), the stability and safety analysis of underground cavities requires experimental investigation and numerical modeling of rock behavior in complex loading condition. In brittle rocks like granite, it is now recognized that rock failure is mainly caused by propagation and coalescence of microcracks. The growth of microcracks may affect not only mechanical strength of rock but also hydraulic properties like permeability Many experimental tests have confirmed various mechanisms of nucleation and growth of microcracks in brittle rocks. Under compressive stresses, sliding wing cracks seem to be the principal propagation mode of microcracks Another important feature in brittle rocks is time dependent deformation In this work, it is assumed that brittle materials are subjected to compression-dominated stresses. The crack density remains small and the interaction between microcracks can be neglected before the onset of the coalescence of microcracks. The initial behavior of materials is isotropic and anisotropy is fully induced by preferential distribution of microcracks. Consider now a representative element volume Most rocks contain initial microcracks due to their formation history. The distribution of these initial defeats may be also anisotropic in nature. There will be superposition and interaction between initial anisotropy and induced anisotropy. The present work focuses on the modeling of induced anisotropic damage. For the sake of simplicity, an isotropic distribution is assumed for the initial microcracks. Only the damage induced by crack growth during external loading is of concern. The macroscopic damage tensor is then defined as the relative variation of crack density in each orientation Based on the micromechanics background and experimental evidences, the macroscopic anisotropic damage model is formulated in this section. The second-order damage tensor given by (16) is used as the internal variable. The general expression of the free enthalpy function By making the standard derivation of the thermodynamic potential, the stress–strain relations of the damaged material can be obtained In the framework of thermodynamics, the damage evolution law is determined by the formulation of a dissipation potential in the space of the conjugated force associated with the damage tensor In the constitutive equations Let us denote the normal aperture by As previously mentioned, time dependent strains develop in most brittle rocks. The accelerated creep strain can lead to delayed material failure. The evolution rate of creep strains depends on applied stresses and is strongly influenced by environmental conditions such as chemical nature of saturating fluids and temperature. In the classic models, the viscoplastic theory is used. However, this mathematical framework does not represent physical mechanisms involved in the creep strains. For most brittle rocks, many experimental studies, for instance In this section, the proposed model is applied to a typical brittle rock: the Lac du Bonnet granite. This rock has largely been studied in the context of the underground research laboratory (URL) in Canada for the feasibility studies of nuclear waste storage According to Eq. The evolution of induced damage density, represented here by For the study of time dependent behavior of material, creep tests have been performed on the Lac du Bonnet granite by Lajtai et al. A new constitutive model is developed for induced anisotropic damage and creep deformation in brittle rocks. Based on experimental evidences, the proposed model takes into account the essential features of mechanical behavior of brittle materials. Though a phenomenological formalism is used, the formulation of the model is clearly based on the theoretical background of micromechanics. The general form of the thermodynamic potential is deduced from the micromechanics consideration. The second damage tensor is defined to approximate crack density distribution. The damage evolution law is directly connected with the crack propagation condition. A unified approach is proposed to describe creep deformation in brittle rocks. The physical mechanism of creep deformation is the sub-critical propagation of microcracks due to stress corrosion process. The kinetics of this process is influenced by environmental factors. The proposed model is applied to a typical brittle rock, the Lac du Bonnet granite. The numerical simulations are in good agreement with experimental data for both short and long term behaviors. However, further validation should be conducted to check the performance of the model for more complex loading paths. The ongoing works concern the modeling of the transition from diffuse damage distribution to localized macroscopic failure in order to perform complete analysis of structures, and the correlation between induced damage and permeability variation. Also, the coupling between initial anisotropy and induced anisotropy may be taken into account in the extension of the model. The work has jointly been supported by a Grant from the France/Hong Kong Joint Research Programme (PROCORE No. 5710QD) and a Grant from the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Reference No. 2004-1-7). The authors also thank Professor D. Kondo for helpful discussions and suggestions.