We report a new method for pre-treatment of refractory gold-bearing tellurides employing the hydrothermal mineral replacement reactions. The method is illustrated by the replacement of calaverite by metallic gold at 150–250°C under vapor saturated pressures. The influences of temperature, pH, and additional salts (NaCl and Na2SO4) on the conversion rate were investigated using the orthogonal array design method. The results indicate that temperature is the most significant factor, followed by pH, and then additional salts. The optimal condition for fast and low cost conversion is 200°C, pH 6.0, 0.01M NaCl, and <38μm particle size. Under this condition, the conversion can be completed within 15h. These preliminary results indicate that the hydrothermal mineral replacement reaction is a promising pre-treating step for gold-bearing tellurides processing.Although gold-bearing tellurides (sylvanite, krennerite, calaverite, and petzite) form a significant amount of gold production in several mines in the world (e.g., In nature, gold tellurides are often replaced by porous native gold ( In most hydrothermal mineral replacement reactions, temperature, pH and solution chemistry are usually the most important factors affecting the reaction rate (e.g., Calaverite grains were from the Golden Mile Deposit, Kalgoorlie, Western Australia. The identification and composition (Au The compositions of the pH buffer solutions were as follows: pH 2.0 (0.0974 The hydrothermal experiments were conducted in 25 Phase identification and quantification were carried out by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis using a Huber Guinier Image Plate G670 with Co The analysis of variance (ANOVA) results are summarized in The fastest conversion (OED4) is still too slow for industrial applications. Also, pH 2.0 is too corrosive for long term use of large scale apparatus. This section aims to improve the conversion rate using less corrosive solutions. It is common that mineral replacement reactions are linearly dependent on specific surface area ( Thus, in the subsequent tests, much smaller calaverite grains (<38 In the conversion from calaverite to metallic gold, temperature is the most significant factor influencing the conversion rate, followed by pH, and then additional salts. The optimal reaction condition for fast and low cost conversion is 200 The authors are grateful to