An experimental study was carried out to develop a simple method of processing copper waste galvanic sludges. This procedure is based on leaching of sludges in 0.5 M H2SO4, precipitation of contaminated copper hydroxides, calcination of these precipitates at 800°C to 900°C for 2 h and leaching of the resulting oxide mixture in 1 M H2SO4 at 60°C. During the calcination step, the impurities that are commonly present in waste copper galvanic sludges, such as iron, chromium, aluminium, zinc, nickel and partly silicon are transferred into sparingly dissolved oxides, which are separated from the recycled metal in the subsequent leaching step. Finally, copper concentrates are separated from these solutions by hydroxide precipitation at pH 6.0. Under these conditions most of the calcium and magnesium and the silicon, nickel and zinc, which were not bound in the leach residue, remain in solution. The purity of the resulting copper concentrates, Cu4(SO4)(OH)6(H2O) containing a small amount of Cu4(SO4)(OH)62(H2O) and Cu4(SO4)(OH)6 is sufficient for their utilisation in the metallurgical industry.Neutralising precipitation with lime is the most widely used industrial treatment of waste water from the metal plating industry in the Czech Republic. The resulting sludges contain hydroxides of heavy metals, gypsum and different amounts of moisture. The sludges are transported and disposed of in special chemical landfills. However, these sludges represent a raw material for the recovery of heavy metals, such as copper, chromium, nickel, or zinc, which are present at concentration of 3%–10%. In order to reduce environmental hazards and to recover heavy metals for industrial re-use, various hydrometallurgical technologies have been developed to enable the treatment of the sludges. Aiming for maximum selectivity and recycling of most metals present in the waste sludges, these technologies are frequently based on the combination of relatively expensive and difficult methods such as liquid–liquid extraction, ion exchange, distillation, and/or electrochemical separation. However, due to high investment and operational costs, these technologies have so far been applied only on the laboratory or pilot scales The objective of this study is to develop a simple method of processing copper waste galvanic sludges and to verify this method on the laboratory scale. This procedure is based on acid leaching of sludges, precipitation of contaminated hydroxides, calcination of these precipitates and leaching the resulting oxide mixture with dilute sulphuric acid solution. During the calcination step, the impurities that are commonly present in waste copper galvanic sludges, such as iron, chromium, aluminium, zinc, nickel and silicon are transferred into slowly dissolving oxides, which can be separated from the recycled metal in the subsequent leaching step. Finally, copper concentrates are separated from these solutions by hydroxide or carbonate precipitation. It is known The laboratory measurements were at first focused on the determination of leaching conditions of copper sludges in aqueous solution of H The dissolution tests were performed with two different types of Cu-oxides samples: (I) Cu-oxides obtained by air-calcination of Cu-hydroxide precipitated from pure solution of CuSO (II) contaminated Cu-oxides obtained by air-calcination of contaminated Cu-hydroxide precipitated from leach liquors originating from leaching waste galvanic sludge in 0.5 M H The composition of copper waste galvanic sludge processed is given in Samples of pure and contaminated Cu-hydroxides were calcined in flow air for 2 h at temperatures of 800°C or 900°C. The conditions of the preparation of the oxides samples were chosen following the results of the thermogravimetric analysis of individual hydroxide precipitates and the knowledge concerning the formation of sparingly soluble spinels Leaching and precipitation experiments were carried out in closed 4–6 L (processing of the sludge) or in 300–500 mL glass reaction vessels (processing of model samples) immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath connected with a water cooler. Mixing was accomplished by means of an impeller. The pH values of the solutions were continuously monitored and recorded. Samples were withdrawn at regular intervals. The concentrations of metals in the filtrates were determined using the AAS method. The precipitates and leach residues were filtered, water-washed, dried at 80°C and weighed. The chemical and mineralogical composition of solids was determined by the AAS method and by X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, Cu The time-dependence of the extraction of copper and impurities is given in The results of the leaching tests performed are given in The rate of the copper dissolution from copper oxides, group (I), The course of dissolution of copper and other metals from contaminated oxides, group (II), due to their very similar chemical and mineralogical composition The composition of leach residues is given in In contrast to the dissolution curves measured for leaching of contaminated oxides in 1.0 M H The results of leaching experiments discussed above lead to the conclusion that most impurities (Al, Cr, Fe, Ni, Zn and partly Si) that are present in waste galvanic sludges are possibly bound in sparingly soluble non-stoichoimetric spinels FeAl On the basis of knowledge described above, a simple method of recycling waste copper galvanic sludges was proposed and verified on the laboratory scale. Samples of galvanic sludge, the composition of which is given in The chemical composition of copper concentrates obtained is given in Although this work does not solve a complete processing of all metals contained in copper waste galvanic sludges, the results obtained confirmed that the method provides a simple and relatively ecological treatment of these waste sludges. The purity of copper concentrates obtained is sufficient for their utilisation in the metallurgical industry. The present study was supported by the grant no.104/97/0705 of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic and by the research intention CEZ-19/28 223100002.