The tendency of the waveform curve can directly reflect the deformation and failure process of specimen in the SHPB (Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar) test of concrete. Different loading rates will result in the different ultimate failure modes, waveform curves and the stress–strain curves of the concrete specimens. Furthermore, these differences are obviously characterized by some feature points of waveform or stress–strain curves. In the present study, with the pulse shaping technique and high-speed photograph, large dimension (Ф120×100mm) SHPB tests of concrete specimen have been conducted. The typical features of the waveform curves under different loading rates have been further classified. According to the experimental observation, the “double-peak” phenomenon of reflection wave in the SHPB tests of concrete-like materials is revealed and interpreted, as well as the “compression wave” phenomenon occurring in the tail of reflection wave under relatively lower strain rate and the obvious “post-peak inward concave descending” of the transmission wave under high strain rate. What's more, the plastic carrying capacity and the effect of the strain rate are also studied. Some empirical understanding on the correspondence between the waveform features and the ultimate failure status of the concrete specimen under various loading rates are also presented. The above research shows that “compression wave” phenomenon of the reflection wave and sustainable plastic carrying capacity will vanish with the increasing loading rate. On the contrary, the “double-peak” phenomenon of the reflection wave, which is considered to be the specific property possessed by concrete-like materials, will become more apparent with the increasing loading rate.Concrete is a kind of brittle material which is widely used in civil engineering and protective structures. Since concrete is actually a multi-phase composite consisting of coarse aggregates, mortar matrix and interface transition zone (ITZ), the material property is dispersed apparently. Especially, concrete has obvious asymmetry of tension and compression, i.e. its tensile strength is much lower in comparison to the strength in compression. Therefore the response of concrete always shows brittle failure behavior under impact or impulsive loading. The concrete structure would bear not only the static loading and seismic action but also the anti-penetration and blasting effects in the war and terrorist attack. Therefore, it is very important to clearly understand the response of concrete under dynamic loading for the successful structural design of the concrete buildings. Most experiment results The complex material properties of concrete determine the existence of the following problems in SHPB test. Based on the previous studies of many scholars What is more, the larger size specimen must match with the pressure bars of corresponding size. However, with the increasing size of pressure bars, the dispersion of the measured waveform signals will become distinct, and it would result in the distortion of dynamic constitutive response of concrete material. Furthermore, it should be pointed out that, due to the brittle behavior of concrete, the effective deformation time of concrete specimen is very short when subjected to dynamic loadings. In the SHPB test, for the steep leading-edge of incident wave, the failure of concrete specimen may occur before the stress wave in the specimen achieves uniform through repeated reflection and transmission. In other words, the stress equilibrium condition cannot be well satisfied. These above existing problems will directly affect the validity and accuracy of the experimental data of SHPB. Fortunately, these problems have been solved in a certain degree in this paper. According to the above analysis, for the concrete containing coarse aggregates, obviously, the specimen with larger size must be prepared to satisfy the uniformity condition on the macro-level, and thus it needs to match with pressure bars of corresponding size. As a result, the waveform dispersion, which might lead to the distortion of the dynamic constitutive of material, will become more serious. Furthermore, references Meng et al. As we know, concrete is a kind of brittle material of which effective deformation time is fairly short. Zhu et al. The functions of the pulse shaper introduced in Ref. With employing the split Hopkinson pressure bar, mostly, the previous researches on the dynamic compressive behaviors of concrete-like materials focus on the strain rate effect. References According to the definition of strength, elastic modulus, critical strain and the capacity of energy absorption, etc., obviously the previous studies on the strain rate sensitivity of concrete-like materials had been conducted depending on the stress–strain curve. Nevertheless, the waveform curves are firstly obtained in the SHPB test, and then be integrated and translated to the stress–strain curve in the relevant analysis. Undeniably, by this means that the test data is usually processed, most mechanic properties of the tested materials will become crystal clear. But, unfortunately, in this way, an important aspect in investigating the dynamic behaviors of materials with SHPB may be neglected, i.e., the dynamic failure process of the specimen. Apparently, the change of the waveform curves can just reflect such a dynamic failure process. As we know, different materials have different dynamic mechanic performances. For example, the behaviors of mild steel are quite different from that of the concrete-like materials. Therefore, it can be concluded that the dynamic failure process of the materials with different mechanic properties will be necessarily different. Reflected in the SHPB tests, the features of the waveform curves of different materials will be necessarily different. In other words, the differences of the waveform features of different materials are the most direct reflection to their dynamic mechanic properties. With the help of SHPB, the dynamic behaviors of the reactive powder concrete (RPC) had been studied by Wang et al. Certainly, the waveform analysis also can be found in the analysis of the stress equilibrium which is usually employed to verify the validation of SHPB test, as reported by Refs. Thus it can be seen that, the previous scholars had analyzed the waveform curves of the SHPB tests in many respects. For meeting the needs of the further research, obviously, the further analysis on the waveform curves appears to be a matter of great importance. Unfortunately, the feature analysis on the waveform curves under different strain rates, which can directly reflect the deformation and failure process of concrete specimen, is more often to be neglected by researchers. On the other hand, seen in the above reviews, the relevant studies on the dynamic deformation and failure process of the specimen in SHPB test, by incorporating with the analysis of waveform features, is rarely reported by the previous scholars. In the research on the dynamic deformation process of materials, the high-speed photography can yet be a better method. With this method, Hao et al. According to the afore analysis, the waveform curves will have different features under various strain rates in the SHPB test of concrete specimen, and these waveform features can be characterized by some typical points on the curves. For further understanding the complex dynamic deformation and failure process of the concrete specimen under various loading rates, with the high-speed photography and the pulse shaping technique, SHPB tests of concrete specimens with the size of Ф120 The SHPB technique has been developed based on the theory of 1D stress wave propagation in the elastic circular bar. Due to the decoupling of strain rate effect from stress wave effect in this technique, currently SHPB is being as a primary method to study the dynamic behavior of material under high strain rates. Basically, the experimental system of SHPB includes the striker bar, input bar, specimen, output bar, absorption bar, measuring system and data processing system, etc. The schematic illustration of SHPB apparatus involved in this paper is shown in Three waveforms are involved in the SHPB test, i.e., the incident compressive pulse due to the impact between striker and input bar, the reflective tensile pulse produced in the input bar and the transmission wave propagating in the output bar. The amplitude of stress pulse is determined by the impact velocity of the striker. When the striker has the same wave impedance as the pressure bars, the duration time of the incident pulse will be twice as that of the stress wave through the length of the striker. Therefore the incident stress pulses of different duration time can be achieved by controlling the length of the striker. The reliability of the experiment results of SHPB is determined by the following two In the SHPB test of concrete specimen, the lateral confining effect can be very difficult to be avoided due to the difficulty of achieving constant strain acceleration and the shear dilation effect in the loading process. Based on the analysis on the size setting of the specimen in the introduction, to better satisfy the uniformity condition and also not result in oversize confining pressure effect, concrete specimens in the size of Φ120 Pulse shaping technique is widely used in the SHPB tests of brittle materials, e.g., rock, cement-based materials, etc. As mentioned above, firstly, the pulse shaping technique can eliminate the high frequency oscillation at the front of the incident wave; secondly, it can facilitate the dynamic stress equilibrium in the specimen. In this experiment, as shown in In this experiment, high-speed photography was used to observe the transient failure process of the concrete specimen. The frames-per-second of the high-speed camera is set as 10 In SHPB test, the length of the striker decides the time duration of the waveforms. In this experiment, for the better analysis of waveform features, two strikers in the length of 400 Apparently, the ultimate failure patterns of concrete specimens are quite different under various impact velocities. According to the extent of damage and destruction, the ultimate failure patterns of concrete specimens can be simply classified into 4 scenarios, i.e., slight-spalling, breaking, fragmentation and comminution, respectively. The waveform features corresponding to the 4 scenarios will become significantly different from each other, as well as the unloading phase of stress–strain curves. For better understanding the waveform characteristics, four trials which can typically represent the failure patterns of concrete specimens in SHPB tests had been selected from a large number of trials to analyze. The corresponding velocities of the striker are 12.55 The four typical ultimate failure patterns of concrete specimen are shown in Under the impact velocity of 15.33 When the striker velocity rises up to 18.55 Under the striker velocity of 21.12 As we know, it is an important guarantee to achieve the longitudinal stress equilibrium in SHPB tests for the validity of test data According to the different ultimate failure patterns of concrete specimens, the longitudinal stress equilibriums of four groups of test data are checked, as shown in In the following, with stress–strain curve, high-speed photography and ultimate failure pattern in each test, the main analyses are carried out in this section as follows: 1) to make analysis and explanations on the waveform features based on the characteristic points; 2) to find out the corresponding relationships among the waveform curves, the stress–strain curve and the ultimate failure pattern. As mentioned before, when the impact velocity of striker is 12.55 In According to With the high-speed photography in In the portion BC, the value of reflection curve increase significantly. According to In the portion CD, there is a significant drop regarding the value of reflection curve, and it accompanies the strain rate decreased, the micro-voids and micro-cracks continuing to be compressed, as well as much more damage accumulated to initiate the compression micro-cracks. At the point D, a minor crack occurs in the specimen surface close to the output bar, as shown in Specially, the transmission curve keeps in a constant value during the portion BE, and thus the stress in the specimen only has a little change but the strain increases significantly. During the portion EF, the specimen enters into a rapid unloading stage and the stress has a large drop. During the stage of the portion FG the specimen separates from the pressure bar and goes through expansion recovery. It should be noted that the reflection wave in the portion FG behaves as “compression wave” characteristic. In general, the reflection wave in the incident bar should fully show as the tension wave, and thus it is conflictive with the “compression wave” phenomenon in the tail of reflection wave. Moreover, the corresponding stress–strain curve behaves as approximately linear elastic unloading. However, maybe due to the large accumulation of damage in the concrete, the unloading modulus is much smaller than that in the elastic loading. The stress of the point G is 0. So far, the loading pulse has completely passed through the specimen. Throughout the whole process, the transmission waveform is very similar to that of the incident wave and has a same duration time as the reflection curve, but has some reduction in the amplitude. Ultimately, as shown in Similarly, when the impact velocity rises up to 13.71 For this case, during the portion OB, the specimen is firstly elastically loaded and then enters into plastic loading state. At the time point C, the value of the reflection curve reaches to the maximum, as well as the corresponding strain rate, and then descends. Correspondingly, the damage in concrete specimen will exacerbate and the cracks may initiate. Maybe delayed at the time point D, spalling will occur on the specimen surface. During the portion DE, the reflection curve fluctuates nearby a lower constant value, and it indicates that the specimen undergoes a sustainable plastic deformation stage under a constant strain rate for a long time. During the portion EF, the value of the reflection curve descends to 0 quickly. Since the specimen remains almost intact at this time, unloading expansion recovery will occurs in the specimen during it separates from the pressure bars. Therefore, the compression occurs in the portion FG, i.e., in the tail of the reflection wave, and correspondingly the stress–strain curve exhibits nearly linear elastic unloading. During the most time (portion BE) of waveform curves, the value of the transmission curve has a very small variation, and it demonstrates the stress of the specimen nearly keeps a constant value. Correspondingly, as shown in As stated above, the ultimate failure pattern of the concrete specimen at the impact velocity of 15.33 With the help of the high-speed photography, the stress–strain relationship of the typical points shown in the waveform curves is analyzed as follows. With comparing Meanwhile, the transmission waveform has become not analogous to that of the incident wave. The incident waveform is almost symmetrical, while some deviation initiates in the transmission waveform, however its duration time is still same as that of reflection curve. Furthermore, the concavity feature of points A and B in the reflection waveform becomes much more apparent when the ASR is risen up to 27.04 As shown in Corresponding to the occurrence of the second peak of reflection wave, the shape of the transmission waveform produces deviation. After the transmission curve reaches to the peak at points H/B, its amplitude only persists a transient duration till to the instant of point D and then rapidly drop down. The decline portion of the transmission curve exhibits outward convex shape and it clearly behaves as nonlinear relationship versus the time. At the point F, the value of the transmission curve has been fairly small and then gradually reduces to 0. In addition, as shown in As shown in the high-speed photography of Based on the above analysis, we conclude that the fine cracks accumulate in the portion CD, and then, the accumulated fine cracks start to rapidly develop in the portion DE. To the point G, the stress pulse has fully passed the specimen. By this moment, the concrete specimen has been significantly damaged and the cracks completely occupy the surface, as shown in Furthermore, it has also been found that the maximum stress of the specimen occurs at the time of point B. However, the fine compression cracks initiates only at the time of point C and starts to rapidly grow at the time of point D. Therefore, it can be seen that, the initiation, growth and rapid development of compression cracks lag behind the occurrence of the peak stress. Correspondingly reflected on the stress–strain curve, the specimen can remain load carrying capacity through the sustainable plastic deformation during the portion BD. However, the load carrying capacity descends significantly from point D. Compared with the former case, the “breaking” case of concrete specimen has a lager sustainable plastic deformation range and its unloading stage behaves as almost linear. Due to the existence of a slight “compression wave” during the portion FG, correspondingly, the stress–strain curve still shows a fairly shorter linear elastic unloading stage. As depicted in Similarly, with the high-speed photography, the stress–strain state of the feature points and the waveforms are analyzed as follows. As shown in Moreover, the deviation of the shape of the transmission waveform becomes more serious compared to the former case. As shown in As shown in the high-speed photography of Compared with the former “breaking” case that the striking velocity is 15.33 Similarly, correspondingly reflected on the stress–strain curve, as shown in As we know, the test with the impact velocity of 21.12 When the impact velocity rises up to 21.12 On the other hand, the shape of the transmission wave deviates more severely. The descending portion HK has become inward concave, and it displays a nonlinear relationship versus the time. What is more, the transmission curve terminates at the point K, which can be considered to be prior to the occurrence of the terminal point F of the reflection curve. Therefore, when the ASR achieves 62.85 With respect to the high-speed photography, as shown in Similarly, corresponding to the waveform curves, the portion DE in which the cracks rapidly develop still lags behind the occurrence of the stress peak B/H and the point D is still regarded as the start of the rapid development of the crack. Compared with the former “fragmentation” case that the impact velocity is 18.58 Correspondingly, reflected on the stress–strain curve, as shown in As shown in Basically, the “double-peak” phenomenon of the reflection wave comes from the damage of concrete specimen. When subjected to dynamic loading, concrete specimen suffers serious damage and material properties change significantly, and thus the specimen impedance will not match with that of the pressure bar seriously. It leads to only a little part of stress pulse transmitted to the output bar through the specimen. Instead, majority of the pulse can only be reflected to the incident bar, so that the second peak is generated and the “double-peak” of reflection wave is developed. It can be deduced that under higher loading strain rate, the more serious the damage of concrete specimen is, the more incident stress pulse will be reflected to the input bar and the significantly higher second peak than the first peak will be led to, until the amplitude of the second peak reaches close to that of incident wave, and even forms a platform. As shown in On the other hand, as shown in Based on the above analysis, it concludes that the “double-peak” phenomenon of reflection wave is the typical performance possessed by concrete-like brittle materials in SHPB tests. Basically, it is caused by the damage of concrete specimen in the loading process. The time points C, D, E corresponding to the first peak, the valley between two peaks and the second peak of reflection wave, respectively, can be further considered as the inherent features of different concrete materials. Through comparing the reflection waveform curves under different strain rates, it also can be found that the obvious compression wave occurs in the tail (i.e., FG portion) of reflection wave when the ultimate failure patterns show slight spalling or breaking (waveform 1 or 2, as shown in In general, the reflection wave in the incident bar should fully show as the tension wave, and thus it conflicts with the “compression wave” phenomenon in the tail of reflection wave. Under the relatively lower impact velocity, the nearly intact or the larger residual cone of concrete specimen, as shown in With increasing the impact velocity, the concrete specimen will be seriously destructed and the size of the residual end cone will be decreased and even the residual cone vanishes. So the expansion recovery of residual specimen will not easily occur and thus it is unable to reversely strike the incident bar. Certainly, the compression portion of reflection wave will not be generated and be replaced by a slightly turn-up of the portion FG. Thus the phenomenon of linear elastic unloading of stress–strain curve will vanish with increasing the striking velocity, such as the curve 3 or 4 shown in Based on the above analysis, the compression in the tail of reflection wave is considered to be the necessary phenomenon in the SHPB test of metal specimen. For example, as shown in Similarly, as shown in When subjected to relatively lower strain rate (i.e., the specimen is almost intact or slightly spalled), the transmission waveform remains similar to that of the incident curve and nearly have the same duration time as the reflection wave. However, when subjected to relatively higher strain rate (the specimen has been damaged into different extent), the shape of the transmission waveforms will deviate from the incident wave and it directly descends rapidly after reaching the peak point H. With the increase of impact velocity, the descending portion of the transmission wave behaves as outward convex, nearly linear and inward concave versus the time, respectively. Eventually, the shape of the transmission waveform will exhibit more obvious “post-peak inward concave descending” phenomenon. Quite differently, the transmission waveform of the metal specimen will still maintain similar to that of the incident wave even if we increase the impact velocity, e.g., the mild-steel specimens shown in Moreover, due to the significant destruction of concrete specimen under high strain rate, only part of the pulse can be transmitted into the output bar. Thus the duration time of transmission wave will be shorter than that of the reflection wave. According to the discussion in Thus, under very high strain rate, saying that concrete specimen serious damaged, we can extrapolate that the end-point K of transmission wave locate between the initiation time of the second peak E and the end-point F of the reflection wave. When loaded at super-high strain rate, the stress equilibrium is hard to achieve and the specimen may be fully destructed before the stress pulse reaches to its amplitude, thus the point K will be much closer to the initiation time of the second peak E of the reflection wave. For example, As shown in Furthermore, as shown in When subjected to higher dynamic loading, the specimen rapidly enters into plastic loading state from elastic state, and thus the damage in concrete initiates. However, in this stage, the specimen still remains intact and can well carry loading. During the portion BC (at the points B/H, the stress in specimen reaches peak; point C is the first peak of reflection curve), the fine compression cracks may generate according to the loading condition, and the specimen is still considered to remain intact and can carry loading (with a little unloading under relatively higher loading). Between the first peak C and the valley D, the crack localization initiates and the specimen still remains intact but unloads significantly. Between the valley D and the second peak E, the cracks rapidly develop and the specimen starts to be destructed with a distinct unloading. During the inter-zone between second peak E and the wave tail F, the specimen starts to collapse, with a fairly weak carrying capacity. In the turn-up of the portion FG, the specimen is completely destroyed without any carrying capacity. Based on the above analysis, we conclude that the first peak C is the feature point that the concrete specimen is compacted but the cracks in specimen are few; large amount of cracks will be accumulated during the portion CD, and the valley D is the start of the rapid development of the cracks; the occurrence of the second peak E means the concrete specimen will lose its load carrying capacity eventually.  Compressive strength The dynamic compressive strength of concrete-like material has been studied in Refs. The DIF formula suggested by CEB 1993 The DIF formula suggested by Zhou and Hao The compressive DIF relation for mortar suggested by Hao and Hao These DIF relations versus the strain rate are plotted in In this experiment, strictly speaking, when the ASR is lower than about 24 Regarding it as the critical condition whether the concrete specimen loses the load carrying capacity, the critical ASR which might render the concrete specimen fully damaged is about 24 Other material behaviors According to the stress–strain curves shown in The energy absorption capability of concrete specimen is defined as the specimen volume multiplied by the strain energy density In the present study, based on the large dimension (Ф120 According to the extent of damage and destruction, the ultimate failure patterns of concrete specimens can be simply classified into 4 scenarios, i.e., slight-spalling, breaking, fragmentation and comminution, respectively. The reflection wave has a distinct “double-peak” phenomenon when the concrete specimen subjected to relatively higher dynamic loading. Furthermore, with the increase of impact velocity, the second peak will be significantly larger than the first peak, and the transmission wave between the two peaks gradually exhibits obvious “post-peak inward concave descending”, and correspondingly the concrete specimen will be more severely damaged. The “double-peak” phenomenon of reflection wave and the “post-peak inward concave descending” performance are assumed as the specific behaviors possessed by concrete-like brittle materials in SHPB tests. When subjected to relatively lower dynamic loading, the ultimate failure patterns of the concrete specimen is nearly intact or shows larger residual cone of concrete, as shown in When subjected to lower dynamic loading, the concrete specimen shows better sustainable plastic load-carrying capacity. However, when subjected to higher dynamic loading, this capacity will become fairly limited, and even disappear. Furthermore, since the growth and rapid development of cracks lag behind the occurrence of the peak stress, the concrete specimen can still have some load-carrying capacity in the process of damage and failure. The concrete is a kind of strain rate sensitive material. With respect to the strain rate sensitivity of its compressive strength, the empirical formula given by CEB (1993) has certain reference value in the design and production. Through the present study, we have further understood some particular waveform features in the SHPB test of the concrete specimen, such as the “double-peak” phenomenon of reflection wave, the “compression wave” behavior in the tail of reflection curve, and the “post-peak inward concave descending” performance of transmission wave and stress–strain curve, etc. As shown in On the other hand, it is known that the waveform features of concrete-like materials might be quite different from the metals. Thus, with respect to the steel reinforced concrete which is consisted of metal and concrete, what waveform features will be exhibited? The research on these questions will be useful for understanding the constitutive behaviors of concrete or steel reinforced concrete. The work is supported by the