TiO2 photoanode of dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) was prepared using four different pastes with various amounts of binder in order to obtain various percentages of porosity. The sublayers of TiO2 photoanode have less porosity and more interconnections between TiO2 particles promoting more efficient convey of photo-generated electrons to the external circuit. The upper layers with high pore density have more surface area to adsorb the dye molecules. Therefore, the upper layers are expected to generate more photo-electrons. The result obtained showed that the cell efficiency in single layered photoanodes increased up to 4.38% by increasing the porosity to an optimum level of 71% and decreased upon further increase of porosity density. The efficiency of double layered cell photoanodes consist of upper layer with 78% porous density and sublayer with 71% porous density was increased up to 4.63%. The best efficiency of 5.35% was achieved in a triple layered cell photoanode (i.e. up to 22% in comparison with the best of the single layered cells). The light harvesting effect of upper layers with more density of porosity seems to be the main reason for the increased efficiency. The simple technique carried out in this work in order to optimize the light harvesting efficiency of TiO2 photoanode is promising and may paved the way for further work in this direction.Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted many interests in the past two decades as a device that efficiently convert solar energy to electricity due to low production cost, low weight, simple fabrication procedure and relatively good energy conversion efficiency ( After O’Regan and Grätzel considerably increased the efficiency of DSSCs by using TiO TiO Due to the significant effect of photoanode on DSSC efficiency so many researchers have focused on the modification of photoanode. Some of them tried to reduce the recombination of photo-electrons by using core-shell structure photoanodes ( In the present work, for the first time we systematically produced single, double and triple layered TiO Cis-bis (isothiocyanato) bis (2, 2′-bipyridyl-4, 4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium (II) bis-tetrabutylammonium (RuL In order to produce functionally graded porous photoanodes, four TiO The porosity (P) of each paste after sintering was calculated as: P For preparation of photoanodes, the TiO The photoanodes were successfully sintered in air atmosphere at 500 The counter electrode was a Pt coated FTO glass produced by coating H The roughness of TiO Clemex Vision image analyzer software was used to determine the thickness of TiO The absorption spectrum was analyzed by Ultraviolet–visible (UV–Vis) spectroscopy using Unicam 8700 spectrometer. Photovoltaic measurements were performed under 1 Sun AM 1.5G simulated sunlight. The effective surface of cell was 0.25  During the photoanodes sintering and binder calcination, the thickness of TiO    In single layered photoanodes, efficiency increased up to the level to that of photoanode 60 and decreases with further increase in porosity. It appears that by increasing the percentage of binder and the porosity, the total surface area of TiO In double layered photoanodes, by increasing the dye content from that of photoanode 40–50 to the level of the photoanode 40–60, the efficiency increased from 2.98% to 3.66%. But although the amount of dye decreased in photoanode 40–70 in comparison with 40–60, the efficiency continues to increasing to 4.08%. This unexpected result could be explained by considering the optical absorption spectra of photoanodes. The optical absorption spectra of photoanodes are illustrated in In triple layered photoanodes the light trapping effect of upper layers is seen in 40–50–70 photoanode. Due to this effect, although the amount of dye adsorbed at 40–50–70 photoanode is nearly the same as 40–50–60 photoanode, the efficiency is around 4.47% which was increased in comparison to 4.00%. The efficiency of 40–60–70 cell is more than 40–50–70, because the middle layer of this cell has more dye adsorption. Also 40–60–70 cell has less efficiency in comparison with 50–60–70 due to less dye adsorption by first layer. These series of comparisons show that the TiO In this work, single, double and triple layered TiO