This chapter highlights comminution energy and evaluation in fine grinding. The purposes for comminution are to liberate minerals for concentration processes, to reduce the size, to increase the surface area, and to free the useful materials from their matrices. Comminution is an old mechanical unit operation for size reduction of solid materials and an important operation in the field of mineral processing, the ceramic industry, the electronics industry and so on. The energy efficiency of comminution is very low and the energy required for comminution increases with a decrease in feed or produced particle size. Research and development to find energy saving and the energy required in comminution processes have been performed. In design, operation and control of comminution processes, it is necessary to evaluate the comminution energy of solid materials. In general, the comminution energy (i.e., the size reduction energy) is expressed as a function of the particle size of feed and product. In addition, the chapter also presented various Laws of comminution energy including Rittinger's law Kick's law Bond's law, and Holmes's law.constant in equation constant in equation constant in equation constant in equation constant in equation constant in equation constant in equation constant in equation constant in equation mill diameter (m) ball diameter (m) comminution (fracture) energy (J) specific fracture energy (J feed size (80% of feed passes) (μm) adjustment factor (–) particle-filling volume fraction (={(feed mass)/(bulk density)}/(mill volume)) (–) ball mill grindability (g ball-filling volume fraction (=[(ball mass)/{(ball density)×(1-0.4)}]/(mill volume)) (–) decreasing rate constant (selection function) (min increasing rate constant (g maximum value of rate constant increasing rate constant (g mass of particles (kg) Weibull's coefficient (–) constant in equation mass of particle 1 (kg) mass of particle 2 (kg) mill rotational speed (rpm) constant in equation critical value of mill rotational speed (rpm) fracture load in equations product size (80% of product passes) in equation product size (80% of product finer than a size grindability test sieve opening (μm) mass fraction finer than a size, mass fraction finer than a size, mass fraction of feed size particles (–) exponent in equation strength of the specimen (Pa) strength of unit volume specific surface areas of feed (m specific surface areas of product (m specific surface area in equation the maximum stress in equation grinding time (min) specimen volume (m unit volume (m mill volume (cm relative velocity (m work input (kWh mass of ground product finer than 75 ball mass (g) Bond's Work index (kWh corresponding Work index (μm feed mass (g) mass of finer than a size mass of product finer than a size diameter of the sphere (particle size) (m), (μm) diameter of sphere particle 1 (m) diameter of sphere particle 2 (m) sieving size for evaluating grindability (μm) particle size of feed (m), (mm) optimum feed size particle size of product (m) Young's modulus (Pa) Young's modulus of particle 1 (Pa) Young's modulus of particle 2 (Pa) constant in equation ratio of critical speed, (= Poisson's ratio (–) Poisson's ratio of particle 1 (–) Poisson's ratio of particle 2 (–) density of sphere particle (kg Comminution is the oldest mechanical unit operation for size reduction of solid materials and an important operation in the field of mineral processing, the ceramic industry, the electronics industry and so on. The purposes for comminution are to liberate minerals for concentration processes, to reduce the size, to increase the surface area, and to free the useful materials from their matrices. There are also more recent technologies, resulting in the need to modify the surface of solids, prepare composite materials, and to recycle the useful components of industrial wastes. Comminution has a long history, but it is still difficult to control the mean particle size and its distribution. Hence, fundamental analysis and optimum operation have been investigated. A demand for fine or ultra-fine particles is increasing in many kinds of industries. The energy efficiency of comminution is very low and the energy required for comminution increases with a decrease in feed or produced particle size. Research and development to find energy saving and the energy required in comminution processes have been performed. In design, operation and control of comminution processes, it is necessary to correctly evaluate the comminution energy of solid materials. In general, the comminution energy (i.e., the size reduction energy) is expressed as a function of the particle size of feed and product Rittinger assumes that the energy consumed is proportional to the produced fresh surface. The specific surface area is inversely proportional to the particle size, then the specific comminution energy Kick assumes that the energy required for comminution is related only to the ratio between the size of the feed particle and the product particle: Equation Bond Holmes Values of In principle, the mechanism of size reduction of solids is based on the fracture of a single particle and its accumulation during comminution operations. In a system composed of an elastic sphere gripped by a pair of rigid parallel platens, the load–deformation curve can be predicted by the theories of Hertz as summarized by Timoshenko and Goodier The relationship between the specific fracture energy and the strength for borosilicate glass and feldspar are shown in However, when two spherical particles, 1 and 2, collide with each other, the maximum stress Strength is a structure-sensitive property and changes with specimen volume. From a statistical consideration of the distribution of the presence of minute flaws From equations Importance of crushing resistance or grindability of solid materials and energy efficiency have been recognized as key parameters in optimising comminution processes in a variety of industries. The grindability is obtained from a strictly defined experiment; two typical methods include: The machine to measure the grindability consists of a top-rotating ring with eight balls of 1 inch. diameter. A load of 64±0.5 lb (pounds) is applied on the top rotating ring. Fifty grams of material sieved between 1.19 and 0.59 Bond's Work index The lowest limit of the total mass of balls is 19.5 In fine grinding, when Bond When the particle size of products is submicron or micronized, it will be difficult to estimate the comminution energy by equations Bond Equation In early stage of grinding, a zero-order increasing rate is applicable as shown in following equations:  Comminution processes generally consist of several stages in series. Various types of crushing and grinding equipments have been used industrially as a mechanical way of producing particulate solids. The working phenomena in these equipments are complex and different principles are adopted in the loading, such as compression, shear, cutting, impact, and friction; in the mechanism of force transmission or the mode of motion of grinding media, such as rotation, reciprocation, vibration, agitation, rolling, and acceleration due to fluids; and in the operational method, such as dry, wet or grinding aid system, batch or continuous operation and so on. However, in practice, it is most common to classify comminution processes into four stages by the particle size produced. Although the sizes are not clearly defined, they are called primary, intermediate, fine, and ultra-fine according to the size of the ground product. On the basis of the above classification, fine grinding equipments produce particles finer than about 10 Ultra-fine grinding equipments produce particles finer than 1 A tumbling mill or a ball mill is most widely used in both wet and dry systems, in batch and continuous operations, and on small and large scales. The optimum rotational speed is usually set at 65–80% of critical speed, Various laboratory studies, pilot plant works, and full scale plant works show that the mill rotational speed, which is one of the operating variables, can affect grinding efficiency and fineness of ground products. The optimum grinding conditions in a ball mill are also affected by mill rotational speed. Grinding conditions investigated in ball mills include the feed size, the feed mass of the material, and the ball mass. These conditions are evaluated by the following equations The material used in the experiment is quartz. The ball mill is made of alumina with an inside diameter of 144   The optimum conditions are tabulated in The grinding rate constant,      Substituting equations The demand for fine or ultra-fine particles is increasing in many industries. This means that it is very important to evaluate and express the fineness of the ground product and the progress of fine or ultra-fine grinding. There are usually two methods (or ways) to evaluate and express the fine grindability of solids. The first method consists of increasing the rate of fine particles. The other consists of increasing the rate of specific surface area of ground product. Fine grinding tests were performed on silica glass particles using an alumina ball mill. Effects of the feed size and the feed mass of silica glass, and the ball diameter on the fine grindability were investigated when the ball mass and the mill rotational speed were constant. Grinding conditions are shown in  