Hydrophobic particles attached to bubble films in foams can increase the capillary pressure required to cause coalescence or bursting. Previous studies have considered the effects of changing particle spacing and contact angle in 2 dimensions (2D), but there are limitations to this approach; in 2D when the separation distance is zero and the particles are touching, the critical capillary pressure tends to infinity as there is no exposed film. In 3 dimensions (3D) spherical packing ensures that there are always exposed sections of film between particles even when they are close packed. Using Surface Evolver, the effects of contact angle and particle separation on the stability of a particle laden film were investigated in 2D and 3D. The 2D model was compared and validated with an analytical approach developed by Ali et al. [Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 39 (2000) 2742–2745] and a 3D model was used to investigate the critical capillary pressures of square and hexagonal packing of monodisperse particles. It was found that when the stability of the film was compared with the area of film per particle both packing patterns have the same stability.Particle stabilised foams are found in many industrial processes, however the physical processes through which the particles stabilise the foams are not well understood. These systems are difficult both to examine in real life and to model but through better understanding of the mechanisms which affect foam stability the many industrial processes reliant on particle laden foams and films may be improved. One such industrial process is froth flotation which uses air bubbled through an ore slurry to concentrate valuable minerals. Chemicals added to the slurry render the surfaces of the valuable mineral particles hydrophobic. The hydrophobic particles attach to the surface of the bubbles as they rise through the slurry and form a concentrated mineralised froth when they reach the surface. This concentrate is then collected and processed. Every time a laden bubble on the surface of the froth bursts, the particles attached to it enter the network of channels running along the edges of films called Plateau borders and move freely. This reduces the efficiency and selectivity of the process. Similarly if a film separating two bubbles within the froth ruptures causing coalescence, the particles attached to the ruptured film will also be lost to the Plateau borders. The causes of coalescence and bursting within the froth are complex and difficult to predict but the fact that attached particles affect the stability of froths, foams and emulsions has been known for a long time, see the work of Aveyard et al. In flotation, hydrophobicity is often characterised in terms of contact angle. In this case contact angle is defined as the angle made between the surface of the particle and the film at the three phase boundary made where the film meets the particle. It is shown in The shape of the particle also has a pronounced effect on its ability to rupture a film. Dippenaar The interaction of particle size, shape and hydrophobicity can have significant effects on the flotation process, but due to the complexity of the system it is difficult to uniquely predict how these properties will affect froth stability experimentally. To successfully investigate properties of particle laden bubbles and foams theoretically, the problem must be simplified. Ali et al. The capillary pressure and geometry are linked via the Young–Laplace law. The geometry of the system determines the curvature of the film linking the particles which is then related to the capillary pressure of the liquid using surface tension and the Young–Laplace law, equation In addition to the model of Ali et al. several other models of particles in films are reported in the literature. Denkov et al. To investigate the effects of particle packing and irregular film shape on the critical pressure in 3D several models were developed using the Surface Evolver Surface Evolver A thin film loaded with spherical particles that bridge both sides of the film is shown in Assuming a regular packing pattern, the film will fail at a point on the exposed film's surface central to the surrounding particles. However, its exact location will depend on the particle packing arrangement. Two 3D packing patterns will be investigated in this paper, square packing and hexagonal packing. The key parameters for the model in 2D, after applying symmetry to reduce complexity, are shown in The 2D model developed in Surface Evolver used the string model to represent the particle in a film. The hydrophobicity of the particle was set by altering the surface tension of the dry surface of the particle (surface bounded by phases V and S, surface tension referred to as The presence of disjoining and conjoining forces acting on the film can also affect its stability but in this case have been neglected. As there is little surfactant found in a flotation froth (of the order of 20–100 g/t ore) and it is assumed the model is quasi static so viscosity can be ignored, disjoining forces have been discounted. Conjoining forces have also been discounted as Van der Waals forces are typically only of a similar magnitude to the surface tension forces in this system when the films are tens of nm thick (Tcholakova et al. The effect of gravity on the model has also been ignored. The Bond number, Eq. In this paper, all linear parameters have been non-dimensionalised using the particle radius and all force parameters have been non-dimensionalised using the surface tension of the film as shown in Eqs. The following procedure was used to find the critical pressure at which a film would fail for a given The 2D model was expanded to 3D to investigate the effect of particle packing configurations on In 3D the packing arrangement of the spherical particles can be compared. A hexagonally packed configuration is the densest possible distribution for a layer of spherical particles of equal size and when they are touching it produces the smallest possible area of exposed film. However, due to the hexagonal shape of the cell, the boundary is not a uniform distance from the centre of the particle. As such there are two possible measures of particle separation, shown in  The 2D tension model was used to generate results using contact angles between 0° and 90° and separation distances between 1.2 and 4.5 to see how they affected It can be seen in   The 2D results have shown that as the distance from the particle to the midpoint of the film increases, The area of the film in the cell can be calculated using Eqs.   The results obtained using the analytical model developed by Ali et al. A 2D model is limited in the sense that although it shows the same trends as the 3D model it cannot take into account particle packing configurations and zero separation distances between particles so it always returns a higher The packing pattern and distance between the particles attached to the film affects the capillary pressure required to rupture the film implying that they are important parameters when considering the stability of a film or foam. When considering the separation distance between particles, hexagonally close packed particles appear to stabilise thin films to a greater extent than square packed ones by increasing the capillary pressure required to rupture them. However, as the separation distance increases above G. Morris gratefully acknowledges Anglo Platinum, Rio Tinto the EPSRC and CIKTN for their support in this project.