Background
                  Vascular calcification is common and constitutes a prognostic marker of mortality in the hemodialysis population. Derangements of mineral metabolism may influence its development. The aim of this study is to prospectively evaluate the association between bone remodeling disorders and progression of coronary artery calcification (CAC) in hemodialysis patients.
               
                  Study Design
                  Cohort study nested within a randomized controlled trial.
               
                  Setting & Participants
                  64 stable hemodialysis patients.
               
                  Predictor
                  Bone-related laboratory parameters and bone histomorphometric characteristics at baseline and after 1 year of follow-up.
               
                  Outcomes
                  Progression of CAC assessed by means of coronary multislice tomography at baseline and after 1 year of follow-up. Baseline calcification score of 30 Agatston units or greater was defined as calcification. Change in calcification score of 15% or greater was defined as progression.
               
                  Results
                  Of 64 patients, 26 (40%) had CAC at baseline and 38 (60%) did not. Participants without CAC at baseline were younger (P < 0.001), mainly men (P = 0.03) and nonwhite (P = 0.003), and had lower serum osteoprotegerin levels (P = 0.003) and higher trabecular bone volume (P = 0.001). Age (P = 0.003; β coefficient = 1.107; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.036 to 1.183) and trabecular bone volume (P = 0.006; β coefficient = 0.828; 95% CI, 0.723 to 0.948) were predictors for CAC development. Of 38 participants who had calcification at baseline, 26 (68%) had CAC progression in 1 year. Progressors had lower bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (P = 0.03) and deoxypyridinoline levels (P = 0.02) on follow-up, and low turnover was mainly diagnosed at the 12-month bone biopsy (P = 0.04). Low-turnover bone status at the 12-month bone biopsy was the only independent predictor for CAC progression (P = 0.04; β coefficient = 4.5; 95% CI, 1.04 to 19.39). According to bone histological examination, nonprogressors with initially high turnover (n = 5) subsequently had decreased bone formation rate (P = 0.03), and those initially with low turnover (n = 7) subsequently had increased bone formation rate (P = 0.003) and osteoid volume (P = 0.001).
               
                  Limitations
                  Relatively small population, absence of patients with severe hyperparathyroidism, short observational period.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Lower trabecular bone volume was associated with CAC development, whereas improvement in bone turnover was associated with lower CAC progression in patients with high- and low-turnover bone disorders. Because CAC is implicated in cardiovascular mortality, bone derangements may constitute a modifiable mortality risk factor in hemodialysis patients.Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in the chronic kidney disease (CKD) population. Recent studies have shown that the development of vascular calcification is the result of an active process, similar to ossification. Renal osteodystrophy is virtually ubiquitous in patients with CKD and is characterized by a spectrum of bone histological abnormalities that may result in hyperphosphatemia and hypercalcemia as a consequence of either excessive bone resorption, which characterizes osteitis fibrosa, or the inability of bone to buffer the excess calcium load in patients with adynamic bone disease. The present study is part of a randomized controlled trial comparing the effects of sevelamer with those of calcium acetate on bone metabolism in long-term hemodialysis patients. There was no difference in coronary artery calcification (CAC) progression or changes in bone remodeling between patients randomly assigned to calcium acetate or sevelamer treatment. The present data consist of a secondary analysis of a randomized clinical trial comparing the effects of sevelamer (Renagel, 800-mg tablets; Genzyme Co, Cambridge, MA) and calcium acetate (PhosLo, 667-mg tablets; Fresenius Medical Care, Waltham, MA) on CAC. Patient distribution is shown in The present analysis includes 64 patients who completed the 12-month protocol and had baseline and end-of-study multislice coronary tomography and bone biopsy data available. Thirty-seven patients were excluded for the following reasons: kidney transplantation (12 patients), parathyroidectomy (2 patients), refusal to undergo bone biopsy (9 patients), death (9 patients), and change of dialysis modality or referral to other dialysis facility (5 patients). There were no differences between excluded patients and those who completed the study regarding age, time on dialysis therapy, smoking, and presence of diabetes mellitus or hypertension. Baseline CAC and bone histomorphometric parameters were also similar. The initial dose of phosphate binder was calculated for each patient according to the usual label recommendations. Thereafter, dosage was adjusted monthly based on results of laboratory tests. Study end points were serum phosphorus level of 3.5 to 5.5 mg/dL, ionized calcium level of 1.11 to 1.40 mmol/L, and iPTH level of 150 to 300 pg/mL. Investigators were also encouraged to alter calcium dialysate concentration and vitamin D treatment during the study based on baseline bone biopsy diagnosis. Therefore, patients with low-turnover bone disease were withdrawn from vitamin D treatment and shifted to a 2.5-mEq/L calcium dialysate concentration regardless of iPTH levels. Daily phosphorus intake and oral calcium load were estimated from a 3-day diet inquiry at baseline and 6 and 12 months, as described elsewhere. Whole blood was collected from all participants at the respective study sites in a fasting state the morning before the first hemodialysis session of the week. Laboratory evaluation included monthly measurements of ionized calcium and phosphorus. Serum iPTH (Immulite Assay; DPC, Los Angeles, CA; reference range, 10 to 65 pg/mL) was determined every second month. OPG (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; Immundiagnostik Laboratory, Bensheim, Germany; reference range, 30.45 ± 12.1 pg/mL), soluble receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; Immundiagnostik Laboratory; detection limit, 1.5 pg/mL), and 25-hydroxy vitamin D (radioimmunoassay; DiaSorin, Stillwater, MN; reference range, 18 to 62 ng/mL) levels were determined at baseline and 12 months. As specific serum markers of bone turnover, bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (enzyme immunoassay; Metra Biosystem Inc, Mountain View, CA; reference range, 11.6 to 42.7 U/L for men and 15 to 41.3 U/L for women) levels were determined at baseline and 6 and 12 months, and deoxypyridinoline levels (enzyme immunoassay; Quidel Corp, San Diego, CA; reference range, 3.25 ± 0.66 nmol/L for men and 3.43 ± 0.64 nmol/L for women) were determined at baseline and 12 months. Calcification score was determined using 16-slice multislice coronary tomography (Somatron Volum Zoom; Siemens AG, Erlhagen, Germany). A chest radiographic image without contrast was acquired while the subject was in apnea to determine initial and final scan levels. Images of each section were acquired during a 150-millisecond exposure with a distance of 3 mm between each slice. Timing of image acquisition was coordinated with the diastolic phase of the cardiac cycle at 60% of the RR interval with the use of electrocardiographic monitoring. All scans were analyzed using Workstation software (Indigo 02 SGI; Mountain View, CA) to determine calcium score. This software can detect calcified lesions with density of at least 130 Housfield units and minimal surface area of 0.5 mm The reported intertest variability using similar methods was 15% or less, and the SD of interscan variability was approximately 10%. Additionally, the ability to track CAC progression is most accurate in patients with intermediate to higher scores because the absolute error in CAC measurement approximates actual CAC scores in patients with low scores (ie, CAC, 1 to 30 AU). Absolute progression of CAC was calculated as the difference between the 12-month and baseline scores, and relative progression was calculated by using the ratio: (absolute progression/baseline score) × 100. Baseline and 12-month bone specimens were obtained alternatively from the right or left iliac crest to avoid interference of repair processes from the previous biopsy. The procedure was conducted using a trephine with a 7-mm inner diameter adapted to an electrical drill (Gauthier Medical, Rochester, MN). All patients were prelabeled with oral tetracycline (20 mg/kg/d for 3 days) administered over 2 separated periods 10 days apart. Bone fragments were submitted for the usual processing and histological studies. Renal osteodystrophy was classified into one of the classic types according to the following criteria: (1) predominant hyperparathyroid bone disease, defined as bone formation rate/bone surface (BFR/BS; reference range, 0.13 ± 0.07 μ According to the recently proposed Turnover, Mineralization and Volume classification for bone histomorphometry, Data are presented as mean ± SD, except for calcium score, which is presented as median and range because of its non Gaussian distribution. Time-average means were calculated for all variables, and the resulting values are presented in comparisons between groups. Demographic, laboratory, and bone histological characteristics were compared between groups using χ Values for the following parameters are given throughout in the first unit listed and may be converted to the second unit shown by multiplying by the conversion factor provided: 25-hydroxy vitamin D (ng/mL to nmol/L; 2.496), calcium ion (mmol/L to mEq/L; 2), and inorganic phosphorus (mg/dL to mmol/L; 0.3229). iPTH levels given in pg/mL and ng/L are equivalent. The 64 patients analyzed were relatively young (47 ± 12 years) and predominantly men (66%) and white (62.5%). Average time on hemodialysis therapy was 37 ± 25 months. Most had hypertension (66%) and 12.5% had diabetes as a comorbid condition. Thirty-seven patients received sevelamer and 27 received calcium acetate as phosphate-binders. Compared with the calcified group ( On follow-up ( When patients in the calcified group who did not experience progression (nonprogressor group) were compared with those with CAC that progressed in 1 year (progressor group; Follow-up data are listed in Taking into consideration baseline bone histological status, high or low turnover, as shown in   Cardiovascular disease is still the most common cause of death in patients with CKD. The cumulative prevalence of traditional risk factors is insufficient to explain the increased cardiovascular mortality in this population. Many other factors associated with CKD and its therapy have been proposed as possible contributing factors, such as chronic inflammation, oxidative stress, hyperhomocysteinemia, and disorders of mineral metabolism. Since Block et al Because CKD directly produces a loss of skeletal anabolic potential by either diminishing skeletal growth factor or producing anabolic inhibitors, It must be emphasized that in the studied population, there was a subgroup of young patients with preserved trabecular bone volume who did not develop CAC, even after 1 year of observation. These observations confirm the important link between bone status and vascular calcification and suggest a role of specific genetic characteristics (ie, calcification inhibitors) on triggering CAC development, which were not addressed in the present study. This study also shows that patients with high-turnover bone status who had a decreased bone formation rate during the 1 year observational period were at lower risk of CAC progression. Because of the prospective design of this study, it is possible to infer that in the group of patients with high-turnover bone status, lowering high turnover decreased CAC progression. It must be considered that this high-turnover state is driven by secondary hyperparathyroidism, which is characterized by poorly differentiated osteoblast precursors manifesting a fibroblastic phenotype and by increased osteoclastic activity. This results in net bone resorption, fibrosis of the bone marrow space, and release of calcium and phosphate into the extracellular fluid. At the other end of the renal osteodystrophy spectrum, adynamic bone disorder is characterized by quiescent osteoblasts and osteoclasts with markedly decreased bone turnover. In this situation, reduction of the rapidly diffusible ion pool of calcium and phosphorus associated with the reduction of bone mineralization front reduces the skeleton's ability to buffer extracellular calcium and phosphate, resulting in increased postprandial fluctuations. Altogether, the improvement in bone turnover was associated with lower CAC progression in patients with high- and low-turnover bone disorders. Considering that CAC is implicated in greater cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, renal osteodystrophy may constitute an additional and potentially modifiable mortality risk factor. Major limitations of this study include the brief observational period (1 year) and a relatively small number of patients. Furthermore, because this protocol was originally designed to compare the effect of different phosphate binders on CAC and bone remodeling in hemodialysis patients, this may have biased observations regarding specific conditions, such as the role of hyperphosphatemia in CAC development. In addition, because of the absence of participants with severe hyperparathyroidism, the effect of high bone turnover on CAC progression might have been underestimated. In conclusion, this is the first study to prospectively analyze the relationship between CAC progression and changes in bone remodeling in a hemodialysis population. Nephrologists must keep in mind that low trabecular bone volume and low bone turnover state may be associated with the development and progression of CAC in patients with CKD, and measures taken to normalize bone remodeling could at the same time prevent the progression of CAC. Further research is needed to investigate whether these findings have a causal relationship or both bone remodeling disorders and vascular calcification reflect an interrelated pathological response to some as yet unidentified environmental trigger, depending on a specific genetic background.  