The present study has investigated the individual and combined influence of pre- and post-anthesis temperatures and cultivars on the protein composition in barley grains. Two barley cultivars were grown in soil and hydroponic systems in daylight chambers with different pre- and post-anthesis temperatures. Size exclusion (SE)-HPLC was used to evaluate the protein composition in mature barley grains. The results showed that individual and interactive effects of pre- and post-anthesis temperatures and cultivar variations influenced protein composition in the barley grains. Pre-anthesis temperature greatly affected the amounts of total sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) extractable proteins (TOTE) and explained 30% of the variation in TOTE. The barley cultivars accounted for 20% of the variation in TOTE. Variation in malting barley cultivars was found to influence the SDS extractable small monomers (41% of the variation). Percentage of SDS un-extractable polymeric proteins in total amount of polymeric proteins (%UPP) was governed by post-anthesis temperature, accounting for 11% of the variation and cultivar differences accounted for 7% of the variation. Thus, the climatic conditions during the specific growing period and a choice of cultivars played a major role in determining the protein composition and ultimately the malting quality of spring barley.Barley ( Protein composition of barley is affected by a number of environmental factors, e.g. temperature, precipitation, fertilizer etc., and from these factors temperature is known to be of significance ( The aim of the present investigation was to study the individual and interactive effects of pre- and post-anthesis temperatures on protein composition of two spring malting barley cultivars, genetically differing in maturation times and GPC. Further the aim was to study if differences in the cultivation systems, i.e. soil or hydroponic, create differences in the protein composition of two spring malting barley cultivars. To obtain differences in protein composition in mature barley grains, spring malting barley cultivars with varying genetic backgrounds, i.e. differences in maturation time and GPC, were chosen. Two (two-row) spring malting barley cultivars, Henley (medium tall, medium maturation time, high grain weight and medium to high GPC) and NFC Tipple (medium short, long maturing time, high grain weight, low GPC) were investigated. Seeds of the cultivars Henley and NCP Tipple were provided by Scandinavian Seed, Linköping (Sweden) and Lantmännen SW Seed, Svalöv (Sweden), respectively. Plants were grown in controlled climatic daylight chambers in the Biotron. Two independent daylight chambers were used. The day/night temperatures in the chambers were set to 18/12 °C (for low temperature chamber) and 23/17 °C (for high temperature chamber). The relative humidity in both temperature chambers was kept at 70%. Two cultivation media, soil and hydroponic, were investigated with application of equalized nitrogen amount in the plants. In the hydroponic cultivation, barley seedlings were placed on black Styrofoam plates, which floated continuously on aired nutrient solution in black 2 dm On average, the plants reached anthesis at day 62 after sowing and that day was set to change from pre-anthesis temperature treatment to post-anthesis treatment. The temperature combinations were high pre-anthesis/high post-anthesis (high/high); high pre-anthesis/low post-anthesis (high/low); low pre-anthesis/high post-anthesis (low/high), and low pre-anthesis/low post-anthesis (low/low). The plants were harvested at full maturity. To determine the amount and size distribution of polymeric and monomeric proteins, the grain samples from each treatment were lyophilized. Thereafter, size exclusion high performance liquid chromatography (SE-HPLC) was used with a two step extraction procedure according to eSMP = SDS extractable small monomeric proteins uSMP = SDS un-extractable small monomeric proteins TOTE = total SDS extractable proteins TOTU = total SDS un-extractable proteins %UPP = percentage of un-extractable polymeric protein in total polymeric protein=[(uLPP +uSPP)/(uLPP+uSPP + eLPP + eSPP)] × 100 %LargeUPP = percentage of large unextractable polymeric proteins in total large polymeric protein) = [uLPP/(uLPP + eLPP)] × 100 %LUMP = percentage of large unextractable monomeric protein into total large monomeric proteins = [uLMP/(uLMP + eLMP)] × 100 %SUMP = percentage of small unextractable monomeric protein into total small monomeric proteins = [uSMP/(uSMP + eSMP)] × 100 Mon/Pol (Monomers/Polymers) = [(eLMP + eSMP + uLMP + uSMP)/(eLPP + eSPP + uLPP + uSPP)] SAS release 9.1 ( Significantly higher amounts of TOTE, TOTU and %LUMP were observed at high pre-anthesis as compared to low pre-anthesis temperature, in both cultivation systems ( Significantly higher amounts of eSMP, TOTU, Mon/Pol, %UPP, %LargeUPP and significantly lower amounts of %SUMP were observed at high post-anthesis temperature as compared to low post-anthesis temperature, in both cultivation systems ( The combination of both high pre- and post-anthesis temperatures (high/high) resulted in significantly higher amounts of eSMP, TOTE, TOTU and Mon/Pol as compared to the combination of both low pre-anthesis and post-anthesis temperatures (low/low), in both cultivation systems ( The combination of high/high temperature resulted in significantly higher amounts of uSMP at soil cultivation, but significantly lower amounts at hydroponic cultivation compared with the combination of low/low temperature ( The cultivar Henley had higher amounts of eSMP, TOTE, TOTU, Mon/Pol compared to the cultivar Tipple, in both cultivation systems ( The cultivar Henley combined with the high/high temperature treatment gave significantly higher amounts of eSMP, TOTE, TOTU and Mon/Pol in comparison with the other cultivars and temperature combinations, in both cultivation systems ( The combination of the cultivar Henley with the high/high temperature treatment (at soil cultivation) and with the low/low temperature treatment (at hydroponic cultivation) showed the highest amounts of uSMP respectively, in comparison with the rest of the combinations ( The combination of the cultivar Henley with the low/high and with the high/low temperature treatment gave significantly the higher and lower amounts of %UPP, respectively, as compared to the other cultivar and temperature combinations, at soil cultivation ( The amounts of eSMP and uSMP were found to correlate significantly and positively with TOTE, TOTU, Mon/Pol and negatively with %UPP and %LargeUPP, in both cultivation systems ( A significant negative correlation was found between eSMP and %LUMP at hydroponic cultivation, although the correlation was not significant at soil cultivation ( The overall variation accounted for by the combination of the used cultivation systems, cultivars and temperatures was 57.0% (for eSMP), 61.3% (for TOTE), 19.2% (for %UPP), 32.4% (for %LargeUPP), 12.3% (for %SUMP) and 30.4% (for %LUMP), respectively ( The results from the regression analyses in the present study have indicated that pre-anthesis temperature had a major effect on the amounts of TOTE, while post-anthesis temperatures to a large extent influenced the polymerization of the proteins. Regression analyses showed that the choice of cultivar was of great importance for the amounts of small monomeric proteins in the grain, as well as on the polymerization of proteins. As to the regression analyses results, differences in the cultivation systems, contributed to a minor extent to the variation in the amount and size distribution of monomeric and polymeric proteins in the barley grains as related to other evaluated parameters (temperature and cultivar). Further, the importance of the combination of the used factors (i.e. cultivation, cultivars and temperature) for governing GPC and protein composition in malting barley was elucidated, and regression analyses indicated that no individual factor could solely explain the grain protein variation. The amounts of TOTE and GPC (measured as nitrogen concentration by Dumas' method) were found to correlate with each other, both in soil cultivation ( The cultivar Henley with high post-anthesis temperature resulted in higher %UPP as compared to e.g. the cultivar Tipple combined with low post-anthesis temperature. These findings in malting barley corresponds well with results previously reported in wheat, where post-anthesis temperature and especially in combination with certain genotypes resulted in the highest contribution to %UPP ( Our results have shown that the SMP fractions were dependent on differences in the cultivars to a larger extent than temperature. Variation in post-anthesis temperature also influenced the SMP fraction i.e. high post-anthesis temperature led to higher eSMP than low post-anthesis temperature. The positive correlation between TOTE and small monomers (found in our results) has not been found in wheat in earlier studies. Instead, a stable level of albumins and globulins has been reported at various GPC (TOTE) levels ( In the current investigation, we have used two different media for cultivations, i.e. soil and hydroponic with equalized nitrogen amount in the plants at the end of stem elongation. Overall, it was observed in our investigation that medium of cultivation played a minor role in affecting the protein composition of the spring malting barley. However, differences in cultivation significantly affected some of the protein factors evaluated, i.e. 2% variation in eSMP and 8% in TOTE, respectively. The amounts of eSMP and TOTE were found to be relatively higher in hydroponic cultivation in comparison with soil cultivation. The differences in the amounts of TOTE, in different cultivations, can also be attributed to the effect of temperature during the entire growing period on nitrogen mineralization process in the soil and changes in nitrogen uptake and re-allocation ( The individual and combined effects of differences in temperature and cultivars were found to influence the protein composition in barley grains. Protein composition, i.e. SDS-extractable proteins were governed mainly by the temperature before anthesis. However, amount and size distribution of polymeric proteins were found to be determined largely by temperature after anthesis. Variation in the spring malting barley cultivars was found to be the main determinant of the monomers and polymers in the grain. The temperature played a limited role in the determination of monomers in the barley grains. The