The increasing consumption of gypsum products compels their producers and consumers to behave in accordance with the precepts of sustainability. Despite the necessity of the integral recycling of gypsum products, only a part of the waste plaster is reused, which leads to the development of products with large quantities of plaster to meet this growing demand. The objective of this research was to investigate the variation of the physical and mechanical properties of residues of gypsum plasterboard sheets and commercial gypsum during recycling cycles on bench scale. The experiment addressed the crushing, milling, calcination, hydration, formation and breaking of test bodies. The microstructure of the recycled gypsum was characterized according to its chemical and mineralogical composition by using scanning electron microscope (SEM) and X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). The characteristics of the powder and the physical and mechanical properties in the fresh and hardened states were determined for five proportions of recycled gypsum and commercial gypsum throughout the recycling cycles. The results showed that it is possible to obtain 8.40 MPa for axial compression strength at 28 days in the first three recycling cycles for gypsum from gypsum boards, recycled gypsum plaster and the suggested mixtures, except for gypsum recycled in the first cycle and commercial gypsum plaster. Values higher than 30 N mm−2 were obtained for surface hardness in all samples. The reversibility of the reactions was verified during the recycling cycles, proving the technical viability of the process up to the third recycling cycle. The third cycle gypsum presented similar results to the original gypsum and met the technical norms requirements. Hence, the potential of producing components containing large quantities of recycled gypsum is notable, thus encouraging not only reverse logistics but also the incorporation of waste products and increasing products cycles.The current development model is based on the exploitation of natural resources to manufacture the most diverse types of products, contributing to the scarcity of natural resources. Thus, it is necessary to adopt new mechanisms and techniques to enable the sustainability of any productive activity ( The recycling process is a way to minimize the waste of raw material for it reduces both waste and the need of natural resources to manufacture new products ( An important aspect of this study is to point out alternatives to the disposal of gypsum waste, whether it is from the industry or constructions. As a result, the accumulation in landfills is avoided and the cycle of exploitation of the suppliers of supplies for the manufacture of plaster is prolonged ( Construction gypsum is a mineral binding agent obtained by calcium sulfate calcination. In this process, calcium sulfate dihydrate loses 75% of its combined water, producing calcium sulfate hemihydrate. Gypsum is composed mainly of calcium sulfate hemihydrate, as shown in Reaction (1) ( It is noteworthy that different types of commercial gypsum plaster contain different amounts of dihydrate, hemihydrate and anhydrite due to the difference in the amount of water that is attached to hemihydrates after the use of the product. Commercial gypsum plaster from Brazil is constituted manly of hemihydrates (54.8%–96.2%), anhydrite (0.0%–19.0%) and dihydrates (0.0%–10.0%) according to Gypsum has been used as raw material in various components, such as in gypsum plasterboard sheets in which gypsum paste is shaped between two sheets of cardboard. When hydration is complete, gypsum is chemically restored to the compound found in nature (dihydrate), forming the core of the gypsum plasterboard sheet ( The typical composition of gypsum plasterboard sheets is complex, with the predominant portion of hydrated natural gypsum (calcium sulfate), paper, glass fibers, vermiculite, clay, starch, caustic potash (KOH), and foaming and dispersing agents ( In North America, approximately 12% of gypsum plasterboard is wasted in construction due to sheet cutting activities during the material application (  The reversibility of the transformation reactions of calcium sulfate to gypsum (calcination) and gypsum to gypsum dihydrate (hydration) leads to produces a recycled binding agent, reducing the consumption of the original mineral ( The recovery of the gypsum binding capacity can be achieved by the calcination process in which gypsum residue is converted to recycled gypsum ( Regarding the characterization of the material, Brazilian standards set minimum values in terms of setting time, fineness modules, axial compressive strength and surface hardness (  In the Brazilian standard For bulk density, the minimum limit determined by the Brazilian standard    According to Brazilian standard  In Brazilian standard The criteria for classification of commercial gypsum, according to Brazilian standards, are described in The better knowledge of the material properties might enable improvements in existing partial recycling processes and in the development of new materials from waste plasterboard in great proportions. The analysis of the mechanical and physical properties of plaster residues aimed to understand the performance of this material during recycling cycles carried out on a bench scale. Samples of gypsum plasterboard sheets and commercial gypsum were analyzed over five subsequent recycling cycles. In short, the objective of this study was to investigate whether the properties of plaster residues remain throughout the recycling cycles or not and how they change. The reversibility of gypsum dehydration reactions reported in the literature guided the experiments performed in this research, which is the reason why recycling the residue of gypsum plasterboard sheets and commercial gypsum during five cycles of recycling was adopted. In To prepare the material, 150 kg of waste material was collected from standard 12.5 mm thick gypsum plasterboard sheets from cutting or losses of making walls and lining using drywall. After the waste preparation, the material was grinded to powder with a manual cylinder for mass pressing. The sheet residue with thickness of 12.5 mm was positioned perpendicularly between the cylinder axes, which were adjusted to the distance of 10 mm. As the crank was turned, at a rotation of 10 rpm, the residue was pressed against the cylinder walls, defragmenting the gypsum mass. The board coating the gypsum plasterboard sheets was separated from the gypsum mass through the compression exerted by the cylinders on the residue As a result of the separation process, 83 kg of gypsum was produced from 150 kg of residue from the interior of the gypsum plasterboard sheets. The remaining portion, 67 kg, was the result of the board coating the gypsum plasterboard sheets, with gypsum strongly adhered. After grinding the material in the manual cylinder, an electro-mechanical cylinder was used to reduce particle size, as observed in After the electromechanical crushing process, the gypsum residue was triturated at 40 rpm in a Quimilo mill composed of a hundred 2 cm diameter agate beads inside a porcelain body. Each batch processed 1 kg of material in 50 min. After grinding, the gypsum residue was calcined in a Biopar electric oven for sterilization and dried with renovation and circulation of forced air. The sample was kept in the oven at 180 °C for 24 h, according to the methodology described by To determine the physical properties of the gypsum powder, granulometry, bulk density and fineness modules tests were performed according to procedures described in Brazilian Standard Compositions with 100% recycled gypsum, 100% recycled gypsum from gypsum plasterboard sheets and mixes of 25%, 50% and 75% in weight were used in the fresh state test and the in the formation of test bodies for the hardened state tests. All mixes were reproduced throughout the five recycling cycles. For both axial compressive strength and tensile strength in the flexion, 5 samples were selected from 26 samples given in Tests were performed at the start and the end of setting time of the recycled gypsum paste to determine the properties of the paste in the fresh state. During the tests, throughout the recycling cycles with recycled gypsum from gypsum plasterboard sheets and with commercial gypsum, the w/g ratio of 0.7 was maintained, which is generally adopted in the formation of gypsum paste in studies and was used by To determine the properties in the hardened state, 5 × 5 × 5 cm test bodies were molded for the axil compressive strength test, as described in Brazilian standard At the end of the tests to determine the mechanical strength, a sample of each test body was collected to determine the chemical composition of the gypsum residue with Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS), present in the SEM. After 45 days, when the material showed a complete cure, it was defragmented. The cycle of recycling was finished, another cycle was started from the stage of electro-mechanical grinding, as observed in Only samples formed with 100% recycled gypsum were used in the next cycle. The other test bodies composed of experimental mixes were discarded. During the manual grinding process, it was not possible to observe any fragment of the board adhered to the gypsum mass. However, after hydration, the gypsum mass color changed to a tone like the coating paper of the sheets. During the scanning electron microscopy, small particles of paper adhered to the gypsum mass were observed, as can be observed in The elongated particle present in the scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of In order to promote further reduction of the particle size of recycled gypsum, it is possible to adopt smaller steel balls instead of agate beads used in the ball mill. Also, the ball mill could be replaced with continuous rotating mills used in the clinker milling process for cement manufacture. The recycled gypsum from the gypsum plasterboard sheets has a smaller particle size than the GC and GR-1C. However, this lower particle size is not sufficient to achieve the bulk density parameter of 700 kg m-³ defined in Brazilian standard According to the Brazilian standard Based on the values presented in The values obtained in the modules of fineness test were greater than 1.10, which classifies the recycled gypsum as a thick plaster according to the criteria established in the Brazilian standard One of the hypotheses for not reaching the bulk density of 700 kg m From the values presented in Even with low bulk density values, the recycled gypsum used in this research presented appropriate mechanical performance for axial compressive strength, splitting tensile strength and surface hardness. The Brazilian standard When analyzing the samples with the gypsum setting time parameters for the coating, the samples GR-1C, GR25GC75-1C, GR-2C, GR75GC25-2C, GR-3C, GR75GC25-3C, GR-4C, GR75GC25-4C, GR50GC50-4C, GR75GC25-5C and GR50GC50-5C reached both parameters simultaneously. Samples of the recycled gypsum from gypsum plasterboard sheets met the start and end time parameters of the setting time for coating plaster simultaneously during the five recycling cycles. The mean splitting tensile strength results are presented in All samples had an increase in their splitting tensile strength values from 7 to 28 days. None of the samples reached 3.9 MPa for splitting tensile strength as described by In general, the 5th cycle presented splitting tensile strength values below the other cycles, which may be related to the difficulty of interlacing between the particles of the short and orthorhombic crystals present in these samples. The values obtained in the axial compressive strength test are presented in In the first cycle, the minimum value of 8.4 MPa, established in the Brazilian standard None of the samples from the 4th and 5th cycle achieved the minimum value of 8.4 MPa at 28 days stipulated in the Brazilian standard Another factor that contributed to the lower resistance of these samples was the excess of water present in the mixture, forming liquid pastes or with excess air/water bubbles entrapped ( Due to this excess of water, the appearance of pores was noted on the test bodies after evaporation, reducing their resistance ( It is assumed that these pores would not be formed, increasing the values obtained for axial compressive strength, if a disembodied air additive was used or if the w/g ratio was lower than 0.7. The results obtained in the surface hardness test of the test bodies are presented in All tested samples were in accordance with the minimum surface hardness value of 30 N mm The samples GC-1C and GC-3C presented higher values than those obtained by The agglutination of the crystals, the formation of large nuclei and the entanglement of the crystals of CaSO From the SEM Pictures of the recycled commercial gypsum, it is possible to observe the formation of agglomerates of elongated microcrystals, with varying dimensions, throughout the five recycling cycles ( In Crystals of different lengths and thicknesses, characteristic of recycled gypsum ( In the GR samples the crystals have orthorhombic forms, different from the crystals observed in the GC, which indicates that the interlacing of the crystals is not so evident due to their crystalline structure. As in GC, fractures were observed in the formation of crystals, generated by the evaporation of the excess water composition in the GR samples. The chemical compositions were similar to those reported in the literature, in which oxygen, calcium and sulfur predominated, confirming the data of The proportion of the elements was maintained during the cycles, as well as the maintenance of the observed elements, confirming the reversibility of the reactions. It was expected that different elements would be found in the GR samples due to the additives used during the production process of the gypsum plasterboard sheets; however, this was not observed in any cycle.  Although the results obtained are restricted to samples of pure residues, that is, obtained from materials not contaminated by others, there is a potential for reuse and industrialization. The results were consistent throughout the recycling cycles, validating the model for bench scale. The results showed that it was possible to produce components using only plaster residues. The physical and mechanical characteristics evaluated showed that plaster residues have promising potential for the use on industrial scale, especially in the manufacture of plaster components. The incorporation of large quantities of plaster residues in the manufacture of commercial products is environmentally beneficial and implement cleaner production. The main conclusions of the study were: The recycling of gypsum waste is technically feasible until the 3rd cycle. It was possible to obtain 8.40 MPa for axial compressive strength at 28 days. Up to the 3rd cycle there were no losses in the properties of recycled gypsum. The grinding was efficient both in the step of separating the board from the gypsum mass of the gypsum plasterboard sheets and in the comminution of the gypsum particles, reaching the parameter for thick plaster described in the Brazilian standard Recycling can be an industrial solution in the production of new building components. The results of the bench studies revealed great potential to produce components made exclusively of gypsum waste. Resistant objects from gypsum residues could be obtained in the laboratory. Even with high degree of fineness, only samples GR-2C and GR-4C met the minimum bulk density established in the Brazilian standard The use of commercial gypsum mixes in the GR samples increased the splitting tensile strength values in all cycles. The increase in resistance is attributed to better entanglement of crystals and reduction of voids, since the crystals of commercial gypsum are more elongated whereas those of recycled gypsum are orthorhombic and shorter, thus filling the voids. The plaster residue can be reused generating new commercial opportunities. The incorporation of gypsum in large quantities in the manufacture of new products provides a cleaner and environmentally friendly production. All samples formed only with recycled gypsum from the gypsum plasterboard sheets met the two levels of the start and the end of setting time simultaneously. The reversibility of the reactions was proved, being possible to hydrate and calcine the gypsum through five cycles. This study was supported by the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) – Social Demand Program and The Federal University of Technology – Paraná (UTFPR).