Background
                  Radial head instability continues to be a challenge in the management of anterior Monteggia injuries; however, there is a paucity of literature on the factors that contribute to this instability. The aim of this biomechanical investigation was to examine the effects of ulnar angulation and soft tissue insufficiency on radial head stability in anterior Monteggia injuries.
               
                  Methods
                  Six cadaveric arms were mounted in an elbow motion simulator. Radial head translation was measured during simulated active elbow flexion with the forearm supinated. After testing the elbows in the intact state, the ulna was osteotomized and tested at 0°, 10°, 20°, and 30° of extension angulation. To examine the effect of soft tissue insufficiency, the anterior radiocapitellar joint capsule, annular ligament, quadrate ligament, and the proximal and middle interosseous membrane (IOM) were sequentially sectioned.
               
                  Results
                  There was a significant increase in anterior radial head translation with greater ulnar extension angulation. Sequential soft tissue sectioning also significantly increased anterior radial head translation. There was no increase in radial head translation with isolated sectioning of the anterior radiocapitellar joint capsule. Additional sectioning of the annular ligament and quadrate ligament slightly increased anterior radial head translation but did not reach statistical significance. Subsequent sectioning of the proximal and middle IOM resulted in significant increases in anterior radial head translation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our study demonstrates that progressive ulnar extension angulation results in an incremental increase in anterior radial head translation in anterior Monteggia injuries. Moreover, increasing magnitudes of soft tissue disruption result in greater anterior radial head instability.Although good results have been reported with appropriate management of acute Monteggia lesions in the pediatric population, their outcomes in the adult population are more variable with high rates of complications. A better understanding of the biomechanics of Monteggia fracture-dislocations should identify the factors that contribute to the radial head instability in these injuries. This should guide the development of improved surgical techniques and rehabilitation protocols to enhance patients' outcomes. The aim of this biomechanical investigation was to study the effects of ulnar angulation and soft tissue insufficiency on radial head stability in anterior Monteggia injuries using an in vitro elbow motion simulator. Six fresh-frozen cadaveric left upper extremities (mean age at the time of death: 60 ± 8 years) amputated at the mid-humerus level were used. Computed tomography was performed to rule out pre-existing degenerative articular pathology or skeletal deformity. Specimens were stored at –20°C and thawed at room temperature (22°C ± 2°C) for 18 hours prior to testing. To facilitate the application of muscle loads, the distal tendons of the biceps, brachialis, brachioradialis, triceps, and pronator teres were sutured in a running locking fashion using an 8-strand braided fishing line (Hercules, CA, USA; 150 lb). The supinator function was simulated using a suture anchor placed at the center of the bicipital tuberosity and routing the attached suture through guide sleeves placed in the proximal ulna. A custom-designed LabVIEW program (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) was used to control the loading of relevant muscles. Simulated active elbow flexion with the forearm supinated was prescribed at a rate of 10°/s based on previously established protocols that have been validated with this simulator. Before testing, 5 simulated active preconditioning cycles of elbow flexion and extension with the forearm maintained in supination were performed. During definitive testing, 2 trials were conducted for each active motion and the average values were used for analysis. Testing was first conducted for the intact state. A custom jig was designed to simulate apex anterior angulation deformities typically seen in Bado type I anterior Monteggia injuries ( Sequential soft tissue sectioning was carried out through an anterior Henry approach. In stage 1, the anterior joint capsule was sectioned horizontally from the lateral to medial margins of the radial head. In stage 2, the midportion of the annular ligament and the quadrate ligament, if present, were sectioned longitudinally. In stage 3, the proximal portion of the interosseous membrane (IOM) composed of the proximal and dorsal oblique cords was sectioned. An optical tracking system (Optotrak Certus; Northern Digital, Waterloo, ON, Canada) was used to track the motion of the radial head. On completion of the testing protocol, each specimen was denuded of all soft tissues, with the optical position sensors left attached for digitization. A clinically relevant coordinate system was created by digitizing anatomic landmarks with a calibrated tracked stylus. To quantify radial head translation, a coordinate system was placed on the radial head with the origin at the deepest point of the radial dish. The y-axis of this coordinate system represents translation along the anterior-posterior plane ( Kinematic data were analyzed at 5° increments from 25°-130° arc of active flexion with the forearm in supination using SPSS 23 statistical software (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). A 2-way repeated measures analysis of variance was performed to compare the effect of ulnar extension angulation and elbow flexion angles on radial head translation. If significance was found, post hoc analysis with a Bonferroni correction was conducted to compare the effects of various degrees of ulnar extension angulation with each other. A 3-way repeated measures analysis of variance with Bonferroni correction was performed to examine the effect of sequential soft tissue sectioning, ulnar extension angulation, and elbow flexion angles on radial head translation. If significance was found, post hoc tests were conducted to compare the effect of various degrees of ulnar extension angulation in the soft tissue sectioned elbow and the effect of sequential soft tissue sectioning stages to each other. Data for the entire flexion-extension arc of motion were not always available owing to line-of-sight issues with the optical tracking system, most commonly at the extremes of the flexion-extension arc. Linear interpolation was used to estimate missing kinematic values when needed (approximately 2% of the data were interpolated). Statistical significance was set at α = 0.05. Sample size was calculated based on α = 0.05, power = 0.80, and moderate effect size (partial η With the soft tissues intact, greater ulnar extension angulation significantly increased anterior radial head translation during active elbow flexion with the forearm supinated ( There was no significant difference between the intact state and 0° of ulnar angulation (mean difference = 0.1 ± 0.6 mm); therefore, only the ulnar osteotomy 0° state was used in the 3-way repeated measures analysis of variance to analyze the effect of sequential soft tissue sectioning, ulnar extension angulation, and elbow flexion angle on radial head translation. This analysis showed that both sequential soft tissue sectioning and ulnar extension angulation had a significant effect on radial head translation (ulnar angulation: Recurrent or persistent radial head subluxation or dislocation has been reported despite numerous surgical procedures that have been proposed for the management of anterior Monteggia injuries. This biomechanical investigation demonstrates that increasing extension angulation of the ulna with or without soft tissue injury results in progressive anterior radial head translation. A previous biomechanical study with annular ligament insufficiency showed the same trend with up to 10° of ulnar extension malalignment. Our study demonstrates no significant radial head translation with isolated sectioning of the anterior joint capsule. Although clinically, an anterior capsular injury might be a part of the spectrum of soft tissue injuries in Monteggia lesions, an isolated capsular injury without injury to the annular ligament would likely be rare owing to the primary stabilizing effect of the annular ligament. In our experiment, additional sectioning of the annular ligament and the quadrate ligament resulted in an increase in anterior radial head translation, which approached but did not reach statistical significance. This finding is consistent with previous anatomic and biomechanical studies that have shown worsening radial head subluxation with a torn annular ligament in Monteggia injuries. With the soft tissues intact, our results show no significant effect of elbow flexion angle on radial head translation even with up to 30° of ulnar extension angulation. This effect is likely due to the intact anterior soft tissue structures (ie, anterior joint capsule and annular ligament). Although increasing extension angulation of the ulna resulted in greater anterior translation of the radial head, these intact soft tissue structures prevented further translation of the radial head throughout elbow flexion. During our experiments, we noted that increasing force was required to achieve and maintain higher degrees of ulnar angulation with the soft tissues intact. However, after soft tissue sectioning, adjusting the ulnar angulation met with much less resistance even up to 30°. Thus, it is unlikely that larger static ulnar deformities will be encountered clinically without concomitant soft tissue injuries. Our results show a worsening of the anterior radial head translation in higher degrees of elbow flexion, particularly during later stages of soft tissue sectioning and at larger degrees of ulnar extension angulation. Deficient soft tissue stabilizers, particularly the IOM, permitted greater displacement of the radius. In the setting of this increased instability, worsening radial head translation may be related to greater activation of the biceps muscle in higher degrees of elbow flexion. Our study has several strengths. The only previous biomechanical study investigating the effect of ulnar angulation on radial head stability evaluated 5° and 10° of ulnar extension malalignment. This study has several limitations. In this cadaveric biomechanical model of anterior Monteggia injuries, a transverse osteotomy was performed and maintained in various degrees of extension angulation using a rigid custom-designed jig that would not allow for fracture collapse and shortening of the forearm length. However, other fracture patterns, such as oblique and comminuted fractures, are frequently encountered clinically. Moreover, with fracture comminution and shortening, there is a change in forearm length relationship, which may influence the magnitude of soft tissue injury and stability of Monteggia lesions. Our model did not evaluate the effect of varus-valgus angulation and rotational deformity of the ulna on radial head translation. The effect of a different sequence of soft tissue sectioning was not evaluated in this study. However, a previous biomechanical study examining the effect of these soft tissue structures on pure radial head dislocations concluded that the order in which these soft tissues were sectioned did not have a significant effect on radial head instability. The results of this biomechanical investigation have important clinical implications. Residual extension angulation of the ulnar fracture causes anterior radial head subluxation/dislocation in anterior Monteggia injuries. Thus, an anatomic reduction and restoration of the ulnar alignment is crucial. Moreover, in cases with significant anterior radial head displacement or persistent instability despite an anatomic reduction of the ulna, disruption of more than just the anterior joint capsule, particularly the annular ligament, quadrate ligament, and the IOM, should be suspected. In this biomechanical investigation, we aimed to examine the effect of progressive ulnar malalignment and soft tissue disruption on radial head stability in anterior Monteggia injuries. Our results demonstrate that progressive ulnar extension angulation results in an incremental increase in anterior radial head translation. Moreover, increasing the magnitude of soft tissue disruption results in progressive anterior radial head instability. Injury to the annular ligament and the IOM should be suspected in anterior Monteggia lesions with a large amount of anterior radial head displacement or in patients with persistent anterior radial head translation despite an anatomic reduction of the ulna. This study was funded by the The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.