The extraction behaviour of Ce(III) from dilute nitric acid medium using a binary mixture of PC 88A and Cyanex 921 has been investigated. Several process parameters such as contact time, concentration of nitric acid, nitrate ion, extractant, diluents and Ce(III) concentration in aqueous feed, organic to aqueous phase volume ratio and temperature were varied to observe the influence on the extraction and to optimize operating conditions. Experimental results demonstrated that extraction of 0.001mol/L Ce(III) from 0.001mol/L HNO3 was 96.6% with mixture of 0.7mol/L PC 88A and 0.1mol/L Cyanex 921. The extraction mechanism was established by applying method of slope analysis. Thermodynamic parameters were calculated from temperature variation studies. The loaded Ce(III) was effectively stripped using 0.6mol/L HCl or 1.2mol/L H2SO4. Extraction data were analysed using regression method.Rare earth elements of high purity have many scientific applications such as catalysts in the production of petroleum and synthetic products, used in magnets, motion picture projectors, lasers, phosphors, and X-ray intensifying screens ( The extractant PC 88A has higher separation factor for some rare earths as shown in The present article describes Ce(III) extraction with a synergistic mixture comprising PC 88A and Cyanex 921(93% of tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide). The effects of shaking time, aqueous phase acidity, concentration of extractants, organic to aqueous phase volume ratio, metal loading capacity, diluent and temperature on the binary extraction system have been investigated. Stripping studies have been undertaken to know reusability of the extractant mixture and also recovery of Ce(III) from the organic extract. To increase the distribution ratio of the metal ion a synergist is usually added which is capable of competing with water molecules for the first coordination sphere of the metal ion. These synergists contain uncharged electron donor atoms and hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains. Coordination sites of the extracted species must be saturated either by additional molecules of water (hydration) or by the undissociated ligand (self-adduct). According to the HSAB concept, hard cations coordinate to various hard ligands mainly by electrostatic interactions. Synergistic extraction shows promising effect in the field of solvent extraction ( The commercial extractants, PC 88A (Daihachi Chem. Ind., Japan) and Cyanex 921 (Cytec. Inc.,Canada) were used as received. All other reagents used were of analytical reagent grade. The aqueous phase was prepared by dissolving required amount of Ce(NO The extraction experiments were carried out in duplicate by equilibrating equal volumes of aqueous phase containing Ce(III) in HNO The concentrations of various reagents used in the test program are listed in The effect of contact time on the extraction was studied by varying it from 1 The extraction percentage of Ce(III) decreased from 49.5% to 3.8% with the increase in nitric acid concentration from 0.001 The experimental results plotted in terms of logD Extraction percentage of Ce(III) by varying nitrate ion concentration from 0.1 The extraction of Ce(III) was increased from 1.9% to 40.8% for 0.1 The effect of variation of PC 88A concentration as stated in In aqueous nitric acid medium, several species of Ce (III) are formed ( The reaction of extraction may be given as: If the total concentration of cerium in the aqueous phase is given as [Ce] where β The extraction equilibrium constant is given as: In the calculation of equilibrium constant, the activity coefficients of all species are assumed as unity and the value of Taking logarithm of both the sides of Eq. The loading capacity of mixture of 0.2 The effect of the organic to aqueous phase volume ratio (O/A) on the extraction was investigated by varying the O/A ratio from 1/5 to 5/1 keeping the total volume constant. The extraction percentage was increased from 1.8 to 93.2 with increase in O/A phase volume ratio ( To know the effect of nature of various aromatic and aliphatic diluents on the extraction of Ce(III),the binary mixture of extractants were prepared in organic diluents namely, benzene, toluene, xylene, kerosene, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride and petrofin and were used for extraction purpose. All other experimental conditions were maintained as described in The enthalpy, entropy changes can provide valuable information regarding extraction mechanism. It would be helpful for the design of improved solvent extraction process as reported by The standard enthalpy change (ΔH°) and entropy change (ΔS°) were calculated from the slope and intercept of the plot of logK From the plot, ( As seen from the Eq. Hypothesis test for linear regression slope: The hypothesis test is to determine whether there is a significant relationship between independent variables i.e., log [HNO where Test requirements: The standard requirements or assumptions for simple linear regression are: i. The dependent variable log D ii. The log D State of hypothesis: If there is a significant linear relationship between independent variables X and dependent variable Y, then slope will not be equal to zero. The regression analysis was performed using a computer program in MS Excel. The values of logD Using above analysis the estimated value of coefficients Since in all cases coefficients are not equal to zero and The stability and recycling capacity of an extractant needs to be evaluated to assess its utility as an extractant for commercial purposes. The aforesaid characteristics of binary mixture have been investigated for Ce(III) in terms of change in percent stripping. Stripping studies using the loaded organic phase containing Nd(III) have been conducted with mixture of Alamine 308 and Cyanex 302 and various reagents such as HCl, HNO The extraction of cerium with mixture of PC 88A and Cyanex 921 depends on the acid molarity and presence of nitrate ion in the aqueous phase. The increase in individual extractant concentration in the mixture resulted in enhancement in the extraction of Ce(III). Kerosene was proved to be effective for dilution of the binary mixture of extractants in terms of better extraction capability as studied. From the variation of the distribution ratio with temperature (298 The authors are thankful to authorities of Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University for the encouragement to carry out this research work. The authors express their gratitude to Prof. Sunita Chand, Dept. of Mathematics for suggestion and useful discussions. 