About 100 000 tons of nickel per annum is produced by the leaching of laterite ores. The laterite ores that are amenable to leaching are low in MgO and high in iron, that is, the limonite layer of the ore body. These ores are leached at high temperature, between 250°C and 270°C using sulfuric acid. Iron dissolves from the goethite, then precipitates, releasing cobalt into solution. The reason for the high temperature is to ensure that the iron precipitates to a sufficiently low level. Nickel and cobalt are precipitated from the solution using hydrogen sulfide. The precipitate, a mixture of nickel and cobalt sulfides, is sent to a nickel-cobalt refinery for further processing.An alternative to mixed sulfide precipitation is to either treat the solution directly or to precipitate mixed hydroxide or mixed carbonates.Processing of both the limonite and saprolite layers of the laterite ore body, such as the process implemented at Ravensthorpe, should result in greater utilization of the ore body. An alternative to mixed sulfide precipitation is to either treat the solution directly or to precipitate mixed hydroxide or mixed carbonates. Processing of both the limonite and saprolite layers of the laterite ore body, such as the process implemented at Ravensthorpe, should result in greater utilization of the ore body. Laterite ore bodies are composed of (at least) two layers: the saprolite layer and the limonite layer. The pyrometallurgical processes for the production of ferronickel and melting-grade nickel, described in The objective of this chapter is to provide an overview of the hydrometallurgy of laterites. Laterite hydrometallurgy produces about 100 000 A similar amount of nickel is produced by the pyrometallurgical reduction of limonitic laterite followed by leaching of the reduced product using NH Laterite hydrometallurgy is based mainly on leaching of limonite or smectite ores. These ores have a high iron content and a low MgO content. They are leached at high temperature with sulfuric acid. The process is frequently referred to as the high-pressure acid leaching process or Once the ore has been leached, it is cooled through several flash tanks to recover as much of the energy as possible. The cooled slurry is then pre-neutralized and sent to a counter-current decantation circuit, where the Nickel and cobalt are precipitated from the solution leaving counter-current decantation as a mixed nickel–cobalt sulfide using hydrogen sulfide gas. The advantage of this precipitation is that many of the impurities in the solution do not co-precipitate. For example, the solutions are frequently saturated in calcium after neutralization, which can cause the formation of crud in downstream solvent extraction. This calcium does not co-precipitate with the nickel and cobalt during sulfide precipitation, making downstream operations easier. Leaching and sulfide precipitation are discussed in more detail in Three alternatives to mixed sulfide precipitation are currently practiced or have recently been practiced: (i) precipitation of nickel carbonate, (ii) direct solvent extraction; and, (iii) the precipitation of mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxides. Cawse (Norilsk), Western Australia, originally operated a refinery. However, it currently produces nickel carbonate, which is sent to the refinery at Harjavalta, Finland. The Queensland Nickel refinery at Yabulu, near Townsville, Queensland, Australia, also precipitates nickel carbonate from solution, which is then calcined and partially reduced in hydrogen gas ( Bulong, also in Western Australia, implemented a process based on direct solvent extraction ( Goro (Vale), New Caledonia, has also implemented a direct solvent extraction process after extensive testing. Few operating details have been published; however, Goro has suffered from extensive commissioning problems ( Ravensthorpe, in Western Australia, implemented a process that included the precipitation of a mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxide as part of their enhanced The schematic flowsheet for Ravensthorpe Nickel is shown in The nickel-bearing solution then passes through two neutralization stages prior to precipitation of the product, which is the mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxide, (Ni,Co)(OH) The solution remaining after the mixed hydroxide precipitation step passes through two further stage of neutralization before being recycled back to the counter-current decantation circuit. Ravensthorpe operated for about a year before being closed due to the economic downturn of 2008–2009. It has subsequently been sold to First Quantum Minerals, who plan to resume operations in 2011. While there are a number of operations successfully using HPAL and sulphide precipitation, there is no standard process for the refining of nickel and cobalt from the mixed sulfide precipitate. Some of the refining processes that are used are presented in the overview of the hydrometallurgical refining of nickel and cobalt in About 100 000 Nickel and cobalt are precipitated from the solution using hydrogen sulfide. The precipitate, a mixture of nickel and cobalt sulfides, is sent to a nickel–cobalt refinery for further processing. An alternative to mixed sulfide precipitation is to either treat the solution directly or to precipitate mixed hydroxide or mixed carbonates. Processing of both the limonite and saprolite layers of the laterite ore body, such as the process implemented at Ravensthorpe, should result in greater utilization of the ore body.