Monocalcium aluminate, CaAl2O4, is the main constituent of calcium aluminate cements (CACs), which are used in a wide range of applications. Conventionally, monocalcium aluminate is prepared by long lasting sintering of the solid oxide mixture in temperatures exceeding 1400°C. The Pechini process is an alternative, low temperature polymeric precursor route for the synthesis of high purity oxides. In the present work, CaAl2O4 is prepared through the Pechini technique. Conventional solid-state synthesis is used in order to compare the final products with those obtained through the Pechini technique. As it is concluded, the Pechini technique can be successfully applied for the synthesis of CaAl2O4. Its formation requires a 3-h sintering at 900°C. The final product is crystalline CaAl2O4 of high purity, without any impurities of reactants or secondary phases.Monocalcium aluminate, CaAl Cement systems are quite complex, due to the appearance of a mixture of multiple binary and ternary compounds, and therefore the use of pure doped or undoped clinker phases can be of great interest in fundamental research on cement materials, as the investigation of the hydration process or the influence of minor elements on the reactivity of cement. Wet chemical synthesis methods can be applied for the preparation of ceramic powders with special characteristics, such as high sinterability, high surface area, well-defined and controlled chemical compositions and homogeneous distribution of the elements. The Pechini technique is an alternative, low temperature polymeric precursor route for the synthesis of high purity ceramics, which is based on the ability of certain alpha-hydroxycarboxyl acids, such as citric acid, to form polybasic acid chelates with certain metallic ions. In the present work, the Pechini technique is applied for the preparation of CA, using nitrate salts as metal-ion sources, citric acid for the chelation of the ions, and ethylene glycol for the polyesterification reaction. The sintering of the polymeric precursor yields the desired oxide. The preparation of the gel is monitored through constant conductivity measurements, and the intermediate and final products are fully characterized by XRD, TG-DTG, FTIR and SEM experiments in order to further understand the mechanism of the oxide formation during sintering at various temperatures. Finally, the product obtained from the Pechini technique is compared to the product obtained through solid-state synthesis. Nitrate salts were used as cation sources; aluminium nitrate nonhydrate Al(NO The gel preparation was monitored through continuous conductivity measurements. First suitable amounts of the nitrate salts were dissolved in 50 Solid-state synthesis was also applied for comparison. Appropriate amounts of CaCO Thermogravimetric analysis (TG/DTG) was used in order to record the sintering reactions. TG and DTG curves were obtained on the dried gel, using a Mettler Toledo 851 instrument. The sample was heated at a temperature range from 20 to 1000 XRD and FTIR were used in order to identify the products and check their crystallinity. The phase distribution of the powders as a function of calcination temperature was investigated by X-ray diffraction. The X-ray patterns were obtained using a Siemens D-5000 diffractometer with Cu Kα The dried gel and the sample sintered at 900 Finally, the ethylene glycol method was used to measure the free CaO content in the sintered products. The conductivity measurements during the gel preparation are presented in The TG and DTG curves, presented in X-ray diffraction experiments indicate that the xerogel is amorphous. All samples calcined up to 800 The crystal structure of CA, prepared through the Pechini technique, was refined by Rietveld profile analysis. The structural data resulting from the refinement are presented in The free CaO content of the sintered products measured by the ethylene glycol technique is presented in The FTIR spectra of the samples as a function of calcination temperature are given in  This work led to the following conclusions: The Pechini technique can be successfully applied for the preparation of CA. Its formation requires a 3-h sintering at 900 The final product is crystalline CA of high purity, without any impurities of reactants or secondary phases. The combination of TG, XRD and FTIR leads to the recording of all the transformations that occur during the processing of the precursors and the formation of the final products. The authors acknowledge the financial support of this research under program Grant No. Protagoras 65/1414. The project is funded by National Technical University of Athens.