The change of ultrasound velocity in aqueous solution was investigated as a function of particle size and suspension density. NaCl, KNO3, K2SO4 and MgSO4
                     *7H2O was used as model substances. Measurements were made on a series of suspensions with different solid concentration (from 0–60%wt) and particle sizes ranges (from 250–500 μm). It was found that there is a strong relation between the particle size and/or suspension density and the ultrasonic velocity. This relation was correlated with a second degree polynomial equation and the error percent was determined. Also the compressibility of the media and particles were calculated based on Urick equation.One of the major problems in industrial crystallization is the on-line measurement of concentration. Up to now many different methods have been developed to determine the concentration of electrolyte solutions Experiments were conducted using NaCl, K In order to see, the possible effect of particles on the measurement of concentration by using an ultrasound technique, a series of experiments were done. For this aim, saturated K As it can be seen from  The variation of ultrasound velocity in different solid fractions have also been reported by number of authors The aggregation of particles is to be seen only in small particle size ranges (<250 μm). As it can be seen from There are different type of scattering effects, and these effects can be investigated by using different scattering theories such as the Urick, Wood, Allegra theories According to Urick, the particle compressibility is only applicable at small values of volume fractions (0–25%). An increase in volume fraction will cause an increase in the hydrodynamic interactions between the particles. This interaction also causes the formation of multi-scattering waves. Therefore in this study, experimental data measured at high volume fraction were neglected due to its unsuitability. In Urick's assumption, the ultrasonic velocity in suspension is controlled by density and compressibility  According to Urick's equation the density of a suspension ( In Urick's equation, the compressibility and the density of a system are taken equal to the volume averages of those the components. The medium and the particle compressibility were calculated from the ultrasonic velocity measurement values using the method described above and results are shown in As it can be seen from The ultrasonic velocity of each investigated substances were calculated by using Eq. (5) and the results were compared with experimental data. The error percent were determined and the results are presented in  The effect of particle size and suspension density on the measurement of the ultrasonic velocity in aqueous solutions was investigated. It was shown that, the particle size and suspension density play an important role in the measurement of ultrasonic velocity. The dependence of ultrasonic velocity on suspension density was correlated with a second degree polynomial equation. The maximum error was found ranging between 0.03–4.58%. The experiments also showed that the suspension density up to 20% mass fraction causes scattering effect. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support by the Volkswagen Stiftung for this project. 