In order to compare the differences between variations of phosphate ore flotation collectors prepared by hogwash oils, JZQ-F collectors were prepared by the hydrolysis method using four types of hogwash oils from different regions in China. The components of the hogwash oils were determined using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FIIR) spectra analysis, while the components of the JZQ-F were determined through gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS). The flotation effects of the JZQ-F collectors were investigated by flotation experiments and the adsorption characteristics were determined through the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM-D). Results show that the JZQ-F collector from the Ordos area has 27.43% unsaturated fatty acids. JZQ-F collectors from Beijing, Qingdao, and Dongguan areas contain over 62% of unsaturated fatty acids, which can acquire phosphorous concentrates with a the grade of P2O5 above 31.96% and the recovery higher than 91.52%. These three collectors have a larger adsorption capacity, faster adsorption rate, and stronger adsorption structure on apatite surface, which contributed to a good adsorption performance and a favorable flotation effect.Due to the growing awareness of hazardous hogwash oil in the current way of being re-used or disposed, the public has paid increased attention to the utilization of hogwash oil In summary, currently the studies on flotation collectors prepared using hogwash oil are heavily focused on the subsequent processing methods and the applications of these collectors. The collectors prepared by the direct method have a certain function to flotation. However, their use is less effective compared to traditional collectors such as kerosene and diesel fuel. The ester exchange method is affected by disadvantages such as a long reaction time. There are few studies investigated the characteristics and components of hogwash oil and the components and action mechanisms of the collectors prepared by hogwash oil. This paper selected four types of hogwash oil from different areas in China as raw materials. The characterization of the hogwash oil was determined and fatty acid JZQ-F collectors were prepared using the hydrolysis method. The components and flotation differences of the JZQ-F collector were investigated. The adsorption characteristics of the JZQ-F collector on apatite surface were also discussed. Hogwash oil was collected in different cities in China, including Beijing, Ordos in Inner Mongolia, Qingdao in Shandong, and Dongguan in Guangzhou. They represents locations where people have different dietary characteristics. Analytical reagents (AR) used for preparing the JZQ-F collector including ethyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol, n-hexane, and petroleum ether. Trichloromethane, cyclohexane, glacial acetic acid and boracic acid used to analyze the fatty acid content were also of AR. The detailed information about the reagents used in this paper are listed in Phosphate ore samples were obtained from an overflow product of a primary grinding classifier from Fanshan Phosphate Ore in Hebei, China. The grinding fineness is −200 mesh = 43.25%. After ambient air drying, mixing and dividing, the phosphate ore was kept in self-sealing bags as experimental samples. The phosphorus pentoxide (P Apatite pure mineral samples were collected from a mining site in the Fanshan Phosphate Ore in Hebei, China. The high-grade apatite rich ore blocks, whose impurities were further removed by weak magnetic separation and high intensity magnetic separation, were crushed and milled with ceramic ball mill to obtain particles with a size less than −0.074 mm. The particles were further sieved to −0.074 mm + 0.038 mm size and stored in self-sealing bags. The P A flotation test was conducted in a XFD-0.5 flotation cell (Exploration Machinery Factory Changchun, China). The characteristics of the functional groups in the hogwash oil were measured by an infrared spectrometric analyzer NEXU-670 (American Thermo Nicolet Co., USA). It has a wave length determination range of 500–4000 cm In order to analyze the fatty acid content for collectors, a gas chromatograph and a mass spectrograph (GC–MS) were employed. A GC (GC-2014; manufactured in Japan) with a +10 to 420 °C operating temperature range and −250 to 250 °C/min rate range was used. The MS model was DSQ. The measurement process for adsorption characteristics was performed in real-time using a Q-Sense E4 quartz crystal microbalance imported from Sweden. The specific density and the melting point of the hogwash oil was determined through a gravity flask method and the capillary method, respectively The fatty acid JZQ-F collector was prepared by the hydrolysis method. The preparation flowsheet is presented in Physical refining. The hogwash oil samples of 100 g and the active white soil samples of 20 g were putted in a conical flask. The mixture was stirred with a magnetic heated stirrer during continuous heating until after it was boiled for 20 min. When the samples were cooled, the hogwash oil and active white soil were separated in a centrifugal machine, and then the refined hogwash oils were obtained. Saponification. The refined hogwash oils were putted in a conical flask, and the sodium hydroxide-ethyl alcohol solution (150 mL of 1 mol/L sodium hydroxide-ethyl alcohol solution for 40 g of refined hogwash oil) was added. After that, 5 drops of phenolphthalein were added as the indicator to keep the solution red. The heating time was 1 h and the temperature was kept within the range of 70 to 80 °C until the oil droplets were completely disappeared. Extraction. After the saponated solution was cooled to the room temperature, a proper amount of water was added to absolutely dissolve it. 1/3 volume of petroleum ether was added for extraction. The substance was separated through a separating funnel, and the lower part was the fatty acid sodium. Acidification. The fatty acid sodium was transferred to another separating funnel, and then excessive of 10% sulfuric acid solution was added to make the acidosis reaction between the fatty acid sodium and sulfuric acid. The solution was reacted completely when the pH was 1 to 2. The lower water layer was removed by the separating funnel. The upper aliphatic acid was washed twice by the deionized water. The solution was separated through the separating funnel, and then the refined aliphatic acid was obtained. The JZQ-F collectors were pretreated with a methyl ester derivatization before analyzing the GC–MS. The process of methyl ester derivatization pretreatment method was as follows: 1 mL of a sample was fully mixed with 30 mL of ether: hexane at a 2:1 ratio. After which a mixture of 20 mL methanol and 15 mL of 1.0 mol/L potassium hydroxide-methanol solution was added under shaking conditions. The saponification time was 30 min in a 60 °C water bath. 15 mL of a 16.0% three boron trifluoride-methanol solution was added for esterification over a 30 min period in a 60 °C water bath after the mixture solution was cooled. 10 mL of hexane and 15 mL of saturated sodium chloride solution were added after the mixed solution was cooled again. The supernatant was separated by centrifugation and partitioning before GC–MS analysis. Flotation experiments were carried using a 0.5 L mechanical flotation cell. Ore samples of 200 g were fed into the flotation tank. Tap water was added to adjust the pulp concentration according to its design after which stirring and mixing was conducted for a 3 min period, and then the JZQ-F collector was added to interact with the ore samples for 5 min. The total flotation time was 5 min. The floated and unfloated fractions were collected, dried, weighed, sample prepared, and assayed. The recoveries were calculated based on the weight and grade of each fraction. The flowsheet of the flotation test is presented in The optimum flotation condition needs to be obtained before further investigating the influence of the four different collectors on flotation efficiency. The experimental factors are pulp temperature, pulp concentration, and collector dosage. The pH of the pulp is 8.0–8.5 without any treatment. By using a single factor optimization experiment, the optimum flotation condition was determined as: pulp temperature 30 °C, pulp concentration 45%, and collector dosage 1100 g/t. During these tests, a clean quartz crystal resonator was mounted in a QCM-D liquid tank. At the beginning, air was introduced into the liquid pool at a rate of 50 µL/min. After the signal of the frequency change (△ The degree of unsaturation of fatty acids has an important influence on the collector performance. This is usually characterized by the iodine value. The iodine value, specific density, and melting point of the hogwash oil are summarized in Further result analysis are presented as follows: The iodine value of hogwash oil collected in Ordos is the lowest, but its content of unsaturated fatty acids is lower than that collected in Beijing, Qingdao, and Dongguan. The differences in the specific density of the hogwash oil from the four regions are not significant although samples from the Ordos area have the lowest value. The specific density of grease is related to the carbon chain length and the degree of unsaturation of the fatty acid. The grease with a long carbon chain and high degree of unsaturation had higher specific density. On the other hand, grease with a short carbon chain and saturated fatty acid had a lower specific density The melting point of the hogwash oil from the Ordos area is higher relative to the other three areas. Saturated fatty acid with the same number of carbon atoms as unsaturated fatty acid results in a higher melting point. As the degree of unsaturation increases, the melting point of unsaturated fatty acids with the same number of carbon atoms decreases (except with conjugation) Overall, the degree of fatty acids unsaturation for hogwash oil collected in the Beijing, Qingdao, and Dongguan areas is higher relative to the Ordos area. In addition to the common features between the infrared spectra of vegetable oil and animal oil, hogwash oil has presented some unique fingerprint characteristics. For the bands over 3000 cm The infrared spectrum of the four variations of hogwash oil is shown in The four kinds of collectors were analyzed by gas-chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC–MS), and the original spectrograms are shown in The results of the GC–MS analysis as The results of the GC–MS analysis as  The fatty acid composition of vegetable oils is simple and the contents of the unsaturated fatty acid is greater relative to the saturated fatty acid, but unsaturated fatty acids are mainly oleic acid, linoleic acid, and linolenic acid. A large number of saturated fatty acids that are rich in animal fatty acids and saturated fatty acids are mainly palmitic and stearic acids The results of the GC–MS analysis indicate that the raw materials of the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors are vegetable oils rich in unsaturated fatty acid while the JZQ-FO collector is animal oils rich in saturated fatty acid. This finding is consistent with the results from the analysis of the infrared spectrum of the four variations of hogwash oils. As a collector for phosphate flotation, the length of the carbon chain and the number of the double and triple bond have a significant impact on the flotation efficiency. Collectors with a carbon chain below 16 or above 18 contain more contents of saturated fatty acid, a relatively lower content of double bonds, and contribute to a less effective flotation performance There are many research and reports on the flotation mechanism of fatty acid collectors used for phosphate rock. The chemical adsorption, surface deposition, and other various adsorption theories and models have been proposed. The main analysis methods are infrared spectrum analysis, Zeta potential analysis, and contact angle analysis The change of frequency and dissipation factor is shown in The adsorptions of the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors are similar, therefore they are not analyzed individually. The adsorption process for the JZQ-FB collector is used as a representative to compare with that for the JZQ-FO collector. As described in At the beginning of the adsorption process, the △ As shown in According to the measured value of △ After comparing the adsorption processes, it is clear that the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors have a larger adsorption capacity, higher adsorption rate, and a stronger adsorption structure. These result in a favorable adsorption performance. It also explains why the flotation index of the three collectors is better than that of the JZQ-FO collector for phosphate ore.  The physical and chemical properties of the four variations of hogwash oils are determined. Combined with infrared spectroscopy, the hogwash oils from Beijing, Qingdao, and Dongguan contain unsaturated fatty acids which are mainly vegetable oils while that from Ordos contains saturated fatty acids and is mainly consisted of animal oils. It is concluded that the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors are mainly unsaturated fatty acids, and the JZQ-FO is mainly saturated fatty acids. Analysis by the GC–MS showed that the contents of the unsaturated fatty acids in the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors are over 62% and are identified as mainly oleic and linoleic acids. The unsaturated fatty acids content in the JZQ-FO collector is only 27.43%. The JZQ-FO collector contains more saturated fatty acids which were mainly palmitic and stearic acids. These results support that the flotation effect of the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FDG collectors is more effective relative to the JZQ-FO collector for phosphate ore flotation. For phosphate flotation, the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors showed outstanding flotation effect. The analysis by QCM-D for adsorption characteristics of the four collectors indicated that the adsorption properties of the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors on the apatite surface are better than that of the JZQ-FO collector. The JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors all have a higher adsorption capacity, faster and stronger adsorption relative to the JZQ-FO collector. Overall these results suggest that the JZQ-FB, JZQ-FQ, and JZQ-FD collectors have a better flotation effect than the JZQ-FO collector. The authors are grateful to the management of the