Effects of skipjack roe protein hydrolysate (SRPH) at various levels (0–3 g/100 g) on properties and oxidative stability of emulsion sausage from broadhead catfish (Clarias macrocephalus) fortified with skipjack tuna roe lipids were investigated. The addition of SRPH increased hardness, cohesiveness and resilience of sausage (p < 0.05). Finer fat globules were visualised in the sample added with SRPH at higher amounts. Nevertheless, the incorporation of SRPH at all levels had no impact on likeness of sausages. SRPH was shown to retard lipid oxidation of sausage during extended storage of 12 days as evidenced by the lower peroxide value (PV) and thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS), in comparison with the control. After 12 days, the sausage with 3 g/100 g SRPH had the retained docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), accounting more than 80%. Addition of SRPH had no effect on the organoleptic properties but could prevent the development of rancidity. Nevertheless, it showed no pronounced impact on microbial growth. SRPH could therefore be used as a natural antioxidative emulsifier in cooked fish emulsion sausage.Emulsion sausage is commercially prepared by poultry, pork or beef emulsified with backfat from several sources. During comminution, bundles of fibres, myofibrils and filaments are disrupted and the size of fatty tissues is continuously reduced. In the presence of salt, myofibrillar proteins become soluble and migrate to the fat globule surface, concentrate and form protein matrix at the fat/water interface ( Recently, meat or fishery products fortified with Cumene hydroperoxide and osmium tetraoxide were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). Trichloroacetic acid and glutaraldehyde were obtained from Merck (Damstadt, Germany). Thiobarbituric acid, ammonium thiocyanate and ferrous chloride were purchased from Fluka Chemical Co. (Buchs, Switzerland). Lipids from tuna roe were extracted following the SRPH with 5% DH, the percent ratio of the number of peptide bonds cleaved to the total number of peptide bonds in the substrate, was prepared as per the method of Broadhead catfish ( The microstructure of the sausages added with SRPH at different levels was determined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Samples with a thickness of 2–3 mm were fixed with 25 mL/L glutaraldehyde in 0.2 mol/L phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). Fixed samples were washed with 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) for 10 min and then post-fixed in 0.2 mol/L phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) containing 10 g/L osmium tetraoxide for 1 h. The fixed samples were then rinsed in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer for 10 min and rinsed with distilled water for 10 min before being dehydrated in ethanol with serial concentrations of 500, 700, 800, 900 and 1000 mL/L. Dried samples were mounted on a bronze stub and sputter-coated with gold (Sputter coater SPI-Module, West Chester, PA, USA). The specimens were observed with a scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-5800 LV, Tokyo, Japan) at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. Sausages fortified with tuna roe lipids and added with SRPH at different levels were monitored for chemical, textural and microbiological changes every 2 days for totally 12 days, except fatty acid profile, which was determined at day 0 and 12 of storage. Sensory evaluation was conducted at day 0, 6 and 12 of storage. PV of sausage samples was determined according to the method of TBARS value was determined as described by Fatty acid compositions were determined as fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) using a gas chromatography (GC-14A, Shimadzu Co., Kyoto, Japan) equipped with fused silica capillary column Carbowax-30 m (30 m, 0.25 mm ID, Alltech Ltd., Deerfield, IL, USA) and flame ionisation detector (FID) (Alltech Ltd., Deerfield, IL, USA). Helium was used as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 30 cm/s. The initial temperature of the column was set at 170 °C and increased to 225 °C with a rate of 1 °C/min and then held at 220 °C for an additional 20 min. The detector temperature was set at 270 °C, while the temperature at the injection port was maintained at 250 °C. Retention time of FAME standards was used to identify chromatographic peaks. Peak area was quantitated and expressed as % of total saponifiable lipids ( Fish sausage (25 g) was collected aseptically in a stomacher bag and 10 volumes of sterile saline solution (8.5 g/L) were added. After homogenisation in a Stomacher blender (Stomacher M400, Seward Ltd., Worthington, England) for 1 min, a series of 10-fold dilutions were made using normal saline solution (8.5 g/L). Total viable count (TVC) and psychrophilic bacterial count (PBC) were determined by plate count agar (PCA) with the incubation at 37 °C for 2 days and 4 °C for 7 days, respectively ( Texture profile analysis (TPA) was performed using a TA-XT2 texture analyser (Stable Micro Systems, Godalming, Surrey, UK) with load cell of 25 kg. Cylindrical aluminium probe (50 mm diameter) was used. The samples were cut into cylindrical-shape (30 mm height × 20 mm diameter) and placed on the instrument's base. The tests were run with two compression cycles. TPA textural parameters were measured at room temperature with following testing conditions: crosshead speed 5.0 mm/s, 50% compression of the original sample height, surface sensing force 99 g, threshold 30.0 g. Time interval between the first and second compressions was 10 s. Hardness, cohesiveness, springiness, chewiness and resilience were calculated from the force–time-curves generated for each sample. Sensory evaluation was performed by 30 untrained panellists (15 males and 15 females) with ages ranging from 20 to 35 years, who were familiar with the consumption of fish sausage. Before testing, the sausage samples were cooked and prepared as described by Samples were also evaluated for rancidity by 15 trained panellists (5 males and 10 females with ages ranging from 20 to 35 years) using a scale of 0–10, where 0 and 10 represent no rancidity and the strongest rancidity, respectively. Training was made as described by All experiments were run in triplicate using three different lots of samples. Completely randomised design (CRD) was used throughout the study. Statistic analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Mean comparison was carried out using Duncan's multiple range test ( Microstructures of PUFAs fortified emulsion sausage containing different amounts of SRPH are illustrated in No marked changes in PV of emulsion sausage were observed in all samples during the first 4 days of storage ( The increase in TBARS of all samples was noticeable throughout the refrigerated storage ( Fish sausage contained a wide range of fatty acids. Proportion of fatty acids in all sausage samples was in descending order: PUFA > MUFA > SFA. Linoleic acid (C18:2 TVC and PBC of the sausage samples were monitored during storage ( Changes in textural properties of the cooked fish emulsion sausages during the storage are shown in Lipid and protein oxidations are relatively associated with the deterioration occurring in meat product ( Colour, odour, appearance and overall likeness of the broadhead catfish emulsion sausage added with different amounts of SRPH (0–3 g/100 g) during storage were scored by 30-untrained panellists as shown in Generally, likeness score for all attributes decrease with increasing storage time. Nevertheless, the degree of decrease varied with samples. At day 12 of storage, the control showed the lowest colour likeness score, compared with others ( Changes in rancidity of fish emulsion sausage added without and with SRPH at various levels were monitored during storage ( Broadhead catfish emulsion sausages, enriched with This work was granted by the