Coals of various ranks were exposed to microwave radiation to quantify the effect on grindability. Reductions of up to 50% of the relative grindability of the coals were reported after 5min microwave exposure. These are believed to be a combination of fracture mechanisms, inherent moisture within the coal structure changing phase under considerable pressure and differential expansion by gangue mineral components. The overall effect of microwave radiation on the coal calorific value was minimal and compares equally to conventional drying techniques. Future work will include scaling up to pilot plant level (50–100kg/h) to allow an accurate techno-economic assessment of the process.The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of microwave radiation on the grindability of coal. Several mechanisms can be proposed, which would suggest possible improvements to the grindability of coal after microwave exposure. The organic components of coal are relatively poor absorbers of microwave energy; however, coals naturally contain water to varying degrees depending upon their microstructure, geological location and relative humidity. Water is considered to be a good absorber of microwave energy Mineral matters within coal differ in their ability to absorb microwave radiation. Some minerals readily heat within an applied electric field (pyrite has an average heating rate of 1.89°C/s when exposed to a microwave field at a power of 0.65 Scanning electron micrograph images of an irradiated typical sub-bituminous UK coal (coal x; for the Proximate and Ultimate analysis of the reference coal, see Experimental studies involved milling non-treated and microwave treated samples of coal; this was necessary to investigate any possible improvement in grindability after heat treatment. After sub-sampling, all samples were contained within air tight bags until heat treatment. For these experiments, the dimension of the mill, type and number of mill medium, the speed of rotation and the time of grinding remain constant. A mild steel rod mill of internal dimension 155 The required size distribution of coal used as pulverised fuel (PF) in power generation is 80% passing 75 Corresponding representative sub-samples of coal x were exposed to microwave radiation at a power of 0.65 The Berry and Bruce The data from the size distribution graphs were converted into comparative work indices and are shown in The comparative work index of the conventionally heated sample was 80%, which suggests that the further improvements in grindability achieved by microwave radiation are possibly because of the rapid expansion of gangue minerals.   Coal moisture content appears to have reduced significantly due to microwave exposure (55.5% after 8   Coal x is classified as sub-bituminous (refer to Microwave radiation may also be used to desulphurise coal partially. Dielectric data for selected coal components ( Pyrite oxidises under normal atmospheric conditions at elevated temperatures; initially FeS Results have shown that reductions of up to 50% relative work index can be achieved by microwave exposure of some coals. The microwave radiation has similar effects on calorific value as would be expected by conventional drying of the coals and is considered to have no significant detrimental effects on the coals' fuel potential. The experimental data has indicated that lower ranked coals are more sensitive to microwave radiation possibly due to increased inherent moisture contents. There is evidence to suggest that gaseous evolution (water and volatile matter) as well as gangue mineral expansion are the probable causes for the improvement in coal grindability and to what extent depends on the coals' particular chemical properties. Future work is to investigate whether this process can be undertaken at pilot scale level and to assess the overall economic balance on the comminution circuit.