A phenomenological constitutive equation for the stress–life (S–N) fatigue behavior of metal single crystals is presented and is validated on the basis of physical definition of fatigue endurance limit. The constitutive equation is developed here on the basis of probabilistic arguments for fatigue fracture in cyclic loading. The physical endurance limit for fatigue is taken as the stress amplitude corresponding to the critical resolved shear stress for dislocation slip initiation in ductile single crystals. It is shown that the constitutive equation is surprisingly compact and very flexible to accurately describe a wide range of S–N behaviors, as found in fatigue of nickel-based superalloy single crystals as well as in Fe and Zn single crystals. The S–N constitutive equation is also expanded by the superposition of the mean stress effect and the cyclic effect in fatigue. A remarkable outcome of this is a master S–N fatigue equation that yields S–N curves for any mean stress, on the basis of the S–N parameters for fully reversed fatigue behavior. The application of the presented equations to characterize the S–N behavior of polycrystalline materials is quite promising.Fatigue behavior of metal single crystals under cycling loading, and the representation of stress–life (S–N) data, are of fundamental interest with respect to basic fatigue mechanisms and in understanding the more complex behavior of polycrystals. Additionally, single crystals are used in niche and fatigue-prone applications such as aircraft jet engine blades It is shown here that a phenomenological constitutive equation for the S–N behavior of single crystals can be developed from well-known probabilistic arguments. According to Freudenthal and Gumbel The probabilistic representation of fatigue failure also can be thought to scale with the range of stress amplitude ( Eq. Eq. The constitutive S–N behavior as predicted by Eq.  Kalluri and McGaw  Hempel Watanabe  In Zn single crystals with 〈1 Further validation of the correctness of the S–N constitutive equation is made here by showing that the equation is extendable to include mean stress effects and that the extended equations predict well the experimental S–N data. Eq. To determine the S–N curve for any The effect of mean stress or stress ratio on the fatigue behavior is sometimes presented in terms of stress amplitude. To predict S–N curves in terms of cyclic stress amplitude, Eq. With Eq.  It is clear from the above assessment that the proposed phenomenological constitutive equation describes the S–N behavior quite accurately. Although the empirical Basquin It is also remarkable that the mean stress or stress ratio effects can be predicted by the superposition of the mean stress and the purely cyclic stress amplitude for The predictive capability of the S–N fatigue equation has been validated on the basis of a physically based endurance limit stress as the lower bound stress limit below which fatigue failures will not occur. This physical endurance limit stress is derived from the critical resolved shear stress for dislocation slip—if slip does not initiate then fatigue failure will not occur in a single crystal. In commercial metallic materials, however, it might be challenging to define such a physical limit, because, experimentally, no two specimens would be alike due to statistical distribution of defect sizes in these materials. This can lead to a large scatter of S–N data near the endurance limit as observed in defect-containing materials  A phenomenological constitutive equation for the stress–life (S–N) fatigue behavior of metallic single crystals is presented and is validated on the basis of a physical definition of fatigue endurance limit. The physical endurance limit stress, taken as the critical resolved shear stress for dislocation slip initiation, or the shear yield stress for multi-slip, establishes the lowest stress amplitude below which fatigue failures will not occur in single crystals. This is validated by comparisons with experimental S–N data of Ni, Fe and Zn single crystals. The asymptotic nature of the S–N fatigue behavior, at the extremes of S–N data, are enforced by the essential boundary conditions, that is the tensile strength and the physical endurance limit stress values, allowing an accurate representation of the entire S–N data by the proposed constitutive equation. The S–N constitutive equation is also expanded by the superposition of the mean stress effect and the cyclic effect of fatigue. A remarkable outcome of this expansion is a master S–N function that yields S–N fatigue curves for any mean stress, on the basis of the S–N parameters for fully reversed fatigue behavior.