Dielectric capacitors have been the major enabler for a number of applications in advanced electronic and electrical power systems due to their capability of ultrafast charging–discharging and ultrahigh power density. High energy density dielectrics are highly desirable in order to reduce the size and cost of dielectric capacitors, which is critical for electrical pulse-power systems and power electronics in electric vehicles. Polymer nanocomposites are promising in raising the low energy density of neat polymer dielectrics of current use. In this study, a class of sandwich-structured nanocomposites are prepared by a facile hot-pressing method. Polyvinylidene fluoride nanomcomposite layers filled with graphene oxide nanosheets coated with TiO2 nanoparticles (G-layers) or Ba0.6Sr0.4TiO3 nanofibers (B-layers) are cast from solution and assembled into sandwich-structured nanocomposites with reversed topological strcuture (BGB & GBG). An ultrahigh energy density of ~14.6J/cm3 is achieved in the BGB nanocomposites. Phase-field simulations reveal the significant implications of topological structure on the dielectric performance of the nanocomposites. By rational design of topological structure and the dielectric property of the individual layers, favorable distribution of local electrical field could be achieved among the constituent layers of the sandwich-structured nanocomposites, giving rise to the concomitant enhancement of electrical polarization and dielectric breakdown strength, and hence ultrahigh energy density.Polymer dielectrics with high dielectric permittivity, high dielectric loss, high breakdown strength, hence high energy density have been actively pursued for the past few decades Given the quadratic dependence of In order to maximize the energy density in nanocomposites, instead of purely maximizing An electrospinning technique is employed to prepare BST nanofibers with high aspect ratios, using analytic grade reagents, barium acetate (99.0%, China National Chemicals Corporation Ltd.), strontium acetate (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), and tetrabutyltitanate (98.0%, China National Chemicals Corporation Ltd.). The raw materials with target mol ratio were dissolved in acetic acid solvent, in which 1:2 For the fabrication of the GO-TiO For the measurements, copper electrodes (4 The electrostatic potential distributions inside the composites are obtained by solving the electrostatic equilibrium equation using the spectral iterative perturbation method, Here For a given sample under an applied electric field through the electrodes, the local electric field concentration determined from the SIPM and breakdown criteria determine the status of the local points in the composite, and here “0” and “1” are used to represent the “unbroken” and “broken” status, respectively, as illustrated in Figure s6a. The breakdown strength of PVDF matrix (~650 The graphene oxide-TiO The frequency-dependences of dielectric permittivity and dielectric loss for the two series of sandwich-structured nanocomposites with reversed topological structure are shown in The discharge energy densities for the GBG/BGB sandwich-structured nanocomposite films are determined from the electrical polarization-electric field ( It is worth noting that the total chemical compositions of the sandwich-structured nanocomposites change from BGB to GBG configurations although the nominal composition remains unchanged in the individual layers. For instance, in BGB10 and GBG10 nanocomposites with fixed 3 First, the electrostatic potential distributions inside the composites are obtained by solving the electrostatic equilibrium equation using the spectral iterative perturbation method. Of particular interest, the distributions of electric field strength and polarization simulated by this phase-field model are presented in The distributions of electric field are presented in the central column of In order to theoretically analyse the dielectric breakdown probability of the BGB and GBG composites, we propose a simple analysis model based also on a spectral iterative perturbation method (SIPM). It is worth mentioning that no structural imperfections, such as pores or voids which are inevitable at high loading of nanofillers, are considered in the model. It is well documented that these structural imperfections seriously decrease the dielectric breakdown strength of nanocomposites by acting as electric hot pot and initiating cracks under intensified electric field. Hence, the simulated dielectric breakdown strengths are higher than those obtained experimentally and should be considered as the higher limit of the dielectric breakdown strength. Nevertheless, the phase-field model does reveal the significant implication of topological structure on the dielectric breakdown strength of the sandwich-structured nanocomposites. The simulated probabilities of failure for the BGB and GBG nanocomposites are plotted against the electric field in We thus summarize the implication of topological structure on the dielectric performances of the sandwich-structured films in the following two aspects. First, BGB configuration gives rise to enhanced dielectric breakdown strength. Compared to GBG nanocomposites, two B-layers of high dielectric breakdown strength are present in the BGB nanocomposites, which could effectively restrain the progress of electrical treeing along the dielectric breakdown path. Second, in the BGB configuration, the larger factor of electric field concentration leads to higher local electric field in B-layers yet lower local electric field in G-layers. In this scenario, the B-layers could be polarized at higher electric field while the lowered local electric field in G-layers leads to small probability of failure, which is very favorable for the concomitant enhancement of electrical polarization and breakdown strength. Our results demonstrate that the rational design of the multi-layered nanocomposites with high electric energy density should be conducted in two aspects. First and foremost, for a specific topological structure of the sandwich-structured nanocomposites, the dielectric properties and thickness of the individual layers should be rationally optimized in such a way that the distribution of local electric field among the constituent layers is in favor for the concomitant enhancement of electrical polarization and breakdown strength. Secondly, the dielectric property of the individual layers could be optimized through tuning the chemical composition of the layer. A class of sandwich-structured nanocomposites with reverse topological structure was prepared by a facile hot-pressing method. Graphene oxide nanosheets coated with TiO This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 