Modern Process Mineralogy has been making significant advances in methodology and data interpretation since it was assembled in the mid-1980s as a multi-disciplined team approach to obtaining mineralogical information from drill core and plant samples so as to infer the metallurgical processing requirements of that ore. This hybrid discipline consists of teams that include geologists, mineralogists, samplers, mineral processors and often others, working together. The degree of cross-training, communication and trust dictates the potential capacity of the team and it is possible to develop technical capabilities that surpass those of conventional teams. A pivotal tool for technically efficient and plant-oriented process mineralogy is, of course, the use of modern, automated laboratory technology. In these cases, process mineralogy, though associated with some capital investment, is a valuable risk reduction tool and an operations optimization tool for any mining company, not only in terms of finances but also in terms of human and intellectual capital. However, if the teams are dysfunctional and information is not interpreted correctly due to limited experience in the team or less than best practice, or it is not implemented or used, much of the value can be lost. Process Mineralogy can then be regarded as ‘time consuming and expensive’. In this paper, the business value of best practice Process Mineralogy is outlined and discussed. Case studies that include ‘green fields’ new design applications and ‘brown fields’ interventions to mature operations have been selected to demonstrate the tremendous financial value that can be achieved are presented, along with those where costly disasters could have been averted. The list is not intended to be exhaustive or complete, and the reader is referred to the extensive literature available. Examples are selected for this publication specifically to illustrate the delicate balance between generating additional business value through potentially expensive mineralogical analyses and the lost opportunities of underperforming flowsheets, unanticipated losses due to high feed variance, inadequate liberation or deleterious minerals, over-reagentised circuits, or extra costs of unnecessary or underutilised equipment.‘ Current best practice of Process Mineralogy is the cumulative product of several teams across the world working at developing this platform by way of new equipment, associated software, methods and associated quality controls over several decades ( It has been shown by several of these teams that a key part of the successful use of the toolbox is high-quality training, both within-discipline and intra-disciplinary. The latter takes longer, and works best through the medium of projects being executed, with group discussions mutually interpreting the data to hand. Several generations of team members balance the experience of the team well, with the older members mentoring and guiding the younger ones, at the same time as learning new skills from the latter. It is highly preferable that most of the team members have several years of operations experience before being assigned to this multi-disciplined team. The intra-disciplinary training generally takes two years to attain a core level of multi-discipline expertise, but the learning never stops. For example, the habit of reading new publications on the subject, attending conferences and having discussions with the presenting authors, and networking with other practitioners, all add considerably to the learning and skill development. This mentoring dynamic leads the efficient interpretation of the large volumes of data that arise from the modern practice into the specific process implications. These large data sets potentially threaten the project unless they are analysed, interpreted and summarised before being presented to the end-user. Provided this process is in operation, the reports and recommendations presented to clients in operations are summarised, readable and practical for the end-user at the operation. The key skill to develop in these teams is the ability to assess a project and to define the correct and appropriate selection of tools and equipment to complete the job effectively and efficiently. Cross-checks using common sense instead of a default setting of “the computer is always right” are critical. The reputation of the Process Mineralogy team thus builds in the mining company or commercial laboratory as a result of the interactive, synergistic and focussed approach in project work, delivering financial value. This enables the executive to continue supporting the team across the metals business cycle. Gaudin’s first liberation model of 1939 presented a penetrating analysis of the problem. His work was followed for decades by geometrical probability models, for example The connection between mineralogy and metallurgical performance in a plant was recognised long ago ( The development of Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning Electron Microscopy (QEM ∗ SEM) (and the second generation QEMSCAN) ( The re-tooling of mineralogical laboratories with automated instrumentation such as X-ray Diffraction (XRD) Rietveld, Fourier Transform Near Infrared (FT-NIR), Automated Mineral Analyzers and other equipment can reduce these metallurgical risks and provide high-throughput and fast-turnaround mineralogical data ( Geometallurgical units ( The synergy between sampling, mineralogy and mineral processing in modern process mineralogy is shown in The foundation of good chemical, mineralogical and metallurgical data is a statistically sound, robust sampling approach. Use of this arrangement at a best practice level does cost more than the conventional approach, however when correctly performed, and when the mineral processing recommendations are used, significant value is delivered for the project in terms of cash flow, as shown schematically in   The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the business value of best practice Process Mineralogy in selected case studies. These demonstrate that, although the cost of this best practice is higher than older conventional mineral processing, the value delivery in return for that investment is very significant. Numerous examples of equivalent development and applications have since been published, for example Although specific value examples will be provided hereinafter, one should not underestimate the extreme value addition/cost savings of continuous process mineralogy in a The startup of a new concentrator, a much anticipated event, is a critical stage in the project. The achievement of designed throughput rate as tonnes per day milled as well as the designed final concentrate grade and recovery have a major influence on the return on investment ( The monetary values lost through plant ramp-up delays and so-called “de-bottlenecking” are large and can range from <US $ 100 to >$ 500 million for single operations. However, a substantial increase of business value is achieved if the ramp up can be accelerated. According to Comminution circuits represent a substantial portion of capital investment necessary to commission a new mining project, with some budgets allocating 35–50% of the plant capital expenditure to comminution and its required ancillary services (    A number of authors have proposed different methodologies to select, scope, size and design appropriate comminution equipment, for example Many of these methodologies are proprietary or not necessarily compatible with the desired final circuit flowsheet. This often leads to particular unit steps of comminution with a reputation for complexity (such as controlled blasting, AG/SAG milling, HPGR and ultrafine grinding) being managed by independent experts at the design stage, despite the potential to achieve a superior grinding circuit design through a more collaborative approach. While overall agreement has not yet been achieved in the industry, there are some larger themes which should be agreed upon. First is the need for the characterization of the ore by unit at a preliminary design stage. This unit division generally involves the compositing of samples which represent either known metallurgical units with the geological distribution of the ore body or known chronological division of proposed feed from the mine. The characterization of metallurgical units is the common approach when the deposit is well understood from a geological perspective, while chronological units are often useful when the mining method has been predefined and sequencing is roughly understood as is sometimes the case with a simple open pit mine. In each method of comminution characterization, further testing is required to understand the variability of the measured hardness within each ore zone. This not only provides a distribution around the measured composite average but also provides a resolution of data when it comes time for the creation of geometallurgical models of grinding design parameters and/or throughput predictions. It is this portion of the testing exercise which satisfies the second criteria described above, that is to produce a design with a known confidence interval or probability of successful implementation. For complex ore bodies (which are becoming more and more common), a division by metallurgical unit is the superior choice due to the flexibility it imparts to later analysis; particularly when the grinding throughput variability within each metallurgical unit is also well understood. The selection of samples on the basis of metallurgical units is largely independent of changes to the recovery flowsheet, most notably to changes in the throughput rate and mine plan which often occur well after the testwork has been completed. This allows the designers a great deal of flexibility to adapt to changes in the project without compromising their source data set. In contrast, when ore bodies are sampled on a chronological basis a change to the mine plan becomes a significant challenge to the interpretation of the raw testwork data and may require additional sampling at the new boundaries of the chronological units in order to define the variability within the new subsets. This flexibility has clear and demonstrable value as calculated by While there were other factors which influenced the selection of the undersized grinding equipment in those three case studies, it is clear that there is value to the flexible interpretation of grinding testwork provided by metallurgical units which would allow for a correction of the mill sizing exercise even at a relatively late stage of the project development. The primary risk that exists in the definition of metallurgical units is the potential for recursive revision of those units. In measuring the process characteristics of a given unit, the boundaries of that ore zone may need to change. This risk is accentuated for grinding measurements which are usually not included in the testwork program until relatively late in the project development after these units have been defined. As such, some consideration should be paid to the measurement of variability within each ore zone and at boundary intersections. For this reason (and others described elsewhere), the number of units should be kept to a minimum to reduce the number of boundary interfaces between units. The Montcalm base metal project, located near Timmins, North Ontario, was successfully commissioned in 2004. In this case, the flowsheet had already been designed by conventional means at the time Falconbridge purchased the resource, and due to the limited seven-year life of mine, had to be fast-tracked to commission into an anticipated upswing in the nickel market. Thus the testwork required an accurate prediction of metallurgical performance by the frozen flowsheet from samples of drill-core ( The Montcalm flowsheet consists of rod mill and ball mill grinding to a target of p80 of 39 The orebody is hosted in a norite and gabbro intrusive complex with minor peridotite lenses and mafic and granodiorite dykes. Shear zones and faults are locally encountered and host chloritic alteration products, including talc. Sampling by drill-core ahead of commissioning the project identified three end members. The Montcalm ore reserves occur as three distinct lenses, referred to as the East, West and Deep Zones. The mineralogical assemblage is locally variable, with changing ratios of the main sulphides: pyrrhotite, pyrite, pentlandite and chalcopyrite. The silicate gangue is primarily composed of plagioclase and amphibole, exhibiting variable degrees of sericitisation or chloritisation. Calcite, magnetite, zoisite (a Ca-Al silicate), quartz, biotite and talc occur as minor accessory gangue minerals. Following this structure, the core was sampled separately and taken through the crushing and blending methodology described earlier. Care was taken to ensure that the full variability of the orebody was captured in the drill-core sampling for the flotation testwork ( The Montcalm end member ore characterization conducted prior to flotation testing included: performing a whole rock thin section investigation of each ore end member, and size-by-size liberation evaluation of each end member from laboratory-scale grinds that simulated the production grind. Geological review of the Montcalm deposit resulted in the definition of three ore end members or geomet units, distinguished by sulphide texture and grade ( This approach also can give initial warnings of critical textures (e.g., grain sizes, possible liberation issues) and problematic mineralogy (such as, in the case of Montcalm, the presence of significant amounts of pyrite). There were a few significant observations reported in the thin section study. The first was the recognition that pyrite is present in significant proportions but also that its presence was quite variable throughout the ore body ( Despite the limited number of thin sections measured, a second important observation was made relating to grain sizes of the sulphides. Pentlandite occurs as coarse grains and also as very small flames locked within pyrrhotite – or a bimodal distribution. Chalcopyrite is on average much finer than the pentlandite and is associated most often with silicate gangue. It was also noted that the average grain size for pentlandite was significantly larger than the proposed target grind of 39 High-confidence flotation testing of a life-of-mine ore composite taken from drill-core produced an estimate of bulk concentrate recovery and grade. This estimate proved to be a recovery of 82.9% Ni at a bulk concentrate grade of 9.0% Ni ( A considerable application potential for robust Process Mineralogy remains untapped as plant surveys too often are used sporadically and/or for circuit troubleshooting only ( According to One of the early successes of plant process mineralogy was the El Indio gold-silver-copper operation in Chile. At this operation, a 3-year continuous Process Mineralogy program (1984–1987) in concert with metallurgical optimization achieved significant recovery improvements ( As illustrated by In the South African platinum industry, the robust process mineralogy platform developed by Rustenburg Platinum Mines and Anglo American since the 1980s led to a thorough understanding of the platinum group element (PGE) mineral hosts in their Merensky, UG2 and Platreef ore types, and led to a list of processing implications that were practically turned into sustainable performance improvements as retrofits to the standard plant layouts ( The data shown in This reduction in grade of PGE in final tailings added significant business value to the Amandelbult operations, adding very roughly 30,000 The engagement of the Process Mineralogy toolbox with existing concentrators requiring performance improvements was well-demonstrated by Several plant surveys ensued, supported by mineralogy as well as size-by-size paymetal analysis of streams, each delivering clues to flowsheet improvement. The survey methodology was not described; however the mineralogy was performed by QEMSCAN. These were implemented across a schedule and progressively advanced the grade and recovery of the saleable concentrate. The heavy talc depressant dose in the rougher float was lightened so as to allow some talc to float. This stabilised the froth. Additional cleaner capacity was found by recommissioning the cleaner circuit from the older, smaller concentrator. A key discovery was the bimodal size distribution of the palladium mineral host grain sizes. The two modes of this distribution are approximately 20 and 5 It was found that mostly, it was the coarser size distribution of discrete Platinum Group Minerals (PGM), as kotulskite and palladoarsenide, that were being recovered. The appropriate regrinding of all primary concentrates in the vertimills had a major effect on both concentrate grade and recovery. The regrind product size was a d80 of 20 The Raglan Ni-Cu-PGE deposit is located in northern Quebec on the Ungava Peninsula. The deposit is hosted by an alternating succession of thick komatiitic peridotite flows and sills of Archean age ( The Raglan operation was commissioned into production in January 1998. The initial measured treatment capacity was approximately 108 tonnes per operating hour or 850,000 tpa, treating ore at a grade of 2.98% Ni. The commissioned grind at rougher float feed level was equivalent to a d80 size of 68 Given the close agreement between designed and commissioned performance, at first glance there would not seem to be any motive to pursue an operations improvement program. But the mill had been designed using conventional mineral processing, and not by modern process mineralogy. Therefore there was no measure of performance entitlement against which the commissioned results could be benchmarked. A first survey of the commissioned flowsheet was performed in June 1998 so as to capture a representative sample suite of the key flowsheet streams for a closed mass and value balance, and thereafter for detailed mineralogical characterization by size class ( From the closed mass and value balance, it was clear that the initial rougher flotation recovery, at 92.8% Ni, was higher than the final recovery at saleable concentrate, which was 86.5% Ni. This implied that a total of 6.3% Ni recovery was being lost by the cleaner circuit in scavenger tailings. The following liberation conventions are used: liberated particles are particles of any size which consist of more than 90% by area of the mineral of interest; middling particles are particles of any size which contain between 30% and 90% by area of the mineral of interest, and locked particles are those which contain less than 30% by area of the mineral of interest. The mineralogical measurement and interpretation of the survey data soon showed that a dominant signature of textures in the flotation circuit was influencing the metallurgical performance. This was associated with a pattern of poor liberation in size classes coarser than 25 Examination of the rougher tailings showed that the NiFe sulphides present were distributed as 8.0% liberated, 20.0% middling, and 72.0% locked particles. A large circulating load was found in the scavenger concentrate that recycles to the column cleaner circuit. The mass and value balance reported a solids circulating load of 394% (basis: rougher concentrate mass arisings Another notable feature in the data was that the two column tailings, i.e. both the primary column tailings and the recleaner column tailings, were joined as one stream to feed the scavenger flotation bank. Closer analysis showed that the liberation levels of pentlandite were different in these two streams, and that the recleaner tailing contained significant amounts of liberated pentlandite at fine sizes. These features are summarised in More detailed analysis of the primary column tailings showed that, for the locked and middling classes of NiFe sulphides, most were to be found in the coarser size fractions between 25 and 106 Gangue mineralogy in the Raglan float feed is dominated by Mg silicates including serpentine, pyroxene, chlorite and trace levels of talc. Other supporting testwork, done in 1998 with high-confidence flotation testing, showed that the introduction of a carboxymethylcellulose depressant, Depramin C, at a dose of 400 Several recommendations for improving flow sheet performance were made as a result of this survey and the associated flotation testwork. These were: re-routing of the recleaner column tailings to the head of the primary cleaner columns; installing a bypass concentrate at the first rougher flotation cell, with adjustment of level control, to release a fast-floating increment of liberated sulphides to final concentrate; regrinding of the primary column tailing prior to presenting this stream to the scavenger flotation bank; and the introduction of a gangue depressant in the rougher float, to control the Mg silicate flotation. The implementation of these changes took place between 1998 and 2000 with the simpler changes being made first. The final modified flowsheet is shown in Copper mining represents (amongst base metals mining) the largest volumes of ore and rock processing. Needless to say, ore variance and process mineralogical challenges have a corresponding large impact on the plants and their metallurgy. There was a threefold increase of operating and capital cost for gold and copper between 2004 and 2014 ( The re-tooling of mineralogical labs with automated instrumentation such as XRD Rietveld, FT-NIR, Automated Mineral Analyzers and other equipment can reduce these metallurgical risks and provide high-throughput and fast-turnaround mineralogical data ( Exploratory and routine support of porphyry copper operations has successfully demonstrated considerable value delivery to the business by way of recovery gains and in identifying and treating problematic minerals such as clays. The plant mineralogy survey at Candelaria led to a 10% increase of gold recovery, lime dosage reduction by 72%, and a reduction of copper losses in tailings by 16% relative. It is apparent from these outcomes, that about US $ 5.5 million additional revenue was gained the first year after the survey through enhanced gold recovery alone. The use of daily blast hole XRD mineralogy is of considerable economic importance to (a) alerting the mill of detrimental ore characteristics (e.g. pyrite depression) and/or (b) if Ore Control needs to blend the feeds to help remove spikes in deliveries. Better mineralogy of feeds in the case of an associated pressure oxidation plant can avoid several days of vessel cleanout which could save The losses of unplanned Cu-Mo-Au concentrator shutdowns can range from High variance in ore/rock alteration can continuously “drain the budget”. A 0.5% combined Cu-Mo-Au loss (related to high ore type variance), in a +/- 100Kt/d concentrator, can amount to US $ 18–30 million per year. A long-term pyrite dilution in the copper concentrate, again, in a +/- 100Kt/d plant can result in US $ 50–70 million losses per year. The experience described above (and the benefits from 6 other concentrator surveys) confirm the conclusions made by Hydrometallurgy of copper is a complex interaction of feed materials, process parameters, site practices, reagents and the variance thereof. As The daily use of quantitative XRD High clay contents can rapidly plug ore shoots (unless blended) or, worse, the high clay feed will reduce/destroy the permeability of lift areas on the heap pad. A plugged shoot event alone may equate to US $ 80,000/event of deferred production. Large geotechnical heap failures can cost up to or over US $ 15 million per case. In one mine, the daily use of XRD/NIR mineralogy on blast holes contributed to US $ 510,000/year in reduced acid consumption (amongst other benefits). A Heap Leach Survey via automated mineral analyzers performed on select heap modules at Cerro Verde ( As A powerful modern toolbox of sampling, geometallurgical unit definition, qualitative and quantitative mineralogy, and laboratory testing, now exist and are available so that it is possible to deliver significant business value to projects and operations if used correctly at a best practice level. Examples of benefits have included green fields as well as brown fields operations’ brownfields retrofit to ‘mature’ plants. There are a number of reasons why this value is not always realised. If poor or non-representative sampling occurs, then specimens and not samples are elected for analysis and metallurgical tests can lead to inappropriate analysis and/or inadequate interpretation. This includes the selection of the wrong equipment and/or analysis technique, or the incorrect application of a dataset. Without an understanding of the implications of the measurements, effective communication within the processing team, (i.e. geologists, mining engineers, mineralogists, process engineers & mineralogists, chemists, environmentalists etc.), and the effective implementation of changes, the information is useless and the resources are wasted. Open engagement between disciplines and with process mineralogy specialists will help manage these challenges and ensure the success of such projects is realised. The biggest risk is short-term ‘cost reduction’ thinking rather than the longer term ‘value’ focus. Most importantly if the value is not recognised throughout the organisation and operational priorities are on short-term cost reduction, then appropriate resources will not be allocated by the various stakeholders including; mining companies, equipment suppliers, research and development companies as well as education and training providers. Without the appropriate skills and expertise to operate the expensive equipment and interpret and analyse the data obtained, the investment is wasted and operational risk remains high. In the future, the need for effective process mineralogy is expected to increase. New, more complex operations, requiring integrated and sophisticated use of current and future knowledge will need to be developed to overcome technical, environmental or societal considerations; for example when the excessive use of energy and water cannot be tolerated or permitted. Innovative and novel technologies, and the skills to utilise them to process lower grade deposits can be developed. The mineralogical knowledge will be essential to the provision of minerals and metals for a sustainable world. The authors acknowledge the tremendous work being done throughout the world with significant value being added in more ways than financial. In particular they would like to thank their friends and colleagues for helpful discussions and input to the preparation of this paper.