The performance of concrete structures depends largely on the bond strength between the steel rebar and surrounding concrete. The design equations currently available in the literature for concrete structures reinforced with deformed mild steel (MS) rebar may not be valid for smooth stainless steel (SS) rebar embedded in concrete. In this study, the bond behavior of SS rebar embedded in concrete is investigated using the push-out test method. The compressive bond behavior of 202 specimens is evaluated, and the bond stress–slip relationships for SS rebar are developed. The effects of concrete compressive strength, rebar diameter, embedment length, concrete cover, and rebar surface condition on bond strength are also examined, and a regression model is developed using the experimental results. The results show that an increase in rebar diameter, larger embedment length, and lower compressive strength all serve to reduce the average maximum bond strength of SS rebar. On the other hand, an increase in clear cover significantly improves the bond strength. Moreover, the test results show that surface treatment of SS rebar has less impact on the bond strength compared to other influencing factors.Mild steel (MS) rebar is a commonly used building material whose excellent mechanical properties, low cost, and widespread availability make it a popular choice for reinforced concrete (RC) construction. However, there is a possibility of deterioration of RC structures due to the corrosion of MS rebar. In coastal climates, this scenario becomes even more acute due to salinity conditions. Once the corrosion begins in the steel rebar, it increases the volume up to 6 to 7 times that of the original rebar The performance of concrete structures depends largely on the bond strength between the steel rebar and the surrounding concrete. Without the desired bonding strength, the structure cannot transmit the forces efficiently Prince and Singh Few studies have been conducted to date that evaluated the bond behavior of SS rebar in concrete Before using SS rebar in concrete, it is important to evaluate its bond behavior with concrete. Proper bonding transfers the axial force from the reinforcement to the concrete. In general, bond stress between deformed MS rebar and concrete develops due to chemical adhesion, frictional resistance, and mechanical interlocking between the two materials. However, SS rebar has different mechanical properties than conventional MS rebar. Moreover, existing design equations for concrete structures reinforced with deformed MS rebar may not be valid for smooth SS rebar embedded in concrete. It is thus important to investigate the bond behavior of concrete structures reinforced with SS rebar in order to ensure the proper implementation of SS rebar in civil infrastructure. All the SS manufacturing companies in Bangladesh, it should be noted, produce smooth SS rebar of either grade 201 or grade 316. Grade 316 SS rebar contains higher nickel content compared to grade 201 SS rebar and is costlier. The authors of this study have performed the flexural performance of concrete beams reinforced with smooth SS rebar, and the results are compared with those of beams reinforced with MS rebar. The SS-reinforced beams are found to outperform the conventional reinforced concrete beams in terms of ductility. These findings serve as a proof-of-concept demonstration of using SS rebar in concrete. In this context, the present study aims to investigate the compressive bond behavior of SS rebar embedded in concrete through an experimental push-out test, and to develop an empirical bond strength equation for SS rebar. This study investigates the compressive bond behavior of SS rebar in concrete, given that bond performance is an important criterion for RC structures. Due to different mechanical properties of SS rebar compared to MS, the use of SS rebar in RC construction will increase the overall ductility and reduce corrosion-related problems. To the authors’ knowledge, no such study has been conducted to date focusing on the compressive bond behavior of SS rebar embedded in concrete. The present study thus investigates the bond stress ( A total of 202 push-out test specimens were prepared considering the influencing factors as shown in Five different test variables were considered for investigating compressive bond behavior, as shown in In this study, locally available SS rebar (Grade 201) was used to investigate bond behavior. The SS rebar used in this study had a smooth surface with a round profile. The chemical composition of SS rebars was presented in Three different concrete mixes were used to investigate the effect of concrete compressive strength on the bond stress–slip behavior of SS rebar. The mixes consisted of cement (ordinary Portland cement, CEM I), natural coarse aggregate (3/4″ downgrade stone), and natural fine aggregate (F.M. above 2.5). It should be noted, admixture was not used for the 40 MPa concrete. On the other hand, for the 50 MPa and 60 MPa concrete, superplasticizer was used as an admixture. In keeping with the objective of evaluating the compressive bond behavior of SS rebar and for the push-out test, a customized arrangement was made to set the specimens for testing in a 1000 kN universal testing machine (UTM), (see Two types of cylindrical moulds (φ100 × 200 mm and φ150 × 300 mm) were used in this study for preparing the push-out specimens as per A customized metal frame was used for the push-out test, as depicted in The push-out test was performed in a displacement control mode with a rate of 1.5 to 2.0 mm/min. Since there is no standard test procedure for the compressive bond test, the authors followed the previous pushout test program on smooth SMA rebars A total of 202 load-slip curves were obtained from the push-out test. The bond strength for each specimen was evaluated using the load-slip curve. It was assumed that bond stress distributed over the length of SS rebar embedded in the concrete was uniform. This assumption of uniform distribution of bond stress is valid for short embedment length as indicated by different researchers Bond strength of 202 specimens are listed in The average maximum bond strength and residual bond strength of SS rebar were evaluated using the following equations: The failure pattern of each push-out test specimen was observed carefully after each test. Two different types of failure modes were observed during push-out testing: push-out failure and splitting failure. Smooth SS rebar exhibited push-out failure, while sand-coated SS rebar exhibited splitting failure. The bond stress between the smooth SS rebar and the surrounding concrete developed due to the chemical adhesion effect between these two materials and, once the adhesion was weakened, the bar was observed to slip from the concrete without developing any crack in the concrete. However, the bond between the sand-coated SS rebar and the concrete developed due to chemical adhesion and some kind of mechanical interlocking with the rough rebar surface. A splitting radial crack was observed in the sand-coated SS rebar after the push-out test. Similar crack patterns were observed for all the sand-coated SS rebar samples. Concrete strength is the most influential among all other factors affecting the bond strength of SS rebar. Three different concrete strengths were used in this study to investigate the effect of concrete strength on overall bond strength. Previous studies on bond strength have revealed that bond stress has a good correlation with the square root of compressive strength ( To understand bond behavior with a change in rebar diameter, four different rebar diameters were used. It was found that an increase in rebar diameter reduces the bond strength significantly. Similar findings have been reported in previous studies The maximum bond strength is presented in a normalized form ( Four different embedment lengths were considered in this study to capture the compressive bond behavior of SS rebar due to a change in embedment length. Here the effect of embedment length was investigated in terms of embedment length to diameter ratio ( Since the cylinder mould had fixed dimensions, the concrete cover was constant for each rebar diameter considering the cylinder boundary. Therefore, to investigate the effect of concrete cover on bond strength, two types of concrete cylinders were considered in the experimental program to enable the implementation of variations in concrete cover. From Sand coating on plain metallic and non-metallic rebar is one of the techniques used to improve the bond strength between rebar and concrete  Given all the influencing parameters of the bond strength of rebar, a test program was set and 202 specimen cylinders were tested. The influencing parameters considered for the bond stress evaluations were concrete strength, rebar diameter, embedment length to diameter ratio, and clear cover to diameter ratio. The bond stress ( Considering the effect of significant predictor parameters and using the multivariate regression analysis, analytical expressions for estimating the bond stress on smooth and sand-coated SS rebar were derived. This study adopted the multivariate regression technique as it allows concurrent modeling and testing of several independent variables. To obtain the ‘‘best fit” line or curve for the series of data points, this study tested different forms of regression equations. The criterion for selecting the suitable equation type was the minimum square of the error between the original test data and the values predicted by the equation. Although the technique may not be the most statistically robust method of fitting a function to a data set, it has the advantage of being relatively simple. Using the multivariate regression analysis technique with the data obtained from the push-out tests, the following expressions were developed for smooth and sand-coated SS rebar: For smooth SS rebar: For sand coated SS rebar:  The developed regression equations for smooth and sand-coated SS rebars in the current study are checked using the experimental data. For doing so, the statistical parameters used are performance factor (PF), coefficient of variation (COV), average absolute percentage error (AAPE), and root mean squared error (RMSE)  In this study, the compressive bond behavior of smooth and sand-coated SS rebars embedded in concrete was investigated by means of 202 push-out tests. The key variables during the push-out tests were the concrete compressive strength, the rebar diameter, the embedment length of rebar, the concrete cover, and the surface roughness of the SS rebar. Three different concrete strengths (40 MPa, 50 MPa, and 60 MPa), four different rebar diameters (10 mm, 12 mm, 16 mm, and 20 mm), four different embedment length to diameter ratios (3, 5, 7, and 9), two different rebar surface conditions (smooth and sand-coated), and two different cylinder sizes (100 mm × 200 mm and 150 mm × 300 mm) were interchanged, resulting in a total of 202 push-out test specimens. The key findings from the study can be summarized as follows: The bond stress ( Concrete compressive strength was found to play an important role in determining the bond strength between the rebar and the surrounding concrete. The bond strength ( Bond strength was found to decrease with an increase in rebar diameter. However, a few previous studies have suggested that lateral confinement could change the bond behavior. In the present study, the effect of lateral confinement (i.e., transverse reinforcement) on bond behavior was not considered. Rebar surface modification (smooth versus sand-coated) has a significant effect on the bond strength of SS rebar in concrete. Sand-coated SS rebar has higher bond strength compared to the smooth SS rebar for lower-strength (40 MPa) concrete. However, the sand coating does not have a significant effect on the bond strength when the SS rebar is embedded in higher-strength (50 MPa and 60 MPa) concrete. Two types of failure modes were observed during testing. Smooth SS rebar showed push-out failure mode, and sand-coated SS rebar showed splitting failure mode with a radial crack on the concrete surface. Concrete clear cover and embedment length were found to have a significant effect on the bond strength of SS rebar. 60% increase in clear cover of normal strength (40 MPa) concrete provides 38–42% higher bond strength whereas high strength concrete (60 MPa) provides 20% increase of bond strength. Bond strength increased with an increase in clear cover due to higher confinement of rebar. On the other hand, an increase in the embedment length of rebar resulted in a lower bond strength due to longer length and larger surface area. Two empirical equations of compressive bond strength for smooth and sand-coated SS rebar were developed based on the experimental results. To the authors’ best knowledge, this study is the first to investigate the compressive bond behavior of round SS rebar (Grade 201). Therefore, in future study we will investigate the applicability of the proposed equations to a wide range of parameters (e.g., bar diameter, bar location, concrete strength, smooth/deformed rebar, modulus of elasticity of rebar, and lateral confinement level). Since this study only used push-out tests to evaluate the bond behavior of smooth SS rebar in concrete, future studies should be conducted using other test methods such as pull-out test and beam-specimen test to achieve reliable results and develop design equation for development length calculation of smooth SS rebar in concrete. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support and laboratory facilities provided by the Civil Engineering Department of MIST. Donation of SS rebars by Steel Tech Ltd. is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are also due to SM lab technicians and other research students who assisted during the experimental program in many ways.