In this paper, a novel flotation technique that combines nano-scale bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation (HC) and carrier flotation is proposed to promote the flotation efficiency of a high-ash (43%) ultra-fine coal sample (<45 µm). We investigated the mechanism by which cavitation bubbles enhance the separation efficiency of carrier flotation using focused beam reflectance measurements, polarizing microscopy, and extended Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek theory. The carrier particles (polystyrene (PS)) and fine coal were pre-treated in a venturi tube and then floated in a laboratory mechanical flotation cell. The flotation results indicate that the presence of cavitation bubbles significantly improved the carrier flotation performance of high-ash ultra-fine coal. This improvement was attributed to the presence of highly hydrophobic PS, which creates additional gas nuclei in the flotation system. The nano-bubbles, which were produced by the venturi tube and adhered to the fine coal particle surfaces, were conducive to the agglomeration of fine coal particles into large aggregates. Moreover, the nano-bubbles functioned as “bridges” of interaction between the carrier particles and large aggregates of fine coal particles. This paper mainly focused on the effect of carrier (PS) and HC on high-ash fine coal. The influence of different HC intensities on carrier (PS) flotation was discussed. Two models for the interactions between the coal particles, nano-bubbles, and PS during cavitation were proposed and were proved using the E-DLVO theory.Coal is an important fossil energy resource worldwide, especially in China. China’s energy mix is dominated by coal, but coal resources have not been used effectively, especially those of fine coal In the first method, there are several ways to increase the apparent particle size, such as agglomerate flotation, selective flocculation, oil flotation, and carrier flotation. Carrier flotation can be regarded as hydrophobic flocculation between finer and coarser hydrophobic particles, which are then recovered via conventional flotation Among the methods for reducing bubble size, hydrodynamic cavitation (HC) is one of the least expensive and most energy-efficient ways to generate nano-bubbles. Nano-bubbles produced using HC can improve the flotation performance of fine particles and reduce reagent consumption Nano-bubbles are gas cavities with diameters less than 1 μm and are co-produced with larger bubbles using HC Zhou, et al. Polystyrene is a synthetic aromatic polymer made from styrene monomers and has a general chemical formula of (C The coal samples were procured from Xianyang, Shanxi province, China. A standard laboratory RK/FD-II sub-aeration flotation cell with 1.5 L volume (Wuhan Rock Crush & Grand Equipment Manufacture Co., Ltd) was used in the conventional flotation experiments. In the carrier flotation tests, PS was used as the “carrier” to further promote the flotation performance of the coal sample. It was difficult to disperse the PS particles in water because of their strong hydrophobicity. Hence, they were pre-treated in an HC system with a throat velocity of 16.50 m/s ( A detailed description of the novel flotation technique combining an HC system and carrier flotation is given in To prove the strengthening effect of HC on the flotation technique developed, the ultra-fine coal samples (60 g) individually mixed with 500 mL ultrapure water. Then the mixture was pre-treated in the HC system for 5 min ( The Fuerstenau upgrading curve is a good tool to estimate the flotation separation efficiency Zeta Plus (Brookhaven, US) was used to measure the zeta potential distributions of coal and PS. First, 0.1 g each of coal and PS were weighed and dispersed in 100 mL of deionized (DI) water. The pH was adjusted using 0.1 mM HCl and 0.1 mM NaOH. Finally, after 1 day of precipitation, the supernatants of different pH values were used to measure the zeta potential. In the process of measurement, each sample was tested five times and the average was taken as the zeta potential value. The results are shown in The size and zeta potentials of the nano-bubbles were measured using Zeta Plus (Brookhaven, US). Firstly, ultrapure water with 0.1 mM NaCl was treated for 5 min in the HC system at different throat velocities (16.50, 16.25, and 15.56 m/s). Meanwhile, ultrapure water untreated via HC (throat velocity of 0 m/s) was used as the control group. Finally, 1 mL of water was withdrawn from each sample to measure the sizes and zeta potentials of the nano-bubbles immediately. In the process of measurement, each sample was tested five times and the average was taken as the finalvalue. Focused bean reflectance measurement was used to measure the change in particle size distribution before and after HC. A total of 12 g of the coal sample and 2 g of PS particles were added to a beaker (500 mL), to which 200 mL of tap water was added, and the mixture was pre-conditioned using a glass rod. Finally, the sample in the beaker was tested via FBRM. During the test, the mixture continuously stirred by magnetic stirrer. When the curve was stable, the sample was withdrawn and treated in the HC system. After 5 min, the sample was monitored via FBRM again. The particle size distribution was recorded until the curve was stable. A polarizing microscope (Sunny Optical-Instrument, Zhejiang, China) was utilized to observe the particle behavior after HC. The PM and FBRM analyses were carried out simultaneously. Following treatment in the HC system, a small number of samples were extracted from the beaker and placed on a glass slide until the water evaporated, and the samples were observed under the microscope.     In   The calculation of the force between particles and bubbles has been reported in the literature The double electric layer interaction energy is calculated using the following equations: The hydrophobic interaction energy is calculated as follows: Parameters used in E-DLVO theory calculation are given in The experimental results showed that the coupling of PS carrier and HC improved the flotation of high-ash fine coal. The nano-bubbles generated on the surfaces of the hydrophobic particles during cavitation promoted the aggregation of ultra-fine coal particles, the attachment between ultra-fine coal particles and PS particles. Moreover, the flotation results improved with cavitation intensity. The absolute value of total energy between nano-bubbles and nano-bubbles (Model Ⅰ) is always greater than that between nano-bubbles and ultra-fine coal particles (Model Ⅱ). Model Ⅰ could significantly improve the flotation efficiency of ultra-fine coal. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Project funded by