The prior aim of lab testing is the determination of parameters. However, the measurements do not only reflect the rock or soil properties, but contain also, at least to some extent, the influence of the test equipment. Even if measurements are designed to minimize the influence of the test equipment often some measurement values are effected by an unknown amount. Therefore, it is proposed to build detailed numerical models of the test device including the specimen and to duplicate the lab test completely. This paper presents experimental and numerical tests performed with a shear box device. Multi-stage direct shear tests were conducted on smooth plane joints in artificial rock-like material under constant normal loading (CNL) conditions. A 3-dimensional numerical model of the shear box device including the sample was built and the laboratory tests were simulated. The numerical model comprises the loading frame, the hydraulic pistons, the shear boxes and the sample and considers the measuring devices. The numerical model was able to reproduce the non-uniform stress distribution at the joint connected with sample rotation, which in turn produces unwanted frictional forces at the upper shear box. Consequently, only 91–94% of the applied and measured normal force really acts at the joint. Moreover, numerical simulations also shows, to what extend the different parts of the loading frame deform.Rocks encountered in civil engineering, energy engineering, water conservation and hydropower engineering, mining engineering, nuclear waste storage engineering, railway bridge engineering and defense engineering are in general jointed and anisotropic in nature. Their strength has to be analyzed to study stability problems related to tunnels, foundations and underground excavations Shear box tests are used to determine the shear strength of geomaterials (soils and rocks). They belong to the standard methods in soil mechanics, but they are not so widely used in rock mechanics because larger samples and much higher forces are needed. Most of the developed shear box devices for rock-like material are restricted to maximum forces between 200 However, there are few laboratory tests and numerical simulations concerning the influence of the test equipment Multi-stage constant normal stress The relationship between shear force and shear displacement is shown in In order to reveal the mechanical behavior of the GS-1000 shear box device ( The simulation procedure duplicates the lab testing by the following steps: Running the model until equilibrium under gravity is reached. Applying the constant normal forces in the vertical cylinder/piston. Applying a horizontal velocity to the horizontal piston. At the same time, the reacting force (force equilibrium via numerical servo-algorithm) is applied to the horizontal cylinder. Numerical simulation results are shown in Rotation of the upper part of the specimen was calculated using the formula:     Like measured during the lab tests, the loading plate and the top specimen experience rotation ( The rotation of the loading plate causes tilt and subsequent addition friction. Unwanted high local friction force ( Sometimes direct measurement at the samples is not possible. Also, there are often restrictions in terms of spatial resolution, that means only average or resulting components of physical quantities can be measured. The combined evaluation of lab tests and in parallel conducted numerical simulations considering the complete test set-up and test-procedure can help to get missing information and will increase quality of parameters deduced from lab test results. The usefulness of complex numerical simulations in parallel to lab tests is illustrated by shear box tests. The numerical model duplicated the whole test equipment and test procedure and has delivered the following additional information: (i) Quantitative value for deformations including misalignment of loading frame and piston as function of applied forces, (ii) detailed inhomogeneous stress distribution along the joint as function of loading and shear displacement, (iii) determination of sample rotation and inclination of vertical loading piston, and (iv) quantitative proof of sufficient system stiffness. In addition, the numerical model can be used to modify or enhance components of the device (developing tool). This work was supported by the