Calcifying vesicles play an important role in the mechanism of aortic calcification induced by dietary cholesterol interventions. This study was initiated to test the hypothesis that alterations in the ratio of bicarbonate/CO2, which is a main physiological buffer, could affect vesicle-mediated calcification. Using rabbits as a model, in vitro calcification of vesicles isolated from aortas was performed to study the effect of the bicarbonate buffer on the mineralization process. When Tris buffer was initially used to maintain pH of the media, ATP-dependent vesicle calcification increased with pH of calcifying media. By replacing Tris with physiological bicarbonate/CO2 buffer, ATP-dependent vesicle calcification increased rapidly with increased ratios of bicarbonate/CO2. The increase appears to be a result of elevated levels of pH through the alteration in the ratios of bicarbonate/CO2. The effect of the physiological concentration of bicarbonate (30 mM) on pH of calcifying media was remarkable since 50 mM of Tris buffer at pH 7.6 failed to prevent a rapid rise in pH under atmospheric CO2. The effect of bicarbonate and CO2 on vesicle calcification was dependent on the ratio of the surface area to the volume of calcifying media, since the ratio profoundly affects the exchange rate between the gas and liquid phases of CO2. Although the pathological conditions that alter the pH remain unknown, it is conceivable that blockage in the supply of blood CO2 to the media by intimal thickening in the lesions could contribute to focal calcification. We conclude that bicarbonate buffer could provide a dynamic and rapid transitional increase in pH of extracellular fluids, thereby creating a favorable condition for the initiation of vesicle-mediated calcification under pathological conditions.The pathological conditions that set the stage for aortic calcification induced by high cholesterol dietary interventions remain incompletely defined Mineral associated vesicles, which are membrane bound with an average size of 200 nm, are present in aortas of human atherosclerotic subjects Calcifying vesicles were isolated from atherosclerotic aortas using the method of Hsu et al. All of the following solutions were prepared under atmospheric CO Since pH plays an essential role in the formation of mineral crystal, the effect of pH on the metastability of a calcifying medium in the presence and absence of vesicles was studied. A defined calcifying medium was used to mimic the physiological concentrations of Ca Although pH levels lower than 7.9 did not induce ATP-promoted calcification within 30 min, it is possible that given sufficient time, Ca deposition can occur at lower pH. As shown in Since the ratio of bicarbonate/CO Exposure of a concentrated sodium bicarbonate solution to a relatively low CO Biological calcification plays a vital structural and functional role in invertebrates and vertebrates. Dystrophic calcification is known to exist in a variety of diseases. The mechanism of aortic calcification is likely a complex process involving several putative initiators including cholesterol An important yet often neglected consideration is the role of bicarbonate/CO To determine whether the observed effects are unique for vesicles from atherosclerotic subjects, we routinely isolated vesicles from normal aortas for comparison Despite the observed effects of bicarbonate/CO Although the pH levels in the calcification front of hard tissues and lesions have not been well characterized, calcifying cartilage fluids have been shown to have a pH level of 7.6 in addition to the presence of millimolar ranges of nucleotides providing a potential source of Pi for calcification Since necrosis and apoptosis are frequent occurrences in atheromatous regions, it is of interest to consider whether these processes can lead to a change in pH and thereby affecting mineralization. The inactivity of quiescent or apoptotic cells could lead to a decrease in the output of CO The aorta dissection by Dr. Nathan Culley and the maintenance of rabbits by Wen-Li Xu and Pamela Smith are greatly appreciated. This work was partially funded by NIH HL65287.