The surface of naturally hydrophobic mineral pyrophyllite was modified to hydrophilic by treatment with prehydrolyzed N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APEO) coupling agent to prepare a novel and effective adsorbent for the removal of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) from aqueous solutions. XRD, FTIR, and SEM analyses were used to characterize the surface modification. It was found that after the grafting procedure, heat treatment at 110°C results in condensation reaction between the OH groups of the APEO molecule and the hydroxyl groups and/or oxygen atoms on the pyrophyllite surface and the adsorption of 4-NP by APEO-modified pyrophyllite involves interactions between dissociated 4-NP molecules and protonated amine groups of APEO molecules attached to the mineral surface. Adsorption equilibrium data for 4-NP adsorption on APEO-treated and untreated pyrophyllite were most satisfactorily fitted using the Freundlich adsorption isotherm and adsorption capacity was found to be 0.268 mg/g for modified pyrophyllite whereas it was only 0.105 mg/g for untreated pyrophyllite.Despite the prolific use of activated carbon, it remains an expensive material since the higher the quality, the greater its cost. Due to the relatively high cost of activated carbons, there has been a substantial body of attempts to utilize low cost, naturally occurring adsorbents to remove environmentally toxic contaminants from waste waters. In recent years, attention has been focused on the various adsorbents, such as chitosan, zeolites, fly ash, coal, oxides, papermill sludge, sawdust, and various clay minerals, which have organic and inorganic-binding capacities and are able to remove unwanted hazardous species from contaminated water at low cost Among the new adsorbents, clays are probably the most promising alternatives to high cost adsorbents. Therefore, the widespread use of clays in industries for wastewater treatment applications today considerably increased due to their local availability, technical feasibility, easy engineering applications, and cost effectiveness. That is why a number of studies have been performed using clay minerals, such as zeolites The majority of clay minerals employed for the removal of organic molecules from wastewater are characterized by a high hydrophilic behavior and, therefore, they are unsuccessful if the surface of clay is not rendered hydrophobic. Fortunately, clay minerals are fine-grained particles with large surface areas and strong adsorption, giving rise to the activation and modification possibility of its surface in order to achieve higher adsorption capacities with the clays. Bergaya and Lagaly adsorption; ion exchange with inorganic cations and cationic complexes; ion exchange with organic cations; binding of inorganic and organic anions, mainly at the edges; grafting of organic compounds; reaction with acids; pillaring by different types of poly- (hydroxo metal) cation; interlamellar or intraparticle and interparticle polymerization; dehydroxylation and calcination; delamination and reaggregation of smectitic clay minerals; and physical treatments such as lyophilization, ultrasound, and plasma. Organo-functionalization or grafting of silane molecules on a clay surface is another interesting method of modification. Silane coupling agents are a family of organosilicon monomers, which are characterized by the general structure Silane coupling agents are capable of providing chemical bonding between an organic material and an inorganic material. Depending on the type of silane coupling agent used and the purpose of the material to be obtained, the surface properties can change from either hydrophilic or hydrophobic There are numerous studies evaluating hydrophilic clay minerals modified to make them hydrophobic either by ion exchange or by grafting coupling agents. But, there are almost no studies reporting the modification of hydrophobic clay to attain a hydrophilic surface, except one attempt in which 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane-treated pyrophyllite was utilized as adsorbent for removal of Cu(II) ions from aqueous solutions Pyrophyllite, which exhibits naturally hydrophobic surface properties in aqueous solutions, is a nonswelling hydrous aluminum silicate mineral with the ideal chemical formula Al The aim of this study is, first, to change the surface property of pyrophyllite from hydrophobic to hydrophilic by grafting amino-silane coupling agent to boost the active sites at the surface of pyrophyllite to achieve higher adsorption efficiency for polar organic molecules. Furthermore, to prove that amino-silane-treated pyrophyllite powder can be conjugated to some organic molecules, the results of batch adsorption experiments investigating the effects of contact time, stirring speed, amount of adsorbent, and initial solute concentration were discussed after 4-nitrophenol solutions were used to interact with amino-silane-treated and also untreated pyrophyllite powders. Pyrophyllite samples were obtained from ÇimSa Mining Company operating industrial mineral deposits in Malatya, Turkey. The chemical analysis ( The silane coupling agent, Prior to surface modification of the pyrophyllite, APEO was prehydrolyzed without using any solvent and catalyst by adding drop wise 3 mol of water per mole of APEO. The reaction was allowed to continue at ambient temperature until a clear and homogeneous solution occurred. Unreacted water and alcohol formed during the reaction were removed by vacuum. Then, the viscous and colorless solution obtained was diluted by dry methanol to prepare a 50% (w/w) solution of prehydrolyzed APEO. Five grams of pyrophyllite powder was dipped into the 20 g of the diluted APEO solution. The mixture was stirred at ambient temperature. After the time proposed for reaction was finished, the solid phase was filtered and dried under vacuum for 90 min at 110 A stock solution of 500 mg/L 4-NP prepared from pure 4-NP crystals was diluted to give a standard solution of the desired concentration of 4-NP. Batch adsorption tests were conducted in 50-ml beakers and equilibrated using a magnetic stirrer. Then 10 ml of the solution was placed into the beaker and equilibrated with a known amount of adsorbent. The pH of the 4-NP solutions was in the range 6.05–6.25 without further adjustment to simulate the natural aqueous solutions. The experiments were carried out at constant temperature (21±1 The equilibrium isotherm results were found to be well described by the Freundlich isotherm model. The linearized form of the isotherm equation can be written as The SEM microphotographs of pyrophyllite and APPYRO particles are shown in The XRD analysis can provide brief information about the extent of pyrophyllite crystallization and the organic incorporation by the (001) basal spacing. XRD data of pyrophyllite and APPYRO and calculated peak positions by using unit cell parameters and related indices are listed in The grafting agents are supposed to attach to clay surfaces by chemical bonding and adsorption to form a monomolecular layer or oligomer film on the clay mineral surfaces Briefly, the surface modification mechanism of pyrophyllite can be explained in two stages. At first, APEO is prehydrolyzed by a hydrolysis reaction in which one and one-half moles of water are consumed per mole of APEO, as determined by the Karl–Fischer titration method. The hydrolysis reaction can be written as After the grafting procedure, the organo-functional NH  It was clearly observed that untreated natural pyrophyllite possesses drastically lower adsorption capacity compared to that of APPYRO. Before making arguments on the 4-NP adsorption mechanisms of pyrophyllite and APPYRO, the condition of the 4-NP molecule in the aqueous solution must be considered. 4-NP is a weak acid and has a dissociation constant (pK In aqueous solutions in this pH range, pyrophyllite offers a negatively charged surface resulting mainly from the edges, which involves repulsive forces hampering the phenolate ion sorption. Besides, interaction of hydrophobic siloxane surfaces of pyrophyllite with polar 4-NP molecules is very weak, mainly depending on the unwettability of hydrophobic surfaces with aqueous solutions. Consequently, in agreement with Boyd's statement Regarding the stability of the APEO molecules on the pyrophyllite surface in aqueous 4-NP solutions of studied pH, nearly 99% of the amine groups at the end of the APEO molecule are protonated and are cationic, as calculated using Modification of the pyrophyllite surface by grafting APEO as coupling agent was studied to render the surface from naturally hydrophobic to hydrophilic and APEO-treated pyrophyllite was utilized as sorbent for the removal of polar 4-NP from aqueous solutions. The following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental results. It was observed that the XRD pattern of pyrophyllite is slightly affected by coating with APEO, since diminishing change in the peaks corresponding to (001), (002), and (003) reflections were detected. The FTIR analysis of the surface showed that the grafting procedure results in the condensation reaction proceeding between the OH groups of the hydrolyzed APEO molecule and the hydroxyl groups and/or oxygen atoms present on the surface of the pyrophyllite. This interaction was proposed as the main mechanism for the surface functionalization. Batch adsorption experiments showed that the H-bonding interactions between dissociated 4-NP molecules and protonated amine groups on the APEO molecules attached to the mineral surface drive the adsorption process. The significant improvement in the adsorption is due to the more polar character of the APPYRO surface, maintained by the coating with APEO. By applying the Freundlich adsorption isotherm model, the adsorption capacities of untreated pyrophyllite and APPYRO were found to be 0.105 and 0.268 mg of 4-NP per gram of adsorbent, respectively. It was concluded that the low adsorption capacity of natural clays can be enhanced by surface modification using organo-functional silane coupling agents and that chemical modification of clay surfaces would be useful for the preparation of new adsorbents for the economic treatment of wastewater containing toxic organic and inorganic molecules. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of İnönü University, Turkey (BAPB-2002/09). Thanks are also extended to M. Asiltürk for her technical assistance during the experimental studies.