To promote organic pollutant treatment efficiency by improving mass transfer, a novel fluidized electrochemical reactor that integrated advanced electrochemical oxidation process (AEOP) with activated carbon (AC) fluidization in a single cell was developed for model pollutant p-nitrophenol (PNP) abatement. Synergetic effect on COD removal was found in such a combined process and the COD removal efficiency was enhanced to be 97.8%. The combined process has been proved to be a promising abatement process for biorefractory organic pollutants degradation, which is advantageous over using either AEOP or adsorption alone. The roles of the location of AC in the cell, liquid flowrate, AC mass and initial PNP concentrations on COD removal were investigated to optimize the performance. A lumped kinetic model based on adsorption/electrocatalysis/oxidation mechanism for COD removal was proposed to predict the role of adsorption, electrocatalysis and oxidation in the combined process. The output of the kinetic model was found to be in good agreement with the experimental data obtained at various initial PNP concentrations and AC mass.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) such as Fenton reaction, ozonation, and photocatalysis, have been extensively studied as the pretreatment or mineralization process for the treatment of wastewater containing biorefractory organic compounds that are unable to be effectively minimized by traditional technologies. Recently, another kind of AOPs, advanced electrochemical oxidation process (AEOP) has attracted increasing interests One area is to develop better performance anodes in respects of high catalytic activity, long life, etc. including glassy carbon electrode In present work, activated carbon (AC) is applied to the electrochemical cell, along with a pilot anode (250 cm  All samples were immediately analyzed to avoid further reaction. The concentrations of PNP and the reaction intermediates were determined using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Gilson). Aliquots of 25 μl were injected to the HPLC and the mobile phase consists of acetonitrile/water/concentrated H The COD concentration was measured by standard method In the presence of AC, organic pollutants can be degraded both by electrocatalysis and adsorption. To evaluate the feasibility of adding AC into the electrocatalysis process, the efficiencies of COD removal by adsorption, electrocatalysis and their combined process were compared in the same reactor, respectively. Adsorption was performed at the same conditions except the absence of current. The tendency of COD concentration during the whole electrocatalysis, adsorption process and the combined processes in the first period of 30 min was tried by the following apparent first-order kinetics, The synergetic effect is related to the addition of AC. In our tests, AC was repeatedly used for three times in the combined process and no significant decay on COD removal was observed, indicating partial recovery of AC was achieved. The regeneration of exhausted AC by electrocatalysis was reported as a promising method Such a combined process obviously possesses advantages over electrocatalysis or adsorption alone in respect of eliminating organic compounds. Therefore, it is of our interests to study the roles of some operational conditions on COD removal. The main parameters examined include the location of AC in the electrochemical cell, the amount of AC, the liquid flowrate and the initial concentration of PNP on COD removal. It was reported that the AC regeneration efficiency by cathode is higher than that in the anode by electrochemical regeneration since the AC can be easily recovered at high pH value zone adjacent to cathode The liquid flowrate significantly influences the mass transfer, which in turn affects both the electrocatalysis and adsorption.   PNP degradation is dependent on both the role of the electrocatalysis and adsorption. It is necessary to discuss the respective role that electrocatalysis and adsorption played in the combined process by means of kinetic model. The degradation of organics by electrocatalysis is assumed due to the hydroxyl radical produced on the PbO The overall steps for PNP degradation by electrocatalysis principally involve the following steps: (i) mass transfer of organic compounds from the bulk of the solution toward the surface of the anode, (ii) adsorption of organic compound onto the catalytic sites of the anode, and (iii) the reaction between hydroxyl radical and adsorbed organic molecular. As described above, mass transfer is not rate-determining step when the liquid flow rate increased to 3.25 l/min and the overall COD removal is a adsorption/reaction-controlled process. Adsorption kinetics has been proved to be an apparent first-order, as mentioned previously in During degradation, quinine-like substances such as hydroquinone and benzoquinone, aliphatic carboxylic acids including fumaric acid and oxalic acid are found to be the principal intermediates and carbon dioxide is the mineralization product As stated previously, the formation of every intermediate (A) generally proceeds in two pathways in the combined process. One is the oxidation on the anode surface by electrocatalysis to its oxidation product (D); the other is first adsorbed on the AC surfaces via adsorption path to form B and then catalytically oxidized to product D. Such an adsorption/electrocatalysis/oxidation mechanism is shown in the following diagram, The integration constants can be estimated by the initial conditions: The actual amounts of pollutants that adsorbed by AC were very difficult to be measured during experiment. However, it should be oxidized simultaneously after adsorption in a continuous treatment process under steady state. Thus, additional assumption that [A] was much larger than [B] would be reasonable Moreover, in order to evaluate the ratio between oxidation directly by electrocatalysis and by adsorption, the selectivity α is defined as: The kinetic rate constants were calculated by means of nonlinear curve fitting When AC density is increased, both K As shown in The combined process with AEOP and AC adsorption for wastewater treatment offered evident advantages over the individual processes for PNP abatement. Synergetic effect was found existing in the combined process on COD removal efficiency and the enhancement was about 98%. In the combined process, organics can be either directly oxidized by electrocatalysis on the anode surface, or by adsorbtion onto the AC surface first and then oxidized. Various operating parameters on COD removal were investigated. In views of environmental protection it was suggested to degrade the pollutants in the anodic cell though no different effects on COD removal rate was found in the anodic cell and cathodic cell. Higher liquid flowrate could improve mass transfer. However, when liquid flowrate was increased to 3.25 l/min such improvement became insignificant, implying that mass transfer was no longer the reaction-limiting step. As for AC loading, it was observed that the efficiency of COD removal could be increased linearly with the increase in AC loading till it reaches 2 g/l. It has also been noticed that the absolute amount of COD removal could be improved at relatively high PNP initial concentrations. The lumped kinetic model established based on adsorption/electrocatalysis/oxidation mechanism was found to have good agreement with experimental data at various initial PNP concentrations and AC loading. The proposed model can be used to predict the role of adsorption, electrocatalysis and oxidation in the combined process. By means of the kinetics model, at either higher AC amount or lower PNP initial concentration, the efficiency of COD removal by electrocatalysis was considerably higher than that by adsorption–oxidation.