Flotation of lead oxide minerals is quite challenging because flotation behaviors of the different lead oxide minerals are different. For example, anglesite is less amenable to sulphidization than cerussite, and when an ore contains both minerals, the selection of a reagent scheme is very difficult. The sulphidization method for lead oxide minerals is a delicate process and is sensitive to a) level of sulphidizer additions, b) number of sulphidization stages and c) conditioning time with sulphidizer. In more recent studies, it was established that aeration during sulphidization has a beneficial effect on lead oxide minerals, especially anglesite.With respect to collector choice, xanthates alone or in combination with mercaptans are the most commonly used. The use of mercaptans when treating ores containing both oxide lead and zinc results in reduced selectivity between lead and zinc.It should be pointed out that the use of barium sulphide and ammonium salts (chlorite, sulphate) resulted in improved lead oxide metallurgy, especially when the ore contains slimes.A new line of collectors, consisting of xanthate fatty acid amine mixture, has been found to be an effective zinc oxide collector. These collectors have been successfully tested on a number of zinc oxide and lead zinc oxide ores. Depressant choice during treatment of zinc oxide and lead zinc oxide ores includes starches, guar, different acrylic polymers and phosphates. The choice of the depressant depends on the type of gangue that is present in the ore.Flotation of With respect to collector choice, xanthates alone or in combination with mercaptans are the most commonly used. The use of mercaptans when treating ores containing both oxide lead and It should be pointed out that the use of barium sulphide and ammonium salts (chlorite, sulphate) resulted in improved lead oxide metallurgy, especially when the ore contains slimes. A new line of collectors, consisting of xanthate fatty acid amine mixture, has been found to be an effective zinc oxide There are a variety of mixed sulphide oxide ores and oxide lead zinc ores, and these ores cannot be classified into any specific group due to the vast differences in geology and mineral compositions. Only limited literature is available on the geological and mineralogical characteristics of these ores. From a processing point of view, these ores can be classified into the following groups: Mixed sulphide and oxide lead zinc ores Oxide lead zinc ores Oxide zinc ore with little or no lead present. In general, the calceous-dolomitic rocks from the Cambrian age are affected by their upper beds, by sulphide mineralization of lead, zinc and iron contemporaneous with sedimentation. The oxide lead and zinc minerals are disseminated through dolomitic limestone. As a consequence of the action of the descending process, these formations may assume different types of mineralization. According to the intensity of the oxidation process, which is associated with the different characteristics of the country rock, this country rock may be (a) principally calceous, (b) calceous with dolomitized zones and (c) primarily dolomitized. In the case of calceous rock formation, the mineralization is well defined in parallel veins with the width ranging from 1 to 6 With calceous rock types, the oxide mineralization extends beyond the veins forming concretion and small masses. The lead content of these mineralization types range from 1.5% to 2.5%, of which ∼50% is oxidized. The zinc content ranges from 5% to 12%, of which 70% is oxide zinc. In the case where dolomitization is extensive, the oxidized mineralization is present everywhere, without regular outline. These are relatively low-grade ores. In all of the above-described cases, clay is often present as a filling in the mineral cavities, which are created as a result of dissolution of limestone and by dolomitization. These ore types are found in Sicily, Ireland, Morocco and Canada. There are only a few deposits of oxide lead ores, some of which are processing plants. These include Mibladen Mine in Morocco, several deposits in Sardinia and Tynagh deposit in Ireland. In general, the mineral composition varies significantly. The limestone deposits contain barite and dolomite. In these ores, lead is represented by cerussite with little to no galena present. The oxide lead ore in a dolomitic matrix may contain clay slimes and a fairly large amount of pyrite and barite; both of these minerals have a negative effect on oxide lead flotation. These ores may contain one or several lead minerals, including cerussite, anglesite and pyromorphite. Some lead oxide ore varieties may contain oxide copper minerals in the range of 0.2–1% Cu. As for the lead oxide ore types, there are a variety of zinc oxide ores. There are three basic ore types of economic value: (a) ores with hemimorphite as the predominant zinc oxide minerals, (b) ores with smithsonite as dominant zinc oxide minerals and (c) ores with a mixture of smithsonite and willemite. Typical mineral compositions of this ore are shown in The smithsonite ore type is usually composed of a mixed assemblage consisting of dolomite, Fe-oxyhydroxide, quartz clay (kaoline and montmorillonite), minor amount of feldspar and Mn-oxyhydroxide. Hemimorphite is typically present as coarse, radiating prismatic crystals between 100 and 500 The hemimorphite ore type is composed of a variety of gangue minerals. Some ores contain a fine-grained aolitic limestone with fossil fragments and random replacement veins of smithsonite, which is highly pigmented with hemimorphite. The goethite in these ores is present as pigmented crystalline masses. The ferruginous calcite in the ore is sometimes replaced with hemimorphite aggregates or crystals, 50–60 This ore type belongs to the refractory ore type, found in Egypt and North Africa. The mixed willemite–smithsonite ore has the simplest mineral composition of the three basic ore types. The silicate, goethite and barite are the principal gangue minerals. Willemite is a major zinc oxide mineral present as free crystals ranging from 50 to 500 There is a fairly large number of oxide lead and zinc minerals, only a few of which have been studied. These minerals can occur separately (e.g. cerussite) or as mixtures of two or more oxide minerals. Depending on the formation of the ore body with oxide minerals, the ore may contain only lead or zinc oxide minerals or a mixture of the lead and zinc oxide minerals. Very often there are ores that contain mixtures of sulphide and oxide lead minerals, which are processed in operating plants. There has been very little research data or literature for a number of the minerals listed in Flotation of the lead oxide minerals is a difficult problem not least because there are no known direct acting collectors. Normally, during oxide lead flotation, a sulphidization method is used with xanthate as a collector. In the majority of cases, the ore is pretreated using a desliming process, especially if the ore contains clay and Fe-hydroxides. Another method includes the preconcentration using heavy liquid. Of all the lead oxide minerals, cerussite and anglesite Excess of sulphidizer has a negative effect on cerussite and anglesite recovery. Depending on the gangue composition of the ore, stage additions of sulphidizer have been proven useful Normally the Na When using Na Prolonged aeration however reduces both lead grade and recovery. The use of barium sulphide as a secondary sulphidizer During oxide lead flotation, the choice of collector is rather limited to xanthates, which are used in operating plants. Dithiophosphates and mercaptans are used as secondary collectors. This is due to the fact that natural ores contain a variety of floatable gangues, for which the anionic flotation process is not applicable. The use of chelating agents as flotation collectors for oxide lead flotation have been extensively examined Wulfenite and minetizit are mainly associated with oxide lead silver ores. Very little to no research data are available on these two minerals. Most recently, research work was carried out on these minerals using natural ore. It has been demonstrated that wulfenite and minetizit can be recovered using sulphidization and modified xanthate. The initial research work on oxide zinc flotation dates back to the 1930s at the University of Liege, Belgium Research work conducted at the University of Liege was carried out on several ore types that contained hemimorphite and smithsonite. The mercaptan-type collectors were effective with both minerals in the presence of sulphidizer. Although mercaptans floated oxide zinc minerals, the recoveries were not satisfactory. Later in the research work, amine-type collectors were introduced to flotation of oxide zinc minerals with significant improvement in metallurgy over that obtained with mercaptans. Extensive research work was performed on Gorno Calamine ore from Sicily, where a large number of amines were examined The results demonstrated that the most satisfactory results were obtained using amines made from coconut oil, whereas the amines made from soya gave poor results. The most effective amines found during this research were Armac C (Akzo Nobel, USA) and Kokoamine KK (Akzo Nobel, USA). The combination of Na Most recently, a new line of collectors The best results were obtained using collector DAS-2, consisting of xanthated fatty acid The choice of gangue depressants is closely related to the gangue type present in the ore. Usually the oxide zinc ores have a complex gangue composition and, therefore, selection of depressants is dictated by the gangue composition present in the ore. The most common depressants used include Sodium silicate Guar Starch Cellulose Different acrylic polymers Phosphates (Na The application of these depressants was discussed in the preceding sections. There are only a few operating plants that treat mixed and oxide lead zinc ores. Most of these plants are located in Sicily, Ireland, Morocco, Egypt and Canada, but there are operating plants found in the USA, Mexico and Argentina. In the past 20 years, extensive research has been conducted on a variety of oxide lead zinc ores with the objective of developing a commercial treatment process. Some of these processes are commercially applied in several operations. The beneficiation of mixed lead zinc sulphide oxide ores is a complex process and is dependent on gangue composition of the ore. There are two basic types of mixed sulphide oxide ores that have been extensively studied. These include (a) ores with dolomitic and calcite gangue present in the ore with moderate clay content and (b) ores with the presence of borite and clay minerals. These ore types are abundant in Northern Canada and Mexico. Extensive research work was carried out on these ores with the objective of developing a treatment process for commercial application. One of the major tasks in the development testwork was to use a non-cyanide flotation method in the sulphide flotation. Typical reagent schemes used in beneficiation of the mixed lead zinc oxide sulphide ores are shown in The compositions of the reagent mixtures are as follows: The continuous plant simulation results obtained in the laboratory are shown in There are only few operations treating mixed lead zinc sulphide oxide ores that contain barite–calcite gangue minerals. A typical example of such an operation is the Tynagh oxide complex in Ireland This ore is treated using a bulk lead zinc sulphide flotation method followed by oxide lead flotation. The reagent scheme used in this circuit is shown in Cyanide is used to depress pyrite, since some of the ore types contain an appreciable amount of pyrite. The results obtained in the plant are presented in There are several operations that treat oxide lead zinc ores, including several operations in Sicily, Morocco and Mexico. The beneficiation flowsheets, in general, are similar to those found in most operating plants. The generalized flowsheet is presented in A possible difference in the flowsheet might be the addition of a gravity preconcentration stage for lead. In some cases, the heavy liquid separation is performed prior to lead zinc oxide flotation. The reagent scheme selection is very dependent on (a) type of gangue minerals present in the ore and (b) type of lead and zinc oxide minerals. In plant practice, lead oxide minerals are recovered using a sulphidization method with xanthate as the primary collector and mercaptans as the secondary collector. The zinc oxide flotation is performed after desliming the oxide lead tailings. In the case of zinc oxide, a sulphidization method is used with amine as the primary zinc collector. The choice of depressant is dependent on the type of gangue minerals present in the ore. A typical reagent scheme used for flotation of oxide lead zinc ores is shown in Collector sterylamine acetate works well on smithsonite, but not as well on calamine. When smithsonite is present in the ore, better results are achieved using a tallow amine emulsion with elevated additions of fuel oil emulsion. Metallurgical results obtained in an operating plant in Morocco are presented in The zinc oxide ores of any economic value are represented by smithsonite and calamine. Willemite, franklinite and other zinc oxide minerals are quite rare. The gangue minerals are usually represented by calcite ferooxides, dolomite and hemimorphite. The composition of gangue minerals, however, varies considerably and may also contain clay, talk, Fe-hydroxide and other minerals. Over the past 30 years, considerable work has been conducted on zinc oxides, for which a number of different methods were developed and examined in a number of different plants. The highlights of the most important methods are presented below.    Pretreatment of the pulp with sulphidizer followed by reconditioning with CuSO The second method involves sulphidization of the smithsonite during heating of the pulp to 50–60°C followed by activation with CuSO  A list of collectors used in the oxide zinc flotation is presented in In every method, sulphidizer Na In the cases where CuSO There are a fairly large number of modifiers and depressants that are used for flotation of oxidized zinc minerals. In actual practice, sodium silicate is most commonly used because of its depressing action on most of the gangue minerals present in the ore. Sodium tripolyphosphate acts as a general depressant and dispersant in concentrations up to 250 Acrylate and low-molecular-weight acrylic acids are effective slime depressants/dispersants. Suspendol PKK and PC improved separation efficiency between zinc and iron oxides. Starches, mainly hydrolysed starch and cooked starch, are effective depressants in the treatment of oxidized zinc ores that contain iron oxides and Fe-hydroxides. As mentioned earlier, the selection of reagent scheme for treatment of oxidized zinc ores depends very much on the type of oxide zinc mineral present in the ore, as well as the type and consumption of gangue minerals. Good metallurgical results were usually achieved on the smithsonite and calamine ores. Oxide lead silver ores are very rare and there is only one operating plant in the world treating this type of ore. The process development and plant design was accomplished during 2005–2006 and has been in operation since December 2007 The principal lead oxide minerals include pyromorphite, wulfenite, mimetite and plumbojerusite. Some galena is also present in this ore type. The principal gangue minerals include silicate, dolomite, siderite, ferohydrooxides and clay minerals. About 20% of the ore is represented by ultra-fine slime with an average size of Silver oxide lead ores have much different flotation processing characteristics. Although this ore responds to sulphidization–xanthate system, silver recovery in the lead concentrate was usually poor and amounted to about 30–40%. Floatability of lead minerals also was not satisfactory. Most of the lead and silver losses occurred in a finer fraction (i.e. −200 mesh). It should be noted that the ore contains an appreciable amount of gold. Electron probe microscopy indicated that finer particles of oxide lead and silver were coated with ultra-fine slimes of Fe-hydroxide. Research and development concentrated on developing an effective reagent scheme and flowsheet that would produce satisfactory metallurgical results. The problem encountered during the development testwork was that no literature was available for flotation of a mixture of pyromorphite, wulfenite, mamitizite and plumbojerusite. In addition, some of the silver minerals present in the ore included argentojarosite, diaphovite and fizelyte. During the development work, a fairly large number of reagent combinations were examined, mainly collector type and decoating reagents to improve lead–silver floatability. It was discovered that using CuSO  It appears that CuSO The development testwork yielded a reagent scheme that is currently being used in the plant. This reagent scheme is shown in The use of CuSO The plant metallurgical results obtained during 6 months of operation are shown in This ore type is unique and there are only two known deposits of this kind, both of which are located in South America.