Direct electrolytic reduction (DER) of UO2 utilizes a molten LiCl-Li2O electrolyte operating at 650 °C.Productive processes at the cathode are UO2 and Li2O reduction (followed by metallothermic reduction of UO2 by Li metal). Non-productive reduction current has been observed that could be attributed to impurities produced from interaction of the salt with water. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) scans of molten mixtures of LiCl containing Li2O, LiOH, and/or Li2O2 indicate that LiOH is the primary cause of reduction current preceding UO2 and Li2O reduction. LiOH reduction appears as a broad soluble-soluble transition and forms a pre-reduction plateau characteristic of micro-electrode reactions. Electrochemical response to LiOH in the salt is reduced with addition of Li0, providing a practical approach to eliminating LiOH from LiCl-Li2O salt before the DER process. Generation of H2 gas was detected while heating Li0 with LiCl-Li2O-LiOH, consistent with a reaction mechanism where LiOH reduction causes formation of Li2O and H2.Growing global energy consumption has put an increased demand on clean energy sources to replace fossil fuels and lower CO Traditionally, PUREX-based aqueous processes have been used to treat SNF. However, concerns for proliferation are amplified when considering the need for transportation of SNF to separate reprocessing facilities as well as the inherent functionality of the PUREX process [ SNF from commercial light-water reactors (LWR) is in oxide form (UO During DER, current is passed through the cell and UO The metallothermic reduction (Equation However, there is published evidence that one or more other cathodic reactions occur during DER processing of UO Both LiCl-KCl and LiCl-Li HCl generation has been measured in experiments involving H The reason for considering LiOH is that it is a likely compound to be subject to electrochemical reduction. It was proposed by Takeda et al. that LiOH will react in an electrochemical cell loaded with LiCl-Li However, these proposed reactions do not include a reduction reaction that will occur at a more positive potential than UO We, therefore, propose an alternative reaction mechanism with the net outcome of LiOH converting to Li Schwandt and Fray reported that they carried out “pre-electrolysis” of molten mixtures of CaO-CaCl To obtain direct evidence of the effect of moisture-based contamination on LiCl-Li All experiments were carried out under Ar atmosphere (≤0.1 ppm H In order to minimize initial moisture contamination, LiCl was pre-dried prior to use in experiments. Similar procedures [ Electrochemical tests were run using a three-electrode cell. A schematic representation showing the working electrode (WE), counter electrode (CE), and reference electrode (RE) set-up is presented in A Q600 TGA/DSC instrument was used to analyze Li A Pfeiffer Vacuum PrismaPlus QMS was used in conjunction with a Lindberg/Blue M tube furnace to analyze for H Several sets of cyclic voltammetry experiments were performed using mixtures of molten LiCl with known additions of Li During initial CV scans of LiCl-Li While the evolution of O The Gibb's free energy of reaction at 650°C for Equation Generation of metal impurities was of concern due to the use of stainless steel crucibles and tungsten electrodes. One test was performed to analyze for these impurities. Samples were taken of a batch of salt (LiCl-Li Cyclic voltammograms in LiCl-2wt%Li After melting a batch of dehydrated LiCl, CV scans were made prior to and after successive additions of untreated Li The Li To better assess the relationship between the −0.8 V reduction peaks and the chemistry of Li The peak current density was plotted versus square rate of scan rate for concentrations of 0.5–2.0 wt% Li The calculated slopes for each concentration can be related to concentration, diffusion coefficient, and temperature using Equation The linear relationship would seem to be compelling evidence that the peaks are due to electrochemical reactions involving Li TGA was used to determine the water content in the Li If water was introduced into the melt via hydrated Li Upon increasing the scan rate during CV scans (up to 5 V s Refer back to The next scenario that was considered was an interaction between LiOH and Li In the tests used to generate While individual additions of Li H High H In order to validate the proposed speciation model, CV simulations using DigiElch 8. FD software were run which replicated experimental conditions during LiOH additions to LiCl in Section 4.2. In the simulation, the charge transfer reaction OH The pre-reduction plateau is also consistent with a microelectrode reaction, but the area of the WE (0.72 cm Based on evidence presented in section 4.2, it has been concluded that LiOH is a key contaminant in the salt due to its deleterious effect on DER cell efficiency. The same method used to identify it could be used for in-situ measurement before, during, or after cell operation. Current responses reported in  This correlation is deemed to be useful in multiple ways. First, it can be used to quickly determine the concentration of LiOH in the salt based on a single CV scan. Second, it can be used to determine the maximum current that will be consumed for reduction of LiOH. If the effective area of the cathode is known, the maximum pre-reduction current can be calculated. Calculating the cathode area can prove difficult if a central lead is embedded in UO The fact that the LiOH impurity causes reducing events during CV scans suggests that it can be eliminated either electrochemically or via addition of a reducing agent to the salt. Since electrochemical reduction is limited by surface area and adds to the reduction time needed for UO To test the use of lithium to remove the impurities from the salt, CV scans were run before and after Li It is hypothesized that the reaction between LiOH and Li to form Li An important implication of the effect of Li The addition of lithium proved effective in quickly lowering impurity induced pre-current. The electrolytic conversion of LiOH to Li Excess Li present in the melt can be problematic however, as Li will attack [ The removal of the pre-reduction plateau after addition of Li We find it pertinent to discuss potential follow-up tests, meant to augment understanding of the molten salt systems presented here and further validate the findings in this study. As mentioned previously, use of tungsten electrodes during electrochemical tests is expected to mitigate the impact of O QMS measurements reported in this paper was performed ex-situ in a separate reactor meant to simulate the effect of electrochemical reduction of LiOH, and not in the electrochemical cell. The electrochemical cell used for these experiments was run using open crucibles in the argon atmosphere glove box (<1 ppm H It should also be pointed out that oxidation/reduction reactions involving oxide ions have not been considered as explanations for the observed CV peaks. Charged diatomic oxide compounds such as O Results from this study offer insights into both the interactions and effects of moisture based impurities in LiCl-Li The pre-current measured by CV can be used for an in-situ measurement of LiOH concentration in LiCl-Li The addition of Li The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at