Possible measures for reducing the energy use in recovered fiber processing are presented. These include: drum pulpers; heat recovery from deinking effluent; supply of waste heat from other process areas to deinking plant; implementation of closed heat and chemical loop; increased use of recycled pulp; fractionation of recycled fiber.Pulpers play an important role in recovered paper stock preparation. The pulpers mechanically break down the recovered paper under simultaneous addition of water. The pulping system significantly affects both the cost-effective designing of the entire stock preparation line and also the finished stock quality. All pulping systems slush down the paper completely, without damaging fibers and without breaking down nonpaper components. Minimum investment and operating costs and also minimum energy consumption are further important requirements. The function of the pulper is to gently slush the recycled paper raw material into a pumpable pulp, which is suitable for processing in stock preparation while facilitating the efficient removal of contaminants from the pulp. The design of the pulping and detrashing equipment should satisfy a number of process requirements presented as follows: Slush down the recycled paper to individual fibers without causing any fiber damage and reducing fragmentation of contaminants enabling efficient removal in the downstream cleaning and screening processes An efficient detrashing system for removing contaminants in the first stage of the stock preparation process Undertake ink detachment Effective blending of chemicals To meet these process requirements, several pulping and detrashing systems have been developed and operated successfully. Vat-type pulpers often with batch operation are being used in many deinking plants. Recovered paper and water are charged to the vat, repulped, and afterwards drained from the vat. A batch process consumes more energy. Power demand peaks when the pulper is charged with paper. A batch pulper has a higher downtime because it is offline when being unloaded. Installing continuous drum or dry pulpers will reduce energy consumption. This may also reduce water use and associated water heating requirements. Drum pulpers are used in mills that produce pulp from recovered paper and paperboard products. This type of pulper is basically a rotating, inclined drum with baffles that is used to mix recovered fiber sources, water, and deinking chemicals (in deinking applications). The more A drum pulper can be installed in any deinking plant that currently uses a vat-type pulper and has the space and production volume to accommodate a drum pulper. Because baling wire must be removed from the paper before entering the drum pulper, bale dewiring and bale breaking equipment may be required in addition to the drum pulper if it does not already exist at the mill. Installing a continuous drum pulper will reduce energy consumption. A continuous repulping process has lower specific energy consumption. Installing a drum pulper will reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Power consumption is lower for the continuous process. This means less electrical power is consumed and less carbon dioxide is generated. A continuous drum pulper will reduce operating costs. Lower specific energy consumption means reduced operating costs. Costs of a continuous drum or dry pulper will be higher than those of batch equipment with equivalent capacity. An analysis by NCASI suggests that replacing a vat-type batch pulper with a continuous drum pulper in deinking operations can reduce specific pulping energy by over 25% ( Deinking effluents are usually discharged at relatively higher temperatures. They certainly represent the possibility of low-grade heat recovery in a typical recycled fiber-pulping mill. The installation of heat exchangers in the effluent discharge system can recover some of this heat for mill uses such as plant water heating. Blue Heron Paper Company and Pacific Simulation conducted a model-based energy assessment at Blue Heron’s paper mill in Oregon City to analyze effluent flow and heat load reduction, fresh water usage minimization, and process energy usage reduction. The Blue Heron mill produces about 650 tons of paper per day. Newsprint and specialty paper products are Deinking requires heat to increase process efficiency like the chemical pulping and papermaking processes. This starts with the repulping process, where the paper is defibered and ink is removed from the fiber surface. Large contaminants are removed through screening and cleaning. Ink particles are removed by washing and flotation. The remaining ink can finally be dispersed. Waste heat can be supplied to the repulping process in the form of hot water. The required heat can be supplied from secondary heat sources in the recycled fiber plant or from other areas in case the recycled mill is integrated with a kraft pulp and paper mill. Water heated with secondary heat can be used in the washing and flotation processes for shower water and dilution. Ink dispersion processes also need high temperatures for softening and dispersing the ink. The stock can be heated in a heat exchanger with hot water or flash vapors from other processes. For final temperature control, live steam could be used if required. Use of secondary heat from other areas of the mill to provide heat to the deinking process normally implies a facility integrated with a kraft pulp mill or a papermaking process for providing sufficient secondary heat. If secondary heat, normally warm or hot water, is available from other mill areas, piping it to the deinking plant is usually possible. Use of secondary heat in the deinking plant will reduce energy consumption ( Both heat and chemicals are used to produce deinked paper. Recovery of heat and chemicals back to the process reduces the energy consumption and also the operating costs ( By installation of a drum or disk thickener after the stock preparation system and before the paper machine, alkaline filtrate can be recycled to these processes. Also, the amount of acid required on the paper machine for neutralizing incoming stock can be reduced. Recovery of fiber and fines can be also maximized by closing the water loop. This will increase utilization of raw materials. Effective washing systems must exist for reducing water use in deinking plants. The quality of the pulp may be affected by low water use, partly caused by collection of metals and other nonprocess elements into the water system of the deinking plant. The feasibility analysis for this technology can be quite complex and should be based on mill-specific process and product quality requirements. Closing the heat and chemical loop will reduce primary energy consumption. Closing the water loop will reduce water heating and increase water temperature. The increase in water temperature may improve the performance of paper machines and dryers. Closing the chemical loop allows recovery of unused chemicals, so less energy is consumed in the production and transport of makeup chemicals. Using a closed heat and chemical loop in the deinking plant will reduce total carbon dioxide emissions. Recycling process water will reduce the use of steam for water heating and in the paper machine dryers. The reduction in steam demand will reduce both fossil fuel consumption in the boiler and carbon dioxide emissions. Recovering heat and chemicals in the deinking process will reduce operating costs. Savings will result from reduced steam demand and chemical consumption. Fiber will be recovered, which will reduce raw material costs. The cost of effluent treatment will reduce. Some of the savings will be offset if additional equipment, such as thickeners or process water clarifiers, is installed. Increased costs associated with chemical management are expected in the more tightly closed water system. Capital costs will depend on the degree of heat and chemical loop closure. The capital costs will be higher when the degree of closure is higher. Use of very low water may require installation of additional washing equipment, and perhaps a press in order to effectively separate the deinking plant white water system from the machine white water system. Recovered paper is a valuable resource and recycling paper into new paper products has a lower environmental footprint than using virgin fiber. In addition, by recycling paper, the amount of waste sent to landfill is reduced. One ton of recycled paper can save up to 3 m Recovered fiber is generally recycled more than once. After repeated recycling, fibers become less flexible and degrade as a result of a process called hornification resulting in reduced strength and bonding properties caused by the loss of the ability to swell when rewetted ( Accepts or short-fiber fraction (SFF) Rejects or long-fiber fraction (LFF) Fractionation in the paper industry is accomplished with the aid of pressure screens or hydrocyclones. Fractionation of recycled pulp can improve and control pulp and paper characteristics by redistribution of fines and ash in the pulp. Andritz (Austria) has tested the potential of separating the long fibers and short fibers in a deinking line. This enables a simplification of the deinking line with a capital reduction of 13–22% compared to traditional DIP lines, and a reduction in electricity of 11–13% and thermal energy of 40% (