Pigments sampled from wall paintings and from crayons taken on the floor, at the Grottes de la Garenne (Saint-Marcel – Indre, France) have been analyzed and characterized by infrared spectroscopy, Raman micro-spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, ICP/MS and analytical TEM. The red pigment used for the wall paintings is mainly composed by hematite, clays, carbon matter and carbonates. Results on the red pigments show that the compositions of the paintings are similar to that of some crayons. Regarding these analyses, their origin is compatible with local siderolithic facieses. Analysis of black pigments shows that they are made of cryptomelane, pyrolusite, clays, carbonates and carbon matter. It shows also that paintings and some crayons compositions are compatible. On the contrary of red pigments, the origin of black pigments is probably allochtonous. Indeed, the traces of thallium detected in cryptomelane, the cerium anomaly and the absence of iron are not compatible with local facieses or other sites from the French Massif Central.35 000 years ago, prehistorical men gave the first major art forms, stones or bones bearing simple incisions, followed by schematic geometrical and animals figures. Time after time, this prehistorical art is becoming increasingly sophisticated and precise to achieve the exceptional quality of wall paintings such as Lascaux cave paintings. This parietal art has been extensively studied by archaeologists, but inputs of sciences like chemistry, biology or geology can be fruitful for several reasons. Numerous studies have been conducted on paintings to understand the nature of the materials and for the understanding of the techniques used by prehistoric men. Thus different authors have used various analytical techniques to analyze prehistorical paintings such as optical microscopy, SEM-EDS ( The The walls of these caves are covered by a substantial set of paintings whose study may allow archaeologists to obtain information or confirm hypothesis about the techniques and tools used by men from the Magdalenian age ( The aim of this study is to characterize the red and black pigments in order to determine if the crayons found on the floor of the cave are related to the wall paintings and also to determine the geological origin of the red and black pigments. Red and black pigments of 2–3 mm Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns have been performed on a Siemens D 5000 diffractometer (Bragg-Brentano geometry, Fourier-Transform Infrared spectroscopy spectra (FTIR) have been acquired using BRUKER EQUINOX IFS-55 equipped with a high energy source, a KBr separator and a DTGS detector. Spectral resolution is 4 cm Raman micro-spectroscopy analysis has been performed using a DILOR XY800 Raman spectrometer equipped with an OLYMPUS microscope. Excitation beam wavelength is The Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) observations have been realized at 120 kV [Philips CM120 coupled to an EDAX EDS spectrometer (Electron Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy)]. The TEM samples were prepared by dispersing the powdered samples in alcohol by ultrasonic treatment, dropping them onto a porous carbon film supported on a copper grid, and then dried in air. ICP/MS (Induction Coupling Plasma/Mass Spectroscopy) quantification analyses have been conducted using a THERMO-OPTEK system equipped with a high sensitivity interface. The samples are dissolved in a high purity acid, then the solution is heated at 7000 °C in the core of the argon plasma and analyzed by mass spectroscopy. As noticed by several authors in numerous Magdalenian caves ( The presence of carbon matter in the paint is noticed by ATR-FTIR peaks at 2963, 2930, and 2860 cm The ICP/MS characterization of trace elements, especially Rare Earth Elements (REE), confirms that pigments from paints and from crayons have the same origin, their REE compositions being similar ( Iron-based minerals have been extensively studied in the area around Possible extraction sites around These samples have been studied by XRD (mineral composition) and ICP/MS (REE composition). The mineral composition of the samples from local sites is similar to the composition of the red pigments (XRD pattern not shown) and clearly suggests a local origin of the red pigments. The study shows that the origin of the red pigments has to be found in ferruginous oolites emplaced in old alluvial deposits over the right bank of the river Numerous studies on black pigments of Magdalenian paintings suggest that the most used black pigments are charcoal and manganese oxides ( XRD study of black pigments shows that the samples from the In addition, the main band of cryptomelane shows frequency variations ( Chemical analysis results from ICP/MS for REE concentration are similar for pigments in the paintings and in some of the crayons and both present an anomaly for cerium ( Finally, it is possible to conclude that some crayons found in the caves could have been used to produce the black-colored parietal paintings, regarding the different FTIR, Raman, EDS-TEM and ICP/MS results. In order to identify the extraction sites of the black pigments, a sampling has been performed after a pre-selection of the most compatible Mn indexes in an area of 30–40 km around the caves, and extended to the French Massif Central. This selection was based on chemical and geological data, but also on archeometry data regarding the Magdalenian age in this area. The study of the samples by EDS-TEM has shown that Tl is associated to cryptomelane in the crayons and the paintings. Tl is not found as an element of other parts of the pigments matter. The association Mn–Tl is known since the 60’s ( 16 sampling sites have been selected ( The “non-local” origin of the black “manganese oxide-based” pigments has been reported by other authors in the pictorial materials of Magdalenian caves ( However, the analysis of some of the crayons collected in the cave, that have not been used for the wall paintings, is compatible with one of the sampled sites ( This study focused on the colors of the Red pigments have been identified to be based on more or less hydrated hematite associated to a small part of clays (kaolinite), some different silicates (gehlenite, illite-micas…) and carbon matter. ICP/MS demonstrated that pigments from the paints and from the crayons have the same origin. It allowed showing that this pigment composition is compatible with local siderolithic facieses. On the other hand, black pigments from paintings and some crayons are essentially made of manganese-containing phases, such as cryptomelane, pyrolusite, associated to a small part of quartz, phyllites, carbonates and carbon matter. The same origin of pigments from paints and some crayons has been established by ICP/MS analyses. However, unlike the red pigments, their origin is not compatible with local facieses. Indeed, an anomaly on cerium concentration, the presence of thallium, the trace or absence of iron is noticed in the pigments composition, while manganese is associated to iron and more or less barium in local indexes. Thallium-containing cryptomelane could indicate an ore coming from a late hydrothermal process, whose origin need to be determined. Extension of the sampling area to the all French Massif Central shows also no compatible facieses. Besides, it could be useful to understand for which use was another type of black crayons whose origin has been locally discovered, and why these crayons have not been used for the paintings in the Finally, this works highlights the fact that a complete and precise geological approach is necessary for the identification of the nature and the supply sources of prehistorical paintings and pigments. Pr Denis Vialou, Professor at the department of prehistory at the This work has been funded by the