The recycling of basic oxygen furnace (BOF) slag is largely limited by its free lime and free magnesia content leading to highly problematic swelling, preventing civil engineering applications. Moreover the presence of phosphorus is a limited factor for their reuse in iron and steel industrial processes.
                  The results of thermodynamic calculations coupled with cooling laboratory experiments and mineralogical characterisation are presented. The aim of this study was to follow slag crystallization with time and temperature from 1600°C to ambient temperature using standard tools but also in-situ methods.
                  The predominance of dicalcium silicate (50wt.%) was highlighted for each type of cooling conditions then calcium ferrites with various proportions. Less total free lime/magnesia is observed for slow cooling conditions (4.5 against 14.9wt.% in the industrial sample), which is an interesting result for recycling.
                  Experiments are in good agreement with the calculations concerning the nature of the main phases depending on the influence of oxygen. The sequence of crystallisation, the variations in the nature of silicate phases depending on the temperature and the evolution of the phosphorus content are documented. Proportions of low and high phosphorus-bearing calcium silicates are evolving with cooling, which will have to be considered when optimising phosphorus retrieval.The recycling of basic oxygen furnace (BOF) slag is an important challenge for steelmaking in order to reduce landfilling, to alleviate the pressure on natural resources and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions — mostly CO BOF slag, a by-product of the oxygen converter process, is a mixture of different mineral phases: calcium silicate, calcium ferrite and magnesia, iron oxide, free lime, free magnesia. Contrary to blast furnace (BF) slag which is reused as additive in cement and concrete and as materials in road constructions, the possibilities of BOF slag recycling are very limited. BOF slag is used in very small quantities for fertilizer and agricultural amendments or in the cement manufacture, as a raw material providing lime and iron oxide. Also clinkers using a small quantity of BOF slag were prepared and characterised by Hydration and carbonation of the free lime and free magnesia which occur with aging are highly problematic and lead to swelling incompatible with road constructions. The phosphorus, present in slag, jeopardizes internal steel making recycling, as it has a marked influence on steel quality (degradation of weldability and toughness properties). Finally, iron limits its reuse in cement production, as standard clinker contains 2–3% of Fe The innovative purpose of the global project (ORLA, 2008–2011), part of which is discussed here is to perform grinding and selective physical separation of Ca, Si-bearing minerals on the one hand and iron-bearing minerals on the other hand in order to perform recycling in cement manufacture and in steel industry respectively. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to obtain large crystal sizes of distinct and (very) pure mineral phases, which requires careful control of cooling conditions and crystallization state. A dedicated research was thus focused on it through laboratory experiments on representative samples and thermodynamic calculations. Previous studies, discussing the cooling of slag –slow and quenched–, concern namely BF slag ( This study, considering the above works, carefully investigates the effect of three different types of cooling conditions on the characteristics of the BOF slag with the aim of optimising their recycling. The crystallization of the phases (nature, crystal sizes, sequence), the influence of trace elements and specifically the distribution of phosphorus between each of them, from the end of the BOF conversion process (around 1650 The BOF slag, selected for this study is a representative sample from the annual industrial production of a steel plant in France which has been prepared from a 1.7 In addition to the industrial cooling (estimated between 16 and 24 The chemical composition of the samples was determined by X-ray fluorescence after alkaline fusion at 1000 Laboratory X-ray diffraction measurements were performed on a D8 Advance Bruker Bragg–Brentano diffractometer (Cu Kα In order to obtain high intensity in short time (15 The ICDD JCPDF database was used for the identification of the crystalline phases. The study of the microstructure was performed using a field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEGSEM — Hitachi S 4500, 1.5 Thermodynamic calculations have been carried out with FactSage software (5.4.1 version) which is a fully integrated database and software package developed jointly between Thermfact/CRCT (Montreal) and GTT-Technologies (Aachen). FactSage is composed of two types of thermo chemical databases: compounds (i.e., pure substances, over 4400 compounds including stoichiometric compounds such as FeO The associated databases used for this study are: ELEM (elements thermodynamic database), FACT 53 (gas species, solid and liquid compounds thermodynamic database), FACT-SLAG (Slag liquid), FACT-SPIN (Spinel) and FACT-MEL (Melilite). We more particularly investigated the influence of the oxidation level which is a key parameter, however very difficult to access. Indeed, between the end of steel conversion and final slag cooling, the oxygen partial pressure varies. In the converter, the slag is in equilibrium with steel (P The slag is mainly composed of CaO, SiO The X-ray Diffraction patterns ( All these phases and substitutions are typical of BOF slag ( In the slowly cooled slag, dicalcium silicates in β form and calcium ferrites are also observed but not in the same proportion. Calcium ferrites are very close to the stoichiometry of srebrodolskite (Ca The rapid cooling slag is mainly composed of tricalcium silicate (JCPDS, 55-0738) with possible substitutions and calcium ferrite with significant Fe substitution by Al, Mn, Mg. Periclase and a small amount of free lime are also identified. In order to follow the structural evolution of the phases Typical microstructures (backscattered SEM pictures) of the three cooling slag are shown on In the industrial cooling sample, ( A first domain (light grey with dark stripes) consists of calcium silicates with a 50–150 A second darker heterogeneous domain is composed of two phases: free lime with small white crystals mostly composed of calcium ferrite, with a large amount of trace elements (SiO At least the lighter domain is attributed to magnesiowüstite, also containing large amounts of MnO (9.8 In the slowly cooled sample ( A gray phase with very large homogeneous dicalcium silicate crystals (180–250 A phase consisting mainly of calcium and iron indicative of srebrodolskite ferrite phase, with small amounts of Al, Si and even Mg and Mn. Even if the concentration in MnO remains high (> A very dark grey phase corresponding to very pure periclase, rather small in size. Wüstite and magnesiowüstite were not observed underlying the fact that all iron is expressed as calcium ferrite. Free lime observed on XRD patterns but not on microscopy is most probably associated with calcium silicates (micro nodule type). In the quenched sample ( Small crystals and dendrites (darkest part) are calcium silicates with two compositions: one mainly composed of CaO and SiO The matrix (the lighter part) is mainly composed of calcium ferrite with amount of traces. The ferrite phase contains a small quantity of phosphorus (P Periclase, highlighted by XRD, was difficult to observe and to quantify precisely (very small crystals in inclusions). Mass balance calculation ( The predominance of the dicalcium silicate was highlighted for each condition and corresponds to half the sample. The other mineral phases represent the other 50% with variable proportions depending on cooling. Namely fewer amounts of total free lime and free magnesia are observed in the slowly cooled sample (4.5 against 14.9  In addition, calculations using extreme low and high oxidising conditions, i.e. P All the predicted natures of the phases and temperatures of formation during cooling are well correlated with the experiment results. Cooling time has an important effect on crystal size, distribution and purity of the phases. Rapid cooling favours the formation of small and thin calcium silicates containing some impurities (average size of 3–10 When cooling time decreases, calcium silicates were mainly observed as β-Ca Calcium silicate as β-Ca Calcium ferrite as sreboldoskite type which could contain several impurities (MnO and traces of SiO Very pure magnesium oxide. As mentioned before, the slowly cooled slag showed less free-CaO than the industrial one, suggesting a better association of CaO with FeO to form dicalcium ferrites. It is also the case for the rapid cooling sample. CaO is mainly formed by the decomposition of Ca The experiments for slow and industrial cooling showed silicate crystals of a larger size than for the other phases, confirming their crystallization at first in the theoretical sequence of cooling. With rapid cooling, i.e. quenching at high temperature, the solidification sequence was not completed entirely and tricalcium silicate is logically observed (Ca Calculations performed with two extreme behaviours of oxygen partial pressure — low and high oxidizing conditions — showed that in an oxidizing atmosphere all iron crystallized as calcium ferrites, separately from calcium silicates. Calculations showed that two clearly distinct phases could be theoretical obtained: calcium silicates and calcium ferrite phases. In a reducing atmosphere, a high amount of Fe Phosphorus is known to be closely associated with calcium silicates ( Moreover two distinct P contents were found in calcium silicates ( Phosphate localisation is a difficult issue: the formation of a solid solution is often stated for dicalcium silicates. A recent detailed study ( XRD analyses of the slag show that even if with a very high content in phosphorus, a Ca If previous studies concern slag after cooling, the in-situ behaviour at high temperature was rarely described. Here we showed that when the temperature increased, the following sequence was clearly observed: β-Ca High temperature XRD shows that dicalcium silicates stabilized with phosphorus are still observed at 1500 In this study, the cooling of a characteristic BOF slag was investigated by laboratory experiments coupled with high temperature analytical techniques and thermodynamic calculations. The cooling rate has logically a significant influence on the size of crystals but also on each phase proportion and their purity. Slow cooling favoured the crystallisation of dicalcium silicate and periclase. Tricalcium silicate and lime were obtained with more rapid cooling. From sizes around 10–50 Phosphorus is mainly associated with calcium silicates. The cooling time influences the amount of phosphorus in theses phases: slow cooling promotes the formation of dicalcium silicate with high phosphorus contents (> The polymorph evolution with temperature is: β-Ca Further experiments are in progress to explain the calcium silicate association with phosphorus at the atomic scale. A study of the insertion of phosphorus into the calcium silicates by NMR, MET and XANES techniques are going on. The optimization of the cooling allows i) a selective crystallization of two phases: calcium silicates first and calcium and magnesium ferrite then, ii) a control of the growth of crystals, iii) a control of the quantities of free lime and free magnesia in the slag. Such conditions offer more interesting perspectives for the selective separation of these two families of crystals for recovery and recycling in two areas: in the cement manufacture for calcium silicates and in the steel industry for calcium and magnesium ferrites. This study leads to recommend a controlled and slower cooling time in industrial processes to obtain higher crystal sizes and a better dissociation of the phases which could be separated by grinding. Grinding tests are currently underway to determine the best method. Moreover, slow cooling causes a decrease in the total quantity of lime and periclase, which are problematic because of their swelling capacity. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from