Many non-meat ingredients are used in the manufacture of comminuted meat products; of these, protein-based ingredients are among the most important. They are very widely used, and in many cases there are specific norms regulating the amounts that can be used and what products they can be used in. The range of applicable non-meat proteins from animal and plant sources is very large ( This article discusses the use of various non-meat proteins, their functionality and their impact on the characteristics of comminuted meat products. Non-meat proteins are used as ingredients in meat products essentially for purposes of economy, functionality and composition (nutrition and health). In this connection, non-meat proteins are used essentially to reduce costs and improve the processing yields of products to which they are added. How economical they are will depend on making the right selection. Non-meat proteins can be added to meat products for functional purposes. The characteristic qualities of comminuted processed meats (emulsion, particulate, sectioned, shaped and restructured products) depend on the functional properties of the protein matrix (from meat and non-meat sources). In the comminution process, the meat is mixed with salt and reduced to varying degrees of particle size in order to partially extract salt-soluble components. Subsequently, depending on the type of product, any fat is dispersed or emulsified within the protein sol matrix, which is then heated to produce setting or gelling of the emulsion and the protein matrix. Water-binding, fat-binding, emulsifying and gelling properties play an important role in such meat systems. Non-meat proteins are used to enhance one or more of these properties, although the functional benefits they confer will never equal those of high-quality lean meat. The choice of such ingredients, how they are used, and how they affect the characteristics of comminuted meat products, depends on a number of factors ( The ability of proteins to bind water and fat, as well as to retain these two components when heated and stored, is crucial in the manufacture of processed meat products. These properties determine not only the final cook yield and the purge or drip loss on freezing and thawing, but also the final quality of the product (appearance, texture, colour, juiciness, flavour, etc.). Different non-meat proteins can be used to bind fat or water. The relative importance of binding water or binding fat depends on the kind of product involved. For example, in a full-fat meat emulsion, fat binding is the more important of the two, whereas in low-fat meat products, where part of the fat is replaced by water to reduce the calorific density, water-binding capacity is the key factor. A meat emulsion is a multiphase system consisting of a complex colloidal aqueous system (or matrix) of salts, proteins and other soluble components in which solid components, including insoluble proteins and fat particles, are dispersed. The stability of meat emulsions, especially after heat processing, depends on the formation in the continuous phase of a stable protein matrix gel that entraps water as well as fat (gel/emulsion system). Non-meat proteins can assist the formation and stabilization of meat gel/emulsion systems. The formation of a stable gel network is important for a range of functional properties of muscled-based foods, including binding of water, fat and particles and texturization. There are a variety of ways in which two or more proteins can interact that will affect the properties of a multicomponent system. A number of possible models have been described for the spatial partitioning of a gelling protein (i.e. from meat) and a gelling or non-gelling co-ingredient. These are: filled gels (where components are interspersed throughout the primary gel network); complex gels (where components are physically associated); and multicomponent gels (having an interpenetrating polymer network). When non-muscle proteins (generally globular proteins, unlike the fibrillar proteins of muscle) are added, the resulting system may be considered qualitatively incompatible, semicompatible or compatible. Depending on the degree of compatibility, the consequences may range from weakening of the texture of the product through dilution of the meat protein (which is a highly functional component) or interference in gel formation, to strengthening of gel texture through reinforcement of the gel structure. Non-meat proteins (e.g. transglutaminase) are also used as cold binding agents for processed meat. Proteins may be modified to change functionality for specific applications in meat processing. A number of non-meat proteins (soy, wheat and others) are texturized by various procedures to give specific textures and shapes, often so as to mimic the structure or appearance of meat. A number of non-meat proteins (whey, milk and egg proteins) are microparticulated to mimic certain properties of fat and are used to replace fats in low-fat processed meats. Flavour enhancers derived from non-meat proteins (such as hydrolysed vegetable protein or autolysed yeast protein) are used to lend a meatier note. Animal and plant proteins (casein, whey protein, gelatin/collagen, fibrinogen, soy protein, wheat gluten, corn zein and egg albumen) have been used in edible films. Therefore, the incorporation of non-meat proteins influences the processing and physicochemical properties of comminuted meat products ( Non-meat proteins can be used to provide nutritional benefits by lowering the calorific and cholesterol contents (when used as fat replacers) and by increasing the protein level and balancing the amino acid profile. Some non-meat proteins (soy, sunflower, etc.) also contain health-enhancing components that make for healthier processed meats. Milk yields a number of forms of milk proteins with a range of functional and nutritional attributes. These proteins are used as fillers, binders and extenders in comminuted meat products (with normal and low fat content). The functional ability of such non-meat protein ingredients derives from casein and whey, the two principal protein components of milk. In conjunction with various factors (composition, processing conditions in which they are derived, etc.), milk proteins can offer excellent functional properties such as solubility, water and fat binding, gelation, emulsion stability and others, and they are widely accepted in the meat industry. Non-fat dry milk (NFDM) is produced from pasteurized skim milk that is vacuum concentrated and spray-dried (skim milk powder). NFDM contains both casein and whey proteins along with lactose and minerals. It has been used as a functional protein ingredient in different comminuted meat products (frankfurter, bologna, sausage, roast, etc.) to improve emulsion stability, sensory characteristics (flavour, colour or juiciness) and water-binding properties (reduced cooking yields). Since calcium can influence the binding properties negatively, the low-calcium form of NFDM may improve functionality. Caseinates are made from lactic or acid casein. Sodium caseinate is the most widely used in processed meats, while calcium and potassium caseinates are used when lower sodium formulation is required. The functional ability of caseinates lies in their molecular structure, a unique combination of electric charge and amino acid content (high-proline and low-sulfur), which prevents heat gelation and denaturation of caseinates and ensures high viscosity of caseinates in solution. They are not capable of binding meat pieces together since they do not gel during heating, but they do increase the gel strength. Caseinates, which are used mostly in processed meats as emulsifiers to improve moistness and smoothness, are preferentially absorbed by the meat proteins at the fat–water interface. As the small fat globules created by the presence of milk proteins are enlarged, water loss during heating is reduced. Unlike vulnerable meat proteins, caseinate-based meat emulsions are less sensitive to temperature changes during processing (e.g. chopping). Processed meats such as hamburgers, nuggets, liver sausage, patties, frankfurters and so forth, have been formulated with caseinate, and although its effect depends on a number of factors, it has generally been found to improve meat emulsion stability (more than many vegetable proteins), sensory attributes and water-binding properties. It can be used in three different forms: as a prefabricated caseinate emulsion, in dry powder form at the beginning of the comminution process and as a prefabricated gel. Milk co-precipitates contain both casein and whey proteins and can be produced with a wide range of functional properties to perform a variety of functions in different comminuted meat products. Depending on the calcium content, co-precipitates can be good emulsifiers, can improve water-binding properties and can serve as gelling agents and thickeners. Co-precipitates have been used in luncheon meats, bolognas, nuggets, frankfurters and other products. Whey, a co-product of cheese and casein manufacture, can be processed into a variety of forms including dried whey (2–13% protein), concentrates (35–80% protein) and isolates (>90% protein). Whey proteins present a strongly folded and organized globular structure. Under appropriate heating conditions, they unfold and build intermolecular disulfide bonds resulting in a gel matrix whose capillaries entrap water. Hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions on the protein surface provide emulsifying properties. The value of whey proteins as functional replacers or supplements of meat proteins in processed meats lies in their high functionality, and that functionality depends both on their origin and on further chemical modification. Whey proteins can bind a considerable amount of water by physical and chemical means, thus preventing moisture loss, improving yields and reducing purge loss in vacuum-packed meats. They are very efficient emulsifiers of fat and oil, forming stable emulsions and helping improve appearance, mouthfeel and juiciness. Whey protein products are used in a variety of processed meats (minced meats, emulsion products, coarse-ground products, whole muscle products) to improve flavour, texture, emulsification, water binding, cook yield and product functional performance. Edible coatings based on whey proteins can be applied to frankfurters and other processed meats. Surimi is stabilized myofibrillar protein obtained from mechanically deboned fish flesh that is washed with water, strained and blended with cryoprotectants. The functional properties of surimi make it eminently suitable as an intermediate product for use in a variety of applications, and its very low fat content makes it ideal for low-fat meat products. It has also been proposed as an additive to processed red meat and poultry products to improve texture and water/fat binding. Surimi has been incorporated in varying proportions as a partial replacement for meat in various comminuted meat products, including frankfurters, bologna, restructured meats and others. In a more recent development, processes similar to those used in fish have been applied to various meat co-products (beef heart, mechanically separated meat, etc.) to produce a surimi-like material for use as a functional ingredient in comminuted meat products such as sausages, patties and the like. Blood collected from a healthy animal, usually sterile, contains approximately 18% protein, whose amino acid composition is reasonably well balanced. Blood is used in food as an emulsifier, stabilizer, clarifier, colour additive, etc., and enhances the colour of cured meat. In many meat products, however, it imparts undesirable characteristics (dark colour and often unpalatable flavour), and it is therefore most useful when separated into plasma protein (60–80%) and red cell fraction (20–40%). Plasma proteins, which are mostly used in dry form, consist of various proteins, mainly albumin, globulin and fibrinogen. They have been used to improve functional properties, to reduce formulation costs and as a protease inhibitor. For purposes of meat processing, the outstanding functional property of plasma proteins is their exceptional gel-forming ability (primarily because of the albumin), which helps to impart good water-binding and meat-particle-binding properties. Albumin gells at 85 °C and fibrinogen gells at 50 °C. Plasma protein also has excellent emulsifying and foaming properties. Plasma proteins have been used as gelling and binding agents in minced beef, frankfurters, bologna, patés and other products. The red cell fraction (34–38% protein) is dried to form a meal, or the haem group is removed to obtain globin. Globin protein has excellent foaming and emulsifying abilities and has been used in some meat derivates, although the high iron content could increase lipid oxidation. A blood-based system can be used to bind comminuted and large pieces of meat. The binding mechanism works through the combined blood-clotting action of fibrinogen, thrombin and transglutaminase (factor XIIIa). Transglutaminase catalyses protein polymerization and cross-linking through the formation of covalent bonds between protein molecules. It has been proposed as a cold-set binder of muscle protein, as it would reduce the need for added sodium chloride and phosphate. However, blood enzyme is rarely used in food manufacture because of certain limiting factors, chiefly that it is complicated to use and is not effective at <37 °C. Mechanically separated meat (MSM) makes an ingredient of excellent nutritional and functional value for comminuted meat products. Mechanically separated meat has good emulsifying capacity, emulsion stability and water-holding capacity. Mechanically separated meat has been used in varying proportions in a large number of meat derivatives (minced meat, sausages and other types of product). Generally, as the proportion of MSM in the formula increases, flavour and overall acceptability scores decrease, the product is darker in colour, and tenderness and juiciness scores rise. There have been two European Union decisions affecting the use of MSM in processed meats. One (Decision 2000/418/EC) prohibits the use of meat separated from ruminant bones, and the other (Directives 2001/101/EC and 2002/86/EC) excludes poultry and pork MSM from the harmonized definition of ‘meat’ in the labelling of products containing them. Egg proteins, derived from whole egg, yolk or whites, are available in different forms for use in processed foods for their functional properties, such as foaming, binding and thickening ability, emulsifying ability and moisture retention. Whole egg and egg white have been used in the formulation of normal and low-fat meat products (meat patties, bologna and others) and have proved very effective as binders for meat. They also have excellent nutritional properties. However, there is a drawback to their use in processed meats in that they are relatively costly. Connective tissue is composed of two proteins, collagen and elastin. Collagen, the more abundant of the two, produces gelatin by partial hydrolysis. Connective tissue is present in comminuted meat products either as a natural component of the meat raw material or as a non-meat ingredient. The use of collagen in processed meats is generally limited because upon heating, collagen molecules shrink and gelatinize, which causes the release of gelatin. However, when properly handled, it can be a good functional ingredient for processed meats. Typically, trimmings with high connective tissue content are minced and added to comminuted meat products. As a rule, the meat in meat products should contain no more than 25% collagen to maintain their structure and acceptability. Collagen in comminuted meat products helps to stabilize the emulsion and to impart textural properties to products like burgers, sausages and frankfurters. The ability of gelatin to form water/fat emulsions which gel upon cooling is considered important for some meat products. Thanks to its excellent water- and fat-absorption properties, collagen improves cooking yields and juiciness. It also reduces syneresis (purge) and hence shelf-life, since purge loss is a growth medium for bacteria. Collagen can potentially be used as a fat replacer in comminuted meat products. The success of such non-meat proteins as ingredients in the manufacture of comminuted processed meats will depend considerably on the source (basically pig skin and hide collagen, bone collagen, offal collagen and skeletal muscle collagen), the preparation conditions, how the ingredient is used and the nature of the product it is to be used in. A variety of procedures to improve the functionality of connective tissue proteins have been tested with a view to enhancing their potential as ingredients in comminuted meat products. These procedures include mechanical modification, enzymatic hydrolysis, acidic or alkaline phosphate treatment and addition in a pre-emulsified or precooked form. Modified connective tissue has already been used in the formulation of low-fat processed meats. Collagen is also used in edible sausage casings. Soy has always been one of the most widely used proteins in comminuted meat products. A variety of processes are used to produce meals and grits (52–56% protein), concentrates (70% protein) and isolates (≥90% protein) from soy beans and as co-products of oil extraction. In each case, differences in composition and processing produce different characteristics, and these characteristics determine their particular application in a wide range of comminuted meat products. Soy flour and grits are chiefly used in minced meat systems as binders; however, both flour and grits give meat products a slightly bitter taste, which limits their use. Soy protein concentrates possess good water- and fat-binding abilities and emulsion properties and are used in emulsion-type sausages, luncheon meat and meat patties. Soy isolates are excellent water and fat binders and possess both emulsifying and emulsion-stabilizing properties. Soy protein isolates aid in forming gels, which act as matrices to retain moisture, fats and solids. Concentrates and isolates are most frequently used in finely ground sausages or emulsified meats. Textured soy products (flours, concentrates or isolates) are extruded under high pressure and heat to give a specific texture and shape, frequently so as to mimic the structure or appearance of meat when poultry when hydrated. A major application of textured soy protein ingredients is in coarsely chopped or minced meats to be used for pizza topping, taco meats, meatballs, meat patties and restructured steak. Soy protein products are used primarily for their functional characteristics. The soy protein polymer chain contains both lipophilic and hydrophilic groups, so that the protein associates readily with both fat and water. This promotes the formation of stable oil and water emulsions when a protein dispersion is mixed with oil. Soy protein can associate with many different types of compounds, adhering to solid particles and acting as a binder or as a dispersing and suspending agent in solution. The functionality of soy protein in comminuted meat products is enhanced by pre-hydration or by the formation of a pre-emulsion in which fat, water and soy protein are finely ground and then salt is added. The degree of hydration varies widely, but as a rule the end product will be firmer the lower the level of hydration. Salt assists the extraction of salt-soluble protein, but it has the opposite effect on soy protein, since it prevents hydration. For optimum functionality, therefore, soy protein must be fully hydrated before salt is added. Soy protein has been reported to assist in the formation of a gel that acts as a matrix to retain moisture and fat and impart a desirable texture; however, under normal meat-processing conditions (temperature 65–73 °C, pH 5.5–6.0, and ionic strength 0.1–0.6), none of the major soy globulins exhibits any appreciable structural changes or hence any interaction with muscle proteins. Such lack of interaction is one of the chief drawbacks to the use of soy protein as a functional ingredient in comminuted processed meats. Indeed, soy protein in high concentrations may act as a diluent, weakening the gel-forming capacity of meat proteins and so negatively affecting the texture of the finished product. Prior heating (90 °C) of soy protein improves its interaction with meat protein. Soy protein can impart certain residual flavours or induce dilution of the natural flavour of the meat, depending on the type of derivative concerned. Soy protein has been used as a fat replacer in the manufacture of low-fat (high-moisture) comminuted meat products. Wheat protein is one of the plant proteins (along with soy) most commonly utilized in meat products. The protein level of finished wheat gluten products is typically 75–82% (dry basis). Vital wheat gluten, texturized wheat gluten and isolated wheat gluten can be used in meat products. When hydrated, texturized wheat gluten has a fibrous structure that can be adapted to mimic the appearance and texture of beef, chicken or pork. It has an excellent water-binding capacity. Gluten protein functionality depends on the wheat source and the preparation process (separation, drying, extrusion, etc.). Gluten protein is eminently suitable for use as a non-meat additive in meat products thanks to its unique functional properties. When mixed with water it can form a viscoelastic mass. Of particular importance to the meat industry are the binding and film-forming characteristics of gluten, which has the ability to interact with myosin. Vital wheat gluten has been used in meat products as a binder, filler, or extender. When added to comminuted meat products such as frankfurters and bologna, it improves cooking yields, water-holding capacity and batter stability. In restructured meats it imparts several benefits, such as enhanced viscoelasticity, colour stability, firmness, juiciness and moisture retention. In other meat pieces and processed meats, the binding ability of wheat gluten improves yield, cooking loss, adhesion, structural strength, rehydration properties, sliceability and retention of sensory attributes. Also, texturized wheat gluten has been added to various meat products (burgers, nuggets, etc.) to improve physical properties and the taste perception of reformed patties or nuggets. Wheat proteins are potentially good non-meat ingredients for use as extenders or binders in low-fat comminuted meat systems. Corn gluten meals are co-products of the corn wet-milling industry. Available products include corn meal (60% protein), defatted corn germ protein and corn protein isolate (90% protein). Corn germ protein is potentially a suitable protein additive for use as an extender in meat products such as frankfurters, bologna and patties. When added to comminuted meat products, it improves cooking yield, water-holding capacity and batter stability, although it can soften the texture of the product; also, the spice formulation may need to be altered. In low-fat meat products, the water-binding and texture-softening effects of corn germ protein are desirable qualities. Non-meat ingredients containing proteins from other plant sources have been used as binders and extenders in comminuted meat products. Pea proteins is a co-product of starch extraction from peas. It has a good potential as an additive for emulsions and other meat products thanks to its promising functional properties (water and fat binding, emulsifying, whippability and foam stability). Pea proteins in the form of flours, concentrates and isolates (up to 90% protein) have been used in both normal-fat and low-fat sausages. Different oilseed (other than soy) protein ingredients (sunflower, rapeseed, peanut and cottonseed, in the form of flours, protein concentrates, protein isolates and extrusions) have been used experimentally in minced meats, patties and sausages. These generally improve cooking yield and emulsion stability and retard oxidative rancidity. Rice products (flours and protein isolates), oat proteins and bean products (flours) have been used in sausage meat. Several yeast-based ingredients can be used in comminuted processed meat as extenders or flavour enhancers. Dried yeasts (45–53% protein), co-products of the brewing industry, are good protein extenders that can be used as emulsifiers in cooked and canned comminuted meat products. Yeast extracts, produced by autolysis, are widely used in processed meats because they impart a meat-like flavour. Microbial transglutaminase (MTGase) has many potential applications in meat processing. MTGase can be used in combination with caseinate or collagen as a cold-set binder (reducing the need for added salt) for meat products that can be sold raw in the chilled state. Consumers and processors are increasingly interested in reducing the salt content of processed meats because of the potential health benefits. MTGase can also be a useful additive in cooked meat products. 