Starchy foods of differing structure, including bakery products, breakfast cereals, pastas, and pulses were digested in vitro. Bakery products and processed breakfast cereals with little resilient structure yielded large amounts of rapidly available carbohydrate (RAC), less slowly digested starch (SDS) and little inaccessible digestible starch (IDS) (70:22:8%). Partially processed grains, such as rolled oats contained an increased proportion of SDS (55:38:7%). Pastas, being dense starch structures digested more gradually to completion by superficial erosion, yielding approximately equal proportions of RAC and SDS but little IDS (43:52:4%). Pulses, which retained their cellular morphology, digested more linearly yielding a lower proportion of RAC, a larger proportion of SDS and more IDS (9:69:22%). Preservation of native “primary” structure, and use of processing to create “secondary” structure, are both means by which wholeness, in the sense of intactness, can be used to influence carbohydrate digestion to make foods of lower glycaemic impact.The concept of wholeness in whole grain foods has two major aspects, both of which appear in the definition of “whole” in the Oxford dictionary ( The reason to focus on wholeness of grains and grain products is that wholeness has been found to play a role in good health ( Ideally, therefore, grain foods should be a source of energy that is obtained without inducing an acute glycaemic response, and in a sustained manner, and should make some contribution to nourishing the colonic biota. Translated into terms of carbohydrate fractions they should make a small contribution of rapidly digested starch (RDS) or of rapidly digested starch plus soluble sugar (rapidly available carbohydrate; RAC), a substantial proportion should be slowly digested starch (SDS), and there should be a proportion of starch (inaccessible digestible starch; IDS) that is undigested in the time allowed by gut transit. In the usual Western diet starchy foods come from a range of botanical sources, that have been subjected to a range of food processes. There are products made from flour that have an open cellular structure as a result of high pressure extrusion or leavening, such as breakfast cereals and breads. There are also products that have a dense compressed matrix as a result of low temperature extrusion, including pastas. And there are products that are consumed with their native structure more or less intact, such as whole kernels and pulses in which starch is encapsulated by indigestible cell walls. In this paper the patterns of digestion of carbohydrate in a range of common foods that differ in structure are explored, using a validated A range of British foods for which glycaemic index (GI) values were available ( The products were prepared as directed on the packaging where appropriate, and rubbed through a 5 To compare the effects of different disruption methods samples were comminuted by three methods: (1) subjects ( The digestions were carried out in 70 The digestion procedure is typical of many which employ a simulated gastric digestion followed by a pancreatic digestion ( The ethanolic phase containing the digesta aliquots was clarified by briefly centrifuging the tubes (1000 Fructose was measured in the ethanolic extract by the thiobarbituric acid method ( Samples of bread, pasta and kidney beans were observed under light microscope (Olympus BH2-RFCA; Leica Applications Suite V3.3.0 software) before and after digestion. The samples were stained with iodine solution (0.2% iodine:2% potassium iodide). Data analysis was conducted and graphs prepared in an Excel spreadsheet (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA). The carbohydrate values were all calculated as glycaemic glucose equivalents by converting the fructose content of foods where present to the amount of glucose of theoretically equal glycaemic impact, that is, by multiplying the fructose component by the glycaemic index of fructose (GI fructose The 24 foods analysed fell into distinct categories with respect to the proportions of the three carbohydrate fractions, RAC, SDS and IDS, that they contained ( Within each of the four food groupings discussed above the foods varied somewhat in the proportions of the carbohydrate fractions that they contained. However, the average RAC, SDS and IDS values for each of the food groupings ( The distribution of glucose equivalents between the three fractions, RAC, SDS and IDS, in the various foods reflected their digestion kinetics ( The food groups – bakery products, pulses and pastas – also showed distinctive responses in terms of carbohydrate fractions to different methods of comminution – 5 The time course of digestion of white bread, fusilli and red kidney bean, as examples of bakery products, pasta and pulses respectively, comminuted by the three methods – sieving, chewing and homogenising – clearly show the cause of differences between the three groups in terms of the kinetics of digestion ( The patterns of carbohydrate digestion revealed in The results have clearly shown how wholeness of foods, in the sense of structural intactness, can influence the temporal characteristics of the postprandial nutrient loading imposed by a food within the gut lumen during digestion. In the present paper the particular loading considered was the loading of glycemic carbohydrate, expressed as glycaemic impact. Since the brush border has an enormous capacity to transport products of available carbohydrate digestion into the portal blood, glycaemic impact is closely related to the glycaemic response that it induces. The relationship between The foods examined were able to be placed into three main groups, although within the groups there was still variation, as the standard deviations in Foods that had little structural resilience under digestion conditions. These foods were based on extensively disrupted grains that had been cooked and processed into food products without the development of secondary structure that could persist in the hydrating and digestive conditions of the gut. Such foods are of typically cellular structure achieved by leavening (breads and biscuits) and puffing by release of gelatinised starch from high pressure (ricies), or are thin crushed structures (cornflakes), and structures containing a high proportion of soluble material such as sugars that can hydrate and dissolve immediately without digestion, including many processed breakfast cereals and biscuits. Leavened bread, for instance has a porous structure that depends on a reinforcing gluten protein network. When the gluten network was disrupted by protein digestion in the gastric phase, a starch slurry resulted, which was immediately and almost totally accessible to amylase digestion. Similarly, many of the biscuits and breakfast cereals consisted of expanded, porous starch matrices, high in soluble sugar. They rapidly hydrated and collapsed quickly during digestion, providing a high proportion of RAC. Mashed potato, although not a cereal, is included as an example of a material that contains very thin cell walls and is disperse, so it has neither primary nor secondary structure, and is predominantly RAC. Foods that resisted digestion because they consisted of dense, homogeneous starch polymer matrices formed in food processing and which provided secondary structure which maintained the integrity of food particles and restricted enzyme activity to the accessible surface of the particles. Pastas are an example of such foods. Their digestion curves were marked by immediate digestion of the accessible portions of crushed pasta, followed by a slower release of glucose by superficial digestion of remaining pasta particles. However, because the pasta particles consisted of an homogeneous starch matrix the digestion continued steadily to completion. The parabolic shape of the digestion curve would have resulted from continuous reduction in surface area as the particles decreased in size ( Muesli, pearl barley and porridge were foods in which digestion was retarded because starch gelatinisation within the native kernel structure had lead to a dense starch mass that restricted enzyme access. Such foods are highly sensitive to particle size reduction ( Foods that resisted digestion because they consisted of fragments of plant tissue made up of clusters of cells with intact cell walls that could act as a partial barrier to enzyme penetration. The pulses fell into this food category. Previous research has suggested that the sturdiness of pulse cotyledon cell walls provides more resistant structure than the cell walls of cereal endosperm ( The experiments on the effects of comminution method have shown that food structure may be important in determining the amount of a food that is able to survive mastication intact enough to influence its rate of digestion, and therefore its glycaemic impact. Cooked rice, which consists of intact grains and a dense mass of starch, contributes particles after mastication that persist long enough to delay digestion ( The results have shown how processing of grains can have nutritionally deleterious effects when it eliminates native structure, and fails to develop secondary structure that is capable of delaying digestion. The digestion characteristics of the foods examined here also supports the view that the prevalence of highly processed foods that lack both primary and secondary structure in the typical modern diet may be harmful to health, if induction of acute glycaemic responses has the physiological effects that have been suggested to result from both the insulin response and elevated blood glucose ( The present paper has addressed only a few, though important, factors that may determine the glycaemic impact of foods, over which a range of other influences may superimpose their effects to add an additional degree of modulation ( The preservation of native “primary” structure, and the use of processing to create “secondary” structure, are both means by which wholeness, in the sense of intactness, can be use to influence carbohydrate digestion to make foods of lower glycaemic impact than is characteristic of most highly processed carbohydrate foods presently available. The research was funded by a