This paper discusses a new method to control particle size distribution in a flotation cell. As known from the literature, fine and coarse particles have different flotation rate constants, hydrodynamic behavior and require different reagent regimes. The device discussed allows separate processing of finer and coarser slurry by the extraction of a third stream, carrying finer slurry, from the flotation cell. By separate treatment of fine and coarse slurry operational conditions, flotation recovery for both can be optimized more efficiently. This dual outlet device (DOD) can be installed in a traditional flotation cell without a need for equipment replacement. Pilot plant tests were conducted in a single 5m3 Outotec flotation cell and the results show that the DOD can extract a fine slurry from the flotation cell and that the DOD product represents 5–15% of the volume flow rate of the feed. In this paper, the first pilot scale tests of the DOD in a single flotation cell are discussed. The aim is to introduce the method and investigate the effect of different DOD configurations on the extracted DOD product. For more strict evaluation of the influence of the DOD on flotation recovery and froth stability (pilot) plant scale tests for a bank of cells and for the entire circuit will be conducted.One of the major factors of influence on flotation recovery is the particle size distribution of suspended solids ( The DOD allows for extraction of a third product stream containing mainly fine particles from the flotation cell. The device is positioned around the flotation shaft and utilizes the shaft’s rotation already in place to perform a low speed centrifugal separation. Aerated slurry is drawn into the DOD and subjected to this centrifugal force field. Relatively coarse particles are directed outward in radial direction away from the shaft and are returned to the flotation bulk slurry. The finer particles are considered to be free from inertial forces and move with the main fluid streamlines ( The DOD utilizes the flotation shaft’s rotation to swirl aerated slurry in a cylindrical chamber within the flotation cell. A cylinder (the static cylinder) with vortex finder is fixed to the flotation cell and a smaller cylinder (the rotator) rotates with the shaft as schematically depicted in  In the right hand figure in Particles with a higher surface to mass ratio are extracted from the flotation cell via the vortex finder to the secondary tailings outlet T At an apatite processing plant of Kemira GrowHow in Central Finland the DOD has been built to fit a 5 The flotation cell available was part of the in-situ processing plant and was run under normal operating condition for apatite flotation, with an air flow rate of 2 From the flotation cell three product streams flowed to a sampling point 2 During the test phase the following parameters were identified as dominant for the DOD performance: clearance The interdependencies between experimental parameters can be assessed by a comparison of weighted differences between the yields of sets of experiments ( The separation efficiency of a classification device typically assesses the separation performance by considering the yield or recovery of one of the two products relative to the feed. Commonly, total fines recovery and a Tromp curve are used. An important feature of such a curve is that there exists a limit particle population that has a chance of unity of being recovered to one of the two outflows. In the case of the DOD, the classification operation generates three product streams. For this reason the classical ‘S-shaped’ curve does not appear. However, a separation curve per particle size class can be drawn when the T The results for particle size distribution of solids in and recovery of fines to the T From the results in From the results in The separation efficiencies of particles smaller than 74 The recovery per particle size class is shown in It can be seen from  The results discussed in Sections Modification of the rotator has a considerable effect on the recovery of fines to the T Pilot plant studies of the separation efficiency of the dual outlet device (DOD) have shown promising results. The DOD has been tested in a single 5 The authors wish to thank Kemira GrowHow, in particular Jarmo Aaltonen and Allan Alaverronen, for valuable help and facilitating a pilot plant location. Funding of Outotec and the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation TEKES is gratefully acknowledged.