In the present research work dimensional accuracy (Δd) of Al-Al2O3 based metal matrix composite (MMC) developed by combining stir casting with ABS replica based investment casting (IC) process has been highlighted. Three controllable factors of the IC process, namely: layer combination (LC), material composition (MC), pouring temperature (PT), were studied at three levels by Taguchi's parametric approach along with fixed parameters of stir casting process and single-response optimization was conducted to identify the main factor controlling Δd. Ceramic shell moulds were made on ABS plastic patterns (prepared by FDM process) using primary slurry and fused-silica sand as stucco. The final MMC prepared by stir casting process has been poured in these moulds. Finally results of study highlights the percentage contribution of different input parameters for Δd of MMC prepared by combined stir casting and IC process.With day-to-day technological advancements, natural materials are becoming insufficient to meet the increasing demands on product capabilities and functionalities while the demand of advance material is increasing at high speed. The amalgam of various critical properties (such as: excellent wear resistance, corrosion resistance, low thermal expansion, light in weight and high strength etc.) that are required in today's manufacturing applications are not available in conventional monolithic alloys. However, all these aforesaid properties can be achieved through the development of metal matrix composites (MMCs) At present many new classes of materials have been devised to satisfy the various applications Many researchers have proposed different methods for MMC development Conventional IC is one of the commercially established processes for casting small and complicated shapes The literature review reveals that lot of research work has been reported on MMC development, process optimization of FDM, IC and stir casting process. But hitherto no work has been reported on ‘Δd’ of MMC developed, by combining FDM, IC and stir casting process. So, in this research work experimental investigations has been made for development of MMC by combining stir casting and ABS replica based IC. For the present study a standard geometrical component (cube) has been selected. The detailed drawing for the component has been made using solid works (CAD software). The drawing has served as the input to the FDM machine and ABS based pattern tree for IC process has been generated. The MMC has been casted through stir casting based IC process. The final specimens have been investigated for Δd. Following are the objective of study: Development of Al- Al To study the Δd of MMC prepared by combining stir casting and FDM based IC. Before going for the final experimentation, pilot experiments were conducted in order to analyze the contributing parameters and their levels. During pilot experimentation stage, it was observed that increasing the Viscosity-efflux time of clay to 100–1200 s (as per I.S. no. 3944 B4 sized cup) resulted into heavier ceramic mould (which have the tendency of breakdown during manual handling). On the other side, reduction in the Viscosity–efflux time to 55–75sec also resulted into breakdown of the mould which might be due to weak bonding. Therefore for present research work Viscosity-efflux time level was kept fixed to 85sec. Further in case of numbers of refractory layers, it has been found that 9 layers were most suitable for attaining desirable characteristics of the castings. Further, it should be noted that in conventional IC during de-waxing stage one has to heat the mould for 150–200 °C, where as for ABS pattern based IC de-waxing needs to be carried out at 1020–1050 °C, thus requiring higher shell thickness/more number of slurry layers. Further in the three levels of layer combination, numbers of primary layer (80-120AFS No.) were kept fixed while the number of secondary (50-80AFS No.), tertiary (30-50AFS No.) and the quarter layer (10-30AFS No.) combination were varied. The primary coating was made with the finest refractory followed by coarse one. As regards to MC is concerned, the proportion of Al Finally three input parameters (LC, MC and PT) were selected after pilot experimentation and their ranges for best outputs were fixed. In first step of pilot experimentation FDM patterns based assembly trees were made. Mould cavity and final castings have been prepared with different input parameters and Δd of cast component was measured as output parameter. For numerical calculation purpose Δd has been measured as deviation in dimensions of actual cast component (measured dimensions) from the master pattern of ABS material (nominal dimensions). Mechanical stirring method was used to develop MMC. Experiments were conducted using three input parameters and three levels as shown in Based upon This research work is aimed at the optimization of Δd of the selected component (cube). Total 27 (9 × 3repetitions) numbers of experiments were conducted under the combinations of different levels of input parameters (as per Cube size = 16.87 mm, Cube cover = 1.87 mm. Total dimension is distance across flats (A/F) = 18.75 mm.  After preparation of pattern tree, the ABS plastic patterns are dipped into the ceramic slurry. Ceramic slurry is the mixture of zircone flour, colloidal silica, ethenol and distilled water. The mixture is rotated in a drum for about 72 h and further it needs 12 h for adjusting its viscosity. The patterns are coated with slurry. For development of MMC with mechanical stirring, pure Al was melted in a silicon-graphite crucible. The setup is shown in Stir casting (SC) method involves the incorporation of reinforcements into liquid matrix melt through continuously stirring resulting in to vortex mixing that enable the proper distribution of the reinforcements. The mixture of the metal and reinforcement, called slurry, is allowed to solidify inside the pre-fabricated mould cavity The dimensional accuracy (Δd) or percentage deviation is basically the amount by which the metal component shrinks or changes its dimensions after casting. As per reported literature during solidification there are two types of shrinkages. One is liquid shrinkage and other is solid shrinkage. The first one is tackled by the riser and gating design and second one is considered in the pattern. For the present study solid shrinkage is important (which is totally volumetric contraction by nature). This comes into picture because for ABS pattern based IC, de-waxing or de-plasticizing require temperature range from 1020 to 1050 °C, which may results into cavity deformation because of thermal expansion of ABS pattern material (much before pouring of molten metal/alloy/MMC etc.). S/N ratio estimates the inverse of the coefficient of variation, that is, estimates the ratio μ/σ, with μ being the processes mean (signal) and σ (noise) the process standard deviation For smaller the better type case, S/N ratio can be calculated as: Where The length of the cube (A/F) is the most critical dimension. So the length of (ABS) plastic patterns is measured and that of the final casted products on coordinate measuring machine. The difference in size of pattern and casting gives Δd. The results of Δd are shown in    The confirmatory experiment has been conducted with LC-1+2 + 3+3, MC as pure Al and PT as 820 °C and percentage improvement in Δd is 0.1%. These results are valid at 95% level of accuracy and are in line with the observations made by other investigators As observed from photomicrographs ( Following conclusions can be drawn from the study: Al-Al We address the use of the investigated material for the additive manufacturing of novel reinforcing elements of composite and building materials