Osteoporosis is a major global public health problem. Aluminum (Al) exposure inhibits osteoblast mineralization and induces osteoporosis. However, the exact mechanism is not fully understood. The transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1)/Smad pathway is a major signaling cascade in regulating osteoblast mineralization. To investigate whether TGF-β1/Smad signaling pathway was involved in the Al-induced inhibition of osteoblast mineralization, osteoblasts were cultured and exposed to different concentrations of aluminum trichloride (AlCl3) (containing 0, 0.01, 0.02 and 0.04 mg/mL Al3+) for 24 h. We found that mineralized matrix nodules, mRNA expressions of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), type I collagen (Col I), TGF-β1, TGF-β type I receptor, TGF-β type II receptor and Smad4, protein expressions of TGF-β1 and p-Smad2/3, Smad2/3/4 trimeric complex were all decreased, whereas the mRNA expressions of Smad7 were increased in the AlCl3-treated groups compared with those in control. In conclusion, these results indicated that AlCl3 inhibited osteoblast mineralization via TGF-β1/Smad signaling pathway in rat osteoblasts. Our findings could provide novel insights into the mechanisms of action of AlCl3 in osteoporosis.Osteoporosis is a major global public health problem of older individuals Transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1)/Smad signaling pathway plays a key role in regulating osteoblast mineralization Therefore, the mineralized matrix nodules, the mRNA expressions of ALP, Col I, TGF-β1, TGF-β type I receptor, TGF-β type II receptor, Smad4 and Smad7, protein expressions of TGF-β1 and p-Smad2/3, and Smad2/3/4 trimeric complex in rat osteoblasts were examined to explore the effects of aluminum trichloride (AlCl This experimental designs and procedures were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Northeast Agricultural University (Harbin, China). Primary osteoblasts were isolated from the calvarium of 3-day-old Sprague-Dawley rats as previously described The determination of mineralized matrix nodules was done according to Matsuda et al. Gene expressions were analyzed by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) method The gene-specific primer pairs are shown in Osteoblasts were harvested and washed twice in ice-cold PBS. Cell proteins were extracted using protein extraction kits (Sangon Biotech Co., Ltd, China). Protein content was quantified by BCA protein assay reagent (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China). The protein was separated in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels electrophoresis, electro-transferred onto PVDF membranes. Then the PVDF membranes were incubated with TGF-β1 antibody (Abcam, USA) under 4 °C overnight. Subsequently the PVDF membranes were incubated with an appropriate secondary antibody (ZSGB-BIO, China). Finally, protein bands were observed using the enhanced chemiluminescent (ECL) reagent (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China). The protein expressions of p-Smad2/3 and β-actin were conducted as the western blot analysis of TGF-β1. The β-actin protein expression was used to normalize the TGF-β1 and p-Smad2/3. All assays were performed in triplicate. Cytoplasm proteins and nuclear proteins in osteoblasts were extracted with protein extraction kit (Sangon Biotech Co., Ltd, China) and nuclear protein extraction kit (BestBio Corp., Shanghai, China) following the manufacturer's instructions. The protein concentration in each sample was quantified using BCA protein assay reagent (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China) and immunoprecipitation was performed with an immunoprecipitation kit (Roche, China). Cytoplasm and nuclear proteins were incubated with Smad4 antibody (Santa Cruz, USA) and protein-G agarose beads, respectively. Then the immunoprecipitates were subjected to Western blotting according to method 2.4 with Smad2/3 antibody (Santa Cruz, USA). Statistical analyses were done using SPSS 17.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) with one-way analysis of variance followed by Student's To investigate the effect of AlCl To investigate the effect of AlCl To investigate the effect of AlCl To investigate the effect of AlCl The present study found that AlCl The aberrant bone mineralization impairs bone formation. Cristinel et al. confirmed that Al ALP and Col I are reliable and sensitive markers for osteoblast mineralization and bone formation. ALP plays a key role in osteoblast mineralization by promoting the formation of hydroxyapatite crystals TGF-β1/Smad signaling pathway is an important signaling cascade in regulating osteoblast mineralization Smad7 negatively controls TGF-β1/Smad signaling pathway by competing with Smad2 and Smad3 for binding to activated type I receptor AlCl The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. This study was supported by a grant from the  Transparency document related to this article can be found online at