A review of the current status and future trends in the automation and control of mineral and metal processing is presented. An evaluation of publications on IFAC MMM events during the last 20 years shows some trends in the application of a number of process control methods in the MM industry. Classical control has seen an extraordinarily wide application, but its inability to solve all the application problems of interest has led to further developments in control system methodologies and theory. One aim of this paper is to review the success of the translation of theoretically based developments into practice. Finally, the importance of information technology for the MM industry and process automation is highlighted and discussed.Industrial automation is undergoing a change that is more rapid than at any other time in its history. Where earlier systems mainly followed process developments, new methods are now revolutionising the entire field of process management. The fields of mineral and metal processing continue to provide challenges in the application of process control at every level of the automation hierarchy, enterprise optimisation and systems integration. In the early 1960s, the emergence of the maximum optimal principle, dynamic programming, Kalman filter and state space description marked the birth of modern control theory. Since then, more attention has been focused on MIMO control theory. During the last three decades, modern control methods have been improved and applied in a range of industrial processes. Since 1980s, the fields of non-linear control systems, A review of the current status and future trends in the automation and control of mineral and metal processing is presented in this paper. An evaluation of publications on IFAC MMM events during the last 20 years shows some trends in the application of a number of process control methods in the MM industry. One aim of this paper is to review the success of the translation of theoretically based developments into practice. To illustrate the relationships between theory and practice, the most successful industrial applications over the years will be described in more detail according to the kind of processes. The examples have primarily been selected from contributions to the IFAC MMM events. Instrumentation is an area that is currently undergoing rapid changes as field communications move from analog to digital protocols. The major advantages of smart instruments are: remote calibration and diagnostics, self-monitoring and remote configuration. Remote operations permit an easier and more flexible configuration, thus reducing start-up costs of automation systems. Self-monitoring enables predictive maintenance, which makes it possible to schedule service operations precisely on time. This helps to avoid shutdowns due to the malfunctioning of instruments and needless service operations. The type of communication protocol is one of the major factors categorising modern field devices. Classical analog field instruments use a 4–20 At the time when the number of digital field devices was increasing, most of the factories used an old 4–20 HART is an acronym for “Highway Addressable Remote Transducer”. The HART communication is accomplished by superimposing the digital signals on the top of an analog 4–20 Fieldbus is an all-digital, high-performance, multidrop communications protocol, which is used to link isolated field devices. Fieldbus requires new transmission technology for digital communication, such as IEC 1158-2 ( Currently, there are several fieldbus standards available on the market, each generated to meet a number of specific needs. Some fieldbuses focus on the control of analog data, some on digital information, while others have speed as their major feature. Process industries have three main possibilities of using smart instruments, the Hart Protocol, two competing digital fieldbuses of Profibus PA or Foundation Fieldbus (FF), or not to use smart instruments at all. Profibus is a leader with respect to the number of applications and devices on the market in Europe. The strength of the initially American FF compared to Profibus PA is that the FF supports the distribution of control actions in the field. The number of smart instruments is gradually increasing. The users are unaware of which of the three possibilities is the right one for their applications. The benefits gained are also under discussion. One problem is the increased power consumption because faster and more powerful microprocessors are being used. This must be taken into account when “intrinsically safe” certification is required. Most of the digital fieldbuses have been installed in the new factories. Until now, the users have had to compromise, partly due to the fieldbus connectivity restrictions set by the automation systems, and partly due to the properties of fieldbus as such. The ever-increasing variety and complexity of the automation systems make it impossible to even attempt to present an exhaustive survey of their current status in a short paper. The changes induced by fieldbus are expected to result in very profound changes in the hardware and operating software. In the DCS/PLC debate that has raged over the past decade, the vendors of these systems have mainly seen their future roles as software suppliers and platform integrators with the focus on applications that differentiate them through the value-added to the end users. Openness has become an essential part of automation. New NT-based systems are now embedded with a mill's information tools. Where earlier systems mainly followed process developments, the new methods are now revolutionising the entire process management. The following survey attempts to comment on developments in the field of process control on the basis of application-oriented papers from selected IFAC MMM events during 1980–2000. The following events were taken into account: IFAC MMM Symposium, 1980, Montreal, Canada. IFAC MMM Symposium, 1983, Espoo, Finland. IFAC MMM Symposium, 1986, Tokyo, Japan. IFAC MMM Symposium, 1989, Buenos Aires, Argentina. IFAC Workshop on Expert Systems in Mineral and Metal Processing, 1991, Espoo, Finland. IFAC MMM Symposium, 1992, Beijing, China. IFAC MMM Symposium, 1995, Sun City, South Africa. IFAC Workshop on Automation in the Steel Industry, 1997, Kyongju, Korea. IFAC MMM Symposium, 1998, Cologne, Germany. IFAC Workshop on Future trends in Automation in Mineral and Metal Processing, 2000, Finland. Only those contributions which take into account control or monitoring applications with pilot or industrial mineral and metal processing full-scale processes are considered. Simulations were not included. The applications were classified on the basis of the methods listed in The summary of the literature study is presented in Successful industrial applications of the control methods have been reported worldwide. The number of applications published over the years in the IFAC MMM events is shown in   Classical control can be seen to have found extraordinarily wide applications during the first three events. The number of classical control applications has decreased over the years, indicating that this technique is mature and is in everyday use at many plants. It is well known that a vast majority of industrial control loops (more than 90%) still rely on various forms of PID controllers. The inability of classical control methods to solve all the application problems of interest has led to further developments in control system methodologies and theory. One aim of this paper is to review the success of the translation of theoretically based developments into practice. AI methods can be seen in most industrial applications since 1991 compared to other methods. The applications have mainly considered three AI methods: expert systems, neural networks and fuzzy control. They are used in nearly 40% of all applications reviewed, and therefore represent the most important methods applied in the control and monitoring of MM processes. It has been widely reported that AI methods are ideal candidates especially for MM processes. The importance of artificial intelligence techniques in real-time process control is emphasised in the articles, and the MM processes are reported to benefit from the applications of AI techniques. During recent years the exploitation of fault diagnosis and process and quality monitoring indicates that control engineering is expanding to include tasks other than control. This represents a potential contribution to the automation of the MM industry in the future. In the 1998 Symposium, these methods were used in 46% of all the applications considered, and in this workshop, in 30% of the applications. Modern developments in process control and monitoring theory continue to find applications in the metal-processing industry. To illustrate the relationship between theory and practice, the most successful industrial applications over the years will be described in more detail below according to the kind of process, and compared to the general trend presented above. The examples have mainly been selected from contributions to the IFAC MMM events listed above. Based on the survey, investigations on industrial control applications in the mineral processing field were mainly focused on grinding and flotation unit processes. In recent years new application areas have also been reported, such as a pressure filter and a rotary drier.  In the Symposium in 1980, The power of model-based control for mineral processing operations was discussed in the next MMM symposium in Beijing by In 1991, a special workshop on expert systems in mineral and metal processing was organised by IFAC. At that time, only two industrial expert system applications were reported in the field of mineral processing: an expert system for coal blending by In the MMM symposium in 1995, two interesting contributions were published by In recent years, the industrial applications of expert systems have largely been concerned with monitoring activities. A feed type expert system for concentrator was presented by The first Model Predictive Control (MPC) implementation in flotation control was presented by AI methods are applied the most for blast furnace and furnaces although process monitoring and fault diagnosis and model-based control methods play an important role. Expert systems for blast furnaces are advisory systems constructed to support the operation of the furnace. The system monitors the heat level of the furnace, the position and shape of the cohesive zone and forecasts abnormal conditions in the furnace such as slipping, channelling, sliding and scaffolding. When the abnormalities in the furnace state are detected, the system suggests suitable controlling actions to the process operators. The first expert system application to blast furnace operation was presented as early as in 1989 by Many contributions concerning applied control theory to sinter plant control have been presented in the IFAC MMM events over the years. In the paper “Mathematical approach for the optimization of the sintering process operation”, A successful fuzzy control of furnace temperature in a zinc roaster at the Kokkola Zinc plant, Finland is reported by The application of neural network to the supervisory control of a reheating furnace in the steel industry, by The paper by In the steel making industries, mould level control plays an important role mainly due to its direct effect on quality and its resulting economic impact. Various kinds of control methods have been applied and reported in IFAC MMM events. The paper “Mould level control in continuous caster via nonlinear control technique”, by Owing to the strong interactions between the process variables, hot rolling has been a good candidate for multivariable control. Many successful implementations have been reported, the latest being “Observer-based multivariable control of rolling mills” by A predictive feedforward control which estimates the local thickness and temperature deviation using a Kalman filter is proposed by Neural computation has found many successful implementations in rolling. In this workshop, Despite the great worldwide expansion of hydrometallurgic processes, there are not many, if any, publications on the control of these processes. This topic is discussed in detail in this IFAC’MM 2000 Workshop in the following papers: Process control advance in gold processing by Today's world is changing rapidly as companies adjust to global economic competition. Information technology (IT) is currently the main mechanism for streamlining business activities, and is now widespread among companies seeking to improve competitiveness. Technological change and organisational restructuring have been found to bring gains in productivity and market share. Current business is undergoing a major paradigm shift, moving from traditional management into a world of agile organisations and processes. An agile corporation should be able to respond rapidly to market changes. Corporations have been developing a number of IT systems to assist with various aspects of the management of on-line business processes. The global market generates a need for global technical support. Telecommunication technology is providing a large number of opportunities for enhancing the speed and quality of the support process by enabling remote access to equipment. A technician can contact equipment located far away from his office, diagnose the equipment status, and suggest appropriate repairs online. In some cases, they can even intervene directly in the operation. This enables considerable time saving and a reduction in the costs of the technical support process. Environmental control is nowadays an important issue for the survival of the process industries. The monitoring of industrial emissions is the first task in pollution control. The reduction of industrial wastes such as waste gas and waste materials are an essential measure for environmental protection. Yield improvements and energy savings are equal to the reduction in industrial waste, and also improve the profit margin of the products. An exact process control is necessary for the better yield and reduction of power consumption. Forecasting of environmental conditions around an industrial area is also important for better pollution control. Pressure for environmental protection is driving the industry to use better, more advanced methods of control and monitoring. Recycling is a new field that has its own session “Recycling” in the programme of this IFAC’MM 2000 workshop. The current methods and future trends in recycling and its control will be presented and discussed. Industrial automation is undergoing a change that is more rapid than at any other time in its history. As a result of the changes induced by fieldbus and smart instruments, we can expect to see very profound changes in the hardware and operating software. Fieldbus is truly the beginning of a new era in process control—an era of field-distributed control system (FDCS). Process equipment suppliers are moving into the area and providing process control solutions, i.e. control methods embedded in smart equipment, because of the competitive advantage it brings. The implementation of advanced technology and the timely use of information have the potential to optimise overall company productivity and, furthermore, to reduce costs under variable processing and economic conditions. This capability will be a key and essential component of the companies that remain competitive in the 21st century. The emphasis will be on plantwide control, integrated business and production control more than on unit process control. Telecommunication technology will provide a larger number of opportunities for enhancing the speed and quality of the support process by enabling remote access to the equipment, process automation and plant information system. The help provided by my students, S. Bergman, M. Dietrich, S. Haavisto, J. Kämpe, J. Laitinen, S. Nevalainen, H. Rauhala, O. Tiili, J. Timperi, E. Vapaavuori and M. Vermasvuori, in collecting the relevant references is gratefully acknowledged. Industrial control application published in the IFAC MMM events during the period 1980–2000 is shown in