Generally, in pelletizing process, the magnetite ore is oxidized to hematite during induration as an exothermic reaction; thereby the magnetite ore requires less energy compared to hematite ore. This form of heat generation inside the pellet is much more efficient than the transferred one from hot gases heated by external burners. This mechanism leads to higher production rates with lower total energy consumption. In order to achieve these improvements, different amounts of anthracite as the solid fuel (0 to 0.95wt.%) were added to the initial mixture of hematite (60%) and magnetite (40%) ores. The portion of hematite was reduced to magnetite phase by anthracite, and then the produced magnetite re-oxidized again to secondary hematite. Afterwards, the studies of mechanical and reducibility behaviors of pellets were performed by the tumbler/abrasive indexes and the Linder experimental tests. Furthermore, the microstructural evaluation was carried out by scanning electron microscope (SEM). The results demonstrated that by anthracite addition to the mixture, the production rate was significantly increased (more than 30%) while the natural gas consumption was reduced at least 35%. Moreover, based on the strength and reducibility analyses, the anthracite addition up to 0.78% (as an optimal amount) caused considerably to the betterment of fired iron ore pellet properties.In the last decades, the access to higher production rates parallel to energy consumption decrease has become the main interest of steel industries ( Moreover, the amount of pressure drop in each firing machine depends on some technical parameters like the potency of air suction fans that have negligible tolerance in this research. According to the limitation of pressure drop variations, in order to increase bed depth, the enhancement of permeability or/and the decreasing of gas flow flux density are absolutely necessary. In fact, the elevation of The present work is focused on the effect of anthracite solid fuel employment (with different amounts) on the properties of green and fired pellets, and the reduction conditions of pellets in Dwight Lloyd straight grate machine. In this research, a series of tests and studies were conducted to determine the optimum parameter amounts for usage of solid fuel in pelletizing process. Based on literature, these studies include the general property evaluation of used concentrates, fired and green pellet property assessment i.e. strength mechanisms, porosity, Linder reducibility tests, and the microstructural analyses. The mixed hematite (60%) and magnetite (40%) concentrates were used to produce oxide pellets. Furthermore, 0.7 Upon completion of raw pellet production, the green pellets are sieved by + As mentioned previously in this work, anthracite is used as a solid fuel and its specifications are presented in In addition, the variations of created FeO percentage and oxidation degree of fired pellets with 0.78 As a result of this figure, by increasing depth, the FeO percentage is dramatically dropped owing to achieving higher temperature in the thinner bed compared to deeper one caused by adding solid fuels. Thereby in thinner beds, the probability of simultaneous transformations of hematite to magnetite and magnetite to wustite is increased by thermodynamic view ( As is shown in The abrasive index (equal to the percentage of particles with size less than 0.5 In the next section, these two parameters have been compared simultaneously for fired pellets and produced DRI.    The above equation of reduction degree is used according to pilot plant instructions of Mobarakeh Steel Company “MSCo” ( The results of In The abrasive index of DRI samples behaves based on two different approaches by depth augmentation. At first, in depths lower than 40 The scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs of created cracks and porosities in the samples with different amounts of anthracite are shown in Finally, In this work, the pelletizing process was successfully done by adding various amounts of anthracite as a solid fuel to the mixture of hematite (60%) and magnetite (40%) concentrates as raw materials. Afterwards, the microstructural, mechanical, oxidation, and reducibility behaviors of pellets were evaluated. The most important results can be concluded as follows: By anthracite addition to the initial mixture, the production rate of induration machine was significantly increased (more than 30%) without modification of grate area and/or fan capacity. The overall energy consumption (natural gas and electricity) of pelletizing process was considerably reduced (at least 35%) due to the partial supplement of required energy for pelletizing process by solid fuel addition. The reducibility of pellets was noticeably increased owing to achieve products with tangible amounts of secondary hematite (that is formed by re-oxidation of magnetite). To further mention valuable results, in fired iron ore pellets (up to 0.78 Finally, in the fixed optimum amount of anthracite (0.78