A commercial enargite (Cu3AsS4) concentrate was mechanically milled in inert and oxidising atmospheres for up to 50 h. No substantial effect was observed in either an inert atmosphere or in air other than a broadening and weakening of the diffraction peaks. Milling in oxygen was dramatic with significant reaction evident even after 1 h. The products were As2O3 and CuSO4·5H2O, both of which are readily soluble; a small amount of SO2 was also formed. Dissolution in acid left CuS as the major phase; this phase was thermodynamically predicted to be a minor phase during the oxidation process and appeared to be stable for long periods under milling. Milling for 1 h at 100 °C resulted in the same products but showed a greater extent of oxidation. The small fraction of tennantite in the sample was comparatively resistant to oxidation.Enargite is a copper arsenosulphide (Cu There has been comparatively little published on solution treatment processes for these minerals due to their relatively low commercial importance with other, more amenable, copper ores being dominant. The general conclusion is that these minerals are not amenable to many conventional processing routes. Ferric oxidation recovered 75% enargite, 15% tennantite and <5% tetrahedrite after 40 h at 95 °C, the low recovery into solution was considered to be due to elemental sulphur blocking the surface Bacterial oxidation has been examined on several occasions Almost all mineral processing plants use mills for the size reduction of particles prior to physical and chemical processing. Continuation of milling beyond that required for size reduction leads to mechanical activation, the energy causing a steady-state particle size due to breakage and re-alloying of particles. The deformation and damage to the crystal structure leads to increased reactivity, which can be seen directly by a reaction within the mill, or indirectly, via a decrease in the subsequent annealing temperature required for reaction. It is a well-known phenomenon that wet milling of pyrite in processing plants leads to slight solubilisation of iron due to the formation of iron sulphate compounds. Thus, even industrial milling performs limited mechanical activation on what is often regarded as the most passive sulphide. It could be expected that reactions may be induced more readily in more reactive sulphide minerals leading to alternative processing possibilities. There have been a number of investigations This paper examines the effect of extended milling, in a range of gas atmospheres, on the solubility of an enargite concentrate. The enargite concentrate was obtained from a commercial operation and had a P A 10.0-g sample of concentrate was loaded into a laboratory scale ball mill The unmilled concentrate and the milled powders were subjected to an agitated leach in 0.5 M HCl at room temperature to determine whether solubilisation had occurred during milling. All powders were analysed by XRD using monochromatized Co  The overall reaction The same calculations were made at 100 °C to examine briefly the effect of having an elevated temperature in the system. Industrial dry mills usually operate above ambient temperature due to the high frictional losses inducing heating; indeed, tower mills are known to require cooling and have reportedly been run at temperatures of up to 200 °C If this reaction were to occur, then the arsenic could be readily removed by a simple alkaline washing, or by heating to volatilise it, thereby leaving a copper-rich product that could be treated conventionally. It should be noted that these systems do not account for the presence of water, as would be encountered during wet milling. If the solubilities of CuSO Similar calculations were made for SO This reaction is only thermodynamically favourable below ∼35 °C, the energy evolved by the reaction (−1088 kJ at 25 °C) would be expected to heat the powder and therefore decrease the importance of this reaction. The diffraction trace of the unmilled concentrate is shown in The antimony is present in the system as a substitute for arsenic in tennantite (which forms a continuous solid solution series with tetrahedrite Cu Milling of the concentrate for 50 h in air or argon resulted in little change in the XRD trace compared with the original concentrate, as shown in It was noted that after 1 h milling in oxygen the mill was 5–10 °C warmer than those for argon or air, which was not unexpected as the thermodynamic calculations indicated that the reaction was highly exothermic. After 10 h of milling, the mills were all at ambient temperature suggesting that the initial reaction was rapid. After milling in oxygen, there was the distinct smell of SO On opening the mill which ran for 1 h at 100 °C, a very strong smell of SO It is clear from the leaching result shown in Enargite dissolution is hindered by the formation of an impermeable layer of elemental sulphur Using an oxygen atmosphere leads to a dramatic increase in solubility, even after only 1 h of milling. This was not unexpected with the XRD results shown in It is interesting to note that the ratio of the slope of the solubility lines for air (0.116% h There were no changes to the XRD traces of the powders milled in either air or argon after leaching, with peaks neither emerging nor diminishing. There was some evidence for the enargite peaks narrowing slightly after leaching and this may well indicate the dissolution of the smaller, more energetic crystallites, as has been noted in many other systems The XRD traces of the powders obtained after leaching the powders milled in oxygen for up to 50 h are shown in The only phases present after leaching the longest milled powder were CuS and quartz; these may also have been the only phases present after 25 h of milling but the excessive overlap of peaks makes this difficult to confirm. Enargite was certainly present after 10 h of milling with the peak at 47° still just evident (this peak is not overlapped by those of the other minerals in the system). The presence of CuS as a minor oxidation product at 25 °C was predicted by the thermodynamic appreciation shown in After leaching, the sample milled for 1 h at 100 °C showed a significantly different product profile to those milled at ambient temperature. All of the enargite and chalcopyrite has been oxidised with the major phases remaining being tennantite and quartz with a smaller amount of covellite also present. It seems that tennantite is more resistant to oxidation than either enargite or chalcopyrite at 100 °C; a similar effect can be noted for the sample milled for 1 h in oxygen where the tennantite peak is substantially more intense than the others after leaching. It would be reasonable to expect that a longer milling time would also lead to tennantite oxidation as is indicated by the diminution of the tennantite peak in the series of samples milled in oxygen for up to 50 h. The leach residues for the samples milled in oxygen and at 100 °C were analysed for Cu, As, S and Fe using XRF. From these results, the fraction of these elements solubilised was calculated from the composition and mass of the residue and is presented in These results are in reasonable agreement with the XRD results discussed earlier. A soluble form of arsenic (As It is interesting to note that thermal oxidation of covellite The solubility after milling for 1 h at 100 °C was approximately equal to that obtained by milling for ∼25 h at ambient temperature indicating that a rate increase of ∼25 is possible. From this observation, an estimate of the activation energy for the oxidation reaction can be made by means of the slope of a two-point Arrhenius plot (unity rate at 25 °C and a rate of 25 at 100 °C) which gives an estimated activation energy of 40 kJ mol Extended milling of an enargite concentrate in argon resulted in little change in the solubility, even after 50 h; indeed, the solubility actually decreased slightly after the completion of size reduction. Milling in air resulted in a slow increase in solubility with milling time. The most dramatic effect was observed in an oxygen atmosphere for which 1 h of milling led to substantially greater solubility than 50 h of milling in air. Further milling in oxygen showed an apparently linear increase in solubility with milling time. The rate of solubility in the presence of oxygen seemed to be directly related to the oxygen partial pressure in the system, indicating first-order kinetics. The increased solubility was shown to be due to the formation of CuSO