Ex-situ mineral carbonation via direct aqueous process at a low CO2 partial pressure (pCO2) is a motivating factor for promoting industrial application. The carbonation extent meets a plateau around CO2 supercritical pressure, making carbonation at the lower part of the plateau attractive in an energy saving prospective. This paper investigated the mechanism of olivine carbonation using a buffer solution with NaHCO3 and NaCl, at 185 °C and 6.5 MPa of pCO2. The results obtained show that when the dissolution of magnesium silicate is effective in the solution, carbonation at relative low pCO2 is preferred due to the slight enhancement of aqueous CO3
                     2− concentration and pH in the solution. The optimum NaHCO3 concentration is not 0.64 mol/L at 6.5 MPa of pCO2, and further addition of sodium salts (NaCl and NaHCO3) is necessary to enhance the carbonation extent. The optimum NaHCO3 concentration at low pCO2 could be reduced through increasing the carbonation time and reducing the particle size. The passivation layer was not formed under the experimental condition. Agitation is necessary to be optimized to prevent settlement of solids in the solution. The successful sequestration of CO2 using olivine at a pCO2 of 6.5 MPa can aid in reducing energy requirements.The global atmospheric CO CO Industries, government and academic scholars have proposed numerous methods of mineral carbonation, including In all the Carbonation at a pCO The principal aim of this paper was to investigate the mechanism of direct carbonation around CO The olivine rock specimen was obtained from the Twin Sisters Ultramafic Complex in Washington State, USA. The X-ray powder diffraction analysis with Rietveld method was used to identify the mineralogical composition of TSO which contained 97.9 wt% forsterite (Mg The mineral pre-treatment method chosen was mechanical activation by size reduction. The sample preparation method was oriented around the mineral preparation undertaken for XRF by the mining industry and associated geochemical assay laboratories. Olivine rock was passed through crushing circuit which was comprised of a primary Blake Jaw crusher (set at 4 cm), a McCully gyratory (set at 1.2 cm), and a series of two cone crushers until approximately 90% of the sample passed through a 5-mesh sieve (4 mm). Sample material was then placed in a tungsten carbide ring mill and ground in 90 s intervals for a total of 6 min. After each interval the sample was screened in a 200 mesh (75 μm) sieves. All the materials that were coarser than 200 mesh were then placed back into the ring mill for re-grinding. The tungsten carbide ring mill was initially cleaned with coarse silica to minimize contamination of samples from the mill and ring. All samples were riffle split before they were used in experimental mineral carbonation and characterization. The starting material used in the experimental mineral carbonation had an 80% passing size of 38 μm, a mean particle size of 23.1 μm, and a specific surface area of 1.8 m The experimental mineral carbonation was carried out in a 100 ml Hastelloy-C Parr bench-top stirred autoclave (Parr Instruments, Moline, IL, USA).  Particle size analysis was undertaken using laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Mastersizer Hydro 2000, Malvern, U.K.) with Mastersizer-S software. The content of major elements was analyzed using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy at Acme Analytical Laboratories Ltd. The particle texture was observed using a Philips XL-30 scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a back scattered electron detector at 15 kV. The mineralogy composition was analyzed using X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) analysis using the Rietveld refinement method. X-ray diffraction data were collected using a Bruker D8 Focus Bragg–Brentano diffractometer (Bruker AXS GmbH, Germany) equipped with a Co Kα radiation source; the samples were scanned at a step size of 0.04° over the 2θ range from 3° to 80°. The X-ray diffractograms were analyzed using the International Centre for Diffraction Database (ICDD) PDF-4 and Search-Match software by Siemens (Bruker). X-ray powder diffraction data were refined with the Rietveld program Topas 4.2 to determine the mineralogy composition of TSO and carbonated product [ SEM micrographs were undertaken on TSO reactant post-mineral carbonation solid products. In comparison to the SEM images of the Twin Sisters reactant material (   The samples listed in Lizardite and amorphous contents increased in all of the reaction products. These are products of the stoichiometry of Equation The negligible variation in quartz content within the product samples compared to the reactant material supports the theory that the forsterite crystals in the solid product become increasingly silica rich as Mg  The carbonation extent of TSO after 2 h carbonation using distilled water and 0.64 M NaHCO  At pCO Lafay et al. found out that simultaneous serpentinization and aqueous carbonation of olivine initiated at low pH (=0.66), and a silica passivating layer during alteration of olivine is only formed under high acid conditions (pH < 4), which include pCO O'Connor et al. have found out that the addition of NaCl could assist to enhance the carbonation extent [ The carbonation extent of TSO after 6 h carbonation using 2.5 M NaHCO      The carbonation extent of this study (50.4 ± 7.1%) is significantly higher than that of Gadikota et al. [ The carbonation extent of this study is much lower than that of Eikeland et al. [ The particle size of the solid reactant in this work is the same as Gerdemann et al. [ This study have tried to analyze the effect of solid content on the carbonation conversion. However, the carbonation conversion is not enhanced with the reduction in solid to liquid ratio as expected. The solid content less than 15% followed the expected trend, due to less solid to liquid ratio which may make the solid agitation easier. However, the carbonation conversion of solid content of 20% is higher than 15% solid content after 2 h carbonation and even higher than 10% solid content after 6 h carbonation. Solid content of 20% may enhance the chance of abrasion between particles during carbonation, which would help to get rid of the passivation layers on the solid surface. The observed results is consistent with Bodénan et al., who obtained an unexpected high carbonation level by coupling direct carbonate ultramafic rocks and mechanical exfoliation [ This paper investigated the mechanism of olivine carbonation in a direct aqueous carbonation route at around CO Reduction in pCO Carbonation extent reached a maximum value at a range of NaHCO Carbonation at low pCO This work was financially supported by