A new modelling technique for simulating hydrocyclone performance has been developed, in which particles in every size fraction of the feed ore are classified based on ore texture type, taking into account that the same ore texture types in every size fraction of the feed ore have similar mineral contents and densities. Mineral tracking by optical image analysis and newly-developed texture classification software was used in this technique to classify the feed ore particles by texture type and to determine the average particle density of each class in every size fraction. Particle density calculations took into account the reduction of porosity with reduction of particle size and the effect of different imaging magnifications for different size fractions. The data obtained about each class in every size fraction was used to create a virtual feed which was input to the hydrocyclone model to simulate the ore processing performance. For model validation, pilot-scale hydrocyclone beneficiation experiments were performed on an iron ore blend, using different hydrocyclone pressures and percent solids in the feed pulp. Model parameters were determined from one set of experimental results and the calibrated model was then used to predict the outcomes of the two subsequent experiments. Comparisons of the model and experimental results are presented and discussed. This new approach enables prediction of the recovery of each mineral and texture type in the products, calculation of the total product iron grade and recovery, and optimisation of the hydrocyclone performance for a given ore.Some iron ores can be effectively beneficiated by desliming using hydrocyclones. Typically, a rigorous and costly experimental evaluation on laboratory- and pilot-scale equipment is conducted on potential ores to assess their amenability to the proposed flowsheet. Hence, the ability to accurately predict beneficiation results for a hydrocyclone would be a low-cost and rapid tool for greenfield and production ore evaluation as well as beneficiation process design and optimisation. During hydrocycloning, denser and/or larger particles are preferentially recovered to the underflow stream, whereas smaller and/or less dense particles are preferentially recovered to the overflow stream ( A large amount of information must be obtained about the fine iron ores in order to understand their behaviour during hydrocyclone processing and for reliable prediction of such behaviour ( Different image analysis systems can be used, e.g., optical image analysis ( Correct determination of particle densities is a key factor for prediction of hydrocyclone performance. Thus, the determination of the porosity of different particles and constituent minerals is a very important part of particle characterisation. Optical image analysis has been found to be an extremely effective tool for providing detailed size-by-size mineralogical information about fine iron ores. It has an advantage over SEM-based techniques in that it more effectively distinguishes porosity and differentiates the main iron-bearing minerals. These minerals, such as vitreous goethite, ochreous goethite, hematite and magnetite, have clear differences in reflectivities when imaged by optical microscope ( Usually to predict the beneficiation performance of specific ores, particles are classified by liberation analysis based on the proportion of a particular mineral in each particle (  This paper describes a new method of hydrocyclone performance modelling, where particles within distinct size fractions of the feed are classified according to a variant of the classification described by A block diagram of the whole modelling process is presented in Each sample (size fraction) was mounted in an epoxy resin block which was then polished on one side and image analysed. Reflectivity thresholding and visual identification was used to discriminate and identify minerals in the iron ore particles ( In the routine optical image analysis work, which served to acquire statistical figures, porosity was not included in the mineral mapping ( Two important factors considered in relation to the optical image analysis and determinations of average mineral porosities were: In order to process images accurately and efficiently, each image was required to contain about 50 to 150 particles. To achieve this, the imaging magnification of different size fractions was varied accordingly. When the same particle was imaged using different magnifications, the area percentage of porosity detected by the image analysis varied. For dark minerals, the apparent percentage of porosity tends to increase with decreasing magnification. For light minerals, the apparent percentage of porosity tends to decrease with decreasing magnification. The amount of porosity within any given porous mineral varies for different size fractions. In smaller size fractions the amount of porosity is lower than in coarser size fractions, due to the destruction of some porosity when coarser particles are broken up into smaller pieces. To take into account the effect of magnification on the determination of average mineral porosity, a selection of liberated mineral particles from the − To take into account the variation of porosity of a given mineral in different size fractions, the average porosity of those minerals in different size fractions was determined using image analysis. As was mentioned above, different size fractions were processed using different imaging magnifications, therefore the porosity figures obtained from such image analysis were corrected for the effect of magnification change (see These figures of porosity of different minerals in different size fractions, and the absolute densities of the nonporous mineral counterparts, were used to calculate the average densities of the minerals in each size fraction (see Further processing calculations such as mineral area-to-weight conversion, particle density calculations and particle classification were later carried out by using these averaged mineral density values. In this way, it was possible to take porosity into account, even in the data from image analysis (optical or otherwise) which did not have porosity included in the original mineral mapping scheme. In The files containing the data on all ore particle sections obtained from the image analysis mineral maps were loaded into the “Recognition” ( To reduce the stereological effect which causes overestimation of minerals liberation in particles, Large Section Stereological Correction ( An example of particle classification of the − To model the hydrocyclone performance in the USIM PAC package, a modified Plitt model (     The differences between the model implemented in USIM PAC and the Every size fraction of the virtual feed input to USIM PAC was represented as a separate phase, subdivided into ore texture classes. There were up to 14 ore texture classes (for this ore type) allocated to each size fraction, each class having its own associated density and grade. The outputs from USIM PAC were the flow rates of every size fraction to the hydrocyclone underflow and overflow streams, and the percentages of ore texture class in each size fraction of these product streams. The flow rates, recoveries to the underflow and losses to the overflow for every class in every size fraction were then calculated from these data using Microsoft Excel. Information about the mineral content of every class (determined earlier using the “Recognition” program) enabled calculation of mineral grades and recoveries or losses. Information about the chemical composition of the minerals, obtained from probe analysis, was used to calculate the iron grade in every class. Finally, the total iron recovery to the underflow, iron loss to the overflow, iron grades of the underflow and overflow were calculated. As part of a large experimental programme, three hydrocycloning experiments (Tests A, B and C) were carried out on a bulk sample of − During hydrocycloning, samples of the underflow and overflow streams were collected by an automated full-stream cross-cut sampler and the solid and water recoveries were recorded. Afterwards, underflow and overflow samples from each experiment were wet screened at 38 µm. The + Polished sections were prepared for all size fractions except the + The minerals of interest which were tracked in the image analysis and modelling work were hematite, goethite (vitreous, ochreous), kaolinite and quartz ( In this work two distinct levels of oxidation/hydration were used for goethite classification: vitreous goethite and ochreous goethite. Despite the slight variability of the chemical composition of certain minerals in different particles, the reliability of such an image analysis approach is shown in Another assumption in this modelling approach is that attritioning or sample loss during processing does not significantly change the particle size distribution ( Despite the good agreement between the assays and mass distributions of the actual and reconstituted feed, a small shift in mass (1–2%) was noted from the coarser size fractions to the adjacent smaller size fractions in the reconstituted feed (see When there is some shift of mass from one size fraction to another size fraction, the resulting recovery figures may be nonsensical. The issue was addressed by carrying out the modelling using the reconstituted feed, rather than the actual feed, in order to eliminate the apparent errors in recovery and to highlight errors connected only with the modelling procedure. Ideally, the modelling should be carried out using the original feed data, but for the purpose of demonstrating the viability of the proposed method for prediction and calculation of mineral, iron and mass recoveries, the use of a reconstituted feed was adequate. As the masses involved were small, any attritioning and/or deagglomeration was not expected to cause a large error in the predicted overall grades and recoveries, but the above example shows that particular care needs to be taken to deagglomerate feed sample material before preparation for image analysis in order to reduce the deagglomeration effect that occurs in a real ore processing situation. The effect of preferred recovery of larger and/or denser particles to the underflow can be seen in The experimentally determined total mass and mineral recoveries (to the hydrocyclone underflow), for the three hydrocycloning tests, are given in As expected, the predictions of recoveries of major ore texture groups to the hydrocyclone underflow were also very close to the experimentally determined recoveries (see Modelling was also performed using the same virtual feed but with different sets of parameters for hydrocyclone apex diameter and percent of solids, while keeping the flow rate constant at 6.8 l/s (see The dependence of the predicted iron recovery (to the underflow product) from the apex diameter and percent of solids in the feed pulp is presented in  From another point of view, the productivity (throughput) achieved using a feed pulp of 40% solids would be much higher than that for a feed pulp of 26% solids but the iron grades achievable would only be approximately 0.05% ( The method of classification of iron ore particles and prediction of hydrocyclone performance presented in this paper allows tracking of the mineral content and textural composition of ore particles. This information is vital for further predictions of beneficiation operations following hydrocycloning, such as magnetic separation or flotation, and for prediction of other possible processing routes, such as sintering, granulation or pelletising. A novel method of quantifying porosity during image processing has been developed which takes into account the decrease of mineral porosity with decreasing particle size, including corrections for the use of different imaging magnifications during optical image analysis. In this work, averaged values for porosities of every major mineral in each size fraction were used. Further development work will consider alternatives such as direct measurement of the porosity of every mineral in every particle by image analysis, or direct particle porosity measurement, followed by magnification correction. In order to obtain reliable predictions of hydrocyclone performance, the feed material should be deagglomerated before sizing to ensure similarity between the actual and reconstituted feeds. If it becomes a significant issue, the effects of attritioning and/or deagglomeration during hydrocycloning on the change in size distribution and mineral content of different size fractions may have to be taken into account during modelling ( The modelling method described in this paper gives a better understanding, for a particular iron ore, of the dependence of target figures, such as iron grade and iron recovery, on hydrocycloning parameters. Virtual optimisation of hydrocycloning, and parameter selection, can be performed using this technique. To further validate the method, hydrocyclone experiments will be carried out for a greater range of hydrocyclone operating conditions than in the set of experiments described above. Modelling of these hydrocyclone experiments will be coupled with other beneficiation unit operations, such as magnetic separation or flotation. We would like to acknowledge the CSIRO reviewers of this paper for their useful corrections and comments and Ralph Holmes for valuable discussions during this study.