This paper discusses the leaching of enargite (Cu3AsS4) in sulfuric acid–sodium chloride solution using oxygen as oxidant at atmospheric pressure. The dissolution of arsenic from enargite in this medium proceeds with elemental sulfur as a reaction product according to:
                        
                           2Cu3AsS4
                              +6H2SO4
                              +5.5O2
                              →6CuSO4
                              +2H3AsO4
                              +8S°+3H2O
                        
                     
                  
                  The dissolution rate of arsenic was found to be very slow. About 6% of arsenic was dissolved in 7 h of leaching at 100 °C in a solution containing 0.25 M H2SO4 and 1.5 M NaCl under a flow of oxygen of 0.3 l/min.
                  The kinetics of arsenic dissolution is well represented by a shrinking core model for spherical particles controlled by surface reaction. An apparent energy of activation of 65 kJ/mol was obtained for the temperature range 80 to 100 °C.Enargite (Cu Leaching processes for copper sulfides have been always considered as viable alternatives to produce copper when direct smelting of the concentrate is not technically feasible. Thus a selective leaching of either copper or arsenic from a chalcopyrite concentrate that contains enargite is an interesting option to produce copper from such concentrates, diminishing environmental pollution with arsenic. Little has been published on enargite leaching or copper concentrates containing enargite in acid media. On this matter,  Enargite can be dissolved in oxidizing acidic solutions with total oxidation of sulfide sulfur to sulfate or partial oxidation to elemental sulfur. Thus, when using ferric ions as the oxidant, the global reactions for both cases can be written as follows: In the presence of oxygen the global reactions to produce sulfate or elemental sulfur are: It should be noted that In this work, the leaching of enargite in the H Enargite mineral was obtained from El Indio Mine (Barrick Corporation), Chile. This material contained large crystals, which were hand picked, ground, concentrated and classified in narrow size fractions. The chemical analysis of the size fractions used in the experiments were: − Isothermal leaching experiments were carried out at atmospheric pressure in a 2 l glass reactor, which was fitted with a water-cooled condenser, a stirrer, a thermometer, and a fritted tube for injection of oxygen and withdrawal of liquid samples during the course of a run. In a typical experiment, the glass reactor was filled with 1 l of sulfuric acid–sodium chloride solution and heated to the desired leaching temperature under specified agitation and flow of oxygen. Once at the set temperature, 2 g of enargite sample was charged in the reactor and leached for a predetermined time. For the determination of arsenic dissolution, various samples (mostly 10 ml of solution) were withdrawn during the experiment for chemical analysis by atomic absorption spectroscopy. In some experiments the elemental sulfur in the solid residues was determined by extraction with CS Preliminary experiments were carried out, at 80 and 100 °C, to determine the conditions in which the leaching of enargite in H Additionally, the data shown in The results shown in Leaching experiments were conducted to study the effect of stirring speed on the arsenic dissolution by using the enargite sample of average size 58 μm. The leaching was carried out in a 1.5 M NaCl, 0.25 M H To study the effect of oxygen flow rate on the arsenic dissolution, various experiments were conducted using different oxygen flow rates at 100 °C for 120 min. The results of these experiments are shown in  A further increase in acid concentration from 0.25 to 0.3 M produces a slight decrease in arsenic dissolution. To verify that the arsenic dissolution from enargite occurs through The effect of the concentration of NaCl on the dissolution of enargite was studied for the range 0 to 2 M. The result is shown in For the case of enargite, as seen in This result suggests that the role of the chloride ions in this system is of a chemical nature rather than of a simple physical effect changing the morphology of the elemental sulfur produced by the leaching reaction. Furthermore, since the arsenic dissolution is small, less than 7% as shown in The rate constant has been found to be first order with respect to the chloride ion concentration, as will be shown below. This finding substantiates the notion that the chloride ions are involved in the mechanism of the chemical reaction occurring on the surface of the enargite particles. Particle size influences the rate of leaching as a result of changing the surface area of the sample. The results of leaching experiments carried out using enargite of different sizes are shown in Additional experiments were carried out to study the influence of temperature on the arsenic dissolution from enargite in the range 80 to 100 °C. The corresponding data are shown in We can observe that the temperature has a significant effect on the dissolution rate. About 1% of arsenic can be dissolved in 7 h at 80 °C and for the same time about 6% of arsenic can be dissolved at 100 °C. This result shows that the reactivity of enargite is very low as compared to the reactivity of other copper sulfides (chalcocite, covellite and chalcopyrite) in the same leaching media. The appreciable effect of temperature on the dissolution of enargite suggests that this process is surface reaction controlled. Thus, the experimental data was analyzed by using the shrinking core model for mono-sized spherical particles under surface-reaction control, which is given as: In this expression,  The values of the kinetic constants obtained from Additionally, the linear dependency of the experimental kinetic constant on the inverse of the initial particle size, as shown in Arsenic dissolution from enargite in H The dissolution rate of enargite in this medium is very slow. About 6% of arsenic can be dissolved in 7 h of leaching at 100 °C in a solution containing 0.25 M H The oxygen flow rate does not affect the dissolution rate of arsenic for values over 0.15 l/min. On the other hand, sulfuric acid concentration and NaCl concentration do affect the leaching of enargite. The kinetics of arsenic dissolution was analyzed by a shrinking core model for spherical particles controlled by surface reaction. An apparent activation energy of 65 kJ/mol was obtained for the temperature range 80 to 100°C. The authors express their gratitude to the Research Council of the University of Concepción for the financial support of this investigation under Project No. 203.095.079-1.0.