Experiments were carried out on the partitioning of uranyl nitrate in nitric acid solution extracted by 30vol.% of tributyl phosphate (TBP) in dodecane at 25°C. The model proposed by Naganawa and Tachimori (Bull. Chem. Soc. Jap. 70, 809, (1997)) for the case of aqueous solutions of nitric acid was used to additionally describe the extraction equilibria of uranyl nitrate. The treatment is based on the assumption of thermodynamic ideality for the organic solution composed of the diluent, the free extractant and the complexes. The stoichiometries of the metal complexes were determined one by one by a suitable procedure. The formation of 6 different complexes involving uranyl nitrate was found capable of representing the partition equilibria for the three extracted compounds: nitric acid, water and uranyl nitrate. This approach suggests the formation of 2:1 and 3:1 complexes for TBP and uranyl nitrate, respectively.Nuclear reprocessing uses chemical procedures to separate the useful components, e.g., the remaining uranium and the newly-created plutonium, from the fission products and other radioactive waste in the spent fuel produced by nuclear reactors. Reprocessing serves multiple purposes. Originally used solely to extract plutonium for producing nuclear weapons, it is mainly used nowadays for the reduction of the volume and radiotoxicity of the waste, allowing separate management (destruction or storage) of nuclear waste components. Plutonium is worth being recovered because it can be recycled to produce a new fuel, like the so-called MOX (mixture of oxides) fuel for instance. The reprocessed uranium, which constitutes about 95% of the mass of the spent fuel material, can be reused as a fuel, but it is extracted mainly to decrease the amount of waste (the former use is profitable only when prices are high). The rest of the waste, composed of fission products and neutron capture products (minor actinides) ( The extent of the benefits of reprocessing is determined by the efficiency of the separation process. Among the different actinide separation methods, solvent extraction ( The PUREX process can be roughly described as the extraction of plutonium and uranium into an organic phase composed of 30% tributyl phosphate (TBP) in odourless kerosene or dodecane from an aqueous solution containing nitric acid, the fission products remaining in aqueous phase. After this first separation stage, further processing leads to the separation of the heavier plutonium from the uranium. The process is based on the complexation of species by TBP. A description of metal partitioning equilibria may have value for the modelling of extraction stages in the nuclear reprocessing industry. Such a model may be utilised for various purposes including real-time safety analysis in a plant (in particular to prevent criticality accidents), the implementation of pilot extractors, and the good working of an industrial process (for instance during its starting phase). A number of models has been presented in the literature for the description of partitioning equilibria: for the extraction of acid and water ( On the other hand, models describing the extraction of all species (metal, acid and water) are very scarce in the literature. To our best knowledge, only Mokili and Poitrenaud proposed such a description for the extraction of lanthanides by TBP ( In contrast, in the present study, all species in organic phase are treated on an equal footing and the organic phase is globally regarded as ideal. Moreover this latter classic assumption is used on the mole fraction scale, in which the diluent is included. This framework may be expected to be more suited to the description of this phase as compared to previous studies developed on molality or concentration scale for the solute species. In the present work, the partitioning of uranyl nitrate, nitric acid and water extracted by 30 The aqueous ternary UO Aqueous and organic solutions were equilibrated by vigorously shaking equal volumes for 20 The densities of aqueous and organic phases were measured using an Anton-Paar DMA 55 tuning-fork density transducer. The concentrations of uranyl nitrate and nitric acid in the phases were determined by spectrophotometric measurement (using a Hitachi U-3000 spectrophotometer) and acid–base titration, respectively. The concentration of water in organic phase was measured by coulometric Karl Fischer titration with a Metrohm KF 737 titrator. We consider the extraction of uranyl nitrate, nitric acid and water by an organic phase composed of tributyl phosphate (TBP) diluted in dodecane. At equilibrium the organic phase extracts all the species composing the aqueous phase, viz. uranyl nitrate, nitric acid and water. Dodecane and TBP are considered to be insoluble in water (the solubility of TBP is on the order of 10 Extraction of the constituents of aqueous phase by TBP is supposed to lead to the formation of well defined complexes of the form As done before ( The partition equilibrium may then be expressed as The mass action law applied to the partition equilibrium (Eq. The activities of the ionic compounds A (= H In this work we make the classic assumption that deviations from ideality in organic phase originate only from association phenomena. In the present case, nonideality is assumed to be due to the formation of complexes with TBP. Besides, the system of the chemical species composing the organic phase (complexes Then, we may write that the activity of every component of organic phase is equal to its true mole fraction ( The true mole fraction of a species X is defined as The true mole fractions naturally satisfy the normalisation condition From Eqs. The normalisation condition, Eq. In this equation, the sum includes the cases { Another useful quantity is the stoichiometric mole fraction of a component Y (= T, U, A or W), which is given by A second equation for The total concentrations of U, A and W were determined experimentally (see The total concentration of TBP was found to be comprised between 1.03 and 1.10 The stoichiometric mole fraction of T can therefore be calculated from Eq. Eq. The resulting equation was solved numerically for Once the value of The reaction equilibrium constants The present model relies on the assumption of a finite number of complexes formed in organic phase. However, besides the generally admitted T The global optimisation procedure employed here is a type of meta heuristic algorithm called differential evolution ( Using the above described procedure, we identified a set of probable complexes, which appeared to fit well the experimental data. Let us underline first that the quantities In this work we employed the extended Pitzer model ( The formulation of the extended Pitzer model is based on the assumption that the contribution of the three-ion interaction terms to excess Gibbs energy could be approximated by a polynomial in ionic strength. Thus, the excess Gibbs energy of solution reads ( The quantities The osmotic and activity coefficients of the electrolyte mixture are obtained by differentiating the excess Gibbs energy, The other introduced above quantities are as follows. The activity of water is obtained from the osmotic coefficient using the relation The activities of species in aqueous phases were computed according to The result for the activity of water can be visualised in This adjustment of parameters in the Pitzer model was then used to estimate the activities of ionic solutes in aqueous phase, for U and A. The first part of the modelling work was devoted to the case of aqueous solutions of pure nitric acid. We used the data given in graphical form in the work of Following previous work ( Among the complexes proposed by The results for the extracted amounts of nitric acid and water as a function of TBP and aqueous nitric acid concentrations are shown in The values of the organic phase densities are given in The densities were empirically fitted by a linear function of the solute concentrations, which gave Next, we started to determine the stoichiometries of complexes involving uranyl nitrate, as described in Six additional complexes with uranyl nitrate were thus identified step by step, in the following order T Therefore, our results suggest the formation of the complexes T It may be pointed out that coordination chemistry, which is sometimes used to interpret the formation of the (hypothetical) T It is observed that the formation constants for complexes containing U have large values. Comparison may be made with the metal-free case if one looks at the value for the formation of T The experimental results for the equilibrium concentrations of the species are presented in The RMSD on a quantity The experimental uncertainties on the measured values of the total concentrations of U, A and W were estimated from the standard deviation on three different measurements. The resulting uncertainty ranges from ca. 10% for the lower U contents to 1% for the higher. It is of the order of 1% for A and W concentrations. The values of the statistical correlation coefficients between the experimental and calculated total concentrations of U, A and W in organic phase are The average deviations of the calculated concentrations of dodecane and TBP from the experimental values are very small, of the order of 1%. The results show rapidly increasing extraction of uranyl nitrate with the concentration of the latter in aqueous phase. This seems to result predominantly from the formation of the T The speciation, i.e. the concentrations of the complexes and of free TBP in organic phase, is presented in A simple thermodynamic model for the extraction of uranyl nitrate, nitric acid and water into the organic phase composed of TBP in dodecane is described. It is applied to represent experimental partitioning data for an organic phase composed of 30 A number of complexes have been proposed that involve two and three TBP molecules per uranyl nitrate molecule. The complexes with three TBPs are important only at low uranyl nitrate concentrations. Some of the uranyl complexes include nitric acid and water molecules and are the main complexes responsible for the extraction of these species to the organic phase at high uranyl nitrate concentrations. This work and the stay of one of us (SH) were supported by “