In this study gelatin (Gel) modified with calcium phosphate nanoparticles (SG5) and polycaprolactone (PCL) were used to prepare a 3D bi-layer scaffold by collecting electrospun PCL and gelatin/SG5 fibers separately in the same collector. The objective of this study was to combine the desired properties of PCL and Gel/SG5 in the same scaffold in order to enhance mineralization, thus improving the ability of the scaffold to bond to the bone tissue. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and the wide angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) measurements confirmed that SG5 nanoparticles were successfully incorporated into the fibrous gelatin matrix. The composite Gel/SG5/PCL scaffold exhibited more enhanced mechanical properties than individual Gel and Gel/SG5 scaffolds. The presence of SG5 nanoparticles accelerated the nucleation and growth of apatite crystals on the surface of the composite Gel/SG5/PCL scaffold in simulated body fluid (SBF). The osteoblast response in vitro to developed electrospun scaffolds (PCL and Gel/SG5/PCL) was investigated by using normal human primary NHOst cell lines. NHOst cell culture studies showed that higher alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and better mineralization were obtained in the case of composite materials than in pure PCL scaffolds. The mechanically strong PCL scaffold served as a skeleton, while the Gel/SG5 fibers facilitated cell spreading and mineralization of the scaffold.Fibrous scaffolds produced by an electrospinning process have attracted considerable interest in bone tissue engineering The bone ECM is a type of organic–inorganic nanocomposite. Specifically, 70% of the bone matrix is composed of nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite, which is deposited in an orderly manner within a nanofibrous collagen matrix Polycaprolactone (PCL) is a biocompatible and biodegradable polyester with excellent mechanical properties The ideal scaffold for bone tissue engineering should have good cell affinity, bioactive properties and enough mechanical strength to serve as an initial support. Scaffold inspired by natural bone ECM that combines a natural origin polymer (such as gelatin, which contains nanoparticles of a bioactive calcium phosphate), with a synthetic polymer (such as poly(ε-caprolactone)), could provide optimal physico-chemical and biological properties. Applications of such materials are multiple. However, guided bone healing through the regeneration of the periosteum membrane would be an option, especially for osteoporotic bone fractures. To date, numerous studies confirmed that the existence of a relatively high amount of stem cells located in the periosteum make this option as a very promising and potential approach for the initial bone ingrowth The aim of the present work was to prepare electrospun bi-layer fibrous scaffolds, including both the poly(ε-caprolactone) for the backbone of the scaffold and the gelatin modified with calcium phosphate for better mineralization. A hierarchically designed composite material is presented, using a sol-gel method to prepare a bioactive phase as an ion release agent, and electrospinning to mimic the extracellular matrix (ECM), adapting their features to biological requirements. The properties of the composite Gelatin/Calcium phosphate/Polycaprolactone scaffold obtained were characterized by SEM, FTIR, WAXD, TGA and DSC methods. Scaffold bioactivity was examined in SBF as well as in cell culture. Gelatin (from porcine skin, type A) and polycaprolactone (PCL) with a molecular mass of 70,000–90,000 Scaffolds were produced by electrospinning, whose set-up consisted of a high voltage supply, an infusion pump and a collector (rotary drum). For scaffold fabrication, each sample of prepared slurries was placed in a syringe (10 The electrospun scaffold samples were covered by a sputtered gold coating and analyzed by a scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM 5500). Fiber diameters were determined based on SEM images. The average diameter of the fibers was determined by performing measurements on 100 fibers. A PMI capillary flow porosimeter (USA) was applied to evaluate the pore size distribution of electrospun materials. Porosity of the scaffolds was determined based on SEM images using Image J software. The average porosity of the scaffolds was determined by performing measurements on 5 SEM images. FTIR spectra were recorded using an FTS Digilab 60 BioRad spectrophotometer (ATR technique, in the 400–4000 The WAXD measurements were carried out on the URD-63 Seifert diffractometer, equipped with a graphite monochromator and a copper target sealed X-ray tube operated at: U Tensile tests were performed using a Zwick-Roell Z 2.5 testing machine. The thickness of the electrospun scaffolds was determined using the thickness gauge TILMET 73. The thickness test was measured on eight samples of each type of fibrous scaffold. The values of the average thickness and standard deviation were determined. The tensile tests were conducted at a speed of 1.0 The thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements were carried out on the Mettler TOLEDO (TA) Instrument, up to 800 The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were carried out using the TA Instruments 5100 analytical system, at a heating rate of 10 In order to evaluate bioactivity of the scaffold in vitro, the mineralization test was performed using simulated body fluid (SBF) Cell culture experiments were carried out with two types of electrospun samples: (1) pure PCL, and (2) composite Gel/SG5/PCL scaffolds. The selected materials were cut into disks (diameter 14 Mineralization was assessed by the OsteoImage mineralization test (Lonza, USA). The test was performed after 7, 14 and 21 The microstructure of electrospun fibrous scaffolds is presented in To assess the bioactivity of the composite scaffold, obtained materials were incubated in SBF. The surface morphology of the PCL and Gel/SG5/PCL samples after 7 In order to estimate the composite capability in promoting mineralization in the cell culture, NHOst cells were seeded onto PCL and Gel/SG5/PCL scaffolds. In this study Gel/SG5/PCL composite scaffolds were fabricated without the use of any cross-linking agent, through collecting separately electrospun poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) and calcium phosphate modified gelatin (Gel/SG5) fibers on the same collector. It is well known that commonly used cross-linking agents (e.g. glutaraldehyde) are not relevant for gelatin scaffold as they decrease the hydrophilicity and the bioactive character of this polymer In this study Gel/SG5/PCL composite scaffolds were fabricated by collecting electrospun poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) and calcium phosphate modified gelatin (Gel/SG5) fibers separately on the same collector. The introduction of PCL improved the mechanical properties of the gelatin scaffold remarkably, and the addition of calcium phosphate nanoparticles (SG5) enhanced the bioactivity of the composite scaffold. The composite Gel/SG5/PCL material had better pore size distribution than individual PCL samples. In vitro biological evaluation showed that the presence of gelatin and calcium phosphate nanoparticles in the scaffold offered higher activity of ALP and better NHOst cell mineralization. This work was supported by the