The present study evaluated influence of boiled sausages consumption fortified with β-CD-I2 on the urinary iodine excretion (UIE) level of volunteers. Median urinary UIE level was increased from 58.02 (24.0–175.4) μg/L to 110.6 (20.5–231.6) μg/L during 10 days. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine (FT4) levels were determined by radio immunoassay analysis. As it was expected, intake of sausages fortified with β-CD-I2 resulted in rise of FT4 level from 1.1 (0.95–1.25) to 1.23 (1.07–1.63) ng/dL, whereas TSH level decreased from 1.53 (0.47–3.37) mIU/L to 1.1 (0.51–3.17) mIU/L. A dynamic gastrointestinal model in vitro was used in order to determine possibility of 3,5-diiodotyrosine (DIT) formation during consumption of the fortified sausages. The DIT concentration was determined by HPLC–MS method and was found to be 0.38 ng/mL in sausage dialyzate. These findings indicate that β-CD-I2 introduction as an iodine carrier in boiled sausages may help to improve iodine status and to control organic iodine species concentration.Iodine deficiency is a one of the major nutritional problem which affects about 2 billion people worldwide [ Iodine plays an important role in breast cancer physiology and has a protective role in breast cancer [ Molecular iodine cannot be directly introduced in the diet due to its high toxicity. This disadvantage can be solved by iodine encapsulation with β-cyclodextrin, which is widely used as a food encapsulating agent [ Boiled sausages were chosen as the vehicle for iodine fortification because they are consumed by wide range of individuals. Another reason for the choice of boiled sausages is a high amount of L-tyrosine residues. Here we suggest that consumption of the fortified sausages would result in the DIT formation due to direct reaction between I The purpose of this study is to investigate the effectiveness of boiled sausages fortification with the iodine-cyclodextrin complex on iodine excretion in a population studied both before and after the fortified sausages intake was introduced. Also, we have used dynamic I The chicken thigh meat was obtained from “Havrylivski kurchata” (Ukraine). The thigh meat was deboned and skinned before being stored under vacuum at −20 °C and was used within a 10 days of storage. Dry beef isolate “Bilkozine” was obtained from Bilkozine Co. (Ukraine). All the other hydrocolloids, namely, xanthan gum, guar gum, soybean isolate, Carboxymehtylcellulose (CMC), whey protein isolate, soybean isolate, salt, sodium nitrite were obtained from Roeper (Germany). Silicagel A300 was sourced from Shandong Silica Gel (China). Aromatizer “Frankfurter`s sausages” was obtained from a local supermarket chain Auchan. Crystalline pepsin and trypsin were purchased from Biopharma (Ukraine). Thirty one patients (14 women and 17 men) participated in a case control clinical study at Institute of endocrinology and metabolism (Kyiv, Ukraine). The participants didn't differ significantly in age, sex or BMI. Exclusion criteria were history of thyroid diseases, treatment with iodine containing drugs, or supplements and food additives including iodinated salt. Two weeks prior to the start of experiment, patients stopped consumption of any iodine containing drugs and food products fortified with iodine. The individuals were observed by a trained doctor in order to exclude somatic and endocrine pathology before the start of experiments. Thyroid glands were examined by manual palpation according to the procedure, recommended by World Health Organization [ All participants consumed equal portion (150 g) of boiled sausages every day for the duration of 10 days, independently on age, sex or body weight. Patients were asked to collect urine samples on days 0 and 10 of sausages consumption and 10 days after sausages consumption was terminated. None of the patients took drugs containing iodine and food products fortified with iodine. Thyroid ultrasound measurements were performed using a real-time ultrasonographic portable scanner Terason 2000 with linear sensor and the frequency of 10 MHz. The thyroid sizes were determined according to the recommendations of J. Brunn et al. [ Urinary iodine excretion (UIE) levels were measured in a laboratory of epidemiology department of V. P. Komissarenko Institute of endocrinology and metabolism (Kyiv, Ukraine) using a modification of the classical Sandall-Kolthoff reaction after digestion with hydrochloric acid, as described by Dunn et al. [ Sample preparation was performed according to the procedure used for iodine determination in food [ Non-fasting blood samples were obtained from each volunteer Synthesis of the β-CD/I Iodine content in the complex was determined by iodimetrical titration procedure, described by Wang et al. (2009a). The iodine content in the complex was calculated to be 16.9 ± 0.1%, indicating that the ratio between β-CD and I The chicken sausage formulation is shown in The batter was stuffed into a natural sheep casing, and the obtained sausages were hand linked at about 15 cm intervals. The sausages were placed on PET trays and wrapped with PA films before being cooked at 90 °C during 30 min. The cooked sausages were retained at 70 °C for 90 min and cooled at room temperature for 2 h. Finally, these sausages were placed in cardboard wrapper and stored at 4 °C before being taken by volunteers. The experiments were performed in a dynamic gastrointestinal model with compartments simulating the stomach and small intestine, according to the procedure described in literature [ DIT concentration in the above samples of hydrolysate solutions was determined according to the known analytical procedure of the DIT analysis described by Wang et al. [ The SPE clean-up procedure had the following steps: SPE cartridges (AccuBond II ODS-C18 Cartridges) conditioning with 3 mL of methanol followed by 3 mL of distilled water; 2 mL of sample application to the cartridges; loading; rinsing with 3 mL of methanol; elution with 2 mL of a methanol–water–formic acid solution (25:24:1, v/v) followed by filtration through a membrane filter and complete collection of the eluent into an HPLC. The eluent was then injected and analyzed. The HPLC–MS system consisted of liquid chromatographer Agilent 1200 equipped with mass-selective detector Agilent 6460 QQQ LC–MS. A Zorbax Eclipse Plus C18 analytical column (3.5 μm particle size, 2.1 mm × 150 mm) was used and run at 30 °C. Gradient elution was performed with a solution of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water (0.1%, v/v) at the flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. An injection volume of 5 μL was used for all sample solutions. The analysis has controlled by Mass Hunter Workstation software. Microsoft Office Excel 2009 software was used for data summarizing and calculations, SPSS 11.0 and MedStat software was subsequently used for statistical analysis. Data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (mean ± SD) and median (range).·. Normality of distribution was calculated using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, and a Mann-Whitney The iodine intake by adults should not be less than 100 μg per day, according to WHO recommendations [ The effectiveness of food fortification with iodine depends on its retention during food processing. It was found, that the most uniform distribution of iodine was observed in the sausages prepared with preliminary stabilization of proteins. This was done during meat comminution stage. We have examined iodine content in the 3 different samples of sausages. It was determined that iodine content in the 150 g of sausages varies from 91.7 to 96.9 μg, which corresponds to the mean iodine retention of 94.3%. Thus, there was no need to adjust serving size, taking into account additional sources of iodine in volunteer`s diet. In the ideal case, temperature of food processing should not exceed melting point of the iodine containing additive. It has been reported, that β-CD-I We have studied the influence of the boiled sausages consumption on iodine status of humans. Our results provide data related to the changes in urine iodine excretion during 10 days of fortified boiled sausages ingestion by 31 volunteers. All the data are given in The values of median urinary iodine excretion before and after consumption of the boiled sausages had no significant difference between males and females, old and young volunteers. In the group of mild iodine deficiency median UIE was 35.26 μg/L (27.72–43.74, p = 0.008) prior to start of the sausages consumption and was increased among these individuals to 147.26 μg/L (73.53–174.6, p = 0.008) after10 days of iodinated sausages consumption. Also, median UIE was increased in the group of mild iodine deficiency from 69.61 μg/L (57.85–82.01, p = 0.01) to 111.39 μg/L (78.13–132.73, p = 0.01) during this period of time. Thus, intake of iodine containing sausages had beneficial effect on iodine status of the volunteers during the experiments Changes in TSH and FT4 were examined for all subjects before and after ingestion of the fortified sausages. The participants did not show a significant difference of FT4 or TSH level before and after consumption of sausages fortified with iodine. Decreased serum TSH level among individuals after sausages consumption was linked with normalization of iodine status. Nevertheless, levels of thyroid hormones were within the normal range during the experiments. Changes in volume of thyroid glands were not detected during our experiments. The volume of thyroid glands of the volunteers before and after 10 days of the fortified sausages intake was analyzed. These ultrasonic measurements were indicated presence of increased thyroid lobe for one person only, whereas the existence of goiter has not been found among all the subjects, except this person who had a first class goitre. All the UIE, TSH and T4 data before and after sausages consumption are given in Different The data given in Recommended iodine daily intake at minimal level corresponds to a spot urinary iodine concentration approximately 100 μg/L [ UIE is considered to be the most valid biomarker of the iodine status. The measurements of iodine content in the collected spots of urine are recommended for the monitoring of iodine nutrition. Iodine status is classified as severe, mild, and moderate for the UIE values below 20 μg/L, between 20 μg/L and 50 μg/L, and above 50 μg/L, respectively. Out of all the participants, only 2 person had a UIE level > 100 μg/L before sausage ingestion, while after 10 days of the sausages consumption, 22 volunteers had a UIE level > 100 μg/L ( The present study indicates that, for majority of volunteers, the iodine deficiency was absent after sausages consumption, even though it was present prior to the experiment. The above was supported by the mean UIE (60 ± 11 μg/L) prior to sausages consumption (Day 0), and UIE was increased to the adequate level of 110 ± 15 μg/L within 10 days of the experiment. At the same time, 25% (n = 8) and 3.2% (n = 1) of cases were detected having moderate and mild iodine deficiency, respectively. It is interesting to note that 10 days after the consumption of sausages was terminated, the value of mean UIE was 65 ± 13 μg/L which was closed to the UIE level prior to the start sausages consumption. Adequate iodine intake is a key factor at synthesis of thyroid hormones in thyroid gland. Our results indicated the FT4 and TSH levels in all participants were normal, suggesting no lack of iodine, which is required for the thyroid hormones synthesis in thyroid gland. We demonstrated that there were no significant differences in the TSH and FT4 levels in individuals with normal UIE. Similar findings were observed in ultrasound examination of thyroid glands. We found the increase thyroid lobe for one person only, whereas the existence of goiter had not detected among all the subjects. The latter is rather affiliated to volunteers` attribute than to experimental data, due to a very small duration of experiment. The correlation between thyroid function or iodine intake and incidences of breast cancer has been established a long time ago [ We proposed, that the interactions between molecular iodine and tyrosine residues give rise to the 3,5-diiodotyrosine formation. Romaris-Horitas et al. performed comparative investigations of bioavailability of iodine species of edible seaweeds [ We used triple quadrupole LC–MS which can be attributed to superior sensitivity. The average concentration of DIT in the dialyzates of boiled sausages fortified with β-CD-I It must be noted, that excessive amount of thyroid hormones in a diet may result in the thyrotoxicosis [ In conclusion, this study proved that β-CD-I The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The work was supported by the