Beneficiation and upgrading of low-grade bauxite is important to the subsequent extraction of Aluminum metal using Bayer process. The mineralogical characterization of diaspore bauxite sample used in this work was performed using various analysis approaches. The results indicated that the major components of raw sample were diaspore and kaolinite. The bauxite samples had high Al2O3 contents with low Al/Si ratios. A dry-based fluidized bed separator with FeSi powder as dense medium was used to beneficiate coarse sized bauxite. The basic fluidization tests suggested that −0.18 + 0.125 mm FeSi powder was appropriate for the fluidization stability, thus utilized as the dense medium for separation. The beneficiation experiments of various sized bauxite samples were investigated under various operational factors of separating time, static bed heights, and operational gas velocities. The upgrading performance of coarse sized bauxite indicated that the satisfied grade of concentrate could be obtained with a reasonable recovery of concentrate. Al/Si ratios were improved to 3.19, 4.53, and 3.66 for the bauxite samples with size fractions of −13 + 6 mm, −18 + 13 mm, and −25 + 18 mm, respectively. This work provided an alternative efficient method for the pretreatment of low-grade bauxite via discharging coarse waste gangue.Bauxite is the most important mineral resource to produce Aluminum metal by mineral processing and metallurgical industry, which mainly includes diaspore, gibbsite, boehmite, et al. In the work, the mineralogical characterization of diaspore bauxite sample was performed to explore the mineral constitutes, chemical compositions, and the occurrence forms of major elements by the analysis of X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF), and scanning electron microscope & energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM & EDS). The fundamental fluidization tests were conducted to find out the optimal size fraction of dense medium for fluidization stability. The beneficiation experiments of various sized bauxite samples (−13 + 6 mm, −18 + 13 mm, and −25 + 18 mm) were carried out to obtain the optimal operational conditions for notable beneficiation efficiency. Finally, the optimum separation results were analyzed under the optimal conditions, which proved the practicability of this technology. A certain quantity of diaspore bauxite sample was collected from Zhengzhou area, China. The raw sample was prepared via the coarse crushing and screening to produce three size fractions of −13 + 6 mm, −18 + 13 mm, and −25 + 18 mm for the experimental investigation. The yields and major component contents of raw bauxite sample are summarized in In our previous exploratory test, the magnetite powder, atomized iron powder, and FeSi powder with specific size fractions were selected as the dense solid medium for the separation of bauxite using the fluidized bed separator As illustrated in In the experimental system, compressed air generated by a fan blower passes through an air buffer and rotameter, and then enters into the air chamber located at the bed bottom. Air is then pushed into the bed bypassing through the air distributor. The air flowrate was monitored using a gas rotameter and controlled by an air valve. A group of pressure sensors were used to monitor the fluctuations of bed pressure drop at varying bed heights. Firstly, the accumulative solid medium is fluidized with the positive effect of inputting air. After sufficient fluidization, 2 kg ore samples are fed into the bed and separated for a period in each separation test. Then, the bed is forced to be static through shutting air supply. Finally, the materials within the bed are divided into two layers to screen out the particulate ores with the upper layer as floats (tailing) and the bottom layer as sinks (concentrate). The products under various operational conditions are analyzed to obtain the grades, yields, and recoveries of concentrates for the evaluation of beneficiation efficiency. The mean bed pressure drops △ The fluidization number The grades, yields, and recoveries of concentrates were used to evaluate the separation and upgrading efficiency of coarse sized bauxite. In addition, Al/Si ratio was used to determine the qualities of raw sample and final products. The recovery of concentrate    Effects of the static bed height and operational gas velocity on the fluidization stability of the bed were investigated to determine the optimal size fraction of FeSi powder for the separation. The fluidized bed with the accumulated FeSi powders of various size fractions was divided into three layers, which represented the upper, intermediate, and lower position of the bed after sufficient fluidization. △ With the fixed gas velocity ( With the fixed static bed height ( Furthermore, the mean bed density at a certain bed height could be indirectly obtained via the calculation of mean bed pressure drops between various positions. Normally a smaller fluctuation of △ The separation experiments of various sized coarse bauxite particles were carried out using various operational conditions of separating time  As presented in With the optimum experimental conditions of In summary, the optimum separating time should be set as 90–120 s to ensure the notable upgrading efficiency of various sized bauxite samples. If the separating time is insufficient, the ore particles do not have sufficient time to complete the efficient separation process by density differences with heavy particles sinking to the bed bottom and light particles floating on the bed surface. Contrarily, overlong separating time may result in the remixing of ore particles that have been efficiently separated, which also decreased the upgrading efficiency. The reasons are explained as: the efficient separation of ore particles with different densities were achieved with the combined effects of bubbling behavior and buoyancy within the fluidized bed. In particular the rising bubbles could carry low-density ore particles onto the bed surface, and the high-density ore particles remained stay at the bed bottom. However, as the excessive increase of separation time, the sustained turbulence within the bed may lead to the low-density ore particles sinking to the bed bottom with the effect of unstable movement of medium powders, and high-density ore particles floating to the bed surface with the effect of entrainment by the rising bubbles.  As presented in With the optimum experimental conditions of In summary, the optimum static bed height should be set as 100–140 mm to ensure the notable upgrading efficiency of various sized bauxite samples. Exceeded low bed height cannot provide sufficient space within the fluidized bed for the separation of ore particles, which results in the insufficient separation and low efficiency. Contrarily, overhigh bed height may increase the movement distances of ore particles along the vertical bed direction during the separation. High-density ore particles (concentrate) are easier to be restricted to move downward to accumulate at bed bottom, which worsens the separation efficiency. Moreover, an increase in bed height leads to an increase of bubble size. Therefore, as the increase of bed height, larger air bubbles may appear and the dynamic interaction between the particles and the rising air bubbles may occur. When the bed height increases to 100–140 mm, the sizes of rising air bubbles have positive effects on the uniform distribution and mixing of FeSi powders, which can enhance the uniformity of bed density within the fluidized bed. As a result, the separation efficiency of ore particles by bed density can be improved. Furthermore, the larger air bubbles with suitable sizes facilitate assisting the upward movement of light ore particles and leaving heavy ore particles at bed bottom. However, if the bed height increases to 160 mm, the bubble sizes may be extremely large, which shows the contrary effects on the uniform mixing of FeSi powders. As a result, the uniformity of bed density notably decreases, which worsens the separation efficiency of ore particles. Moreover, the overlarge air bubbles may promote the upward movement of high-density ore particles, which results in the mixing of concentrates into the tailings. Consequently, the separation efficiency of ore particles can be decreased.  As presented in With the fixed experimental conditions of In summary, the optimum fluidization number should be adjusted as 1.4–1.8 to ensure the notable upgrading efficiency of various sized bauxite samples. Exceeded small operational gas velocities cannot sufficiently fluidize the accumulative media powders by overcoming the bed resistance, thus resulting in the smaller bed void fraction. In this case, the uniform distribution of bed density cannot be well achieved, which indicates that the insufficient fluidization state cannot provide suitable separation stability for ore samples. Meanwhile, the sufficient space for downward movement of heavy ore particles is restricted. Therefore, the separation efficiency of ore sample is relatively low with the lower gas velocities. However, the remixing of the medium particles and ore samples may occur with the overlarge operational gas velocities, which decreases the separation efficiency of ore samples. On the one hand, the higher gas velocities may extremely increase the bed expansion, which results in overlarge bed void fraction. In the case, the bed has the tendency of transforming stable bed to transporting bed, which indicates that the uniform distribution of bed density also cannot be well achieved. Therefore, the bed stability is destroyed, which is not appropriate for the separation of ore sample. One the other hand, the air bubbles with the higher rising velocity may lead to the entrainment of heavy ore particles floating on the bed surface, which results in the mismatching of concentrates and tailings.     The major components of raw bauxite sample were diaspore and kaolinite. The various sized samples have high Al Effects of various operational factors on the separation efficiency of coarse sized bauxite indicated that the optimal operational conditions should be adjusted as: Under the optimum operational conditions, the recoveries of concentrates of various sized bauxite reached 69.92%, 73.21%, and 80.89% with the concentrate grades of 63.15%, 70.32%, and 66.21%, respectively. Moreover, Al/Si ratios were improved from 2.41, 2.70, and 3.16 to 3.19, 4.53, and 3.66, indicating notable upgrading performance. This fundamental work provided an alternative efficient technique for the pretreatment of low-grade bauxite. We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled “Beneficiation and upgrading of coarse sized low-grade bauxite using a dry-based fluidized bed separator”. This work was supported by