Studies on coal–water slurries (CWSs) have been conducted for many years to replace fuel oil. In this research project, the effect of coal properties on CWSs have been investigated using two Turkish coals of different ranks and a Siberian bituminous coal. Physical, chemical and surface properties of coal samples were determined. Furthermore, adsorption tests were carried out in order to put forward the effect of additive adsorption on the viscosity of CWSs. Viscosity measurements were realized for CWSs of various solid ratios by weight that were prepared using coal samples having mean particle sizes of 19, 35 and 50μm.Coal–water slurries (CWSs) with advantages such as the production of high solids concentration, savings from transport, storage and dewatering costs are regarded as an alternative to fuel oil. The technology for the combustion of CWSs has developed over the years. Viscosity is one of the most important rhelogical properties of CWSs and it is desired to be as low as possible. Viscosity that affects the fluidity of the CWS primarily depends on the coal properties Coal type is not an important parameter when preparing CWSs, however, the effect of coal properties on the viscosity of the CWS should be determined in advance. It was reported that the water adsorption capacity of the coal plays an important role in the rheologic properties of CWSs Al Taweel and Fadaly The degree of coal wettability plays an important role in the preparation of CWSs since only the wettable portions of the coal surface can acquire a surface charge The significance of the particle size and distribution of the coal used in CWSs was put forward by Round and Hessari In the scope of this investigation possible use of Turkish brown coals in CWSs was studied. In this respect the physical and chemical properties of coal samples were determined, furthermore, the surface characteristics were analyzed and adsorption tests for the chemical additives were performed. Two Turkish brown coal samples of different ranks from Soma and Istanbul–Agacli districts were employed in the experimental work. In addition to the Turkish coals a bituminous coal sample from Siberia was also used as a reference sample. The coal samples were ground with a laboratory size ball mill and classified into −210+106, −106+74, −74+53, −53+35 and −38 Some physical properties of experimental samples are presented in Chemical additives in CWSs are used for various reasons. Those include dispersant agents, grinding aids in ball mills and suspension stabilizers to prevent particle settlement The porosity of coal samples was calculated using apparent and true densities. Specific surface area of coal samples was measured employing BET method. Grindability was determined using ‘Hardgrove index’ method. A Zeta Meter 3.0 type device was used to perform zeta potential measurements. A coal sample of 0.1 Viscosity measurements were performed employing a RVD2-Brookfield rotating type viscosimeter. Coal–water slurries were prepared by dispersing the coal in distilled water with a mechanical mixer operating at 1200 Zeta potential measurements were realized using samples in the absence and presence of chemical additives. The results for all coal samples are presented in It is seen in The viscosity of the CWS was measured using coal samples having mean particle sizes of 19, 35 and 50 The effect of coal type on the viscosity is more pronounced at 35 The rank of the coal, hence its porosity, volatile matter, C and O contents are the factors causing different slurry viscosities. In Investigations on CWSs have mostly been conducted with bituminous or semi-bituminous coals. The O/C ratios of these coals vary between 0.1 and 0.3 and their inherent moisture values are low depending on the porosity. Turkish coal samples used in this investigation are lignitic brown coal samples. They have lower Hargrove index, higher porosity and inherent moisture values compared to Siberian coal samples. Furthermore, they have exceptionally high O/C ratios and their oxidation degrees are 2–3 times higher than Siberian coal sample. CWSs prepared using Turkish brown coal samples were found to have similar properties to those prepared with bituminous coals by other investigators  The addition of chemical additives is necessary to increase the absolute value of zeta potentials of experimental coal samples to sustain stability. The adsorption density of PSS decreases in the order of decreasing coal rank, i.e. Agacli, Soma and Siberian coals. This is because the coal surface is more hydrophobic for higher rank coals and thus adsorption enhances through hydrophobic bonding between the surface and the hydrocarbon chain of the chemical additive. Low rank Turkish coals used in this investigation permit less solids loading capacity compared to the Siberian coal for the same slurry viscosity. This is a function of porosity, moisture absorption capacity, volatile matter, C, O and H contents. When water is added to the coal it fills the pores and consequently less water remains available between particles in the case of higher porosity. Therefore, particle movement is hindered and viscosity increases.