The application of high-pressure roll mills (HPRM) for industrial comminution has been growing, particularly because of its energy efficiency. Many aspects of HPRM comminution have not been fully characterized because the performance of the machine is affected by numerous parameters that still need to be investigated and optimized. The present paper is concerned with the effect of feed moisture on HPRM performance. The comminution of minus 8-mesh dolomite feed at several different moisture levels was conducted with a laboratory HPRM to delineate the effect of feed moisture on product characteristics, specific energy consumption, and such mill operating parameters as applied load, roll gap and roll speed. The results showed definite effects of moisture on these parameters and the product size distribution, most likely because of lubrication of the particles in the compacting bed as they pass through the roll gap.Mineral processing consumes a significant proportion of the total electricity generated worldwide, about 5% of the global electricity being consumed by mineral processing plants. About 80% of that is consumed in the crushing and grinding of raw materials ( Although the only useful work achieved in comminution is the production of new surface, the thermodynamic efficiency is so small that it is a useless measure. As suggested by Loose-bed (unconfined system) comminution is represented by grinding in tumbling mills, such as ball mills. In such mills, comminution efficiency is low because ball–particle interaction and energy transfer is really just a hit-or-miss proposition. In confined-bed comminution, energy is transferred directly to the charge mass, and breakage takes place by very high stresses generated locally at the contact points between particles in the tightly compressed bed ( Several factors affect the performance of the HPRM: the material properties, the granulometric composition of the feed, the feed moisture, the roll pressure, and the rate of applied stresses ( This paper is concerned with a detailed study of the effect of feed moisture on the performance of the HPRM. It presents the results of a thorough investigation of the effect of a wide range of moisture contents in the feed, up to 10% by weight, on the product characteristics and the mill operation and design parameters, such as applied load, specific energy, mill speed, and roll gap. Interrelationships between operation and design parameters on the product size distribution are also illustrated. The feed material used in this study was carefully prepared minus 8-mesh dolomite, with a median size The laboratory-scale HPRM is constructed with two counter-rotating rolls, each 200 mm in diameter and 150 mm in width. The housing for the bearings on one roll is fixed, while the other roll can freely slide laterally in parallel with the adjacent roll through a Schmidt coupling device. The rolls are driven by a 37-kW variable-speed DC motor. A transducer attached to the drive shaft measures the roll torque, and the whole system is interfaced with a dedicated computer for recording the roll gap, roll torque, roll speed, milling force, and total energy, simultaneously. During an experimental run, an infrared emitter/receiver located at the top of the feeder column ensures that the feeder system is full of material by controlling the vibrating feed hopper. Product samples are collected by manually switching a cutter from one position to the other, activating a microswitch that starts the data acquisition system. At the beginning of a grinding experiment, the idling roll speed was set at approximately 26 rpm. The main controlling variable on the machine is the load applied to the rolls, which was varied on loaded rolls from 4 to 11.4 tons, or 40 to 114 kN. The rolls, their housing, and drive gears were designed by Professor Klaus Schoenert and constructed at the Technical University of Clausthal, Germany, and all the rest of the system was designed by Dr. Oliver Gutsche and constructed at the University of California, Berkeley ( The moist feed material was prepared by adding the required amount of water to 3 kg of dry dolomite to make a charge of the desired moisture content. The moisture levels used in this investigation were 0.0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5 and 10.0% water by weight of the dry charge. Charges of moist material were added to the feed shaft and the vibrating hopper. A colored dolomite bed of about 0.5 cm thickness was placed between each of two differently moistened charges to serve as an indicator of the end of one charge and the beginning of the next one. However, about 1 kg of material between charges of two different moisture contents (half a kg below the colored bed and half a kg above it) was rejected from the product sample to avoid interference between each two successive charges having different moisture contents. This arrangement leaves about 2 kg of product from each experimental moisture level. These 2-kg product samples from each different experiment were soaked in water to disintegrate the product cake so that it could subsequently be sieved. The product size distribution was then obtained by standard wet–dry sieving procedures using a Ro-Tap sieve shaker. The results of our research will be discussed in three different sections. Although interrelated, each of these broad aspects will be discussed separately and then all three will be related to each other. One aspect of this work concerns the effect of feed moisture on the operating variables, such as applied load, roll speed, roll gap and specific energy consumption. The second aspect deals with the effect of feed moisture on the product size distribution, the rate of fines production, and the retained coarse material. The third aspect concerns the effect of feed moisture on the energy efficiency of high-pressure roll mill comminution. Five levels of feed moisture and their effect at different applied loads were investigated. In each series of experiments, the applied load was set at a specified value at 0.0% moisture (dry feed material). At the end of each experiment, all operating parameters were read and recorded by means of the computer set up. These parameters were load, average speed, roll gap, and net energy consumption. The collected sample from each experiment was weighed and recorded, mainly for calculating the specific energy (on a dry basis) at each specified applied load and feed moisture. At each set of load levels (as set at zero moisture), the load steadily decreased with increasing moisture in the feed, as can be seen from the results given in  As the feed moisture was increased, the measured roll speed at all set load levels increased (by about 2 rpm), as can be seen from the plots given in The change in specific energy consumed in HPRM comminution as a function of feed moisture and applied load is more complicated. As can be seen from the plots of results given in In high-pressure roll milling, the rate at which dry particles can be fed to the mill is limited by the upward flow of air being evolved as the bed of particles is compressed in the gap. For the experiments that were conducted in this work, we found that the throughput dropped as the gap decreased. A consistency in the results was observed in the relationship between roll gap, roll speed, and throughput. Roll speed (rpm) times the roll circumference times the roll width times the gap equates to a volume per unit time. The throughput divided by the foregoing quantity would represent the density of material in the gap as it passes through. For the experiments represented by a load level of 40 kN with dry material, the quantity, (throughput) Here the effect of feed moisture on the nature of the roll mill product and specific energy utilization at different levels of set-loads is presented and discussed. With regard to the material discharged from the roll mill, discussion will center on the particle size distribution, the percentage of fines and the percentage of coarse material. It should be recalled that in particle bed comminution, such as in the HPRM, breakage occurs by compression and by shear. The addition of water to the feed would provide lubrication between particles as they enter the gap, and this would affect shear more than compression loading. Also, when a fairly soft mineral, such as dolomite, is ground in the high-pressure roll mill, the comminuted product coming out of the roll gap is a cake or briquetted flakes. Lubrication effects would probably be acting in the initial stages of bed compression. First of all, whenever moisture was present, the size distributions of the roll mill products were quite similar but differed from that obtained when the dolomite was comminuted in the roll mill dry. So for clarity, in Also in The percentage of minus 200-mesh material in the product is plotted in However, at low energy levels, the rate of fines production tends to decrease to some extent. At higher energy level there is a slight tendency for the fines production to increase slightly with increased feed moisture (although at 2.5% moisture there appeared to be a small decrease first). At high energy levels and low moisture content in the feed, the amount of moisture (for example, 2.5% water) was just enough to act as a lubricant. As the moisture was increased beyond this level, internal friction in the particle bed decreased and the coarse-size material was rapidly compressed into the bed so that the coarse-size material was trapped, nipped and broken as the bed passed through the roll gap, giving rise to more fines.   From the foregoing discussions, it can be seen that the coarse-size fractions are more sensitive to moisture effects on the feed than are the finer fractions, especially at higher energy levels. This suggests using the reduction ratio at the 80% finer size of both the feed and product material might be a better parameter for correlating the energy efficiency of comminution as a function of feed moisture than the median (50%) size. For our purpose, the reduction ratio that will be used is The presence of moisture in the feed to the high-pressure roll mill has a significant effect because of its lubrication effect on compacting particles. Because of this, feed moisture has an effect on operating and design variables of the high-pressure roll mill, the nature of the product size distribution, and comminution energy efficiency. At all load levels, the applied load was found to decrease with increasing feed moisture. The roll gap also decreased with increasing feed moisture, probably due to the enhanced rate of material extrusion because of the decrease of internal friction between particles in the bed as a result of water lubrication. The measured toll speed increased at all set levels with increasing feed moisture. At low energy levels, the measured specific energy decreased with increasing moisture in the feed, but increased at higher energy levels. At low levels of applied energy, the production of fines (as measured by the percentage of minus 200-mesh material in the product) was reduced somewhat by the addition of moisture to the system. Perhaps if 100 mesh rather than 200 mesh had been used as the indicator, the observed effects would have been more pronounced. At low applied loads, and hence low specific applied energy, the extent of comminution decreased with increasing moisture. At greater applied loads, the efficiency of breaking coarse-size particles is higher as the moisture level is increased, possibly because the fines might be carried into the interstices between coarser particles in the bed, leading to greater compression loading the coarser particles. This work was conducted with dolomite feed, which forms a cake as the material passes through the roll gap. It would be interesting to determine the effect of moisture on the high-pressure roll milling of a brittle feed material, such as quartz, which comes out of the roll gap as a free-flowing product. Because of the effectiveness of the roll mill in comminuting coarser size particles, the reduction ratio was expressed in terms of the 80% passing size as