A series of N-arylhydroxamic acids (31) were synthesized and tested as collectors to float sphalerite from a Canadian copper–zinc ore. The compounds were classified into four types namely, N-aryl-C-alkyl, N-aryl-C-aryl, N-aryl-C-aralkyl, and dihydroxamic acids based on the type of substitution. Dihydroxamic acids were found to be poor mineral collectors while the efficiency of sphalerite flotation increased in the order N-aryl-C-aryl<
                     N-aryl-C-alkyl<
                     N-aryl-C-aralkyl. Sphalerite was floated without activation by copper sulfate, and the best sphalerite recovery of about 80% (grade 32%) was achieved with N-hydrocinnamoyl-N-phenylhydroxylamine (HCNPHA) 67 g/t collector dosage. However, pyrite also floated along with sphalerite and this appeared as a major disadvantage to be addressed.Xanthate reagent scheme for the flotation of base metal sulfide ores is widely accepted and extensively used by operating mills all over the world. Activation of zinc minerals, especially sphalerite, by copper sulfate in xanthate-based flotation is a well known phenomenon ( Let us consider the Canadian scenario in the production or processing of zinc minerals. Canada produces about 70,000 tonnes of zinc concentrate per month ( The authors synthesized and tested a few cupferron-derivatives ( Hydroxamic acids have structural similarity to cupferron and belong to the O–O type chelating collectors and had been used as analytical reagents (  Flotation tests were done on a Canadian ore that contained about 2–3% copper, 7–8% zinc and about 15–20% iron. Chalcopyrite, sphalerite and pyrite were the main sulfidic mineral constituents of the ore. 350 g of the ore was ground in a polyurethane-lined rod mill with stainless steel grinding medium for 8 min at 67% solids so that 50% the ore passed through 150 μm mesh. Mild steel grinding mill was not used to prevent addition of extraneous iron in the system for fear of masking the results with the newly synthesized collectors. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (0.1% aqueous solution) was used as the frother, and lime water and sulfuric acid solution(1 M) were used for pH adjustments. Water at pH 9.0 (the pulp pH during flotation) was used occasionally to wash the sides of the flotation tank while pulling the froth, to compensate for the loss of water and maintain the pulp level. The complete procedure for flotation tests is outlined in the form of a scheme in Head assays based on the mineral distribution in the floats and tails of all the experiments matched very closely to the ore assay. This supported the data reliability and sampling protocols followed in different stages of experimentation. Since the main objective of the study was > 42% sphalerite also floated without adding collector. When the collectorless prefloat was collected for only 2 min, loss of zinc values in the prefloat was reduced to 17% and still about 60% of chalcopyrite was recovered in 12% mass. Addition of sodium sulfite suppressed sphalerite and pyrite to a great extent but sphalerite once suppressed by sodium sulfite could not be floated by the collector NBuPHA in the subsequent stage. Hence, addition of sulfite as modifier was ruled out. 1 kg/t of lime suppressed sphalerite reasonably well and was preferred to soda ash. Addition of zinc sulfate along with lime suppressed sphalerite flotation in the prefloat and only about 8% sphalerite values were lost into the prefloat. From these observations it was decided to have a collectorless prefloat for 2 min to remove major part of copper values and retain as much sphalerite as possible (∼ Molecular architecture and the position of substituents affect the performance of a compound as a mineral collector and this had been studied by several researchers ( The most significant finding of the work is the ability of arylhydroxamic acids to float zinc minerals without activation by copper sulfate. A few of the arylhydroxamic acids tested floated > Irrespective of the amount of chalcopyrite recovered in the prefloat, combined copper recovery was always > Dihydroxamic acids floated only less than 25% sphalerite, and therefore were found to be inefficient as collectors. Dihydroxamic acids were synthesized expecting each collector molecule might chelate on two mineral sites and the collector consumption would be reduced. On the contrary, they were found to be poor mineral collectors. The long molecules of dihydroxamic acids seemed to have prevented many of mineral sites from chelation so that the mineral particles were not rendered hydrophobic-enough to float. This appears to be a possible reason for the inability of the dihydroxamic acids to float appreciable amount of any mineral. It was interesting to note that the recovery of chalcopyrite, which was about 95% in all the other tests, dropped to about 80% in the tests with dihydroxamic acids. Among the other three classes of hydroxamic acids used, the effectiveness as a collector for zinc mineral decreased in the order: Presence of a xylyl group (2,6-dimethylphenyl) was detrimental to flotation (please refer to all compounds that end with XHA in their abbreviated names), and this had also been observed in an earlier study ( Increasing the chain length away from the chelating group, especially in the One of the best collectors among In the case of The Comparison of results of HCNPHA with HCNEPHA and those of PANPHA with PANEPHA indicated that alkyl substituent added at the Considerable amount of pyrite was also floated by the collectors and this partly affected the sphalerite grade of the float concentrates. It is to be noted that no specific effort was made in these investigations to suppress pyrite. Further research is needed to study the suppression of pyrite while using the arylhydroxamic acids as collectors. Arylhydroxamic acids were found to float sphalerite without activation by copper sulfate. Dihydroxamic acids were found to be poor mineral collectors while Financial assistance for the research was provided by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). Thanks are due to Mr. Carl Goodwin for help in procuring materials, and Mr. Allan MacKenzie, Mr. Keith Pringnitz, and Mr. Ain Raitsakas, Instrumentation center, Lakehead University for spectroscopic measurements, and ICAP analysis.