To study the characteristics of different comminution methods during the separation of coal components, mineral liberation analysis (MLA) was performed on typical coal variants produced in Western China. In this work, the granularity, free surface, phase specific surface area, and mineral phase interfaces of coal and its primary mineral constituents under the actions of rod milling and ball milling were investigated. For the same milling time, ball milling was found to be more effective in reducing grain sizes and producing more concentrated grain size distributions. The mineral components with different dissemination grain sizes and dissemination patterns exhibited different separation grades and responded differently to each comminution method. The recovery rates of coal and siderite monomers for rod milling were 92.85% and 61.56%, respectively. The recovery rates of pyrite and quartz monomers for ball milling were 80.52% and 52.60%, respectively. The free surface and phase specific surface areas were compressively analyzed for optimum mineral separation, and separation models were developed for typical coal components under the actions of each comminution method. The compaction forces associated with rod milling tended to induce intergranular cracks, whereas the impact forces associated with ball milling generated intragranular cracks; the latter is beneficial for separating minerals with relatively fine disseminated grain sizes.The adequate separation of useful minerals is the primary objective of mineral processing ( The samples used in this study were obtained from coals mined from the Yangchangwan coal mine (henceforth referred to as YCW).  In the process of grinding, a part of the energy input is used to reduce particle size to produce new surface, and another part contributes to unnecessary energy consumption, such as heat, chemical energy, and the energy consumed by the newly formed crystal structures ( The mineral liberation analyzer 250 (FEI, USA), from the Oil Sands and Coal Interfacial Engineering Facility of the University of Alberta, Canada, was used to study the liberation characteristics of each coal component. A quantitative characterization of the dissemination and liberation degree of the minerals was performed on the basis of the free surface ( The phase specific surface area (     From  As coal accounts for the majority of the contents, the recovery rates of fully separated coals under the actions of RM and BM are the highest among the various components of coal, at 92.85% and 92.33%, respectively. The recovery rates of liberated pyrite and quartz are significantly higher for BM (80.53% and 52.60%, respectively) than for RM. Moreover, the grain size of fully separated pyrite and quartz is approximately 50 µm ( Based on the above analysis, the degree of liberation of each component under different comminution methods can be divided into five classes: Easily liberated (100–80% R  Under the actions of BM, the increases in the CMRs of coal, pyrite, and quartz with respect to raw coal are relatively high, at 25.19, 27.74, and 32.46%, respectively ( In components with high levels of content (e.g., coal), the compaction forces associated with RM dominate. Hence, the mineral boundary lengths in coal obtained from RM are shorter than that obtained from BM. The impact forces dominate the actions of BM, resulting in smaller coal surface areas relative to that obtained from RM (as shown in For the disseminated components of coal with relatively large disseminated grain sizes (e.g., pyrite and quartz), the compaction forces associated with RM tend to cause a portion of the minerals to separate along their liberation surfaces, resulting in smaller mineral boundary lengths relative to that obtained from BM. The impact forces associated with BM tend to induce mineral exposure instead; consequently, the mineral surface areas associated with BM are significantly smaller than those associated with RM (as shown in The response of siderite to the comminution methods is slightly unclear, as RM results in lower boundary lengths, whereas BM results in smaller mineral surface areas. For liberations lower than 95% and for the same degree of liberation, CMR The mineral components that exhibit bedded distributions and have extremely fine disseminated grain sizes (e.g., illite and mica) are generally very difficult to separate; moreover, they are characterized by three-phase distributions, as shown in Kaolinite is extremely difficult to separate, and its composition is dominated by two-phase and three-phase distributions, as shown in  The actions of RM are largely characterized by compaction forces; the grinding actions of RM occur quite gradually and via the line contact between the rod and various components. The intergranular cracks dominate during component separation, while the intragranular cracks play a secondary role. During RM, the interface and interface area of the target component decrease. However, the mineral boundary length reductions dominate in components that have high levels of content and large disseminated grain sizes, such as coal. The actions of BM are largely characterized by extremely rapid impact-driven crushing forces that occur via point contacts between the milling balls and various components. The intragranular cracks dominate during the component separation, while the intergranular cracks play a secondary role. The boundary length and area of the mineral components with relatively fine disseminated grain sizes and bedded distributions decrease. However, because of the force and rapidity of impact-driven crushing, the reduction in the interface surface area dominates, along with the decrease in the grain boundary lengths. The representatives for this category of mineral components include pyrite, quartz, siderite, and calcite. The mineral separation process was found to be affected by the type of comminution method, as well as the disseminated grain size, and dissemination states of the component minerals. This resulted in different grades of separation, which manifested in the different levels of separation responses to each comminution method. In the conventional sense, the ideal mode of separation occurs along the separation surfaces; for easily separated mineral particles that have high levels of content, the compaction forces associated with RM will allow for the separation of minerals along the separation surfaces. However, the expected level of separation cannot be easily obtained from the compaction forces when it comes to components that have relatively fine dissemination grain sizes and bedded disseminations. Because of the strong impact forces associated with BM, the occurrence of intragranular cracks led to synergistic intergranular cracks, thus improving the exposure and subsequent separation of a mineral of interest during the comminution process. Therefore, the separation responses of the mineral components in this category were found to be stronger for BM than for RM. Financial supports for this research, supported by