Measuring the size of bubbles is of fundamental interest in process engineering, especially in flotation. The size of a bubble influences its rising velocity, coalescence tendency and interaction with particles and surrounding liquid. This paper presents an online Bubble Size Analyzer (BSA) with automated image analysis software. The importance of isokinetic sampling with short residence time in the sampling system is shown. Key parameters of the image analysis software are pointed out. The BSA was used to characterize a laboratory dissolved air flotation setup. In accordance with literature, bubble size reduction with increasing saturation pressure and recycle flow was measured. It was discovered that bubble generation in the flotation setup happened by classical dissolved air flotation only when it was operated with pure water. With sodium chloride saline and complex protein solution a mixed dispersed/dissolved air flotation was observed. Maximum bubble sizes were found in water, reduced sizes in saline and minimum size in protein solution. Due to its flexible online installation, the BSA is recommended as a suitable tool for bubble size measurements in laboratory and real processes, where inline analysis is not possible.Dissolved air flotation is a common process to remove pollutants, colloids, fines and ultrafine particles, precipitates, ions, microorganisms, proteins, dispersed and emulsified oil from water containing low amounts of or no surfactant at all ( Once P is known, based on the detailed knowledge of the flotation subprocesses, the exponential first order flotation rate k can be obtained using the following relationship ( With the superficial gas flow rate The significant differences between the specific diameters of a size distribution are demonstrated in In flotation, the knowledge of the surface area of a single bubble as well as the total generated bubble surface area is most relevant to the process. That is why the Sauter mean diameter Bubble size distributions in dissolved air flotation have been measured by a variety of analysis techniques and are in the range of 10–500 µm ( Some techniques used in situ bubble size analysis through glass walls ( Bubble size analysis in this paper was performed with a new optical Bubble Size Analyzer (BSA). Different hardware and software settings were tested to define the optimal setup. Measurements were validated with several sizes of certified monomodal reference particles and their mixture. Experiments were conducted in a laboratory dissolved air flotation device. A sketch of the online Bubble Size Analyzer is given in The camera was connected to a computer with a Bubble Size Analyzer (BSA) The analysis result displays several distributions: the number frequency, volume frequency, cumulative number and cumulative volume distribution. It also includes the Sauter mean diameter The flotation setup used in this work is a modified laboratory device for dissolved air flotation (DAF) built by In classic dissolved air flotation, a recycle stream is pumped from the flotation cell into a pressurized saturator. Following Henry’s law, saturation depends on the dissolution properties of gas in water at the surrounding pressure. The dissolving of gas in the saturator has kinetic mass transfer limitations so 100% saturation dissolution cannot be obtained. Saturator efficiencies are reported to be in the range of 80–95% ( In the first result section, the suitability of the Bubble Size Analyzer for particle and bubble size analysis was examined. Calibration measurements with standard particles are presented. An evaluation was done regarding how bubble size results might be influenced by BSA hardware and software settings. The second section presents the characterization results of the laboratory dissolved air flotation setup. Reproducibility of bubble size measurements was shown and operational flotation setup influences were analyzed. To realize representative online bubble size measurements, potential hardware influences on the risk of bubble classification and coalescence were investigated. Software key parameter influences on the result were analyzed. The suitability of the BSA for particle and bubble size analysis was evaluated. A set of monodisperse silica particle standards (BS Partikel GmbH, LS0500b20 calibration standard set with 5 particle sizes) was used to calibrate the analysis device and to verify that the BSA is a valid method for bubble or particle analysis in the range of 5–100 µm. The certified average particle sizes of the particles were 4.88 µm, 9.7 µm, 19.55 µm, 40.3 µm and 75.5 µm. The monodisperse particle solutions were suspended by a magnetic stirrer in 1 L deionized water in a Schott Flask. The BSA, with a sample pipe length of 0.3 m and sample chamber width of 500 µm, was positioned centrally on top of the flask. The sample recirculation pipe was fixed at the bottom of the flask. Sample pump velocity was set at 0.05 m/s. All BSA software settings were kept constant. Due to low particle concentrations, the distributions were based on the analysis of 2000 images.  In To estimate the error of classification due to sampling velocity, a mixed particle standard suspension containing 4 monomodal sized particles (9.7 µm, 19.55 µm, 40.3 µm and 75.7 µm) was analyzed with sampling velocities of 0.05, 0.15 and 0.2 m/s. The particle number and the cumulative number frequency distributions, displayed in At a low edge gradient of 15, the number of particles smaller than 15 µm increased strongly with sampling velocity. The influences on numbers of particles with a certified median of 19.55 µm, 40.3 µm and 75.7 µm were similar, which is why they were summarized in With a low edge gradient value of 15, all circular particles were included in the distribution, even if they were captured out of focus and appeared blurry and bigger than they were. With an edge gradient of 45 all blurry particles were rejected. Further increase of the edge gradient value would have caused rejection of sharp particles, because there is a technical limit of grey value gradient for the particle-liquid interface on the image. That is why the BSA software was generally set at a high edge gradient interpolation value of 45, to exclude blurry, out-of-focus particles from the particle size distributions. At the edge gradient of 45, the number of particles smaller than 15 µm increased with sampling velocity. The increase ratio was similar as at a low edge gradient of 15. But the number of particles greater than 16 µm decreased much stronger with increasing sampling velocity. An explanation might be that their risk to be captured out of focus and to appear blurry was higher. This caused a ratio of particles smaller than 15 µm, compared to the total particle count at the given sampling velocity, to be 18% at 0.05 m/s, 28% at 0.15 m/s and 40% at 0.2 m/s. Classification was not only caused by anisokinetic flow, but was additionally enhanced by rejection of blurry particles. Particles smaller than 15 µm, that were not affected by the edge gradient rejection as strongly as particles greater than 16 µm, were overrepresented in the size distribution. To avoid classification error, keeping the sample pump velocity isokinetic is essential. Additionally, it would be recommended to use the BSA device only for analysis of size distributions with low particle numbers below 15 µm. As already mentioned, bubble size distributions in dissolved air flotation range from 10 to 500 µm ( When analyzing bubble sizes with the BSA, the result can not only be made erroneous by classification but also by coalescence. So, the aim was to find the BSA operating parameters with the lowest influence on the real bubble size distribution in the flotation tank. To evaluate the effects of bubble classification and coalescence within the BSA, the experimental setup was chosen as follows. Bubbles were generated in the laboratory dissolved air flotation device ( Flotation settings with the different media were chosen as follows. With YMB saturation pressure was set at 2 barg and aeration at 6 NL/h, with NaCl saturation pressure was set at 2 barg and aeration at 3 NL/h, APW saturation pressure was set a 3 barg and aeration at 3 NL/h. The BSA software was operated with standard settings ( To allow for sufficient bubble singling and illumination, the sample chamber width was set at 200 µm with YMB and at 500 µm with APW and NaCl. This was necessary due to different bubble concentrations. To show the significance of isokinetic sampling, the sample pump velocity was varied. Isokinetic pump velocity was calculated by Computational Fluid Dynamic Simulation to be at 0.13–0.15 m/s at the sample pipe immersion depth, when the recycle flow is set at 100 L/h. To include sample pump velocities below and above isokinetic flow, it was chosen to be 0.03–0.2 m/s. These experiments were performed with a sample pipe length of 0.3 m. To examine the influence of coalescence, the residence time in the BSA device was varied. Increasing residence time was realized by increasing the sample pipe length from 0.3 m to 0.6 m and 0.9 m, meanwhile the sample pump velocity was kept constant at 0.15 m/s. The effect of sample flow velocity on bubble size analysis was examined in the same way as performed with certified monomodal sizes particles. The classification influence by anisokinetic flow was comparable in all three media. For the sample pump velocity of 0.03 m/s, which was significantly lower than isokinetic flow, it was observed that the peak of the number frequency distributions was about 10 µm higher, while the number frequency of bubbles above 80 µm was lower. For pump velocities smaller than isokinetic flow, the smallest bubbles in the flotation basin followed the liquid streamlines around the sampling device and were underrepresented in the size distributions. On the other hand, with slow pumping, the number frequency of bubbles >80 µm was low, since it caused straight laminar flow through the sample pipe which reduced the probability of coalescence. Just considering classification influences, one would expect further decrease in the bubble size with sample pump velocities exceeding the bulk velocity of 0.15 m/s. But for the pump velocity of 0.2 m/s, the size distributions showed a slightly lower peak along with slightly increasing frequencies of larger bubbles. This could be explained by increasing probability of bubble collision with increasing turbulence. The trend was most significant in water, since the coalescence tendency of bubbles in water is higher. As performed by Leppinen and Dalziel, modelling bubble coalescence during dissolved air flotation could be done with the turbulent coagulation theory developed by   In easiliy coalescing media, it is recommended to keep the sample pipe length and residence time as short as possible, to avoid unneccessary deviation from the original bubble size by the analysis device. In media, where coalescence is negligible, it could be acceptable to adapt the sample pipe length if necessary. The BSA was developed for online bubble size distribution measurements. In the first step, the suitability and reproducibility for the bubble size analysis was pointed out. The general influence of different process media on the performance of the flotation setup was described. In the following section, influences of the operational flotation setup parameters on the bubble size were investigated. The classic mechanism of bubble generation in the laboratory flotation device When the flotation setup was operated with water ( The bubble surface area flow To characterize the flotation setup, the influences of saturation pressure, gas/recycle volume ratio and recycle volume flow on the bubble size distribution were measured in three different media. In deionized water, bubble sizes in DAF are reported to be stable above 4 For the measurements in We found strong chemical influence on bubble size distribution. The Sauter mean diameters in APW were generally about 20 µm higher than in NaCl and 40 µm higher than YMB, e.g. at a pressure of 3 barg the Sauter mean diameter in APW was 77 µm, in NaCl 58 µm and in YMB 41 µm. The differences could be explained by the energy demand for the generation of gas-liquid interface and by the coalescence tendency of the media. The energy demand for generating gas-liquid interface depended on surface tension. Bubble size distributions with low Sauter mean diameters show high bubble surface to volume ratios, hence their generation was more energy demanding. It was most energy demanding to generate bubbles in NaCl, since it showed the highest surface tension with 76 mN/m. But the dissolved electrolytes reduced repulsive electrostatic forces, stabilized the gas-liquid interface and hindered bubbles to coalesce ( Increasing gas flow caused some Sauter mean diameter growth in YMB and strong growth in saline. Deviations between three measurements were small in YMB and strong in saline. At a gas/recycle flow ratio of 2%, the fraction of gas bubbles generated by dissolved air flotation is expected to be highest. Since the gas volume available for dissolved air flotation depends on thermodynamic solubility, the number concentration of bubbles generated by DAF is limited. Evidently, with increasing gas flow, the fraction of induced bubbles increased. As described before (  For the lowest recycle flow of 50 L/h, the mixing intensity was insufficient in all media. Bubble number concentrations were low and no reliable size distribution could be measured. With increasing recycle volume flow from 70 L/h up to 120 L/h, the bubble Sauter mean diameter slightly decreased ( In this paper, an online bubble size analysis technique based on automated image analysis is presented. The Bubble Size Analyzer (BSA) performance was calibrated with standard particles. Quantitative investigations evaluated the influence of BSA software and hardware parameters on analysis results of standard particles and bubbles. Optimal settings minimized the effect of classification and coalescence on the size distribution. Algorithms to avoid inclusion of blurry particles in the size distributions and to separate overlapping bubbles were included in the software. Isokinetic sampling minimized the error due to classification. Anisokinetic sampling of bubble samples did not only cause classification but also increased risk of coalescence. Short residence time within the analysis device was necessary for representative bubble size results in water, however this does not apply to coalescence inhibited media. The BSA was developed to evaluate the performance of a laboratory dissolved air flotation device. It helped to specify that pure dissolved air flotation only happened when the flotation liquid was water. When operated with liquids containing high concentrations of coalescence inhibiting compounds, as in 2 M sodium chloride saline or in complex protein solution, the device demonstrated mixed induced and dissolved and air flotation. The bubble size results were influenced by surface tension and coalescence tendency of the liquids as well as by operational flotation parameters as saturation pressure, gas and recycle flow. The measured Sauter mean diameters for varying operational parameters ranged in water from 77 µm to 120 µm, in saline from 60 to 131 µm and in YMB from 42 µm to 65 µm. The Bubble Size Analyzer proved to be a suitable tool for bubble size measurements in a laboratory process. The flexible and mobile setup allows for online measurements and could be used for bubble size analysis in real processes. Such a setup is recommended especially when inline analysis devices cannot be installed. BSA sampling should be adapted according to the given flow regime to minimize classification and coalescence influences. The authors thank Patrick Graefen for programming the LabVIEW bubble size analysis application and Hendrik Monschau for his assistance with the installation of the image analysis setup. We also thank Julia Hofinger for computational fluid dynamic simulations of the flotation setup. The collaboration with Enviplan mbH allowed for fast engineering design of the flotation setup. Further specifications of the BSA Software are given in