The distance and charge weight scaling law has been used for many years to predict the peak particle velocity ( For more than half century the scaling law has been adapted to meet the site-specific conditions as presented in Ground vibration monitoring data were obtained from the two largest open pit coal mines in Indonesia (PT. Adaro Indonesia/Adaro and PT. Kaltim Prima Coal/KPC). These data were used to develop a new relationship in which the effect of bedding planes is included in terms of an incident angle and the number of coal layers. The Adaro mine is located in South Kalimantan in Indonesia. In 2012, Adaro produced 47.2 million tonnes of coal. It has total reserves of 921 million tonnes and resources of 4.7 billion tonnes Nineteen blasting operations of overburden materials were evaluated in which the ground vibration had been measured at three positions namely side wall, high wall and low wall. The side wall represents vibration propagating perpendicular to the dip direction of the bedding plane. The low wall and high wall represent vibrations passing through the bedding plane. On the high wall, vibration propagates toward the dip direction of the bedding plane, whereas on the low wall, vibration propagates toward the opposite direction. The ground vibration readings obtained from nineteen blasting operations at Adaro, where up to five vibration monitors were used, consist of 21 readings from the side wall, 28 readings from the high wall, and 21 readings from the low wall The primary explosive used was ammonium nitrate – fuel oil (ANFO). Two types of blasting hole with diameters of 200 KPC's operation is located in Sangatta, about 310 KPC is also an open pit operation, in which the overburden is excavated by drill-and-blast method. Explosive charges, spacing, burden, and so forth were normal for the particular site and were not determined by this study. Production blast holes of 200 Fifty-six ground vibration readings were obtained from two or more monitoring stations at the high wall position. Blast vibration propagates toward dip direction of the bedding plane. The difference of each vibration readings was quantified by an incident angle. The incident angle is defined here as slope between the direction of the vibration propagation and the dip direction of the bedding plane as shown in Ground vibration is theoretically damped at boundaries separating media of different density. For coal deposit, the coal has a density of 1.3 There were a total of 70 vibration readings at Adaro (see The measured   There were a total of 56 vibration readings at KPC, where all monitoring points were obtained from the high wall (see Following the earlier explanation that ground vibration is theoretically damped by reflection at boundaries separating media of different density, in coal mines it can be concluded that the coal layer with lower density than overburden material would act as the boundaries. The influence of the number of coal layers on The square root scaling from Nicholls-USBM was still employed for developing the new relationship. For simplicity, the ratio of distance ( It is customary at the present time to consider the explosive charge ( The earlier results shown in The final relationship of The proposed relationship shows that Forty-six of the total 56 ground vibration readings at KPC were used to observe relationships between  The authors extend their appreciation to the management and personnel of Adaro and KPC who provided excellent co-operation during the blasting monitoring for this work. Field investigations were performed with Mr. Dwihandoyo Marmer and the late Mr. Robby Kristian Sitohang.