The pretreatment of middlings and coarse refuse material collected from a Pocahontas No.3 coal source using calcination was investigated for the potential of improving the leaching recovery of rare earth elements. Calcination at 600 °C significantly and preferentially improved light REE (LREE) recovery to values in the range of 80–90% using 1.2 M HCl. The positive effect was due to the increased pore diameter and volume as well as thermal decomposition of the minerals associated with the LREEs. Heavy REE recovery was not increased after calcination at 600 °C due to the need for higher temperatures to achieve thermal decomposition of HREE minerals. Furthermore, some HREEs were also associated with sulfide minerals (e.g., pyrite) which were transformed into low-solubility oxides (e.g., hematite) after roasting at 600 °C. Based on the leaching characteristics of the major elements (Fe, Al, Ca and Mg) and REEs along with SEM-EDX data, it was concluded that REEs in the two samples mainly occurred as phosphate minerals. In the middlings, some of the minerals were completely encapsulated by kaolinite, which was less apparent in the coarse refuse. In addition, it was found that a portion of the REEs (10–25%) in the samples were associated with the organic matter and micro-dispersed minerals in the organic matrix, was released after calcination and easily recovered using 0.1 M (NH4)2SO4 solution at pH 5. Scandium primarily occurred in mineral forms with minimum amounts associated with ion-adsorbed clays and organic association.Rare earth elements (REEs) are a group of 15 lanthanide elements plus scandium and yttrium Multiple modes of REE occurrence in coal have been reported, i.e., minerals (phosphates, carbonates, aluminum phosphate-sulfates, oxides, etc.), ion-adsorbed and ion-substituted (aluminum silicates, silicates, etc.) and organic compounds The findings of a significant number of studies focused on rare earth element recovery from coal and coal-related sources have been reported in recent publications Calcination has been widely utilized to recover valuable elements by transforming their minerals into more leachable forms. In the rare earth industry, monazite, bastnaesite, and xenotime concentrates are normally calcined with reactants such as concentrated sulfuric acid, ammonium chloride, CaO-NaCl-CaCl As such, calcination without any reactants was performed on coal samples in this study. To the authors’ knowledge, a very limited number of studies included the use of calcination as a means to improve REE recovery from coal-related sources In this study, coal middlings and coarse refuse were collected from a preparation plant which processed Pocahontas No.3 seam coal. Calcination, acid leaching, ion-exchange, and SEM-EDX characterization tests were performed. Leaching characteristics of both the major elements and REEs were investigated, which contributed to an in-depth insight of the REE recovery potential from the Pocahontas No.3 coal as well as the REE mineralogy. Representative middling and coarse refuse samples were collected from existing process streams of a preparation plant located near Beckley, WV, USA which processed coal from the Pocahontas No. 3 seam. The coarse refuse sample was further processed in the lab using a dense medium bath comprised of ultrafine magnetite and water to obtain a 2.2 SG float fraction. Both the middlings and the 2.2 SG float fraction of the coarse refuse were dried at room temperature and pulverized to achieve a top particle size of 0.18 mm. The pulverized samples were utilized as feed material for calcination and leaching tests. The acids used for the leaching tests and sample digestion for ICP analyses were of trace metal grade. Ammonium sulfate ((NH Calcination was performed at different temperatures (400, 500, 600, 750, and 900 °C) using a muffle furnace manufactured by Thermo Fisher. The calcination temperatures were reached by elevating from 25 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min. The samples were placed into ceramic crucibles (5 g in each crucible; crucible volume equaled 100 mL) for calcination and a total amount of 30 g were treated in each batch. The samples were roasted at the calcination temperatures for 2 h, after which, the system was cooled automatically to 25 °C. A static air condition was applied during the calcination process. Acid leaching tests were conducted in a three-neck round bottom flask which was connected to a thermometer, condenser, and glass stopper. The flask was submersed in a water bath for temperature control. The leaching tests were performed under a uniform condition, i.e., 75 °C, 1% solid concentration by weight, 1.2 M HCl, and 500 rpm magnetic stirring, to evaluate the effects of calcination. The effects of acid concentrations and (NH A total volume of 1 L was utilized for each test. Slurry samples of 15 mL were collected at 5, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, and 300 min from the start of the leaching process. Weights of the slurry samples were recorded. The slurry samples were filtered using a 0.45 μm pore size filter-mate supplied by Environmental Express. Elemental concentrations in the filtrate were measured using ICP-OES. After 300 min of leaching reaction, the residual slurry was filtered using a 0.45 μm pore size filter paper. The filter cakes were dried at 60 °C and digested for ICP measurements. Elemental contents ( Digestion of the solid samples followed the ASTM D6357-11 standard, which utilized hydrofluoric, nitric, and hydrochloric acids of trace metal grade at an elevated temperature. For each batch of digestion, a standard solid sample supplied by the National Institute of Standards and Technology of the U.S. Department of Commerce was digested together with the solid samples. REEs and other major elemental concentrations contained in the standard sample were analyzed by the same ICP-OES unit for quality control. Differences between the measured contents and the values provided by the supplier were ±10%. Proximate analyses of the calcined and non-calcined samples were performed following the ASTM A field emission scanning electron microscopy SEM (FEI Helios Nanolab 660) in conjunction with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer EDX (Oxford EDX detector) was used to analyze the morphology and elemental composition of targeted particles. An area of 0.2 × 0.2 mm was selected for elemental mapping and several REE-rich particles were found and evaluated. Surface areas of the calcined samples were determined by N Elemental compositions of the middlings and coarse refuse samples measured using ICP-OES are shown in Both physical (particulate surface area, morphology, pore size, pore volumes, etc.) and chemical (elemental composition, mineralogy, crystallinity, etc.) characteristics of the samples were changed by calcination at the elevated temperatures, which improved their elemental leaching characteristics. As shown in Mineralogical changes of both samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The mineral matter associated with the coal samples primarily consisted of quartz, kaolinite, illite, muscovite, pyrite, calcite, anatase and rutile. Distinguishing between muscovite and illite was difficult since illite is usually formed from weathering of muscovite and both minerals have a very similar XRD pattern A comparison between the XRD patterns of the calcined and non-calcined samples indicated that the crystallized structure of pyrite in the samples was destroyed at 400 °C. It has been previously reported that pyrite undergoes thermal decomposition at 400 °C resulting in the formation of hematite (α-Fe The physical characteristic changes of the samples calcined under different conditions was examined using surface area and SEM morphology characterization ( In high rank coal-based materials, some trace elements, especially REEs, are physically and/or chemically associated with the major minerals In this study, the leaching recovery of Al, Mg, Fe and Ca were measured as a function of reaction time. As shown in A significant amount of Ca (90%) and Mg (30%) were leached from the 500 °C and 600 °C calcined samples in the first 5 min, which was due to the dissolution of very soluble carbonate minerals such as calcite and dolomite. Al recovery gradually increased with reaction time indicating slow dissolution of the Al-bearing minerals, i.e., kaolinite and muscovite/illite. However, the leaching kinetic rate of Al in the middlings and coarse refuse was different. About 23% of Al was dissolved after 60 min of leaching from the middlings material calcined at 600 °C followed by an increase to 51% after 300 min. Comparatively, Al recovery from the 600 °C calcined coarse refuse material was about 26% with 60 min of leaching and rose to only 36% of Al after 300 min of leaching. This finding indicated that the dissolution rate of muscovite/illite is slower than that of amorphous kaolinite based on the differences in mineral composition between the two samples. Distinct association characteristics of light and heavy REEs have been reported in literature, which is mainly due to the lanthanide contraction effect. The light REEs (LREEs) are cerium (Ce), lanthanum (La), neodymium (Nd), praseodymium (Pr) and samarium (Sm) while the group of heavy REEs (HREEs) include yttrium (Y), europium (Eu), gadolinium (Gd), terbium (Tb), dysprosium (Dy), holmium (Ho), erbium (Er), lutetium (Lu), thulium (Tm) and ytterbium (Yb). It has been reported that HREE/LREE ratios gradually increased with a decrease in the ash yield for high-rank coals Leaching results obtained under the standard conditions for the non-calcined middling and coarse refuse materials indicated relatively poor potential for recovery. Total REE recovery for the middlings sample was less than 25% after 300 min of leaching and the recovery from the coarse reject material was even less with a value around 15% as shown in As shown in For both the non-calcined and calcined coarse refuse samples, the leaching curves of LREEs showed a similar trend as HREEs, i.e., rapid leaching at the beginning followed by a gradual increase thereafter ( For the calcined middling samples, REEs were more quickly leached at the beginning (e.g., in the first 15 min) relative to the rest of the process ( To eliminate the effects of organic matter on the evaluation of REE association characteristics, the middlings and coarse refuse samples were ground for 30 min in an attrition mill. The organic matter was separated from the mineral matter using laboratory froth flotation. The nearly pure mineral matter fraction was leached under the standard test conditions. As shown in For the coarse refuse, the low recovery of the LREEs in the non-calcined samples was most likely due to the low solubility of LREE minerals, which were mainly rare earth phosphates as identified by the P leaching characteristics and the SEM-EDX results in the following sections. The significant increase in LREE leaching recovery after calcination of the coarse refuse ( For the middlings sample, LREE leaching data suggests that a portion of the REEs are controlled by the physical association with aluminum silicates. The LREEs in the de-carbonized, non-calcined middlings had better leachability compared to the coarse refuse (58% versus 24%) and the recovery increased by 25 absolute percentage points by calcination. Furthermore, after the first 15 min of the leaching reactions, LREEs in the 400–750 °C calcined middlings samples showed similar leaching kinetics as Al. As such, calcination of the middlings material provided a benefit to the leaching of a portion of the REEs through decomposition of the LREE mineral structures but the effect was limited by encapsulation within the kaolinite. As shown in A comparison between the HREE recovery of the calcined flotation tailings and original samples (Figs. As suggested, a significant portion of the REEs in the coal samples may be associated with phosphate minerals whose structures are decomposed by calcination. Therefore, the effects of calcination on the leaching characteristics of the P existing within the two coal samples were investigated to establish a relationship between P and REEs. A comparison between the phosphorous kinetic leaching data in Given the effect of thermal decomposition on the solubility of rare earth minerals (mainly phosphates), acid concentrations lower than the standard 1.2 M content may achieve the REE recovery needed for economic recovery. As such, tests were conducted over a range in HCl concentrations from 0.006 M to 1.2 M on calcined samples prepared using a temperature of 600 °C. As shown in Ion-adsorbed REEs, which can be easily recovered using an ion-exchange process, have been identified previously in coal-based sources Acid leaching test results indicated that REEs in the Pocahontas No.3 coals mainly existed as rare earth phosphate minerals. Some of these minerals were completely encapsulated by aluminum silicates especially in the middlings sample. Thermal decomposition of the rare earth phosphate occurred when calcining the samples at 500–600 °C. SEM-EDX characterization of the 600 °C calcined middling material as well as the de-carbonized middling flotation tailing material was conducted for a better understanding of the REE mineralogy. A particle enriched in LREEs is shown in A REE-rich particle shown in The leaching test results showed that HREE recovery was lower than LREEs and a slight increase in recovery was observed after the first 15 min of leaching ( SEM-EDX characterization was also performed on the middling flotation tailings to compare mineralogical changes before and after calcination. Several particles rich in REEs were discovered. Using EDX data of all the spectra obtained from the calcined and non-calcined middlings, the atomic ratios of REEs to P (REEs/P) were calculated, which are shown in Scandium is presented separately due to the fact that its ionic radius is much smaller than that of REEs, which results in different mineralogical and leaching characteristics. The Sc leaching behavior indicated that the element is primarily associated with insoluble minerals which may be encapsulated within the aluminum silicates. Less than 5% of the Sc was leached at pH 5 using 0.1 M (NH Mineralogy and leaching behaviors of REEs associated with the middlings and 2.2 SG float fraction in the coarse refuse of a Pocahontas No.3 coal source were investigated to assess the benefits of calcination as a pretreatment step to a leaching process. The study involved bench-scale leaching experiments under standard conditions as well as detailed characterization evaluations using XRD, SEM-EDX, and BET units. Maximum recovery of REEs from both the middlings and coarse refuse was realized after calcination of the materials for two hours at 600 °C. The recovery improvement over the non-calcinated material was 67 absolute percentage points for the 2.2 SG fraction of the coarse refuse and 48 percentage points for the middling material. About 80–90% of the LREEs were leached from the calcined samples under the standard leaching conditions while the HREE recovery was somewhat lower (40–60%) due to differences in the mode of occurrence. When the calcination temperature exceeded 600 °C, recovery of both the REEs and the major elements (Al, Mg, Fe, and Ca) was decreased due to transformation into a molten state. Based on the leaching behaviors of both the major and rare earth elements, it was concluded that a portion of the LREE minerals were encapsulated by aluminum silicate in the middlings sample which was not the case for the coarse refuse material. Results from both the leaching and SEM-EDX studies indicate that both the LREEs and HREEs primarily exist as phosphate minerals. Calcination at 600 °C of the Pocahontas No.3 samples caused thermal decomposition of the LREE minerals which led to fast leaching kinetics within the first five minutes and exceptional recovery values. However, the recovery of HREEs from associated minerals existing in de-carbonized flotation tailings material produced from the middlings and coarse refuse was not positively affected by the calcination pretreatment. In fact, HREE recovery was decreased by about 5% after calcination at 600 °C. This was explained by a small fraction of the HREEs that were associated with sulfide minerals (e.g., pyrite) which were transformed into low-solubility oxides (e.g., hematite) after calcination. However, direct calcination of the original middlings material increased the recovery of HREEs by 40 percentage points due to the release of REEs from the organic matter and REE-enriched micro-dispersed mineral matter from the organic matrix that comprised a significant amount of the middlings material. From the 600 °C calcined middlings and coarse refuse, a portion of the REEs (about 15–25%) were leachable by ion exchange leaching using 0.1 M (NH This material presented in this publication is based upon work supported by the U.S.