In this paper, static bending and buckling of a functionally graded (FG) nanobeam are examined based on the nonlocal Timoshenko and Euler–Bernoulli beam theory. This non-classical (nonlocal) nanobeam model incorporates the length scale parameter (nonlocal parameter) which can capture the small scale effect. The material properties of the FG nanobeam are assumed to vary in the thickness direction. The governing equations and the related boundary conditions are derived using the principal of the minimum total potential energy. The Navier-type solution is developed for simply-supported boundary conditions, and exact formulas are proposed for the deflections and the buckling load. The effects of nonlocal parameter, aspect ratio, various material compositions on the static and stability responses of the FG nanobeam are discussed. Some illustrative examples are also presented to verify the present formulation and solutions. Good agreement is observed. The results show that the new nonlocal beam model produces larger deflection and smaller buckling load than the classical (local) beam model.Nanotechnology is able to create many new materials and devices with a vast range of applications, such as in medicine, electronics, biomaterials and energy production. Structural elements, such as beams and plates in micro or nanolength scale are commonly used as components in micro/nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS). In all these applications, the thickness of the micro- and nanostructures is typically on the order of micrometer and nanometer. Both experimental and atomistic simulation results have shown a significant size effect in mechanical properties when the dimensions of these structures become very small. For this reason, the size effect has a major role on static and dynamic behavior of micro, nanostructures and cannot be ignored. It is well-known that classical continuum mechanics does not account for such size effects in micro-, nano-scale structures. In order to overcome this problem, many higher order continuum (nonlocal) theories that contain additional material constants, such as the modified couple stress theory In the classical (local) elasticity theory, the stress at a point depends only on the strain at the same point whereas in the nonlocal elasticity theory, the stress at a point is a function of strains at all points in the continuum. In this way, the nonlocal continuum theory contains information about long range forces between atoms, and the internal length scale is introduced into the constitutive equations simply as material parameter to capture the small scale effect. In this context, the application of the classical continuum theory to the analysis of nanostructures is not appropriate since the classical theories lack the accountability of the size effects arising from the small-scale. The application of nonlocal elasticity in micro and nanomaterials has received much attention among the nanotechnology community recently, and also the literature shows that the nonlocal elasticity theory is being increasingly used for reliable and quick analysis of nanostructures. For example, static Developments in the field of materials engineering lead to a new type of materials with smooth and continuous variation of the material properties that called functionally graded materials (FGMs). The mechanical and thermal response of materials with spatial gradients in composition and microstructure is of considerable interest in numerous technological areas such as tribology, optoelectronics, biomechanics, nanotechnology and high temperature technology. The graded transition in composition across an interface of two materials (for instance, metal and ceramics or polymer) can essentially reduce the thermal stresses and stress concentration at intersection with free surfaces. Also, FGMs will allow a tailored fit to a special purpose, i.e., with the static deflection not exceeding a specific level, or the buckling load not being less than a pre-specified level, or the natural frequency either exceeding or to being less than a pre-specified frequency. In view of these advantages, a number of investigations, dealing with static, buckling and dynamic characteristics of functionally graded (FG) structures, were published in the scientific literature Therefore, based on the above discussion there is a strong encouragement to understand the mechanical behavior of FG nanobeams in the design of nanodevices. This paper focuses on the static bending and the buckling of the FG nanobeam based on the nonlocal Timoshenko and Euler–Bernoulli beam theory. It should be stressed at this stage that Euler–Bernoulli beam theory neglects the effect of transverse shear strain because the assumption of plane cross-sections perpendicular to the axis of the beam remaining plane and perpendicular to the axis after deformation. This simple beam theory can give excellent solutions to the analysis of slender beams. However, when a beam is moderately deep, this theory needs some modifications to include the effect of transverse shear. Timoshenko beam theory, which takes into consideration the influences of transverse shear deformation, is more appropriate for the estimation of the mechanical behavior of short beams. The material properties of the FG nanobeam are assumed to vary in the thickness direction. The governing equations and the related boundary conditions are derived using the principal of the minimum total potential energy. The Navier-type solution is developed for simply-supported boundary conditions, and exact formulas are proposed for the deflections and the buckling load. The effects of nonlocal parameter, aspect ratio, various material compositions on the static and stability responses of the FG nanobeam are discussed. Some illustrative examples are also presented to verify the present formulation and solutions. Good agreement is observed. Nonlocal elasticity theory was first introduced by Eringen  We assumed that the FG nanobeam is made of two different materials, and the effective material properties of the FG nanobeam (i.e., Young’s modulus The effective material properties of the FG nanobeam are defined by the power-law form. The volume fraction of the second material is assumed by: Based on the Timoshenko beam theory, the axial displacement, The governing equations and the boundary conditions will be derived by using principal of the minimum total potential energy. The first variation of the strain energy is given as: Furthermore, the following boundary conditions at the edges of the beam (at By using Eqs. The explicit expression of the nonlocal normal force can be obtained by substituting for the second derivative of Eliminating the shear force The explicit expression of the nonlocal bending moment can be obtained by substituting for the second derivative of By substituting for the second derivative of Finally, the nonlocal governing equations in terms of the displacements can be obtained by substituting for The displacement field of Euler–Bernoulli beam theory can be given as: The axial strain With the similar procedure that was applied for Timoshenko beam theory, the force–strain and the moment–strain relations of the nonlocal Euler–Bernoulli beam theory can be obtained as follows: Note that shear force is obtained zero for Euler–Bernoulli beam theory since the shear strain is neglected in this theory. Also, nonlocal axial normal force and bending moment can be found as: The nonlocal governing equations in terms of the displacements can be obtained by substituting for In this section, the governing equations are analytically solved for static bending and buckling of a simply-supported FG nanobeam. The Navier solution procedure is used to determine the analytical solutions for the simply-supported boundary conditions. For this purpose, the displacement functions are expressed as product of undetermined coefficients and known trigonometric functions to satisfy the governing equations and the conditions at For the static bending problem, the axial compressive force Substituting Eqs. With the similar process, when Eqs. Eq. For the buckling problem, the external loads For Euler–Bernoulli beam theory, an eigenvalue equation and the exact formula of the critical buckling load are obtained, respectively In this section, various numerical examples are presented and discussed to verify the accuracy of the present nonlocal beam models in predicting the static and stability responses of FG nanobeam. The FG nanobeam has the following material properties: In order to demonstrate the efficiency and accuracy of the present exact solution, some illustrative examples are solved and the present results are compared with the existing data available in the literature. For this purpose, dimensionless deflection of a homogeneous nanobeam subjected to uniformly distributed load and dimensionless buckling load obtained by the present solution are compared with those of Aydogdu  The effect of the nonlocal parameter on the static and buckling responses of FG nanobeam is demonstrated in   Bending and buckling of the FG nanobeam are examined based on the nonlocal Timoshenko and Euler–Bernoulli beam theory. The governing equations and the related boundary conditions are derived using the principal of the minimum total potential energy. The Navier-type solution is developed for simply-supported boundary conditions, and exact formulas are proposed for the deflections and the buckling load. The effects of nonlocal parameter, aspect ratio, various material compositions on the static and stability responses of the FG nanobeam are discussed. Numerical results show that the nonlocal effects play an important role on the static and buckling responses of the FG nanobeam. The new nonlocal beam model produces larger deflection and smaller buckling load than the classical (local) beam model. Therefore, the small scale effects (or nonlocal effects) should be considered in the analysis of mechanical behavior of nanostructures. Also, note that reasonable choice of the value of the nonlocal parameter is also crucial to ensure the validity of the nonlocal beam models. Further, it is found that the power-law exponent has a great influence on the responses of FG nanobeam, and the responses can be controlled by choosing proper values of the power-law exponent.