Coking of coal blends using high volatile coals with poor coking abilities to produce a high quality coke for blast furnace application can be achieved by compacting the coal blend prior to the carbonization process. Here densification up to a relative material density of 80%, i.e. a compact density around 1100kg/m3, has proven to be advantageous. Coal is compacted by stamping, if the so-called stamp charging process applied. Compacting of the coal by pressing is used in case of the cokemaking with so called heat-recovery ovens.
                  Stamped and pressed coal cakes require over the cake volume uniform high density and mechanical stability. Besides the aspects of the coal selection, the efficiency of the process is mainly determined by the operating parameters compacting time and compacting energy for coal cake making and by the sufficient cake mechanical stability to ensure trouble-free charging the ovens.
                  At the Department for Mechanical Process Engineering & Solids Processing of the Technical University Berlin the two sub-processes of densification and strengthening during stamping and during pressing are theoretically and experimentally investigated using specially developed lab-scale compacting test units for stamping and for pressing and a coal cake strength test device.
                  Describing cake density in terms of coal properties for a given coal and measured compacting energy input then leads to a compacting equation with the so-called Stampability as the integral model parameter for the stamping process. For the pressing process the cake density can be calculated with the measured compacting pressure and the Compressibility factor, respectively. Investigations were carried out to provide evidence of a significant influence of coal type, coal surface moisture, coal granulometric properties on the densification process.
                  In order to investigate the mechanical strength properties of the stamped and pressed coal cakes, a specific strength tester has been developed, combining the possibilities of investigating compressive/tensile strength as well as shear strength.
                  Based on the tests on the densification behaviour and cake strength for a given coal, the stability criterion of a coal cake with the required density and height can now be calculated.compressibility factor (–) speed of light in the vacuum (m/s) RRSB fineness parameter (m) dry ash free specific stamping energy (J/kg dry coal) specific stamping energy for force (N) maximum force (N) gravitational constant (m/s coal cake height (m) Hardgrove grindability index (°H) stampability (–) stamping step (–) RRSB broadness parameter (–) briquetting pressure (kN/m reference pressure (kN/m Rosin-Rammler-Sperling-Bennet-distribution-function (–) path (m) initial displacement (m) maximum path (m) velocity (m/s) volatile matter content (–) surface moisture (–) water and ash free water free optimum of surface moisture model parameter model parameter (–) model parameter (–) dielectric constant A s/(V m) coal cake’s dielectric constant A s/(V m) inner friction angle (°) density (kg/m initial bulk density (kg/m coal cake density (kg/m normal stress (Pa) Compressive strength (Pa) own weight of coal cake (Pa) tensile strength (Pa) shear stress (Pa) cohesion (Pa) maximum of shear stress (Pa) Coking of coal blends using high volatile coals with poor coking abilities to produce a high quality coke for blast furnace application can be achieved by compacting the coal blend prior to the carbonization process. Compacting of coals not only improves the flexibility of the cokemaking by using high amounts of poor and medium coking coals and other low-cost raw materials in blends. Also the oven throughput is increased Coal is compacted by stamping, if the so-called stamp charging process applied. Stamp charging means coke production in conventional chamber ovens, where the coal blend is previously compacted to a so-called “coal cake” with slightly smaller dimensions than those of the oven and charged vertically standing into the oven on a coal cake charging plate from the battery ram side through the oven door as shown in Compacting of the coal by pressing is practised in case of the cokemaking with so-called heat-recovery ovens. In this case the oven charge is compacted to a coal cake with significantly lower height than of the oven and charged horizontally lying into the oven on a charging plate through the oven door The stamped coal cake with dimensions of 0.5 Besides the influence of the capillary water on the densification process itself also the mechanical properties of the compact are determined by the surface water as it serves as a binding agent in the formation of adhesive forces. Within the systematic of process engineering the stamp cake can be classed as so-called wet agglomerate which is characterized by the adhesive forces resulting from liquid bridges within the capillary pore system The following objectives are relevant to the technical compacting process: The realisation of a certain cake density, homogeneous within the cake volume, in combination with a maximum mass throughput taking account of the carbonisation properties of the coal blend. The guarantee of a sufficient cake strength in terms of operating safety while charging the coal cake to the oven and the achievement of short compacting time for increasing productivity. At the Department for Mechanical Process Engineering & Solids Processing of the Technical University Berlin the two sub-processes of densification and strengthening during stamping and during pressing are theoretically and experimentally investigated using specially developed lab-scale compacting test units in combination with a strength test device suited to the dimensions of the compacted cake. The objective of the work is to establish a comprehensive mathematical model on the compacting behaviour of large coal bulk quantities and the optimization of the compacting processes by stamping and by pressing. For the investigation of the densification process a special micro-stamping test device is used, consisting of a stamping mould of 100×100 For quantifying the densification process the stamper is instrumented with an inductive displacement transducer and a load cell. The simultaneous measurement of the stamper’s path and normal force acting on the stamper allows the recording of the variation in time. During the stamping process the cake density and other derived quantities change, e.g. the cake porosity or the pore saturation index. e.g. the cake density (wf For the investigation of the compacting by pressing a hydraulic pressing device has been developed. It consists of a press die powered by a hydraulic piston and a box with a base area of 10 Similar to the stamping tests the path of the press die and the load on the coal sample is recorded throughout the whole pressing process. The data obtained by a series of measurements with two different ranked coals is shown in In order to investigate the mechanical strength properties of the stamped and pressed coal cakes, a specific strength tester has been developed, combining the possibilities of investigating compressive/tensile strength as well as shear strength. The photo left in   With increasing cake density the compressive strength continuously rises up to values of approximately 400 The measuring equipment comprises a bidirectional load cell with a maximum load of 5 Ten different coal samples with a wide variation of their properties relevant to mechanical and carbonisation behaviour were tested ( From the movement of the stamper, the effective energy input by stamping can be determined. This is done by performing a mathematical integral calculus of the load–path curves as shown in Instead of using the theoretical value of the potential energy connected with the vertical position of the stamper, the energy effectively inserted into the coal is precisely determined by Eq. Between the cake density and the cumulative mass-specific stamping energy accumulated during the stamping steps, a functional relationship is apparent ( The correlation can be mathematically described by means of the following compacting Eq. The Stampability Coal type and blend composition (as the stamping process should also depend on the mechanical properties of the coals used). Ash content or mineral content, respectively. Particle shape, particle size (as fine particles add to the densification by filling small pores). Coal surface moisture (as moisture has an influence on the densification process by reducing internal friction and by affecting the dampening characteristics). This effect can be further improved by using suitable additives. In stamp charging, the water is used as a binder to give the coal cake the necessary mechanical strength, while with respect to the coking process, the coal moisture degrades the thermal balance during the carbonization process. Therefore, the determination of the optimum water content with respect to cake stability is necessary. In the investigated range of 6–14% moisture, the tests with one coal at otherwise constant test conditions showed a maximum increase in cake density at approximately 10% corresponding to the best value of the Stampability The effect of coal type on the Stampability has been investigated in tests using different ranked coals with a range of solid density, ash and volatile matter content, compare To investigate the influence of the coal type on the stampability factor For all tests the particle size distribution, the moisture of the charge, the height of fall of the stamp and the number of stamping steps were kept constant, so the only parameter investigated was the coal type, characterised by the Hardgrove grindability index (HGI). The HGI can be determined according to ISO 5074 standards 1994 As it can be empirically specified for most of the hard coals, with VM from 10% to 38%. The obtained data of each test was analysed as described above to calculate the stampability factor From the observed proportionalities between the Stampability Having determined the numerical values of the model parameters  As a comparison of This formula is in line with the pressure – density correlation described by Johanson The data derived from the tests deployed in a double logarithmic scale lead to the diagram in Pressing tests with a variation of the moisture content are shown in  With an increasing number of stamping steps, i.e. by increasing the stamping energy, the strength also increases, recognizable from the shift of the yield limit to generally higher values. Cohesion, the shear strength at zero normal load, increases as well as the tensile strength, which can be read from the intersection of the yield limit with the axis of abscissas (compressive strength by definition takes positive values). As it can be seen from the similar slopes of the yield limits the angle of internal friction does not vary much with the number of stamping steps. As the necessary cake density is determined by the requirements of the coking process, the development of mechanical strength in turn depends on the densification process. The knowledge of the yield limit as a function of the achieved cake density is the basis for assessing the risk of mechanical failure. The mechanical strength significantly increases with increasing cake density, as one parameter besides others that affect the strength, as number of particle contacts, moisture, etc. To develop a quantitative criterion for preventing mechanical failure of the cake, the strength parameters have to be transferred to the industrial scale and then compared with the mechanical loads acting on the full-size coal cake, thereby taking statiscal and dynamical loads into account. In plotting the test results showing the linear correlation between measured shear stress versus normal stress and in applying the Mohr–Coulomb Breakage Hypothesis with the friction angle Based on the tests on the densification behaviour and cake strength for a given coal, the stability criterion of a coal cake with the required height The normal stress of the cake given by its own weight should be lower than the maximum compressive strength of the cake. The stability criterion of the cake results in:        The paper at hand presents selected results from micro-stamping tests and micro-pressing tests. Describing cake density in terms of coal properties for a given coal and measured compacting energy input then leads to a compacting equation with the so-called Stampability as the integral model parameter for the stamping process. For the pressing process the cake density can be calculated with the measured compacting pressure and the Compressibility factor, respectively. Investigations carried out to provide evidence of a significant influence of coal type, coal surface moisture, coal granulometric and mechanical properties on the densification process. A strength test device was designed to determine the coal cake’s compressive/tensile strength as well as its shear strength, the latter even under different normal loads. Varying the applied normal load the yield limit of the cohesive and highly consolidated coal cake follows a linear correlation between shear stress and normal stress. Linking the mechanical stability with the densification process the mechanical strength significantly increases with increasing cake density. Based on the test results the stability criterion for a given cake height can be calculated. Part of the research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union’s Research Fund for Coal and Steel /RFCS) Research programme under Contract No. RFCR-CT-2006-00002 (MAXICARB)