This paper presents a bibliometric analysis of process system failure and reliability studies. This analysis attempts to answer following questions, related to the evolution of failure and reliability engineering in process system: (i) What are the key areas? (ii) What are the major tools and their evolution and frequency of use? (iii) How much global popularity does this field possess? (iv) Which countries are active in these areas of research? (v) Who are the top contributing authors? (vi) What is the principal source of documents in this field? (vii) What are the prevalent factors behind the citations? and (viii) What is the contribution of the industries? This field is found to have a sharp increase in the number of documents in the last twelve years (2006–2018). It is observed that process reliability is a global topic, with an active participation from the USA, China, India, and Norway. Methodology, reliability model, and maintenance-related journal articles cover the colossal portion of the documents, and conferences are the most popular mean of industrial documents. IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Reliability Engineering & System Safety, Microelectronics Reliability, and Engineering Failure Analysis are the chief sources of documents. Despite a vital contribution from industry, collaborative works between industry and academia are observed to be rare.Safety of a process plant has always been a prime concern, since an accident resultant from simple equipment or human failure, may end up with injuries, fatalities, and asset and environmental loss [ Process safety and reliability are closely related to each other. Reliable process operation is a pre-requisite to safer plant operation [ Review articles have paramount significance in the research community, because of their capability of providing a brief and state-of-art development of a field. Many reviews have been reported in different areas of process reliability. An overview of reliability data collection, analysis, and application in the process industries was demonstrated by Bendell [ An exact solution to reliability problems often becomes arduous, especially when the system is large and complex. An accurate estimation of reliability bounds helps to overcome this problem. Beiu and Dăuş performed a comprehensive review of reliability bounds for consecutive-k-out-of-n Systems [ Maintenance helps to improve system availability. Das and Sarmah reviewed optimum preventive repair, replacement, and inspection policies [ These review articles are excellent sources of information about contemporary development in process reliability. However, these cannot describe the evolution of process reliability, geographic popularity, emerging countries, leading contributors and their research area and focus, potential sources of the documents, dominant factors behind the higher number of citations of a paper, and industrial contribution. The current authors believe that an analysis of these research parameters will be both conducive and interesting to researchers of industry and academia, as they will get a quick and concise overview of process reliability analysis. A bibliometric review can nicely describe these parameters [ This review covers documents on reliability, availability, maintainability, dependability, testability, cost-benefit, life-cycle, and failure analysis, maintenance modeling, and asset integrity management. Although this article is mainly concerned with documents that focus on the reliability analysis of chemical process systems, other multidisciplinary documents related to general reliability theorems (i.e. k out of n system, redundancy allocation in several system configuration, system reliability analysis in different failure and repair condition, and so on) that are applicable to chemical plants, are also considered. Additionally, documents on electro-mechanical components that are part of process industries, are further included. Documents on electrical power transmission and generation systems are excluded considering them as parts of basic electrical engineering. We have tried to maximize the number of documents to be analyzed using several combinations of frequently used keywords. Still, many documents can be inadvertently omitted. We apologize to the readers and researchers if we have missed any relevant document. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: This bibliometric analysis was conducted in three major steps. At first, several keywords related to process system reliability and its sub-disciplines were cautiously selected and utilized to collect bibliographic information from the Web of Science Core Collection (WoS) and Scopus databases. Although WoS is renowned for its quality and enriched collection [  AND Nevertheless, this approach was inapplicable to Scopus, since it does not allow to conduct the exploration of documents with such a high number of keywords. We collected documents from Scopus in two phases. The technique adopted for Scopus was as follows: First phase, AND Second Phase, AND AND NOT These searches resulted in a total of 80,699 and 104,970 documents from the WoS and Scopus databases, respectively. The reasons of Scopus' higher number of documents lie on the facts that it stores more conferences, and it maintains lesser categories than WoS. For example, Scopus indexes a vast number of documents under the Engineering category, while WoS has several categories for the engineering documents such as Engineering Mechanical, Engineering Chemical, Engineering Industrial, and so on. The categories that we have selected for WoS are Engineering Electrical Electronic, Operations Research Management Science, Engineering Industrial, Engineering Multidisciplinary, Engineering Mechanical, Energy Fuels, Automation Control Systems, Engineering Manufacturing, Materials Science Multidisciplinary, Statistics Probability, Engineering Chemical, Multidisciplinary Sciences, Mathematics Interdisciplinary Applications, Engineering Environmental, Engineering Marine, Chemistry Multidisciplinary, Engineering Ocean, Engineering Petroleum, Chemistry Analytical, Mining Mineral Processing, Chemistry Applied, and Chemistry Physical and 42,157 documents were obtained. Similarly, 71,006 documents were found from Scopus for Engineering, Energy, Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, and Multidisciplinary categories. There is a fundamental distinction between the provided file format by WoS and Scopus. WoS gives the bibliographic information in Tab-Delimited format, while Scopus delivers the same information in CSV (Comma-Separated Values) files. All the Tab-Delimited files from WoS were converted to CSV files, and all the CSV files (from WoS and Scopus) were amalgamated into one file sequencing them in proper annual order, as it is easier to analyze the CSV files using MS Excel. Then, duplicate documents were automatically eradicated using MS Excel. However, it does not ensure that all the duplicate documents are removed since often different databases store the documents in a slightly different form. Hence, manual action was carried out to remove all the irrelevant and additional duplicate documents. All these actions resulted in 9835 documents. VOSviewer and MS Excel were used to extract meaningful results from these 9835 documents by bibliometric analysis. The outcomes are summarized in the following sections: All documents (9835) were classified based on publication type (i.e. journal article (JA), conference paper (CP), review (REV, conference review (CR), book (B), and book chapter (BOC)), sub-division (reliability (RE), availability (AV), maintainability (MN), maintenance (MA), dependability (D), failure analysis (FA), asset integrity (AI), testability, cost-benefit analysis, and so on), and document focus (model and methodology (M), application (AP), intelligent system (IS), and opinions and discussions (OD)). Methodology-based documents were again divided into seven major branches: general framework (GM) [  Investigation on these 9835 documents reveals that process reliability emerged at the beginning of the 1950s [ A total of 11,190 author-indexed keywords are registered from these 9835 documents, which implies the diverseness of process reliability. VOSviewer was used to extract the key research areas and tools from these keywords.   Highly frequent: MKM, MCS, FS, BN, GA, FTA Moderately frequent: NN, SMKM, PN, RBD, UGF, FMEA Less frequent: BDD, PSO, Copula, DBN, AHP, DFTA, GO, GO-Flow It is worth mentioning that although PSO, DBN, and copula have been listed as less frequent tools, these have made a potential impact among the researchers within a brief period, and it is expected that these advanced tools will be continuing to be popular along with classical tools such as MKM, MCS, FS, FTA, GA, NN, and BN.   Geographic distribution is a measure of the global popularity of a research field. VOSviewer was used to identify the contributing countries in process reliability, and it found 93 contributing countries. A total of 66 countries were registered with a minimum of 5 documents, while 52 countries were found to have a minimum of 10 documents.  We have further investigated the human ( In Eqs. Values of v and w were collected from  IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Microelectronics Reliability, Nuclear Engineering and Design, and Chemical Engineering Progress are publishing in this field from the early stage of evolution. Many new sources such as Process Safety and Environmental Protection, Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part O: Journal of Risk and Reliability, International Journal of Performability Engineering, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, Mathematical Problems in Engineering, Chemical Engineering Transactions, Springer Series in Reliability Engineering, Applied Mechanics and Materials, Advanced Materials Research, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, Proceedings of the Annual Offshore Technology Conference, Engineering Failure Analysis, and IFAC conferences are emerging as the notable sources of documents in this field. IEEE Transactions on Reliability shares the strongest bibliographic coupling (indicated by the thickness of the arc between two spheres) with Reliability Engineering & System Safety, followed by the linkages between IEEE Transactions on Reliability and Computers and Industrial Engineering, Reliability Engineering & System Safety and Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part O: Journal of Risk and Reliability, and IEEE Transactions on Reliability and International Journal of Systems Science.   The right-hand bars reveal that these 20 sources produce mainly documents on methodology development, except Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Proceedings of the International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering – OMAE, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Pressure Vessels and Piping Division (Publication) PVP, and Nuclear Engineering and Design. Proceedings of the International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering – OMAE strongly focus on the documents that deal with the application, while the other three publish a good combination of application and methodology-based documents. Reliability Engineering & System Safety is also found to be a suitable source for publishing application-based documents. Reliability Engineering & System Safety and Computers and Industrial Engineering are found to be the potential sources of documents on intelligent systems. VOSviewer was used to extract the number of authors affiliated in process reliability, and it was found that 13,283 authors have contributed to produce these 9835 documents. A total of 749 authors has a minimum of 5 documents, while a minimum of 10 documents is registered for 260 authors.  We have additionally analyzed the type of developed methodology and demonstrated application by these authors (shown in We have further analyzed the dominant factors behind citations of the top 10 most cited authors (shown in Industrial participation in any research field plays a pivotal role to ensure a pragmatic and sustainable growth. Hence, it is of paramount significance to display industrial contribution. MS Excel was used to serve this purpose. Authors' affiliation helps to determine whether an author is attached to an industry or academia. Complete information of authors' affiliation was found in 8957 documents, and these documents were further manually scrutinized to find out the number of documents published by the authors from industry. A total of 1403 documents have been produced by industrial authors, and 198 out of these 1403 industrial documents were found to be published by collaborating with authors from academia ( Levitin G., Amari S.V., Nayak A.K., Lisnianski A., and Boring R.L. have produced the highest number of industrial documents, while Lisnianski A. and Levitin G. have the greatest number of citations from these industrial documents. IEEE Transaction on Reliability, Proceedings of the Annual Reliability and Maintainability Symposium, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Pressure Vessels and Piping Division (Publication) PVP, Reliability Engineering & System Safety, Proceedings of the International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering – OMAE, Microelectronics Reliability, Proceedings of the Annual Offshore Technology Conference, NACE – International Corrosion Conference Series, and Proceedings of the International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference are some notable sources of industrial documents. Although several industries such as the Human Reliability Associates Ltd., DNV-GL, Shell, Chevron, Halliburton, Schlumberger, Offshore Pipelines and Risers (OPR) Inc., Kuwait Oil Company, Saudi Aramco, Lloyd's Register, British Petroleum, TransCanada PipeLines Limited, SINTEF, Relex Software Corporation, Statoil, Israel Electric Corporation Ltd., Petrobras, Qatar Petroleum, ExxonMobil, Husky Energy, Process Integration Ltd., Refinery of Daqing Petrochemical Company, Sumitomo Chemical Engineering Co., Ltd., Sinopec, Karrena GmbH, Dow Chemical Company, ABB, Pure Technologies Ltd., ReliaSoft Corporation, Deepwater Corrosion Services Inc., Exponent Failure Analysis Associates Inc., BASF Corporation, Hitachi Global, Eastman Chemical Company, Det Norske Veritas, and Union Carbide Corporation are found to be heavily engaged in process reliability research, collaborative industry-academia contribution is found to be limited. In this paper, a bibliometric analysis-based review of research on process system failure and reliability engineering is displayed using the information available in the Web of Science Core Collection and Scopus databases. Exploration was carried out in the key areas, major tools and their evolution, engaged countries and their human and financial efficiency, prolific contributors and their research focus, potential sources, and industrial contribution. Process reliability is found to be a popular area in the research community, with a sharp increase in the total number of publications in the last 12 years (2006–2018). Publications in this field commenced at the beginning of the 1950s, and documents became regular from 1959. Researchers focus mainly on methodology development for reliability, availability, and failure analysis, and maintenance modeling to ensure reliable process operation and prevent accidents. Journal articles focusing on model and methodology development, are found as the most popular mean of documents in this field. The evolution of process reliability implies that these models are already in industrial practice from the 1970s and becoming increasingly popular. Geographic distribution suggests that process reliability is a global topic, as it is seen from the number of engaged countries in research. It is further noticed that authors from both developed and developing countries have contributed significantly to advance this field. The USA is found to be the leading contributor. China, India, Canada, and the UK are the other top contributing countries. China has got a monumental growth after 2000 in the number of published documents. Apart from China, Iran, Malaysia, Tunisia, UAE, and Algeria are identified as emerging countries. Two different indices: number of documents per million population (human efficiency) and number of documents per capita income per thousand USD (financial efficiency) were utilized to determine the efficiency of the top 25 contributing countries. Norway has the best human efficiency, while India ranks on the top in terms of financial efficiency. Investigation of key areas suggests that reliability analysis, availability analysis, predictive maintenance, condition-based maintenance, failure analysis, remaining useful life estimation, and dependability modeling are some of the major research areas. Monte Carlo methods, Markov models, fault tree analyses, fuzzy sets, genetic algorithms, and Bayesian networks are identified as the most frequently used tools. Dhillon B.S., Xing L., Gopalan M.N., Coit D.W., Levitin G., and Zio E. are observed to be the leading contributors; all have focused mainly on methodology development for process reliability analysis. Levitin G. is the most prolific industrial author. Investigation suggests that methodology-focused journal articles in reliability analysis and maintenance modeling are most likely to be cited by peer researchers. IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Reliability Engineering & System Safety, and Microelectronics Reliability are the most popular journals for publication in this field, and these sources have produced almost one-fourth of the total research volume. Proceedings of the Annual Reliability and Maintainability Symposium, Computers and Industrial Engineering, Proceedings of the International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering – OMAE, International Journal of Systems Science, and International Journal of Reliability, Quality and Safety Engineering are some other notable sources for documents in this field. Although most of the industrial documents are presented mainly in the conferences, some journals such as IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Reliability Engineering & System Safety, Microelectronics Reliability, Hydrocarbon Processing, and Nuclear Engineering and Design are also found to be prospective places of industrial documents. Although this research field is heavily dominated by the academicians, authors from industry have a significant contribution, evident from the extensive search on authors' affiliation. However, documents as a result of collaboration between industry and academia, are found to be rare. Although VOSviewer is efficient in extracting the meaningful bibliometric indices such as potential sources, contributors, and key areas, a major drawback of using it lies on the fact that texts corresponding to many spheres get overlapped which may hinder the interpretation of the figures. This review is not entirely time-invariant since the analyzed parameters (except emerging periods) are expected to change with time. However, this review has captured the state-of-art information up to January 2019. According to the two indices: the number of documents and number of citations, two of the authors of this article are found to be the well-known contributors in this field. Therefore, it may seem to be a self-promoting work. However, the current authors want to declare that this review has been conducted based on the well-established several bibliometric indicators, as mentioned in several bibliometric review papers stated in The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thankfully acknowledge the financial support provided by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at