Periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures following total knee arthroplasty (TKA) are an infrequent, but devastating, complication. From 1998 to 2000, we treated 30 supracondylar femur fractures above TKAs. Eighteen fractures were managed with retrograde intramedullary rod fixation (FIMR) and the other 12 fractures with traditional open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF). Follow-up averaged 3 years, with Knee Society knee scores being 84 and 82, respectively. Complications included 1 above-knee amputation for deep sepsis and 1 nonunion with varus alignment. FIMR appears to be the treatment of choice when it is feasible. However, traditional ORIF also may yield satisfactory results in those designs that cannot accommodate retrograde FIMR fixation.Periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures following total knee arthroplasty (TKA) are infrequent, but devastating, complications. Although the prevalence is low, ranging from 0.3% to 2.5%, as the general population ages and the number of TKAs performed increases, so will the number of periprosthetic femur fractures Although several classification schemes have been proposed for periprosthetic femoral fractures, we have found the classification system proposed by Rorabeck most useful Treatment options range from nonoperative closed management including casting, traction, and bracing to surgical treatment with open reduction with internal fixation, intramedullary fixation, and, finally, revision arthroplasty. The decision of whether to proceed with nonoperative or operative treatment has been the subject of a great deal of controversy. The purpose of this study was to compare our experience using both intramedullary fixation and traditional open reduction and internal fixation techniques for periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures following TKA with historical reports in the literature. From 1998 to 2000, 30 periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures were treated at our institutions. A retrospective analysis of these records was conducted. The time from index arthroplasty ranged from 1 to 15 years. There were 20 women and 10 men, and the average age was 70 years (range, 54–85 years). Specific patient demographics are listed in Twenty patients had fractures that were comminuted, 5 had short oblique fractures, 3 had transverse fractures, and 2 had spiral fractures. All fractures were supracondylar in location and were displaced. They all were managed with stable internal fixation. Eighteen fractures occurred in prosthetic designs that contained an open box that accommodated FIMR and were treated as such: 12 Synthes (Paoli, PA) retrograde femoral nails and 6 Biomet (Warsaw, IN) retrograde femoral nails. There were no significant gender differences between patients treated with ORIF versus FIMR ( Postoperative follow-up averaged 3 years (range, 2–4 years). Knee Society knee scores were 84 in the FIMR group and 82 in the ORIF group at latest follow-up. Ten patients have 2-year follow-up, 15 patients have 3-year follow-up, and 5 patients have 4-year follow-up. For the patients who underwent FIMR, the average range of motion was 5° to 100°. Patients who were treated with ORIF had an average range of motion of 5° to 95°. The overall range of motion was not statistically different between groups ( Complications included 1 above-knee amputation for deep sepsis following FIMR. This patient was a diabetic with severe peripheral vascular disease who had a dysvascular extremity following surgery. One patient had a fracture nonunion with varus alignment. This was treated with autogenous bone grafting and revision open reduction and internal fixation. This eventually went on to union 3 months following the second procedure. This report compares our experience with surgical management of periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures with historical reports in the literature. The treatment of periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures poses interesting management challenges. The literature remains fairly divided on the best treatment method since Hirsch et al. first described this entity in the early 1980s Supracondylar periprosthetic femur fractures are a relatively rare occurrence following TKA, and as a result, most reports in the literature consist of small cohorts. Good outcomes previously were defined as healed fractures without joint pain and a 90° arc of motion. Furthermore, it has also been suggested that shortening of the affected limb up to 2 cm and 5° of valgus/varus deformity can be accepted Operative fracture management is undertaken with the goal of achieving fracture stability and union, while allowing for early patient mobilization. The methods of surgical fixation that have been advocated in the literature include standard ORIF techniques using condylar buttress plates, condylar screws, or blade plates, retrograde intramedullary rod placement, and the use of supracondylar nails. Historically, ORIF of these fractures with plates and screws has been plagued by significant rates of malunion and nonunion Retrograde intramedullary fixation and supracondylar nails have been proposed to improve the rate of union, while decreasing soft-tissue trauma The current series reviews a cohort of 30 patients with periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures treated with either an intramedullary rod or plate and screw fixation. Periarticular plates have been extremely useful in very low or distal fractures allowing very distal fixation. For higher or more proximal supracondylar fractures, a retrograde femoral intramedullary rod was the ideal choice. As in other series, several fractures occurred above a TKA and below a femoral hip stem, for which plate and screw fixation was chosen. The closed-box femoral prosthesis configuration also mandated plate and screw fixation. The management of periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures presents significant challenges to orthopedic surgeons. It appears that femoral prostheses that have an open-box design and that have a relatively high or a proximal supracondylar fracture pattern are best managed with a retrograde femoral rod whereas femoral prostheses with a closed-box design or those with an open box design but that are associated with a relatively distal supracondylar fracture pattern are best managed with plate and screw fixation. The advent of locking-plate technology has significantly improved the strength of the construct in these fractures. In addition, bone cement or bone graft also can supplement these reconstructions as either a void filler or as an adjunct for screw purchase The authors acknowledge Emilie Cheung, MD, Susan Harding, MD, and Lawrence Naame, MD, for their contributions to this manuscript.