The swelling behavior of argillaceous rocks is a complex phenomenon and has been determined using a lot of indexes in the literature. Determining the required modeling indexes that need to be performed requires expensive tests and extensive time in different laboratories. In some of the cases, it is too difficult to find a relation between the effective variables and swelling potential. This paper suggests a method for modeling the time dependent swelling pressure of argillaceous rocks. The trend of short term swelling potential during the first 3days of the swelling pressure testing is used for modeling the long term swelling pressure of mudstone that is recorded during months. The artificial neural network (ANN) as a power tool is used for modeling this nonlinear and complex behavior. This method enables predicting the swelling potential of argillaceous rocks when the required indexes and also correlation between them is unattainable. This method facilitates the model of all studied samples under a unique formulation.Argillaceous rocks (e.g. mudstone, shale, etc.) are sedimentary rocks form clay deposits. Because of clay minerals in argillaceous rocks, they absorb water easily and in large amounts and they swell Swelling behavior of weak rocks under wetting and drying periods have been investigated and modeled in recent years. Pejon and Zuquette reported the relation of texture, structure, clay content, bulk density, specific gravity, dry density, initial moisture content, initial void ratio, porosity, degree of saturation, blue of methylene value (vb), cation exchange capacity (CEC), clay activity index (Acb), carbonate content, mercury porosity, and cyclic wetting and drying on the maximum swelling strain of mudstone In focus of ordinary swelling (single wetting period), Shakoor and Sarman reported the relation of unconfined compressive strength, second-cycle slake durability index, absorption, void-ratio, liquid limit and plasticity index parameters with the maximum swelling strain of mudstone This paper aims to find a new model and determine the long term time dependent swelling pressure of mudstone. Mudstone samples with various swelling potential were taken across from drilled holes at an underground site, in the Masjed-Soleiman Underground Hydroelectric Power Plant (UHEPP). This project is being constructed by the Iranian Water and Power Resources Development Company (IWPC) on Karun River in South West of Iran. This test is intended to measure the pressure necessary to constrain an undisturbed rock specimen at constant volume when it is immersed in water. The result of this test is necessary to analyze the stability of near structures. The apparatus ( The specimen (7) is mounted in a saturation unit which is installed between the plunger and the load cell. The watering unit consists of a massive stainless steel ring (6) with an internal diameter of 50 The specimen with the watering unit is installed in the load frame and an initial load of 50 This test was performed on mudstone samples using eight testing devices during 2 As explained in Section As the maximum swelling pressure is affected by all of those required variables; then, the swelling behavior in the first hours of the testing period is affected by such variables, also. Therefore, the variation of swelling potential in the first hours of the tests can be considered as an agent of all the variables. In this paper, the swelling pressure of mudstone during the first 3 An ANN is an interconnected group of artificial neurons that uses a mathematical or computational model for information processing based on a connectionistic approach to computation. In most cases an ANN is an adaptive system that changes its structure based on external or internal information that flows through the network. In more practical terms neural networks are non-linear statistical data modeling or decision making tools. They can be used to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs or to find patterns in data. Feed forward neural networks (FF networks) are the most popular and most widely used models in many practical applications. The input to the network is a vector, which includes independent parameters [ The parameters of the network ( The gradient descent algorithm is generally very slow because it requires small learning rates for stable learning. Using the momentum coefficient speeds the learning process. The momentum coefficient mirrors the effect of physical momentum of an object in motion. This mechanism can enable the training equation to work through local minimums As explained earlier, the first 3 Before training the network, the input/output datasets were normalized within the range of ±1. The normalized value ( The network uses the tangent sigmoid transfer function ‘tansig’ in all layers. This model was designed with MATLAB 6.1 Neural Network Toolbox The network was trained using Gradient descent with momentum backpropagation. One of the problems that occur during neural network training is called overfitting. The error on the training set is driven to a very small value, but when new data is presented to the network the error is large. The network has memorized the training examples, but it has not learned to generalize to new situations. One of the methods for improving generalization is called early stopping. In this technique the available data is divided into three subsets. The first subset is the training set, which is used for computing the gradient and updating the network weights and biases. The second subset is the testing set. The error on the testing set is monitored during the training process. The testing error normally decreases during the initial phase of training, as does the training set error. However, when the network begins to overfit the data, the error on the testing set typically begins to rise. When the testing error increases for a specified number of iterations, the training is stopped, and the weights and biases at the minimum of the testing error are returned. The validation set error is not used during the training, and the model never ‘sees’ the validation set until after the model has been developed and its predictive performance is assessed solely on this dataset. The current practice uses 298 datasets (60% of all datasets) for training, 74 datasets (15% of all datasets) for testing and 124 datasets (25% of all datasets) for validation stages. The training, testing, and validation datasets were selected randomly among dataset.  The best result obtained from a trial includes the lowest error in the training stage using different random initial weights and biases. During training, the network returned 7  The multiple regression approach (MRA) has been used for describing the swelling behavior of argillaceous rocks. The performance of the model is evaluated by statistical indices and is compared to MRA. The root mean square error (rmse) and correlation index (corr) are determined as follows: The performance capability of the network was examined using the indices above between the network predictions and the measured values contained in the datasets. The results are shown in This comparison shows that the described method is an effective way of modeling the swelling behavior of argillaceous rock with acceptable accuracy. The lowest error and best correlation index of the ANN model is comparable with MRA. Determining the time dependent swelling potential of argillaceous rock is a long term process. In some of the cases, the swelling potential of such rocks still increases during the years. Although some researches have been performed to find a relation between the laboratory indexes and the swelling potential, but other factors can change the expected results. This paper has aimed to find a method, independent of indexes, and use the variation of swelling potential in first hours of swelling test to predict the long term swelling potential in combination with ANN. The validation result shows that this method can model the swelling potential of mudstone and help to save the 92% of the time and other costs.