The premature failure of components due to poor inter-particle bonding is the most critical issue in cold spray (CS) additive manufacturing. Herein, a hybrid strategy combining gas-atomization (involving in-situ reaction), CS, and post-friction stir processing was proposed to design a nano-TiB2/AlSi10Mg composite. Multiscale characterization in terms of X-ray diffraction and scanning and transmission electron microscopy was conducted to track microstructure evolution for better understanding the mechanisms determining mechanical performance of the produced composites. The results showed simultaneous improvement in both ultimate tensile strength (365 ± 35 MPa) and ductility (16.0 ± 1.2%), which represents a breakthrough. The strengthening and toughing mechanisms were attributed to the fine matrix grains with the significantly improved metallurgical inter-particle bonding, and the uniformly distributed TiB2 nanoparticles as reinforcement that was strongly bonded with the matrix (i.e. the formation of semi-coherent TiB2/Al interface). This study provides new guidance for hybrid additive manufacturing of metal matrix composites with high performance.Cold spray (CS), as a solid-state deposition technique for surface coating, has recently been defined as an unconventional additive manufacturing (AM) process to fabricate net-shaped components and to repair damaged parts [ So far, Al matrix composites (AMCs) fabricated by CSAM have received increased attentions due to their high potentials for aircraft and marine applications. It has been widely accepted that certain mechanical properties (e.g. microhardness, wear performance) of the CS AMCs can be largely improved by properly integrating ceramic reinforcement particles into the Al matrix [ Post-heat treatment (HT) and friction stir processing (FSP) are the most commonly used techniques to enhance mechanical properties of the CS components by improving the inter-particle bonding and reducing porosity and residual stress [ However, to the authors’ best knowledge, the currently available results only showed limited improvement in strength-ductility trade-off for AMCs by the post-FSP. For example, post- FSP conditions were tentatively optimized to further improve tensile properties of the CS Al In the present work, a hybrid AM strategy combining gas-atomization (involving in-situ reaction), CS and post-FSP was proposed and validated and was used to design new AMCs with concurrently improved tensile strength and ductility. A specially designed Al matrix composite powder reinforced with in-situ formed TiB A specially designed 7.0 wt % TiB A homemade helium circulation CS system (LERMPS, UTBM, France) was used to build a component with over 2.5 mm thick onto grit-blasted Al substrates (140 × 80 × 4 mm). Helium was used as the propellant and carrier gases with an inlet pressure and temperature of 1.8 MPa and 320 °C, respectively. Nozzle standoff distance and traverse speed were set to 30 mm and 100 mm/s, respectively. Post-FSP was done using a commercial friction stir welding machine (FSW-RL31-010, Beijing FSW Technology Co., Ltd, China), equipped with an H13 steel stir-tool with a threaded pin of 3.5 mm in root diameter and 2.0 mm in length, and a concave shoulder of 10 mm in diameter. Rotation and traverse speeds were set to 1500 rpm and 500 mm/min, respectively. The tool was set to a 2.5° tilt angle to avoid surface defects. The as-acquired samples are shown in The as-sprayed deposits before and after FSP treatment as well as powders were examined by an X-ray diffractometer (Siemens D5000, Germany) with the Co (λ = 1.78897 Å) source at a current of 40 mA, a voltage of 35 kV and scan step of 0.02°. Polished cross-sectional microstructures of the samples were observed using an optical microscope (Nikon, Japan) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy-dispersive spectroscopy unit (JSM5800LV, JEOL, Japan). Average porosities of samples were determined by analyzing five cross-sectional images using ImageJ software (ImageJ, NIH, Bethesda, Md.). To clearly observe the microstructure, specimens were polished and etched at room temperature using Kroll's reagent (3 ml HF + 6 ml HNO Microhardness measurements were performed on the cross-section of the deposits using a Vickers hardness indenter (Leitz, Germany) with a load of 100g for 15s. Ten measurements for each sample were conducted to have an average value. A medium-sized tensile specimen with the width in the gauge section of 2 mm, total length of 37 mm, and thickness of 2 mm was tested using a Zwick/Roell Z100 machine at a strain rate of 1 mm/min. The location and the dog-bone specimen size are shown in As shown in   Based on the EBSD orientation maps ( Comparatively, The TEM image in  The microhardness of the composite deposits in the stir zone is about 110 ± 3 HV As shown in The typical fracture surfaces of both CS samples show primary brittle fracture along with inter-splat interfaces and the intergranular fracture (as exemplified in For a certain MMC, it is well established that the final mechanical properties depend largely on the following four factors [ Importantly, free of any processing defects is the starting point before the correlation between microstructure (e.g. grain structure and TiB At micron-scale, the microstructure of the initial composite powder can be well preserved in the CS deposit except that high strain stress and numbers of fine grains were generated near highly deformed inter-splat boundaries. These ultrafine grains and the localized work hardening effect could increase the microhardness and strength of the CS deposit, but remarkably reduce the ductility. During FSP, the material in the stir experienced severe deformation, which continuously drove the dynamic recovery and recrystallization processes. Compared to the as-sprayed state, a homogenous structure with fine grains (0.5–3 μm) and more uniformly distributed residual stress were obtained for both the pure AlSi10Mg and TiB At nanoscale, as revealed by TEM images ( To understand the strengthening behavior of TiB The contribution by grain refinement (Hall-Petch equation) can be expressed as follows [ Moreover, our TEM results ( According to the previous study [ The enhanced ductility in the post-FSP composite sample may be explained as follows: i) the presence of a large number of Grain boundaries in the fine-grained matrix (0.5–3 μm) contributed to the enhancement of plastic flow and ductility by providing a tortuous path for the crack propagation during yielding and necking processes [ In this study, a novel gas-atomized composite powder reinforced with in-situ TiB The CS TiB Both the as-sprayed pure AlSi10Mg and TiB FSP treatment altered the inter-splat bonding conditions from interlocking or partially metallurgical bonding in the as-sprayed state to a fully metallurgical bonding state. Simultaneous enhancement in tensile strength and ductility of the CS TiB  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support of X.L. XIE's Ph.D. thesis was from the