The valley floor of a 33.9km2 watershed in western Colorado experienced gradual sedimentation from before ∼6765 to ∼500cal yr BP followed by deep incision, renewed aggradation, and secondary incision. In contrast, at least four terraces and widespread cut-and-fill architecture in the valley floor downstream indicate multiple episodes of incision and deposition occurred during the same time interval. The upper valley fill history is atypical compared to other drainages in the Colorado Plateau.
                  One possible reason for these differences is that a bedrock canyon between the upper and lower valley prevented headward erosion from reaching the upper valley fill. Another possibility is that widespread, sand-rich, clay-poor lithologies in the upper drainage limited surface runoff and generally favored alluviation, whereas more clay-rich lithologies in the lower drainage resulted in increased surface runoff and more frequent incision. Twenty-two dates from valley fill charcoal indicate an approximate forest fire recurrence interval of several hundred years, similar to that from other studies in juniper–piñon woodlands. Results show that closely spaced vertical sampling of alluvium in headwater valleys where linkages between hillslope processes and fluvial activity are relatively direct can provide insight about the role of fires in alluvial chronologies of semi-arid watersheds.Small- to medium-sized drainage basins in the semi-arid western United States typically contain terraces, arroyos, and inset fill deposits that record Holocene deposition and incision. Much of the research on these types of basins has focused on incision, in part because widespread arroyo formation from about 1850 through the early 1900s had significant economic and social consequences ( Aggradation has received somewhat less study than incision ( The initial goal of this field-based study was to document middle to late Holocene valley-floor deposition and incision at upper Gibbler Gulch in western Colorado ( Gibbler Gulch drains northeastward down the dip slope of the Uncompahgre Plateau, then turns northwest and joins East Creek ( Local climate in western Colorado is strongly dependent on elevation and aspect ( Vegetation is dominated by piñon pine ( Gibbler Gulch drains Mesozoic sedimentary rocks. The upper watershed drains eolian Wingate Sandstone and eolian Entrada Sandstone. In lower Gibbler Gulch surface exposures comprise the Entrada, mudrocks of the Wanakah Formation, and mudrocks, sandstones, and carbonates of the Morrison Formation. Thus, most of the sediment introduced into the upper basin is quartz sand, whereas a mix of quartz sand, silt, and clay are delivered to the middle and lower basin. Data were collected during summer 2005 and spring, 2008. Field mapping used topographic maps, air photographs, and hand-held GPS units. Three sections (PR, GG, and CH) in upper Gibbler Gulch and two sections (BK and DC) in lower Gibbler Gulch were measured ( Twenty-two charcoal samples were collected from the arroyo walls and dated ( In Gibbler Gulch, two terraced valley fills are separated by a bedrock canyon ( The planar surface of the Qt2 is about 400 Longitudinal profiles of the base of the active south channel and the top of the Qt2 terrace are shown in The Qt2 fill is dominated by parallel beds, most of which range in thickness from 4 to 30 These thin, normally graded, sandy beds are interpreted to represent deposition from shallow, unconfined flows (“sheetflood”) and strongly resemble sandy, hyperconcentrated flood flow deposits described by Coarse sediment and associated scour surfaces are also present. Rare granule to pea-sized gravel in upper Gibbler Gulch is interpreted to be from local channelized flow. Scours less than 1.0 Qt1 sediments differ from those of Qt2. Trough cross-beds up to 0.5 Charcoal is common in the Qt1 and Qt2 fills. Fragments up to 1.0 Charcoal can be used to determine timing of deposition if the charcoal age coincides with the time of sediment deposition. One or more sediment layers can be deposited after a single fire ( An erroneously young age interpretation for the sediment encompassing charcoal can result if bioturbation or pedogenesis moves the charcoal downward. Very little burrowing or other disruption of Qt2 sediment is visible in the arroyo walls, so post-depositional, downward movement of charcoal is not believed to have been significant. Conversely, entrainment and re-deposition of primary depositional charcoal can result in an erroneously old age interpretation by placing older charcoal above younger charcoal ( Deposition of the Qt2 alluvium began before ∼ One 2.2 Two independent lines of evidence suggest relatively gradual accumulation of Qt2 fill without any major hiatus. First, the time-depth trends shown in Deposition of the Qt2 alluvium at upper Gibbler Gulch was relatively continuous at a time when alternating deposition and incision occurred in lower Gibbler Gulch and at some other locations on the Colorado Plateau ( Insight regarding factors that may affect deposition and incision can be obtained by comparing characteristics of upper Gibbler Gulch, which has two terraces and no channel-scale scours, with lower Gibbler Gulch, which has at least four terraces and common, channel-scale scours. Both areas have similar vegetation type and coverage, elevation, aspect, and microclimate, so these factors probably are not major reasons for observed differences. Bedrock knickpoints may have affected deposition and incision. Upper Gibbler Gulch has a single knickpoint near the upper end of the valley fill ( The difference in watershed area, 33.9 Another factor that may contribute to the differing alluvial chronologies of the upper and lower reaches is local lithology. The upper reach drains clean, eolian sandstones, whereas the lower reach drains a far more heterogeneous mix of eolian and fluvial sandstones, mudrocks, and carbonates. The full geomorphic significance of these lithologic differences is beyond the scope of the present study. Nonetheless, the possibility exists that a high infiltration rate in the sand-rich upper basin and upper valley fill may result in less storm runoff and fewer and less intense flashy flows compared to the more heterogeneous, clay-rich, and less permeable surficial geology more characteristic of lower part of the watershed (c.f., The Recurrence interval of high-severity fires in piñon–juniper woodlands is generally several hundred years or more, and low to moderate severity fires are uncommon ( The relation between fires and valley-fill sedimentation in upper Gibbler Gulch is not yet clear although fire-caused sediment movement is common in areas of moderate to high relief in the western US. Fire-caused debris flows and sedimentation on alluvial fans in areas with conifer forests, including piñon–juniper woodlands, in regions of moderate to high relief ( Sedimentation from heavy precipitation in the absence of fires is a widespread occurrence in the semi-arid western United States. In the Qt2 fill, such sedimentation probably is represented by layers with little or no primary depositional charcoal. However, differentiating sedimentary units resulting from fire-related versus precipitation-induced flooding remains speculative. The mid to late Holocene alluvium of upper Gibbler Gulch is characterized by numerous layers of normally graded, sand to clay-sized sediment deposited from before ∼ The long aggradational history of upper Gibbler Gulch also contrasts with a history of incision and deposition in lower Gibbler Gulch for reasons that remain unclear. One possible cause is the presence of a major, bedrock-controlled knickpoint at the lower end of upper Gibbler Gulch that may have blocked the upstream migration of headward erosion. An alternative hypothesis is that high infiltration rates in sand-rich, clay-poor lithologies in upper Gibbler Gulch favored deposition over incision as compared to lower Gibbler Gulch, where lower infiltration capacities and higher runoff from more clay-rich lithologies may have led to large floods and channel incision. Ages of charcoal deposited by floods in upper Gibbler Gulch document at least 15 fires between ∼ Present results indicate that studies of valley-fill incision and deposition focused on small drainages like upper Gibbler Gulch, where hillslope runoff and soil erosion can be directly linked to alluvial chronologies, can improve insight about the role of fires in watershed fluvial activity. Relatively limited information exists about fire frequencies in piñon–juniper woodlands of the semi-arid western U.S. Results from charcoal dating of a limited number of samples in alluvium of Gibbler Gulch watershed suggest that high-severity fires recur every several hundred years, although the temporal pattern is somewhat episodic. Support was provided by