The polymer/probucol co-milled mixtures were prepared to improve drug dissolution rate and oral bioavailability. Probucol, a BCS II drug, was co-milled together with Copovidone (Kollidon VA64, VA64), Soluplus, or MCC using the dry media-milling process with planetary ball-milling equipment. The properties of the milled mixtures including morphology, crystal form, vitro drug dissolution and in vivo oral bioavailability in rats were evaluated. Probucol existed as an amorphous in the matrix of the co-milled mixtures containing VA64, which helped to enhance drug dissolution. The ternary mixture composed of VA64, RH40, and probucol showed increased dissolution rates in both sink and non-sink conditions. It also had a higher oral bioavailability compared to the reference formulation. Dry-media milling of binary or ternary mixtures composed of drug, polymer and surfactant possibly have wide applications to improve dissolution rate and oral bioavailability of water-insoluble drugs.The number of active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) of biopharmaceutics classification system II (BCS II) is increasing. However, their oral availability is generally limited due to the low aqueous solubility. Improving the solubility/dissolution of poorly water-soluble compounds is a challenging task in the development of pharmaceutical preparations containing BCS II drug for oral delivery Milling is an important process to reduce particle size mechanically in chemistry, mineral processing, materials and pharmaceutical industries. The co-milling approach is more versatile in contrast to melting or solvent-evaporation methods. Melting is a temperature-dependent process. Many substances undergo thermal decomposition and impurities are increased at high temperature. For solvent-evaporation methods, residual solvents remaining in final product may create potential toxicity issues. Therefore, embedding a poorly water-soluble drug as a solid dispersion in a hydrophilic carrier by mild co-milling is a promising strategy for enhancing the dissolution of water-insoluble drugs. Several pharmaceutical products based on micronized or nanocrystal/nanosuspension techniques via milling method, have been successfully marketed Probucol is a potent anti-oxidative drug for the prevention and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases and xanthoma. It has also been used as a lipid-lowering drug before. Although Western countries withdraw it because of the reduction in serum high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), recent animal and clinical studies reported favorable effects of probucol on atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases. Its mechanisms of action have been explained at the molecular level. Although probucol is known to prolong QT interval on an electrocardiogram, no fatal ventricular arrhythmias have been reported even in positive studies. Potent anti-oxidative effect of probucol and enhanced reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) may explain its strong anti-atherosclerotic effects despite serum HDL-C reduction. Probucol has pleiotropic and beneficial therapeutic effects on cardiovascular system. Especially, it was one of the few drugs to prevent restenosis after percutaneous transluminal coronary (PTCA). Although statins are effective for lowering low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and reducing coronary heart disease risk, probucol should be considered as an option in case statins are not effective As a typical BCS II drug, the effectiveness of probucol (oral bioavailability Probucol was purchased from Wuyi Cihang Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. (Hebei, China). Kollidon® VA64 (Vinylpyrrolidone/vinyl acetate Ball milling was performed with a PM0.4L high energy planetary mill (Chishun, China) equipped with 200 The milled mixtures were observed with a BA300POL microscope (Motic, China). Morphology of Samples sputtered with gold, were observed using S-3400 SEM (Hitachi, Japan) at 5.0 DSC analysis was carried out using DSC-1 system (Mettler Toledo, Switzerland) in the temperature range of 30 The in vitro release test was performed using the paddle method as described in Male Sprague-Dawley rats 190 For analysis, 200 Maximum concentration ( The microscopic and SEM images of milled samples were shown in The DSC thermogram of probucol showed a typical sharp endothermic peak at 129.1 The drug release profiles of the milled mixtures ( The ratios of drug to excipients had a significant influence on drug release as well. The dissolution rates of probucol from ternary formulations were obviously decreased with an increase in the ratio of drug to excipients ( It is known that nonionic surfactant, such as RH40, is generally used as solubilizer to increase the solubility of drugs. In order to understand the effect of RH40 on ternary co-milling mixture, the dissolution test of VA64/RH40/probucol ternary co-milled mixture and its physical mixture were conducted. The results showed that the dissolution rate of its physical mixture was extremely low (only 0.36% at 2 Although probucol tablets (Chinese Pharmacopoeia, and Japanese Pharmacopoeia) and probucol fine granules (Japanese Pharmacopoeia) are included in various Pharmacopoeia (no dissolution test was specified), only probucol tablet was available in Chinese market. Besides the normally used diluents (such as cellulose derivative and lactose) and other inactive ingredients, considerable amount of surfactants (Tween 80) was incorporated in the tablet formulations to improve drug dissolution/absorption. The commercially available probucol tablet (Qilu Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., China) was grinded to coarse powders to perform dissolution test. The cumulative drug dissolution percentage of the grinded tablets was only 0.68% at 2 The mean plasma concentration versus time curves of probucol after a single oral administration of grinded powder of probucol commercial tablets or the ternary co-milled mixture to rats were shown in The main pharmacokinetic parameters of probucol were calculated and summarized in From microscopic and SEM images of milled samples, the gradual reduction in size and associated morphological changes of probucol during the milling process were observed. As expected, the milling process led to a smaller particle size. But the decrease of particle size and milling time was not linearly related. After certain time of milling, the particle size of probucol did not reduce anymore and aggregation occurred. This aggregation process occurs spontaneously in powders because of adhesion forces that always appeared among fine particles obtained by milling method  In the MCC/probucol and Soluplus/probucol binary system, MCC and Soluplus are difficult to be crushed into fine particles. They maintained original material morphology with drug powders adhered to the surface and the grinded mixture was not uniformly dispersed according to the SEM images. Soluplus, polyvinyl caprolactam-polyvinyl acetate-polyethylene glycol graft copolymer, is a novel amorphous polymer specifically designed to produce amorphous solid dispersions by hot melt extrusion. The amphiphilic structure of Soluplus makes it a polymeric surfactant, which form self-assemble micelles in aqueous media. Recently, Soluplus was reported to be effective in increasing the solubility and dissolution and improving the oral bioavailability of poorly water-soluble drugs Unlike the MCC/probucol or Soluplus/probucol binary co-milled mixture, VA64/probucol binary co-milled mixture had a smooth surface on their irregular-shaped particles with no drug powder adhering to. This is shown in the microscopic and SEM images of the sample. Because the temperature of the grinded materials was far below the relatively higher The dissolution behavior of the co-milled mixture was greatly dependent on the nature of the hydrophilic polymer used. VA64 is a random copolymer of 6 parts of hydrophilic In the ternary mixture, RH40, a nonionic surfactant, could increase the solubility and wettability of water insoluble drug. It also decreased the However, based on the dissolution results of the ternary co-milled mixture and the physical mixture ( Co-milled mixture containing BCS II drug, probucol, was produced using dry media milling method. With the help of hydrophilic polymer (VA64), and homogeneously distribution of amorphous form of probucol in the milled mixture was obtained. The co-milled mixture showed enhanced in vitro dissolution and significantly improved in vivo bioavailability in rats. The addition of surfactant RH40 to prepare the ternary co-milled mixture obviously increased the dissolution rate of probucol at both sink and non-sink conditions. These results suggested that the binary or ternary mixtures composed of drug, polymer and surfactant prepared by dry media-milling technique have great potential to improve in vitro drug dissolution rate and oral bioavailability of water-insoluble drugs in pharmaceutical applications.