Flotation is an interfacial separation technique, which plays a major role in mineral processing industry. It separates particles according to their wetting properties. In flotation pulp, particles and bubbles are highly dispersed in aqueous medium and in the presence of various flotation reagents. Almost all interfacial interactions including inter-particle, inter-bubble, and bubble-particle interactions in the complex pulp medium are driven by surface forces. Therefore, a fundamental understanding of the role of surface forces in flotation is a prerequisite to enhance practical flotation performance and adapt it for treatment of complex and refractory ores. In this paper, recent advances in the field of surface forces encountered in mineral flotation are reviewed. In particular, we highlight the latest progress in the attachment mechanism between bubble and particle with the aid of atomic force microscope and interference microscope. The current knowledge gap and future directions are also discussed.Flotation is one kind of interfacial separation techniques based on the differences in surface wettability of fine particles. It plays a major role in mineral processing industry [ In flotation the crushed ore is dispersed in the presence of bubbles and various flotation reagents. Almost all interfacial interactions, including inter-particle, inter-bubble, and bubble-particle interactions in the complex pulp medium are driven by surface forces [ Surface forces act on the nanoscale. Thus, their quantitative measurement is always challenging [ In the AFM method, an optical lever is used to monitor the deflection of the cantilever when an external force is applied. The force can be obtained using Hooke's law. With the development of the colloidal probe technique [ We note that the surface forces in unconventional oil processing have been reviewed recently (Zhang et al. [ The earliest force measurement between model particles aimed at validating the DLVO and extended DLVO theory [ Slime coating, widely observed in mineral flotation, not only reduces the hydrophobicity of valuable mineral particles but also decreases the grade of flotation concentrate. As the name suggests, an attractive force is necessary for slime coating to occur. The driving force could be represented by either electrostatic or van der Waals forces, depending on the type of clay and valuable mineral. Due to the surface charge anisotropy of clay minerals, the electrostatic force between valuable minerals and different clay faces is very complex and difficult to predict. Otas et al. [ Flocculation is one of the most promising methods for ultra-fine particle flotation [ The mechanism at the origin of the hydrophobic force still remains an open and unsettled issue [ Indeed, there are two observations supporting the hydrophobic force originates from water structure effect. Mezger et al. [ Another interesting experiment was carried out by Tabor et al. [ Control of froth stability is of critical importance in flotation engineering. A better understanding of surface forces across the liquid lamella in a foam film is important to achieve a better control of flotation froth. Several factors have been proposed to explain the stability of foam films, such as decreased surface tension, surface force and specific-ion effect [ Inter-bubble force measurements are more difficult than inter-particle force due to the deformation effect of air bubble. In addition, extreme care should be taken to avoid contamination: trace amounts of surfactant were proven capable of making the air/water interface immobile [ Using bubble probe AFM, Vakarelski et al. [ Liu et al. [ Some studies suggested the possibility that an additional attractive force (i.e., hydrophobic force) needs to be present to explain foam stability since classical DLVO theory did not work well at low concentration of surfactant [ Bubble-particle interaction is the key process in mineral flotation. It can be divided in three processes: collision, attachment and detachment [ According to the classical DLVO theory, both van der Waals and double layer forces between bubble and mineral particle are repulsive in most cases [ Butt [ Shi et al. [ Xie et al. [ Pan and Yoon [ Zhang et al. [ Flotation is a typical example of applied colloidal science. Almost all interfacial interactions in the flotation pulp, including inter-particle, inter-bubble, and bubble-particle ones, are driven by surface forces. Recent experimental breakthroughs led to new scientific questions to be addressed in the future: Particle-particle interaction. Concentrating on relevant minerals it would be interesting to investigate the surface force between specific faces of clay with well-defined geometry in flotation solution, providing a full answer to the mechanism of slime coating. On the other hand, force measurements should be coupled with water structure detection to shed new light on the origin mechanism of true hydrophobic force. Bubble-bubble interaction. The experimental results on the surface forces between bubbles have shown a wide range of variations and further study is still required. Trace amounts of surfactants proved to render air/water interface immobile, so that a no-slip boundary condition is required to describe hydrodynamic forces. Bubble-particle interaction. In recent years researchers have been able to measure hydrophobic forces between bubble and particle. One open question is still the difference between the decay length in bubble-particle system and the decay length in oil-oil droplet system. In addition, previous studies showed that the critical thickness of the film formed between a bubble and a particle depends on the bubble size. The underlying mechanism for this experimental phenomenon is still unclear and further investigations are needed to clarify it. Nothing declared. This work was supported by the