The properties of flotation frothers depend on their structure. This paper forms part of our investigation into the frother structure-property relationship using bubble rise velocity as the property, the structure variation in this study being the hydroxyl group position in alcohols. Single bubble rise velocity profiles were measured in a 350cm column and velocity at 300cm determined to estimate the concentration at minimum velocity (CMV): a decreasing CMV means it requires less concentration to slow the bubble, and vice versa. Two kinds of alcohols, alkyl alcohols (straight- and branched-chain) and 1,ὠ-diols, were investigated using five and six carbon members. The general effect is that CMV decreases as the OH moves to a terminal position, in the case of 1,ὠ-diols this means the 1,2 structure. For the alkyl alcohols, the effect of OH position on CMV was greater for branched-chain compared to straight-chain members, and having the methyl branch as far as possible from the terminal OH gave the lowest CMV. The most significant effect on CMV was the position of the second OH in 1,ὠ-diols. Arguments based on surfactant molecule orientation and packing on the bubble surface and the role of hydrogen bonding in the case of 1,ὠ-diols are advanced to account for the effects on CMV. Some observations on frother design based on the findings are offered.Initially developed to treat sulfide ores in mineral processing, flotation has now expanded to non-sulfide minerals and to other processing industries, including waste water treatment ( Alcohols, such as methyl-iso-butyl-carbinol (MIBC), 1-hexanol, and 2-ethyl hexanol, have been used industrially for decades ( The setup to determine the local rise velocity as a function of distance, or velocity profile, is shown in A glass capillary, nominal internal diameter 51 To reduce the data to a single metric, the velocity at 300 Before any test the system was flushed repeatedly with tap water till the known velocity profile in tap water was obtained, which could require up to 20 times the column volume. This precaution plus the reproducible water column height and use of minimum gas rate to just release a bubble gave the replication needed for the study ( The alkyl alcohols (i.e., monohydric alcohols) investigated, along with a sketch of each structure, are identified in The general formula for alkyl alcohols is R-OH (R The 1,ὠ-diols (i.e., dihydric alcohols, also called glycols) tested are listed in  To compare the effect of different structures, we use the velocity at 300  With a methyl branch at the 3C position,  The general finding is that there is an impact of the OH position on bubble rise velocity which is more pronounced in the branched-chain than in the straight-chain alkyl alcohols, and is especially significant in the 1,ὠ-diols. The CMV is estimated graphically by regressing a line through the velocity-concentration data to intercept the velocity The effect of hydroxyl position on bubble rise velocity showed the same trend with both the straight- and branched-chain monohydric alcohols and the 1,ὠ-diols (dihydric alcohols). The general finding is that as the OH is moved closer to the terminal position, the slower the rise velocity for a given concentration, that is, the more efficient the surfactant became in slowing the bubble down, reflected in the decreased value of CMV. The effect of the position of the second hydroxyl group in 1,ὠ-diols gave the most significant effect, and the effect of OH position was greater for branched-chain compared to straight-chain alkyl alcohols. The mechanism and possible importance for frother design are considered. The general orientation of alcohol molecules at the air/water interface is with the hydrophilic OH group(s) exposed on the water side of the interface and the hydrocarbon group(s) on the air side. At the moment a bubble is released, the surface is initially clean and is progressively ‘contaminated’ with surfactant as the bubble rises. Fluid shear over the bubble surface transports surfactant to the rear of the bubble. This increase in molecule packing towards the bubble rear gives a gradient in surface tension, which increases in the opposite direction (i.e., towards the front of the bubble), and is credited with increasing drag and slowing bubble rise ( Interfacial properties are strongly influenced by the surfactant molecular orientation at the air/water interface ( The anticipated effect of OH position on orientation with 1,ὠ-diols is illustrated for the six-carbon case in For the branched-chain alkyl alcohols, the position of the OH relative to the methyl group involves additional considerations. One is steric hindrance ( Another feature may further influence packing density. In both the alkyl alcohols and 1,ὠ-diols, as the OH migrates to the terminus, the free length of hydrocarbon chain increases which could result in chain-chain interaction. To explain the significant effect of moving the position of the second OH in the 1,ὠ-diols requires a further consideration, namely the role of H-bonding. The surfactant molecule must transfer from the bulk solution to the bubble surface. H-bonding between the OH of the surfactant molecule and water molecules (i.e., intermolecular H-bonding) influences the rate of transfer. In the case of diols, there is also intramolecular H-bonding, that is, H-bonding between the two OH groups of a magnitude dependent on the distance between the two OH groups ( The effect of OH location on CMV is reasonably explained by the mechanisms discussed above, at least qualitatively, but what do learn about frother design? The ability to slow bubble rise is a key function of frother, here indicated by the CMV. We can suggest that the lower the CVM the ‘stronger’ is the frother in regard to slowing the bubble rise. The summary of CMV values in The first observation is that the six-carbon varieties are significantly stronger than the equivalent five-carbon structures, having a lower CMV by typically an order of magnitude. This mirrors flotation experience, where, for example, six-carbon alkyl alcohol frothers dominate over five-carbon alkyl alcohols. Static (equilibrium) surface tension measurements also reveal the strong effect of chain length ( With reference to the alkyl alcohols, the second observation is that the lowest CMV is for the OH at the terminal position. This is evident in the six-carbon case for the straight-chain alcohols by comparing 1-hexanol with the other two straight-chain alcohols, and in the branched-chain alcohols by comparing the 1-pentanol structures with the others. For the branched-chain alkyl alcohols, the next question is the ‘best’ position of the methyl group. First we need to keep the OH at the terminal position as that has already been established as its ‘best’ position, after that having the methyl group as far away as possible gives the lowest CMV. For the six-carbon alcohols, this means the 4-methyl-1-pentanol structure is best. This is interesting: the common commercial six-carbon alkyl alcohol is MIBC, that is, 4-methyl-2-pentanol which is not as strong, based on CMV, because the OH is not in the terminal position. According to The results for 1,ὠ-diols suggest that the second OH does not offer any advantage over alkyl alcohols, the strongest, 1,2-hexanediol (CMV: 0.18 The effect of hydroxyl (OH) position in alkyl alcohols, both straight-chain and branched-chain, and 1,ὠ-diols was investigated by measuring the concentration to reach minimum velocity (CMV) in single bubble experiments. The common effect was that moving the OH to the terminal position gave the lowest CMV. The effect was strongest in 1,ὠ-diols (i.e., moving the second OH to the 2 position), and OH position in branched-chain alkyl alcohols had more impact than in the straight-chain alkyl alcohols. The general argument is that the position of the OH affects molecule packing density which controls the magnitude of the surface tension gradient: the OH at the terminal position allows more vertical orientation and closer packing thus increasing the surface tension gradient which increases drag and slows the bubble rise. The pronounced effect of the second OH position in the 1,ὠ-diols is attributed to the relative magnitude of intermolecular H-bonding with water molecules and intramolecular H-bonding between the two OH groups in the molecule: as the second OH is moved away from the first, intermolecular H-bonding intensifies and retards mass transfer to the bubble surface thus enhancing the OH position effect compared to the alkyl alcohols. With respect to frother design, for alkyl alcohols the structure giving lowest CMV was OH at the terminus and the methyl branch as far away as possible. In the case of six-carbon alcohols this suggests 4-methyl-1-pentanol would require less dosage to function as a frother than MIBC, which is 4-methyl-2-pentanol. The work was conducted under the Chair in Mineral Processing funded through the NSERC (