The role of surface tension in the mechanism of bubble growth and detachment for a co-flowing air-water two-phase flow in a micro-tube is addressed. A numerical investigation for a horizontal axisymmetric flow with the assumption of zero gravity and an upward flow accounting for gravity contribution is carried out. The continuous liquid phase is flowing in a tube of 500 μm inner diameter and the gas phase is axially injected through a nozzle of 110 μm inner diameter and 210 μm outer diameter. A single-fluid model is used to determine the flow field, solving the continuity and momentum equations associated with the volume of fluid method for interface tracking. An open source software, OpenFOAM, is utilized for solving numerically this problem. The prediction results show that the surface tension plays a double role. First, it keeps the bubble attached to the injection nozzle during bubble growth and neck formation. Then, it destabilizes the interface by pinching off the neck in the immediate vicinity of the nozzle at about a distance of 0.5 the nozzle diameter rather than right at the nozzle exit. In-depth analysis of the mechanism of bubble formation induced by the effect of surface tension is carried out. It is highlighted that this latter acts as an attachment force at the injection nozzle during the bubble growth and it acts over the entire interface of the bubble yielding the formation of a neck. Later, the capillary effects reduce the diameter of the neck until it breaks and yields the detachment of the bubble. Further investigation at the nozzle wall allows depicting the motion of the contact line during the process of bubble growth and its significant effect on the bubble formation.drag coefficient tube diameter (m) added mass force (N) buoyancy force (N) drag force (N) gas momentum force (N) pressure force (N) surface tension force (N) terrestrial gravitational acceleration (m/s tube length (m) nozzle length (m) bubble length (m) unit vector normal to the interface pressure (Pa) volumetric flow rate (m coordinate in radial direction (m) radius (m) bubble radius (m) inner radius of nozzle (m) outer radius of nozzle (m) contact line radius (m) neck radius (m) Reynolds Number (ρUD/μ) bubble surface (m time (s) velocity (m/s) superficial velocity (m/s) bubble volume (m coordinate in axial direction (m) Bubble center of gravity (m) Gravity level volume fraction curvature of the interface dynamic viscosity (Pa.s) density (kg/m surface tension (N/m) contact angle (°) viscous stress tensor, (Pa) gas phase liquid liquid superficial gas superficial Bubble formation from orifices in a liquid has been a topic of interest to the scientific community for several decades. It is mainly due to the wide variety of applications and processes in which this phenomenon is encountered like gas-liquid reactors, direct contact heat exchangers, flotation processes, etc. Recent developments in the field of two-phase microfluidics and processes in micro-reactors gave rise to renewed significant interest among the researchers ( This subject is still relevant because it is considered a fundamental process for understanding the interfacial phenomena. In several applications related to two-phase flow, it is important to predict the size of the bubbles formed to evaluate heat and mass transfer between phases and pressure loss in two-phase flows. A literature review related to the formation and detachment of bubbles reveals that the majority of previous works dealt mostly with the same configuration of an upward gas flow through an orifice in a liquid at rest. This configuration is generally chosen to allow the buoyancy forces to generate the detachment of bubbles from the orifice or the injection nozzle and the slip between the liquid and gas phases. Analytical approach was first developed, then it was followed by experimental studies and more recently numerical simulation became an interesting tool for analysis of these phenomena. Analytical models of bubble growth were developed by many authors among which Experimental works also were carried out since the beginning of the last century. We may cite the oldest, which is the work of Since the 2000′s, numerical studies on the formation and detachment of bubbles have become numerous. They focused on the interface capturing and tracking techniques to locate mobile interfaces separating the two immiscible fluids in order to predict the geometry of the discontinuous phase. Some works provided also an assessment of the different forces acting on the bubble during its growth. Most of the works done to date in this field did not bring any particular attention to the contact line (CL) that separates the three phases, solid, liquid and gas, at the injection orifice. For most theoretical, experimental or numerical works, the authors implicitly assumed that the CL is located and pinned at the inner diameter of the injection nozzle. To our knowledge only the experimental works of From this literature review, several comments may be made. First, the main configuration considered is a vertical injection of the gas through an orifice or an injection nozzle in a stagnant liquid. Then, during nearly a century, a great deal of analytical and experimental work was conducted on the formation and detachment of bubbles. Whereas, numerical studies on this topic are more recent and have become more important over the past two decades. Many studies aimed at analyzing the influence of the physical properties of fluids, the respective flow rates of the phases, the diameter of the injection nozzle on the formation of bubbles and their sizes at detachment. More recent work has investigated the influence of gravity magnitude on bubble formation ( Overall, the numerous studies conducted nearly for a century allowed a better understanding of the mechanism of bubble formation at orifices or nozzles immersed in a liquid for given orientations of the injection with regard to gravity. However, the recent work done over the last few years showed the need to further explore this topic as many questions remain open, in particular about the mechanisms of bubble formation in the absence of gravity. The other issue very little investigated concerns the formation of bubbles from micro-orifices. Achieving experiments at these scales still presents many challenges and both experimental and numerical studies are very limited ( The present study is carried out in this context by addressing these issues. It aims at analyzing numerically bubble growth and detachment emerging from a micro-tube in a liquid flow under two different levels of gravity (0 and 1 g). In the next section, we present the physical model and the mathematical formulation to predict the two-phase flow in the entrance zone where the two phases are brought in contact. The volume of fluid (VOF) method is implemented to track and locate the interface and its induced deformations. It is followed by the section dedicated to the numerical tool used i.e. the open source code OpenFOAM (Open Field Operation And Manipulation). The bubbly flow regime is considered with laminar flow conditions to yield smooth interfaces and analyze the bubble growth and detachment. Then, the prediction results are presented in the next section. It is organized such as a qualitative description, which is first given through numerical visualizations and the geometrical characteristics of the bubble with a focus on the contact line motion along the injector wall, is presented. It is followed by a quantitative assessment of the forces acting on the bubble for an upward flow with gravity contribution. The magnitude and the role of the surface tension force is highlighted during attachment and pinching of the bubble. The paper is ended with a conclusion on the mechanisms of formation and detachment of bubbles in a co-flowing water-air flow and highlighting the dynamics of the associated contact line at the injector wall. The mathematical formulation relies on a physical model that consists of a micro-tube of 500 μm inner diameter carrying water flow in which air is injected axially through a centered nozzle of 110 μm inner diameter and 210 μm outer diameter ( Each fluid flows under laminar flow conditions in order to deal with smooth interfaces. To predict the liquid and gas flows in the micro-tube, the mass balance and momentum equations of each of the phases with the associated boundary conditions are solved numerically. The flow is assumed adiabatic and axisymmetric. The two immiscible fluids have uniform inlet velocities that allow laminar flow conditions and meet at the exit of the nozzle to yield a two-phase flow ( The mass and momentum equations can be written as: The density ρ and viscosity µ are computed as the averages over the two phases, weighted with the volume fraction φ The surface tension force F The curvature of the mobile interface is computed as: The unit vector n is given by the following equation: The scalar φ being the volume fraction. Its evolution is governed by the advection equation: An axisymmetric computational domain, encompassing hexahedral and prismatic elements, is constructed and a hybrid computational mesh is used with different levels of refinement. Mesh dependency study is conducted, showing the numerical solution is mesh-independent for a spatial step size of 1 μm. A no-slip velocity boundary condition was used for the walls. At inlets, constant volume fraction values and uniform inflow velocity profiles for the gas phase and for the liquid phase are applied. For the outflow boundary, we applied a given value for the pressure and a zero-gradient for the velocity and for the volume fraction. Eventhough the equilibrium contact angle between the wall and water depends on the water purity and on the surface roughness and wettability. In the present work, two situations were investigated. The first one corresponds to a moving contact line in order to look at its effect on bubble formation and detachment. The second corresponds to fixed contact line.  An open source code, OpenFOAM (Open Field Operation And Manipulation), based on the control volume method is used to solve the governing equations. The standard form of the transport equation for a scalar property ϕ is: Standard discretization schemes are applied within the control volume approach. The transient terms in the equations are discretized using a first order implicit scheme (Euler) with Courant number (CFL) smaller than 0.5.The convection term in the momentum equation is discretized using a Gauss limited linear scheme. The convection term in the VOF equation is discretized using the Gauss vanLeer scheme. Finally, diffusion term is discretized using the Gauss Linear Corrected scheme ( The adopted solution method for the resulting algebraic equations is the preconditioning gradient method (PCG) with diagonal incomplete-Cholesky preconditioner for pressure and bi-conjugate gradient (PBiCG) with diagonal incomplete-LU preconditioner for velocity. In the interFoam solver available in OpenFOAM Code, the pressure-velocity coupling is handled with PISO (Pressure Implicit with Splitting of Operators) algorithm ( The convergence criterion of the computation iterative process is achieved for each time step when the residuals of pressure and velocities are less than 10 Appropriate mesh refinement has been implemented in InterFOAM, the solver of OpenFOAM, in order to capture and locate the interface with VOF method with clearness and obtain a smooth interface. Before running our cases, we have checked the computer program by comparing obtained results with published ones in the literature. Several comparisons have been made with results of Results are obtained for a co-current flow in a tube of 500 µm inner diameter with an injection nozzle of 110 µm inner diameter and 210 µm outer diameter. It carries the gas phase on a length of 30 × 10 Based on the visualization of a bubble starting from its formation at the exit of the injection nozzle to detachment, Indeed, this phenomenon is only a consequence of the effects of the surface tension force on the bubble, which keeps the bubble attached to the wall in the first and the second stage, whereas it contributes to the formation of the neck and the detachment of the bubble in the last stage.  We observe several stages characterized by different bubble shapes such as those shown in With the condition of no slip velocity at the walls of the gas injection nozzle and without setting the static contact angle at As mentioned previously, the contact angle is not set at a prescribed value, but varies instantaneously. It is defined as the angle between the tangent to the interface of the bubble and the wall and is measured in the liquid phase. A literature survey showed that studies that considered the contact line motion are rather rare.  Numerical and experimental profile in the Let us focus on the end of the last stage i.e. on the bubble detachment process. Furthermore, if we track the axial location of the neck, we observe a linear increase of its position with time before a rapid acceleration to produce the detachment in a few microseconds (0.01 ms). It is noticed that the detachment of the bubble does not occur at the exit of the nozzle, but in its immediate vicinity at a distance of about 0.5 times the diameter of the nozzle. The previous analysis related to the visualization, the shape and the size of the bubble remains a rather qualitative analysis and does not allow to fully understand the causes.  The buoyancy force (F The gas momentum force (F The surface tension force (F The viscous drag force (F The added mass force (F The pressure force (F At each time step, the solver of OpenFOAM supplies the data for velocity, pressure and volume fraction. A computer program is then written in  Under quasi-static conditions only gravity force, pressure force, surface tension force as well as the resultant of all the forces mentioned above are shown on this figure. The other forces remain negligible. From this figure, we notice the three stages during bubble formation as reported previously. Let's recall that the negative forces are playing an attachment role and the positive forces a detaching role. For the first stage, the magnitude of the surface tension force increases to a maximum value as well as does the pressure force. However, the magnitude of the surface tension force is always greater. Indeed, the displacement of the contact line induces the increase of the surface tension force in order to maintain the bubble attached to the nozzle. The dominance of this force, which is an attaching force, does not allow detachment by other forces applied on the bubble. In this step, the dynamic contact angle is almost constant and therefore has no influence on the bubble formation and the forces applied on it. However, the displacement of the contact line has a remarkable influence on the forces applied on the bubble and on its formation. Moreover, the optimum of the forces which limits this stage corresponds to the upper limit of the contact line radius which equals the outer radius of the nozzle ( For the second stage, the magnitude of the surface tension force decreases and then it remains relatively constant while the contact line is pinned to the outside radius of the nozzle. Therefore, the behavior of the surface tension force is rather influenced by the instantaneous contact angle ( During the third stage, a decrease of the magnitude of the surface tension force is observed and at the end of the process a sharp drop of the surface tension force yields the pinch-off and detachment of the bubble. The trend of the pressure force shows a rapid decrease with the return of the contact line to its initial position at the inner radius of the nozzle. This coincides with the beginning of the neck formation and the reversal of the curvature of the interface. However, the surface tension force decreases mainly because of the inward motion of the contact line and the decrease of its radius as well as the increase of the contact angle over 90° On the other hand, we may highlight that although the tube is vertical and we consider an upward flow, the gravity force is not playing any significant role in this context of small size bubbles. The gravity force very slightly increases linearly with time (up to 0.6 μN), but remains negligible compared to other forces. After reviewing the possible mechanisms of bubble formation for very low Reynolds number, we thought that the mechanism of bubble detachment may be caused by surface tension force under these conditions. Contrary to the conventional mechanistic approach where the surface tension has a role of attachment to the injection nozzle, in this case, the surface tension may play a double role, it causes the attachment of the bubble to the nozzle during the first 2 stages and then it contributes to destabilize the interface during the last stage, by creating the neck which is followed by the pinch-off and detachment of the bubble. From the birth of the bubble at the injection nozzle with the shape of a spherical cap, it increases in volume while the contact line moves outwards. Then, it keeps increasing in volume and stretching while the contact line is pinned at the outer nozzle radius and a cylindrical neck is formed. It is followed by an inward motion of the contact line to its initial position and then the destabilization effect of the surface tension force starts and generates a minimal surface feature illustrated by the narrowing of the neck. This amplifies until the pinch-off and the detachment of the bubble of a spherical shape. This description is verified by the evaluation of the surface/volume ratio of the bubble from its birth to breakup ( In order to highlight the influence of the contact line motion on forces applied on the bubble, we have considered the cases of a free contact line and a fixed contact line at the injection nozzle ( The study of bubble growth and detachment in a co-flowing two-phase flow in a cylindrical micro-tube is carried out to analyze the role of surface tension force with or without gravity. Two configurations are considered, a horizontal axisymmetric flow in the absence of gravity and an upward flow in the presence of gravity. The open source code "OpenFOAM" is implemented to simulate the mechanism of growth and detachment of bubbles for a two-phase air-water flow in a micro-tube using the Volume of Fluid method for tracking the mobile interface. The prediction results show that the bubble detachment does not occur at the exit of the nozzle, but in the immediate vicinity of the nozzle at a distance of about 0.5 times the nozzle diameter. For very small nozzles, the diameter of the bubble is smaller than the capillary length (capillary regime), we have shown that the gravitational forces have no influence on the detachment of the bubbles nor on their size even in the presence of gravity. This study has highlighted the role of surface tension force and its importance on the growth and detachment of bubbles. It acts as an attaching force at the injection nozzle during the bubble growth stage until the formation of the neck. The capillary effects then tend to reduce the diameter of the neck until the pinch-off and cause the detachment of the bubble. Wall-level analysis is used to describe the motion of the contact line during the bubble growth process and its significant effect on bubble formation. We have demonstrated an influence of the contact line on the size of bubbles formed depending on whether the contact line is fixed or mobile. We have shown that the detachment time is substantially reduced when the contact line is fixed compared to that of a mobile contact line, thus producing smaller size bubbles. The comparative study between the forces applied on the bubble allowed to highlight the significant influence of the contact line.  All authors, herby, declare that there is no conflict of interest with any person or administration in relation with this work.