The present study investigates the use of ammonium sulfate as a lixiviant in the recovery of rare earth elements (REE) from clays. Rare earth ions are physically adsorbed on clay minerals, with concentrations ranging from 0.05 to 0.5wt.%. It was previously shown that they could be easily recovered via an ion exchange mechanism during leaching with inorganic monovalent salt solutions (such as ammonium sulfate). A standardized desorption procedure was established to systematically investigate the influence of leaching conditions such as lixiviant concentration, temperature, pH and agitation rate on desorption kinetics and REE extraction levels. It was determined that the optimum leaching conditions, leading to 80–90% total REE extraction, required pH values in the range 3–4 and moderate temperatures (<50°C) in order to avoid lanthanide precipitation/loss via hydrolysis. Various lixiviant concentrations above a certain “cut-off” level (about 6 times the stoichiometric requirement) did not affect extraction levels, while the agitation speed was irrelevant with regards to leaching efficiency, requiring only sufficient stirring to ensure complete slurry suspension for effective mass-transfer. Extraction kinetics were found to be very fast, with less than 5min to reach terminal extraction, and independent of lixiviant concentration, pH, temperature and agitation speed.The ongoing development of new, advanced technologies generated an increased demand for rare earth elements (REE) in the international market, with emphasis on identifying new resources to insure an adequate supply for present and future use. As the main commercially significant REE-rich sources, containing up to 70% rare earth oxides (REO), such as carbonate-based bastnasite and phosphate-based monazite become limited, the research focus shifted on the ion-adsorption clays as an alternative source of lanthanides ( Alumino-silicate minerals (i.e. clays) can be regarded as natural ion exchangers: isomorphous substitution of one cation with another of similar size but with lesser charge (e.g. Al In one of the first known investigations describing the extraction of REE from kaolinite, the use of NH Recent new findings were reported on the extraction process during leaching with sulfate and chloride-based salts of monovalent cations (Li, Na, Cs and NH Based on that study, (NH Two types of natural clays known to contain adsorbed REE from an undisclosed location were employed in the present work, and referred to as YR (yttrium-rich) and YM (yttrium-medium), respectively, depending on their initial yttrium content. The complete elemental analysis, including detailed REE composition, was determined by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and Inductively-Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-OES) as per procedures described in a previous publication ( For the preparation of all solutions used in the present work, de-ionized water and A.C.S. reagent grade (NH To evaluate the influence of agitation speed, tests were conducted in a cylindrical 1 L Pyrex reactor fitted with a variable speed control stirrer and sampling line; an axial-mixing type Teflon-coated impeller was employed. At the end of the experiment, the solids were separated by vacuum filtration (Whatman 541 filter paper, 22 Chemical composition in terms of major compounds is shown in Previous work ( Considering that the total content of REE is about 2.5 The results of YR and YM batch leaching tests at 25 Individual extraction levels varied widely from element to element, with Er and Tm exhibiting the lowest extraction from both clays regardless of lixiviant concentrations. The desorption behavior difference of an REE element from different clays could be explained by the possible different mineral structure. According to Despite detectable Ce content in both initial clays (i.e. 0.008 to 0.02 The leaching kinetics was very fast for both clays, with less than 5  As process kinetics was found to be very fast, it was decided that studying the influence of other experimental factors (pH or temperature) on kinetics was not of interest. Based on previous experimental findings ( A two-stage leaching process was also tested to investigate whether additional REE extraction was possible. Leach residue (L1) was re-pulped in fresh 0.5   The StreamAnalyzer™ of the OLI software package ( In this specific case, the modeling was based on an initial concentration of ~   It can be thus inferred that at pH 5, even though theoretically below the REE hydrolysis limit, permanently chemisorbed surface species of the type clay-O In conclusion, even if the ion-exchange reactions are considered pH-independent, the permanently-sorbed species start to form at pH values above 5, making thus the control of pH an important factor during clays leaching with (NH According to   In the early eighties, Miller studied extensively the factors affecting the sorption of lanthanides on montmorillonite and reported that the extent of irreversible adsorption increased with temperature in the range 20–100 To relate these findings to our own work, it can be argued that, even if the ion-exchange reactions are temperature-independent and lanthanide sulfate solubility is minimal dependent on temperature, an increase in temperature caused partial dehydration of the hydrated REE adsorbed on the clays (both on surface and in interlayer), formation of fixed chemisorbed species and thus decreased REE extraction levels at 50 In order for the ion exchange process between the adsorbed lanthanides (Ln The issue of optimum solid-to-liquid ratio (i.e. clay-to-lixiviant solution) was not addressed in this study; it was decided to select a S/L of 1/2 by mass throughout the tests, as to ensure complete slurry suspension (i.e. high solid–liquid contact interface), and efficient agitation. A higher electrolyte fraction was not deemed necessary due to the fact that sufficient stoichiometric excess was delivered by using the1/2 ratio. On the other hand, due to the extremely fine nature of the clays used and the general tendency of dry clays to absorb water and expand ( The present study investigated the influence of experimental conditions such as lixiviant concentration, pH, temperature and agitation speed on the extraction process of rare earth ions adsorbed on two types of clay minerals via leaching with (NH Prolonged leaching did not improve extraction, likely because the un-leached REE were permanently adsorbed and could only be liberated via more aggressive and non-selective acid or alkaline leach. It was also found that individual lanthanide extraction levels varied widely from element to element and this variation was similar regardless of experimental conditions. This behavior was attributed to the increased hydrolysis tendency in the lanthanide series with increasing atomic number and the contraction of ionic radii, thus making heavy lanthanides more difficult to extract. It was determined that terminal extraction levels of 80–90% are achievable under ambient temperature (25 Financial support from the