This paper describes application of a fast inversion method to recover a 3D susceptibility model from magnetic anomalies. For this purpose, the survey area is divided into a large number of rectangular prisms in a mesh with unknown susceptibilities. Solving the full set of equations is substantially time consuming, and applying an algorithm to solve it approximately can reduce the time significantly. It is shown that the Lanczos bidiagonalization method can be an appropriate algorithm to solve a Tikhonov cost function for this purpose. Running time of the inverse modeling significantly decreases by replacing the forward operator matrix with a matrix of lower dimension. A weighted generalized cross validation method is implemented to choose an optimum value of a regularization parameter. To avoid the natural tendency of magnetic structures to concentrate at shallow depth, a depth weighting is applied. This study assumes that there is no remanent magnetization. The method is applied on a noise-corrupted synthetic data to demonstrate its suitability for 3D inversion. A case study including ground based measurement of magnetic anomalies over a porphyry-Cu deposit located in Kerman providence of Iran, Now Chun deposit, is provided to show the performance of the new algorithm on real data. 3D distribution of Cu concentration is used to evaluate the obtained results. The intermediate susceptibility values in the constructed model coincide with the known location of copper mineralization.One of the most important topics in applied geophysics is the inversion of ill-posed problems. Inversion of geophysical data is often ill-posed meaning that the solution might not depend solely on the data and requires additional information to be determined uniquely. Many attempts have been made in the geophysical context to find a unique and stable solution for geophysical inverse problems subject to the following conditions: (1) Non-uniqueness: the problem has infinitely many solutions, (2) Instability: the inverse process causes unstable solutions because the eigenvalues of the forward operator are close to zero, and because the observation are contaminated with noise ( Many researchers have dealt with the inversion of magnetic data to determine the magnetic properties and geometry of subsurface structures. Inversion of large scale data needs tackling two problems; (a) fast forward modelling and (b) using an efficient and fast solver for central system of equations like the conjugate gradient (CG) method. In the cases of using several hundred thousand model parameters and tens of thousands of data, the main problem of inversion is related to fast computation of the forward operator. For such problems especially airborne potential survey, a compression technique like sparsity based representation of the forward operator by wavelet transforms can be used. After solving the problem of the forward mapping, a fast solver like the CG method can be applied to compute model parameters (  The main motivation of this study is fast recovery of 3D susceptibility distributions. Our work suggests using a new method faster than the CG which avoids large matrix multiplication. To do this, an iterative method called Lanczos bidiagonalization is applied. The original system of equations is replaced by a system of lower dimension to increase the speed of the solution procedure significantly while being able to solve the original problem with a high degree of accuracy. A weighted generalized cross validation (WGCV) score is used to choose an optimum value of a regularization parameter. It is shown that the WGCV determines a regularization parameter which is close to the optimum one in the predicted mean-squared-error (PMSE) sense. In what follows, after a brief introduction of the inverse procedure, a noisy synthetic multi-source magnetic anomaly is considered to demonstrate the capability of the method. To this end, real data pertaining to the Now Chun porphyry-Cu deposit located in Kerman, central Iran, are presented. Mapped 3D distribution of Cu concentration is in well agreement with the obtained result. To perform inverse modeling, a collection of rectangular prisms provides a simple way to approximate a volume of mass. If small enough, each rectangular prism can be assumed to have constant susceptibility. In low susceptibility ranges, a linear relationship between susceptibility and magnetic anomaly strength is a valid approximation; therefore, the inverse process reduces to solving a linear system of equations ( Forward modeling of magnetic data were first presented by In order to be able to compute an appropriate solution of the susceptibility distribution χ in Eq. The speed of solving Eq. The Lanczos bidiagonalization algorithm was proposed by It is assumed that the parameter Since a suitable value of the regularization parameter is not known a priori, the matrix However, in the case of under-determined system of equations, The main conclusion of this paper is that computing As any regularization method, the inversion algorithm presented in this paper cannot be used without an appropriate regularization parameter(s). The two parameters To evaluate the capability of the method, a synthetic magnetic anomaly consisting of four different rectangular bodies is simulated. Six different steps of The optimum value of regularization parameter The maps of four depth slices through the recovered model shown in The case study is located within the Urumieh–Dokhtar (Sahand–Bazman) magmatic arc subdivision of the Central Iran zone where extensive Tertiary to Plio-Quaternary extrusive and intrusive units are exposed in a NW-SE trend ( Most of the geological units have been altered hydrothermally with the most intensive alteration occurring in the subvolcanic rhyo-dacitic bodies. The general trend of altered rhyo-dacitic units and hydrothermal dissemination is northeast–southwest ( The primary control of the bulk magnetic properties of the host rock and magnetic intrusions is the partitioning of iron between oxides and silicates ( A ground-based magnetic survey was performed in the area addressed above, in which the distances between profiles and stations are 50 The WGCV curve for two different weights zero and 0.5 is shown in The 3D view of Cu concentration for a cut off 0.3% is shown in In this study, we presented a new fast algorithm for 3D inversion of magnetic data. The main characteristic of the study was implementation of the Lanczos bidiagonalization method in which the forward operator matrix is replaced by a bidiagonal matrix with remarkable lower dimensions. Subsequently, the speed of algorithm increased using this replacement. A comparison of the obtained results by the proposed method had close similarity to the solution of the original problem. A weighted generalized cross validation method was used to choose an optimum value of the regularization parameter and we showed that it worked well for the Lanczos bidiagonalization implementation. The WGCV determined a regularization parameter which was close to the optimum one in the PMSE sense. An interesting result from the study obtained by comparison of the mapped 3D Cu concentration with the recovered susceptibility model at Now Chun copper mine in central Iran, and high values of copper concentrations corresponded to low values of the recovered susceptibilities. The authors gratefully acknowledge support provided by the faculty of Mining Engineering,