Utility of microorganisms as surface modifiers in flotation and flocculation has generated great interest in recent times. The surface properties of the minerals and the microorganisms such as zeta-potential (ζ-potential) and hydrophobicity play a major role in determining adsorption of the microorganisms to the minerals and hence the efficiency of flocculation and flotation. These properties are also dependent on the solution conditions such as pH and ionic strength. In the present investigation, the role of ionic strength and pH in determining the surface properties and hence adsorption of the bacterium Bacillus polymyxa to hematite and quartz has been studied in detail. Results indicate that increasing the ionic strength changes the ζ-potential of hematite and the bacterium without changing the point-of-zero-charge (PZC). Contact angle measurements showed that hematite was the most hydrophobic when compared with both quartz and the bacterium. Adsorption tests demonstrated that conditioning time, pH and ionic strength are all important in controlling adsorption of B. polymyxa on to both quartz and hematite. Adsorption of bacteria on to hematite was more compared with quartz. Flocculation tests demonstrated that in the presence of bacteria and electrolyte, hematite settled very rapidly in the pH range of 2–8. However, quartz settled much slower under the same indicating that the quartz particles are being dispersed. Thus selective flocculation of hematite can be used effectively in separating hematite from quartz. Interaction energies calculated using the extended DLVO theory were found to be in good agreement with the adsorption and flocculation tests.Bioprocessing of minerals has been a subject of research for over two decades. In bioprocessing microorganisms can be used instead of conventional chemicals for two purposes, (a) to act as leaching agents either by directly attaching to the mineral surface or by producing acids which aid in leaching and (b) to act as surface modifiers to enhance the separation of one mineral from another either by flotation or flocculation. In both these methods of bioprocessing, the attachment or adsorption of microorganism to the mineral surface is an important process. The attachment is dependent on both the solution conditions such as pH and ionic strength and the surface properties of the minerals and the microorganism such as zeta-potential ( Several mineral-microorganism systems have been studied in the past with respect of bioprocessing. Smith and Misra In all of the above studies, the difference in the natural surface properties were utilized for selective adsorption. No studies have been done to determine the effect of altering the surface properties on adsorption of the microorganism, i.e. changing the surface charge or surface hydrophobicity of either the mineral or the microorganism or both. It has been shown in earlier studies that the presence of various ions alter the The objective of the present study was to examine the adsorption of A pure culture of the microorganism, Pure handpicked mineral samples of hematite and ‘milky’ quartz were obtained from Alminrock Indscer Fabriks, Bangalore, India. The samples were ground in a dry mill and then sieved. The ground samples were used for  Contact angle measurements were performed using a contact angle goniometer (Ramé-Hart Inc., NJ, USA). The mineral samples were first molded in epoxy resin with one flat surface being exposed for contact angle measurements. The surface of each sample was polished using 1000 and 4000 grit SiC paper. Final polishing was carried out with 0.05 μm alumina suspension. The samples were thoroughly washed with distilled water before making the measurements. In case of the bacterium, the suspension containing the microorganism was filtered using a 0.2 μm Millipore filter paper as described by van der Mei et al. Contact angles of different liquids were measured using the sessile drop technique. A 2 μl drop was placed onto the surface and measurements were made within 2–3 min of placing the drop. Angles on both sides of the droplet were measured. The average of about eight readings is reported here. The contact angles could be reproduced with an accuracy of ±2°. Adsorption tests were performed in shake flasks and the change in cell number was monitored by counting using a Petroff–Hausser counter. About 1 g of mineral sample was conditioned in 50 ml of either distilled water or KNO Flocculation tests were carried out with each of the mineral samples in 100 ml graduated cylinders. About 5 g of the mineral was dispersed in double distilled water or KNO As described earlier, the growth curve of The The contact angles of water, formamide and diiodomethane on all the three surfaces, i.e. bacteria, hematite and quartz were measured by the sessile drop technique and are shown in The effect of conditioning time, pH and electrolyte concentration in determining the adsorption of The most significant result to be noted here is the difference in the amount of The effect of pH on adsorption was also examined in both absence and presence of electrolyte and the results are shown in Washing tests were conducted to verify the nature of adsorption of Adsorption isotherms were also carried out by varying the bacterial concentration from 10 Flocculation tests were conducted to validate the results obtained by adsorption tests and the results are shown in But in the case of quartz, the reverse of the above was phenomenon observed, i.e. the amount settled decreased with the addition of bacteria and electrolyte. Quartz is negatively charged and so is the bacterium. When both are placed in the same suspension, then the overall negative charge of the system is increased which could lead to greater stabilization of the suspension. So the same bacteria under the same conditions can do two different things, i.e. it enhances settling of hematite while it retards the settling of quartz. This phenomenon can be effectively used in selective flocculation and separation of hematite from quartz. The interaction energies between the mineral and the bacteria were calculated using the extended DLVO theory The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: Electrolyte concentration and pH play a major role in determining the surface charge of Surface free energy calculations indicate that quartz and the bacterium were hydrophilic while hematite was hydrophobic. The γ Adsorption tests demonstrated that attachment of bacteria to mineral surfaces was strongly dependent on presence of electrolyte. With an increase in electrolyte concentration, the amount of bacterium adsorbing to hematite and quartz increased. Attachment on to hematite was more than quartz at any given condition. Adsorption in the presence of electrolyte was also found to be dependent on pH. While maximum attachment on to quartz was found to be around pH 2, maximum attachment to hematite was observed over a wider pH range (pH 2–6). Flocculation tests demonstrated that presence of electrolyte and bacteria increase the settling rates of hematite while the settling of quartz is retarded. This points out that quartz is dispersed thus making it possible to selectively flocculate hematite. Interaction energy calculations using extended DLVO theory correlated well with the experimental results. The major contribution to the The authors wish to acknowledge the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India, for providing financial assistance to carry out this work.