The goethetic-hematite iron ore contains more goethite and kaolinite mineral. These mineral phases are more fragile nature. During crushing and screening, these phases generally report in the below 10 mm size fraction. The low grade fines generated during crushing and screening, is scrubbed using screw scrubber or screw classifier to remove below 100 µm size fractions. The overflow of screw scrubber contains mostly clay and goethite minerals which becomes difficult for settling. Hence the settling studies were carried out on this sample using anionic commercial flocculant at different solid concentration and flocculant dosages. It contains more than 96% of below 45 µm. The overflow contains 61.72% Fe(T), 3.91% SiO2, 3.81% Al2O3 and 3.94% LOI. The XRD and heating cycle studies were carried out to determine the mineral phase analysis. It contains around 65% hematite, 26% goethite and 9% kaolinite. Without addition of flocculant, the settling rate is at the desired level (2 m/hr) but at 35% solid concentration, the settling is very low (0.24 m/hr). The flocculant dosage was varied from 10 to 60 g/tonne of ore. It has been observed that at 10% solid concentration, minimum required dosage of flocculant is 10 g/tonne to achieve 2 m/hr settling rate. It has been observed that with increase in solid percentage, the settling rate of particles decreases. At 30% solid concentration, the requirement of flocculant is around 60 g/tonne. Once, the solid concentration of particles increases more than 30%, the settling rate becomes very slow even after adding the flocculant. In this study, the settling rate was optimised with respect to solid concentration and flocculant dosages.In mining and mineral processing industries, dewatering of mineral concentrates and tailings is one of the most significant unit operation activity. Dewatering of concentrates and tailings not only reduces the holding volume but also increases the water recycle to the processing plants At low solid concentration, the inter-particle distance between each particle is more and the particles settles independently. However, at higher concentration, the distance between particles is very less and for which the particles come into contact with each other The hematite iron ore from one of the mines of Odisha was taken for this study. The hematite iron ore fines contain reasonable amount of clay minerals, which gives negative affect in wet process for preparation of pellet feed material. It has swelling properties, which causes increasing the viscosity of slurry, and it disturbs the rheology of the slurry. Due to high viscosity, the performance of each unit operation of the process goes down drastically. Goethite is fragile nature. The kinetic of reduction of goethite in comparison with hematite is high. As a result, the ultra fines generation is more during grinding and beneficiation process. For utilization of fine size concentrate of iron ore, making pellet is the most appropriate solution. Indian iron ore has high LOI due to the presence of kaolinite, goethite and gibbsite and high Blaine number due to fragile nature of the goethite present in the ore. XRD and heating cycle analysis were performed to determine the presence of different precise minerals The low grade iron ore contains mostly below 100-µm size material. By using screw scrubber, the below 45-µm size fraction material is collected as the screw scrubber overflow and this material is used for the settling study. Slurry of different solid concentration was prepared by varying the solid content from 10 to 35% by weight at a natural pH of 6.0. Comparatively, settling study also was done by using an anionic water soluble flocculant at different flocculant dosage varying from 10 to 60 g/tonne of ore. Sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid was used to vary the pH of the slurry and also studied the effect of different pH on the settling rate of the particles. A measuring cylinder having a capacity of 1 L was used to study the rate of setting of particle by observing the interface level at different interval of time in each case. The chemical analysis of the as received iron ore was performed by using wet chemical analysis. By using ICP-OES, the other minor chemicals were also analysed by using standard reference. The detail chemical analysis of the as received sample is shown in X-ray diffraction (XRD) study was used for identification of various mineral phases and assessing the abundance of each phase in the sample. The XRD was carried out by means of Philips Diffractometer having automatic divergence slit, receiving slit and graphite monochromatic assembly. Co kα radiation of 40KV and 30 mA is used for this purpose. A diffraction pattern recording the angle against the intensity is obtained over a range. Each mineral phase is matched with data book and various minerals are identified. Further, the variation in the peak intensities of different mineral phases in the ore sample indicates their relative abundance. The XRD studies of the samples from bulk and screw scrubber overflow were carried out and shown in The quantitative analysis of major and minor mineral phases of bulk sample was estimated based on heating cycle data, chemical analysis and XRD data. The results are given in the The size distribution along with iron analysis of the bulk sample is given in the Particle size of the bulk sample and screw scrubber overflow was analysed by using Malvern mastersizer instrument with an obscuration range of 13–18%. The bulk sample contains around 88% below 45 µm size and the overflow of screw scrubber holds more than 96% below 45-µm size and are shown in After scrubbing of the iron ore samples, all screw scrubber overflow was taken for the settling study. A commercial anionic flocculant was used for settling of fine particles in the present study. The settling was carried out in a graduated measuring cylinder of 1 L capacity. Settling study was carried out using different dosages of flocculant at different solid percentage. The interface height was observed against the time intervals. The interface level with respect to time was recorded in each case. This data was used to study the settling behaviour of the solid particles in the slurry with respect to different dosages of anionic flocculant. The anionic flocculent used in this study is basically a linear, long-chain, water-soluble and high molecular weight synthetic polymer of repeating units of acrylamide and its derivatives. The functional groups present in the anionic flocculent can be easily identified form the typical molecular structure and it is shown in The settling study with different solid concentration was carried out without using flocculant. The results are shown in Above 15% solid concentration, the rate of settling of the particles generally becomes slow. So to enhance the settling rate, different dosages of anionic flocculant was added to the slurry. The settling study was also carried out at different solid concentrations with and without flocculant. By using anionic flocculent, the efficiency of solid liquid separation is improving drastically. The ultrafine dispersed particles come close together with increase in the effective particle size of the solid and making two clear phases, i.e. solid and liquid phase. Generally, when two or more solid particles comes close together, the vandal walls forces exceeds than the repulsive force due to agitation and the particle settles down naturally. However, by using flocculent, the fi-ne particles get collide with each other and coagulate to form larger particles. This helps in rapid settling of the particles. The flocculent used in this study have more affinity to adsorb on the surface of the particles. When there is two different opposite charged surface, better adsorption of the flocculent occurs. The possible mechanism of attachment of the particles by using the flocculent is shown in The flocculant rate was varied from 15 to 60 g/tonne. The comparative result is shown in Settling study of screw scrubber overflow was also carried out to find the effect of pH on settling rate. Experiment was carried out by varying the pH from 3.0 to 9 for 20% solid concentration without adding any flocculant. It was observed that the settling rate of the solid was so rapid particularly at a pH of 5. However, the settling rate becomes little slower compared to this pH. Settling study at different pH is shown in Settling study of screw scrubber overflow fraction of high grade iron ore was studied with varying the solid concentration, flocculant dosage and pH. Also the mineral phases present in the iron ore was studied by XRD and chemical analysis. Based on the above studies, the following conclusions can be drawn; As the as received ore (Bulk) contains good amount of −150 µm particles in rom fines, by simple scrubbing and classification processes, it may be separated at the beginning. The goethite and kaolinite minerals are dominating the hematite mineral phase, and as these minerals are more fragile in nature. So the bulk ore itself contains more amount of fine particles i.e. below 45 µm size. The screw scrubber overflow contains good amount of kaolinite and natural ultra-fines; the settling of it becomes very difficult. To improve the settling rate, anionic flocculant may be used. Slurry at a pH of 5.0 will be the best suitable for settling without flocculant at higher solid concentration of 20%. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.