The addition of low levels of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in the ammoniacal thiosulphate gold leach system lowered the catalytic cupric/cuprous redox equilibrium potential, hence the mixed solution potential and reduced the consumption of thiosulphate. In the leaching of pure gold, gold dissolution was enhanced in the presence of EDTA at a relatively low concentration, but excessive EDTA decreased gold dissolution. Raman analysis of the leached gold foil indicated that the stabilisation of thiosulphate by EDTA decreased the formation of the passivation layers of elemental sulphur and copper sulphide at the gold surface. In the leaching of a sulphide ore, the leaching kinetics and overall extractions of gold and silver were enhanced substantially, while the consumption of ammonium thiosulphate was reduced from 9.63kg/t to 3.85kg/t in the presence of 2.0mM EDTA after 24h leaching. This beneficial effect became more pronounced at a higher EDTA concentration. The enhanced gold and silver extractions by EDTA were attributed to the increase in the dissolution of gold and silver bearing sulphides, the stabilisation of copper and thiosulphate in leach solutions, the prevention of leaching passivation and the decrease in the interference of foreign heavy metal ions. The use of EDTA in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching system makes it practical to achieve satisfactory gold extraction over extended periods of leaching under low reagent concentrations, where the consumption of thiosulphate is low.Thiosulphate gold leaching has received much attention as an alternative technology to the cyanidation of gold ores in recent years due to the growing environmental concerns over the use of cyanide. Thiosulphate leaching is effective for the treatment of complex and carbonaceous-type ores through the degradation of sulphide matrices and the prevention of preg-robbing ( From an economic point of view, it is required that the leaching should be carried out under low reagent concentrations over extended periods where reagent consumption is low. Efforts were made to minimise thiosulphate consumption by reducing the concentration of thiosulphate in solution ( Ammonia is used for stabilising copper in solution in the ammoniacal thiosulphate system. At a low ammonia concentration, it is problematic to maintain copper at low concentrations in solution in the leaching of sulphide containing ores due to the adsorption of copper species on the mineral substrates especially sulphide minerals in gold ores. As a result, it is necessary to introduce additives to stabilise copper in solution at low reagent concentrations of ammonia, copper and thiosulphate. Gold foils (99.99% Au, thickness 0.2 Pyrite samples with 99% purity and a trace of silica, which were obtained from Geological Specimen Supplies, Australia, were crushed, milled to 100% −45 Elemental concentrations in solutions were determined by Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP–OES), involving the oxidation of sulphur species as stable sulphates prior to the analysis. After oxidation by hydrogen peroxide, solutions were acidified by HCl and HNO Leaching of pure gold was performed in a 250 Leaching of the sulphide ore was performed in a 1.5 It is common practice to activate sulphides such as pyrite and pyrrhotite with the addition of Cu In the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching system, the Cu In the presence of 0.5  As noted from In contrast, in the presence of 0.125 The mixed solution potentials decreased in the presence of EDTA, and this effect became more pronounced at a higher EDTA concentration. EDTA has stronger abilities than ammonia to complex the cupric ion, as indicated in The introduction of EDTA decreased the concentration of the oxidative cupric tetra-amine complex, and hence lowered the catalytic cupric/cuprous redox equilibrium potentials. It was indicated that the cupric tetra-amine complex promoted the oxidative degradation of thiosulphate to tetrathionate (  As presented in  The difference in the effect of the EDTA concentration on the leaching of pure gold and the sulphide ore was possibly attributed to the dissolution of sulphide minerals in the ore and the release of heavy metal ions from the sulphide minerals. Clearly, the dissolution of sulphides increased significantly in the presence of EDTA in the thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore, as indicated by a sharp increase in the sulphur concentration in EDTA stabilised cupric ions in solutions in the presence of pyrite, as discussed above. In such a system, pyrite only dissolved to a small extent and other foreign cations were very limited for EDTA to complex. In addition, EDTA has a stronger ability to stabilise the cupric ion than the iron ions ( Clearly, the copper concentration in solution increased with the addition of EDTA, and in general the copper concentration became higher at a higher EDTA concentration (  The presence of EDTA reduced the decomposition of thiosulphate in the leaching of the sulphide ore ( Heavy metal ions such as Ni, Zn and Cr were found to retard gold leaching especially at relatively higher concentrations due to the formation of passivation layers at gold surfaces (  The effect of EDTA on leaching of pure gold and a sulphide ore was investigated in ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions. EDTA stabilised the cupric ion in solutions at a lower ammonia concentration, due to the formation of a more stable complex with the cupric ion than ammonia. The introduction of a small amount of EDTA in the ammoniacal thiosulphate system lowered the catalytic cupric/cuprous redox equilibrium potential, hence the mixed solution potential and reduced the consumption of thiosulphate, since the interaction between thiosulphate and the cupric complexes was reduced. In the leaching of pure gold, EDTA at a low concentration increased the overall gold dissolution over a prolonged leaching period because of the stabilisation of thiosulphate by EDTA. An excessive EDTA dosage caused a decrease in gold dissolution. Surface speciation by Raman spectroscopy on the leached gold surfaces indicated that the presence of EDTA decreased the formation of the passivation layers of elemental sulphur and copper sulphide at the gold surface. In the leaching of the sulphide ore, the addition of EDTA decreased the mixed solution potentials and the consumption of ammonia thiosulphate from 9.63 The financial support from