Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) Ni–Ti thin films have attracted much interest as functional and smart materials due to their unique properties. However, there are still important issues unresolved like formation of film texture and its control as well as substrate effects. In this study, near-equiatomic films were obtained by co-sputtering from Ni–Ti and Ti targets in a process chamber installed at a synchrotron radiation beamline. In-situ X-ray diffraction during the growth of these films allowed establishing a relationship between structure and deposition parameters. The effect of a TiN layer deposited on top of the SiO2/Si(100) substrate prior to the deposition of the Ni–Ti films was analysed. These experiments show that TiN acts not only as a diffusion barrier, but also induces different crystallographic orientations. A TiN layer with ≈215nm thickness induces the preferential growth of (110) planes of the Ni–Ti B2 phase parallel to the substrate from the beginning of the deposition with a constant growth rate during the whole deposition. For a TiN thickness of ≈15nm, the diffraction peak B2(110) also appears from the beginning of the deposition but much less intense. In this latter case, the B2(211) peak was also detected having observed a crossover from 〈110〉 oriented grains dominating at small thicknesses, to 〈211〉 oriented grains taking over at larger thicknesses. The same orientations and similar intensities were observed for a Ni–Ti film deposited on a TiN layer with ≈80nm.Ni–Ti thin films are recognized as an excellent material for use in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Their high recoverable strains and large recovery forces coupled with the compatibility with batch-processing technology of silicon micromachining are a plus for the desired merging of the silicon-based microelectronics with micromachining technologies. They can be electrically driven using joule heating and, when compared with the bulk material, they demonstrate fast cooling rates because of their higher surface/volume ratio of materials increasing substantially the heat transfer rate Ni–Ti thin films are usually prepared using a sputtering method and typically deposited on Si and on SiO In most polycrystalline materials, crystal orientations are present in a definite pattern and a propensity for this occurrence is caused by the processing conditions. Many material properties (Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, strength, ductility, toughness, electrical conductivity, In a previous work, we have shown that the presence of a poly-Si buffer layer enhances the crystallization process of the Ni–Ti films, because of the higher number of nucleation sites provided by the rougher surface morphology of the poly-Si layer, when compared with a naturally oxidized Si(1 In the present study, the effect of a TiN layer deposited on top of the SiO The Ni–Ti films and the TiN buffer layers were deposited by D.C. magnetron sputtering in a chamber especially designed for The substrates mounted on a resistive heater were 15 The deposition chamber, equipped with Kapton windows for XRD was mounted on the six-circle goniometer at the ROBL beamline at the ESRF in Grenoble. The X-rays were monochromatized to A series of samples was also investigated by The growth of near-equiatomic Ni–Ti thin films was studied. The only varying deposition parameter for the set of samples presented here was the thickness of the TiN buffer layer. The integrated intensities of the Bragg-Brentano diffraction peaks TiN(1 In this study, TiN buffer layers of approximately 15, 80 and 215    The temperature dependence results of the electrical resistivity of the Ni–Ti samples with TiN buffer layers of approximately 15 and 215 As the temperature decreases, a clear increase in the resistivity is observed, followed by a decrease associated to the A TiN intermediate layer acts not only as a diffusion barrier, but also induces different crystallographic orientations on the Ni–Ti film deposited on top, which depends on the preferential orientation of the topmost TiN layer ( However, for the other two samples (TiN thickness of about 15 and 80 The decrease of the lattice parameter The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity of the Ni–Ti films allows us to detect different behaviour during phase transformation ( The According to the electrical resistivity results obtained during temperature cycling, the distinct crystallographic orientations of the Ni–Ti films influence their phase transformation behaviour. The authors would like to thank the FCT/MCTES for a Ph.D. scholarship (POCI 2010/FSE for R.M.S.M.), U. Strauch for technical assistance during the measurements at ROBL, and the DAAD (German Academic Exchange Service) for financial support under contract D/05/50641 within the program Acções Integradas Luso-Alemãs/DAAD-Grices 2006. Thanks are also due to Professor E. Fortunato for the use of the fourprobe apparatus for the electrical resistivity measurements at CENIMAT. The financial support from ESRF for experiments at ROBL as well as the pluriannual financial support of CENIMAT from FCT/MCTES are gratefully acknowledged by R.J.C.S., L.P., K.K.M., and F.M.B.F.