South China Block (SCB) is the area including the Yangtze Craton and the Huanan Orogen where scattered Precambrian terranes are usually regarded as segments of Cathaysia Land. It is the third most important molybdenum metallogenic province in China, next to the Qinling-Dabie area and Northeast China, containing 29 Mo-only or Mo-dominated, 9W-Mo(-Sn-Bi) and 8 Cu-Mo deposits. These 46 deposits are located mainly in: (1) the Lower Yangtze River Belt of the northeastern Yangtze Craton, (2) the Northern Jiangnan Orogenic Belt that is generally considered a Meso-Neoproterozoic magmatic arc complex accreted onto the southeastern margin of the Yangtze Craton, (3) the Wuyi-Yunkai Orogenic Belt characterized by local exposures of Proterozoic metamorphic terranes and the more widespread Sinian (Uppermost Proterozoic) to Triassic sedimentary sequences, and (4) the Southeast Coastal Volcanic Belt characterized by Yanshanian andesitic to felsic volcanic rocks. Their genetic types are dominated by porphyry and skarn mineral systems, with only a few quartz-vein systems. The orebodies form veins, lens, cylindrical shapes, pipes, or irregular in shape, usually controlled by faults at various scales and volcanic-subvolcanic complexes. The host-rocks are variable in lithologies, including granites, porphyries, volcanic breccias and tuffs, clastic sediments and carbonate rocks, but the high-grade orebodies are usually hosted in carbonate-shale sequences. Hydrothermal mineralization processes can be generally divided into four stages, from early to late, they are (1) K-feldspar-quartz veins or veinlets, (2) quartz-molybdenite stockworks, (3) quartz-polymetallic sulfide stockworks, and (4) quartz-carbonate-fluorite veinlets. Fluid-rock interaction as exemplified by wallrock alteration evolved from K-silicate alteration (K-feldspar-quartz-mica), through phyllic (quartz-sericite-chlorite-epidote), to propylitic or argillic alteration, with skarn alteration typically occurring in skarn-type mineral systems. Hydrothermal mineral assemblages vary between two end-members, namely the dry system formed by CO2-rich fluids and marked by quartz, K-feldspar, fluorite, carbonate and epidote, and the wet system mainly originated from CO2-poor fluids and composed of biotite, sericite and chlorite. The ore-forming fluids are magmatic in origin and show high-temperature and high-salinity. The melt-fluid systems forming Cu-Mo deposits are more oxidizing than those forming the W-Mo or Mo deposits, as suggested by accessory minerals in granitoids and daughter minerals in fluid inclusions. The Cu-Mo deposits are related to the I-type granitic rocks (adakite-like), whereas the W-Mo and Mo-only systems are related to granitic rocks of S- or A-types, although all of them show high K contents. Available isotope ages show that the Mo and Mo-bearing deposits were predominantly formed in the early Yanshanian Orogeny (170–134Ma), followed by the late Yanshanian Orogeny (110–92Ma) and the Caledonian Orogeny (450–410Ma). The Caledonian Mo-mineralization has been observed only in the Wuyi-Yunkai Orogenic Belt and related to the collision between the Yangtze Craton and the pre-Devonian Huanan Orogen or terranes separated from the Cathaysia Land, linked to the assembly of the Gondwana supercontinent. The Early Yanshanian mineralization affected the entire Huanan Orogen and the eastern Yangtze Craton, and resulted from the syn- to post-collisional tectonism following the closure of eastern Paleo-Tethys. The Late Yanshanian Mo deposits mainly occur in the Southeast Coastal Volcanic Belt and the southeastern margin of the Wuyi-Yunkai Orogenic Belt, and are related to the westward subduction of the Paleo-Pacific plate. The skarn-type mineral systems generally show lower Re contents than the porphyry-type deposits in a same tectonic unit, suggesting that carbonate host-rocks have lower Re contents than the causative porphyries. The Re contents in molybdenites from porphyry or porphyry-skarn Cu-Mo systems are >50ppm, mainly >100ppm, suggesting a source significantly contributed by the mantle; whereas the Re contents in molybdenites from the Mo-only or W-Mo-dominated deposits are <100pm, mainly <50ppm, indicating a genetic relation to the crust-sourced granitic magmatism.China has the largest molybdenum resources in the world and also has ranked as one of the two largest molybdenum production countries since the 1990s ( The SCB underwent multistage tectono-magmatic events and is well endowed with resources of W, Sn, Bi, Sb, Cu and Mo. To date at least 46 Mo deposits (including Mo-only, Mo-dominated and Mo-bearing; In this contribution, we summarize the principal geological and geochemical characteristics of the Mo deposits in the SCB, and then discuss their geneses and geodynamic settings. The SCB is the area north to the Xiang-Guang Fault, northwest to the Longmenshan Fault, and southwest to the Ailaoshan–Red River suture zone, respectively, and facing the Pacific Ocean in the southeast ( The Yangtze Craton is mainly covered by the coal-bearing Phanerozoic sedimentary sequence, with the basement rocks exposed along the margins. The basements rocks in the southeast margin of the Yangtze Craton consist of Mesoproterozoic volcanic-sedimentary rocks and constituting the Jiangnan Orogenic Belt, or a Mesoproterozoic accretionary arc ( The SCB underwent multiple tectonic-magmatic-metallogenic events since the Proterozoic period ( The eastern SCB is characterized by Yanshanian (Jurassic to Cretaceous) magmatic rocks and mineral deposits ( As shown in The Lower Yangtze River Metallogenic Belt (LYRB, Deposit Nos. 1–7 in The basement rocks of the LYRB are composed of a Neoarchean to Paleoproterozoic metamorphic complex and a thick flysch sequence intercalated with pelagic volcanic rocks, together with Neoproterozoic granitic rocks ( A set of NNW-, NW-, NNE- and some E–W-trending faults can be observed in the LYRB ( The Mo deposits in the Jiangnan Orogenic Belt are concentrated in the northern sector in Jiangxi and Zhejiang provinces (Nos. 8–12 in The basement rocks in the Northern Jiangnan Orogenic Belt (NJOB) comprise Mesoproterozoic migmatite, gneiss, schist and granulite, with isotopic ages ranging from 1.5 to 1.2 A set of NW-, NNE-, NW- and some E–W-trending faults can be observed in the NJOB ( The Neoproterozoic mafic-ultramafic rocks along the Jiang–Shao and Northeast Jiangxi faults, including peridotite, orthopyroxenite, gabbro, diabase, were interpreted as being part of the Neoproterozoic ophiolitic mélange ( The Wuyi-Yunkai Orogenic Belt (WYOB) is a NE-trending mountainous area bounded by the Jiang–Shao Fault to the west and Lishu–Dapu Fault to the east, including the Wuyi Shan in the north, the Nanling Mountains (Southern Range) in the center and the Yunkai–Dayao Mountains (close to China-Viet Nam border) in the south. The WYOB contain 27 Mo deposits, namely, four W-dominated (Nos. 19, 29, 30 and 33), three Cu-dominated (Nos. 23, 28 and 32) and twenty Mo-only or Mo-dominated (Nos. 13 to 18, 20 to 22, 24 to 27, 31, 34 to 36, 38 and 40 to 41) deposits. These deposits cluster in four areas, from north to south: (1) Nos. 35, 36, 38, 40 and 41 in the northeastern Wuyi Shan where the Early Cretaceous volcanic rocks occur and thus can be also assigned to SCVB; (2) Nos. 13 to 20 in the central Wuyi Shan occupied by pre-Devonian metamorphic rocks; (3) Nos. 21 to 30 in the Nanling Mountains; and (4) Nos. 31 to 34 in the Yunkai Mountains. The Paleoproterozoic Badu Group and Mayuan Group (ca. 1.9–1.8 Granitoids in the WYOB show relatively high ε The Southeast Coastal Volcanic Belt (SCVB) refers to the area southeast of the Lishui-Dapu Fault, where it is characterized by the Yanshanian volcanic rocks which can be also observed in the easternmost sectors of other tectonic units of the SCB ( The SCVB contains abundant epithermal Au-Ag-Cu deposits ( The molybdenite Re–Os geochronology and zircon U–Pb geochronology are the most powerful tools to elucidate the age of mineralization and magma emplacement ( It is clear that the molybdenite Re–Os ages and zircon U–Pb ages for each Mo deposit are nearly time-equivalent, with largest time gap < Two Caledonian Mo deposits have been recognized in the Yunkai Mountains of the WYOB ( At least 22 of the 46 Mo deposits in SCB yield mineralization ages of 170–134 Up to now only nine Mo deposits have been proven to have formed in Late Yanshanian Orogeny, with isotope ages ranging from 110 to 92 As well known, the Indosinian (Triassic) Orogeny is well represented in the SCB and adjacent areas ( The Mo deposits in the SCB are mainly hosted in: (1) Proterozoic metamorphic basement rocks, (2) Paleozoic–Triassic sedimentary cover comprising of the marine–terrestrial carbonate and clastic rocks, and (3) Yanshanian volcanic rocks in the SCVB ( The basement rocks are rarely exposed in the SCB, mainly including the Neoproterozoic Shuangqiaoshan Group in the Dexing Cu-Mo deposit (No. 10; The Paleozoic–Triassic sedimentary covers consist of clastic rocks and carbonates which are common in the Yangtze Craton and the WYOB, hosting the majority of the significant Mo deposits in SCB. Where the carbonate rocks are intruded by the ore-forming granitoids, skarns and skarn-type Mo orebodies are present in the contact zones, and occasionally accompanied with hornfels-type Mo mineralization, in addition to the porphyry-type mineralization. The skarn-type orebodies often have very high-grades, as the massive carbonate can act as impermeable seals for fluid circulation. This is well exemplified by the Tongshankou Cu-Mo deposit ( The Yanshanian volcanic rocks, mainly comprising rhyolite and dacite, widely crop out in the SCVB, followed by the southeastern margin of the WYOB and the eastern LYRB. These host-rocks are generally permeable, due to fractures created either by structural deformation or by hydraulic fracturing. The pores and fractures provided conduits for fluid migration and sites of metal precipitation. In this case, the ore minerals mainly occur as disseminations, disseminated aggregates, stockworks and veinlets; and the orebodies occur as veins, lens, pipes or pods ( Granitoids, including porphyry stocks, are a common kind of host-rocks of the porphyry or porphyry-skarn Mo deposits. The Mo deposits in the SCB are hosted by a variety of igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks in different geological times ( South China was subjected to multistage tectonic events, and thus the pre-Jurassic rocks were strongly deformed, with tight folds and faults being commonly observed. The regional faults control the location of the granitic intrusions, and together with the folds, control the occurrences of the orebodies. Regional faults and their subsidiary structures are generally NE-, NW- and E-W-trending, but the N-S-trending structures are only present in the Shizitou, Pingdi, Shizhuyuan, Baishiding, Chilu, Jukou, Shangchang and Dali Mo deposits ( The structures and/or their combinations with intrusions or specific lithostratigraphic units usually control the shape and occurrence of the orebodies. The orebodies are mainly stratiform, veins, lens and pipe in shape, and usually occur in or near the contact zones between the porphyries and wall-rocks. The spatial relationships between orebodies and porphyries include three types: (1) orebodies completely occur within the causative porphyries, as shown in the Yinkeng, Shangchang and Baishizhang Mo deposits; (2) all the orebodies occur in the country rocks (sedimentary, metamorphic rocks and older plutons) of the ore-causative intrusions, as exemplified by the Yuanzhuding Cu–Mo ( Intensive wallrock alteration is recognized in all the Mo deposits in the SCB. The majority of the Mo deposits in WYOB and LYRB show intense K-feldspar, carbonate, silicification and fluoritic alteration, accompanied by weaker phyllic and argillic alteration, as compared to world-class porphyry Cu–Au or Cu–Mo systems. By contrast, the Mo or Cu–Mo deposits in the SCVB and the NJOB show strong silicification, sericitic, chloritic, phyllic and argillic alteration, but less K-feldspar, carbonate and fluoritic alteration ( Wallrock alteration zonation and temporal evolution of the porphyry-skarn Mo deposits in the SCB have been variably documented ( In general, the alteration system in most porphyry-skarn Mo deposits, in spite of their differences, is zoned outward or temporally evolved from high-temperature assemblage of K-feldspar, silica, biotite and albite, through moderate-temperature phyllic alteration, to low-temperature argillic alteration and/or carbonation. The high to moderate temperature potash silicate and phyllic alteration styles are usually pervasive, while the low temperature alteration system is commonly shown as carbonate-quartz veinlets. One third (17) of the 46 Mo deposits discussed in this contribution are polymetallic, and can be distinguished between the Cu–Mo and W-Mo-Sn-Bi groups. All the Mo deposits in the LYRB are polymetallic and represented by Cu-dominated (Tongshankou, Chengmenshan, Matou and Hucunnan) and W-dominated (Ruanjiawan, Jitoushan and Baizhangyan) systems. Three metal inventories (Mo-only, Cu- and W-dominated) have been identified in the NJOB and the WYOB. The Cu–Mo systems are represented by the Dexing (No. 10), Dabaoshan (No. 28), Yuanzhuding (No. 32) and Luoboling (No. 23) deposits, whilst the W-dominated polymetallic systems include Yangchuling (No. 9), Xingluokeng (No. 19), Shizhuyuan (No. 29), Huangshaping (No. 30) and Shedong (No. 33) deposits. In the SCVB, the Mo deposits are commonly Mo-only and small in size, with exception of the Sanbao W–Mo deposit. It is very common that the metal inventory is controlled by the lithology of the host- or wall-rocks. For example, at the Beikengchang Mo-Fe-Pb-Zn deposit, the Mo orebodies are hosted in clastic rocks, but the skarn-type Fe-Pb-Zn orebodies are hosted in the contact zone between the porphyry and carbonate ( Most researchers have assumed that the Cu in porphyry-type deposits is mantle-derived, because the primitive andesites have higher Cu concentrations (145 One of the most important factors controlling the different metallic associations is the causative porphyries, as the metals in the porphyry-skarn deposits are believed to be derived predominantly from the magmas ( To discriminate the genesis of hydrothermal mineral systems, The Mo deposits in SCB, except for the Xiongjiashan and Dabaoshan deposits, contain the W-type (including WL- and WV-subtypes) and S-type inclusions with high homogenization temperatures and high salinities, which are characteristics of magmatic fluids ( Nearly all the Mo deposits are characterized by the wide variation of homogenization temperatures (Th), salinities and densities ( The C-type inclusions were reported in several deposits, but the CO The δ The δ The Huangshaping Mo polymetallic deposit, however, is an exception in the SCB. It yields a broad range of δ Available lead isotope compositions are listed in The Re contents in molybdenite from different deposits vary widely, ranging across several orders of magnitude from ppm to percentages. The factors controlling Re contents of molybdenite are debated. The Re contents in molybdenites of the Mo deposits of skarn or skarn-porphyry types in the LYRB cluster around 10 In the NJOB, the Re contents in molybdenite samples from Dexing Cu–Mo deposit are all higher than 50 The Mo deposits in the WYOB cluster in three areas, i.e. Wuyi Shan, Nanling Mountains and the Yunkai Mountains. It is notable that the molybdenite samples from the Mo-only and W–Mo deposits in the Wuyi Shan and Nanling Mountains are all < In the Yunkai Mountains, the available data of Re contents in molybdenites have been obtained from three deposits with quite differing ages, metal inventories and genetic types. The Yanshanian Yuanzhuding porphyry Cu–Mo deposit also shows high but widely variable Re contents in molybdenite ( The molybdenite samples of five deposits in the SCVB range from < From the data and discussions above, it can be summarized that the ore metals were mainly originated from causative magmatic rocks and partly sourced from the host-rocks. The Caledonian Mo deposits have higher Re concentrations in molybdenites than those of the Yanshanian, suggesting that the continental crust became more sialic from Early Paleozoic to Mesozoic. Except the Chengmenshan skarn-type Cu–Mo deposit, all the Yanshanian porphyry or porphyry-skarn Cu–Mo systems have Re contents in molybdenites higher than 50 It is generally accepted that the porphyry-skarn Mo-polymetallic deposits, as well as some quartz vein type Mo deposits, are related to the ore-hosting porphyries and their precursor intrusions in space, time and genesis. These ore-hosting intrusions are commonly multiple phases and emplaced during a short time in the SCB. They are mostly intermediate-felsic intrusions including granodiorite (porphyry), diorite (porphyry), quartz porphyry, monzogranite porphyry, moyite and biotite granite. The geochemical data of the reported granitoids have been summarized in this contribution. The geochemical signatures of representative granitoids in different regions of the SCB and the differences between Cu–Mo and Mo-only or W-Mo(-Sn-Bi) systems are recognized and briefly introduced below. The Cu-Mo or W-Mo mineralization-related granites in the LYRB are mostly granodiorite or granodiorite porphyry, and commonly contain magnetite as accessory minerals, implying a high oxygen fugacity of the causative magma ( The granitoids in the NJOB are represented by the Dexing quartz diorite to granodiorite porphyries and the Yangchuling granodiorite-granite complex, which are responsible for the Cu-Mo and W-Mo mineralization, respectively. The Dexing quartz diorite-granodiorite porphyries show a typical calc-alkaline signature, and have relatively high MgO, Cr, Ni and Sr contents, high La/Yb and Sr/Y ratios, but low Yb and Y contents, typical of I-type adakite affinities. They are also enriched in LREE and LILE (e.g. Rb, Sr, Ba), depleted in HFSE, which are identical to the granitoids formed in volcanic arcs. The ( The Yangchuling granitic complex, hosting the W-Mo deposit, comprises the calc-alkaline Qipancun granodiorite and Dagang'ao monzograntic porphyry, with SiO In the WYOB Mo mineralization is genetically related to the Caledonian, Early Yanshanian and Late Yanshanian granitic rocks. For this reason, an overview of the geology of these granitic rocks is given below. The Caledonian granitic magmatism in the Yunkuai Mountains has been proven to associate with Mo-only and W-Mo mineralization. The granitoids at the Shedong W-Mo deposit comprise mainly granodiorite with SiO Outcrops of Early Yanshanian granitoids are widespread in Huanan Orogen and are associated with numerous W, Sn, Bi, Mo and Cu deposits, which have been thoroughly studied since 1940s ( The granites associated with Mo-only mineralization can be exemplified by the Yuanlingzhai granite porphyry. It shows high values of K The Yuanzhuding granodiorite porphyry is typical of the Early Yanshanian granitoids that caused the Cu–Mo mineralization, belongs to the peraluminous high-K calc-alkaline series and exhibits slight Eu anomaly, high (La/Yb) In other words, the partial melting of the continental crust, the root of thickened lower crust and the SCLM of the WYOB generated the Early Yanshanian granitoids associating with W-Mo-dominated polymetallic, Mo-only and Cu–Mo deposits, respectively. Late Yanshanian granitic magmatism resulted in the formation of Mo-only and Cu–Mo systems, represented by the Yinkeng porphyry Mo deposit in northeastern Wuyi Shan and the Dali porphyry Mo(–Cu) deposit in Yunkai Mountains, and the Luoboling porphyry Cu–Mo deposit in eastern Nanling Mountains. The granite porphyry, which originated the Yinkeng Mo-only deposit has high contents of SiO The Dali quartz monzonite porphyry hosts a porphyry-type Mo deposit with Cu as by-product, has lower contents of K The Cu-Mo-bearing Luoboling granodiorite porphyry has lower K The SCVB only host Late Yanshanian Mo-only and W–Mo deposits, and the Mo-associated granitic rocks are represented by the Shipingchuan K-feldspar granite (kaligranite). The Shipingchuan granite has high contents of SiO It is clear that the causative granitoids associated with Cu–Mo and Mo-only or W-Mo-dominated polymetallic systems have different geochemical features ( The oxygen fugacities of the causative granitoids decreased from Cu–Mo, through Mo-only, to W-Mo-dominated polymetallic deposits, as indicated by the accessory minerals of the granites. Magnetite and anhydrite are the major accessory minerals in the granodiorite porphyries associated with the Cu-Mo deposits, as exemplified by the Tongshankou ( By compiling published geochronological data ( The Caledonian Orogeny is widely observed in the JOB and WYOB, characterized by an unconformity between the underlying metamorphosed Neoproterozoic-Early Paleozoic lithostratigraphic sequence and the overlying slightly metamorphosed Devonian-Triassic sedimentary strata. It is also supported by a large amount of Early Paleozoic to mid-Paleozoic granitoids and related mineralization. A group of geologists suggested that the Caledonian Orogeny in South China resulted from a mid-Paleozoic collision between the Yangtze Craton and Wuyi-Yunkai Orogenic Belt along the Jiang-Shao Suture which represents the closure of the Huanan Ocean (e.g., The Caledonian Mo-only and W–Mo deposits were only discovered in the Yunkai Mountains. The Caledonian granitic intrusions, as exemplified by the Shedong granodiorite and Baishiding biotite monzogranite, mainly show the characteristics of the S-type granites. These deposits and their causative granites are linked to a tectonic setting of either a continental collision orogeny or an intracontinental orogeny, no matter whether in compressional or extensional phases ( What can drive a regional intracontinental orogeny remain a puzzle, therefore the force that drove the Caledonian Orogeny in South China is still debated between the possibilities including: (1) far-field impact of the collision between the SCB and North China Block along the Qinling-Dabie-Sulu orogenic belt ( In this contribution, we prefer to relate the Caledonian Orogeny with the mid-Paleozoic collision between the Yangtze Craton and the Huanan Orogen, after the southeastward subduction of the Hunan Ocean along the Jiang-Shao Suture, which was an impact of the Gondwana Assembly. Most of the Mo deposits in the SCB were formed in the Early Yanshanian Orogeny. Because the SCB is close to the Pacific Ocean, the Early Yanshanian Orogeny in the SCB has been generally related to the northwestward subduction of the Paleo-Pacific plate ( (1) As well known, the SCB was a continent surrounded and flooded by the Paleo-Tethys during Devonian-Triassic, which is indicated by the widespread Devonian-Triassic sedimentary sequence of marine facies in SCB and its surrounding orogens, except for the Pacific Ocean. The Paleo-Tethys terminated diachronously in the Triassic in Qinling-Dabie orogenic belt along the Mian-Lue suture ( (2) The Middle–Late Jurassic volcanic rocks locally crop out in the WYOB (e.g., Southern Jiangxi, Hunan, Western Fujian, and Northern Guangdong) ( (3) The Early Yanshanian granitoids in the WYOB have ( (4) The Early Yanshanian Mo deposits in SCB cluster in several E-W-trending belts, such as Lower Yangtze River Fe-Cu-Au-Mo belt (deposit Nos. 1 to 7), the Nanling W-Sn-Mo-Bi belt (Nos. 21 to 30), and the northern Jiangxi–western Zhejiang Cu-Mo-W belt (Nos. 8 to 12; (5) Overall, the Early Yanshanian mineral systems in SCB are dominantly represented by W, Sn and Mo, associated with the granites of S- and A-types, instead of the Cu-Au-Mo commodities usually associated with I-type granitoids related to volcanic arcs or trans-crustal faults. These deposits are believed to have resulted from continental collision or intracontinental tectonic event. Except for the skarn-type or porphyry-skarn-type deposits, only two Early Yanshanian Cu–Mo deposits have been recognized to associate with porphyries at Dexing and Yuanzhuding. The Dexing porphyry Cu–Mo system near the Northeast Jiangxi Fault was suggested to have originated from partial melting of a Neoproterozoic juvenile crust under a post-collisional extension setting ( It is pointed out that the Early Cretaceous post-collisional extension was possibly juxtaposed and enhanced by the back-arc extension related to the westward subduction of the Paleo-Pacific plate, which was quite favorable for large-scale magmatism and metallogeny ( The Late Yanshanian Mo deposits mainly occur in the SCVB, with a few exceptions (e.g., Luoboling Cu–Mo and Pingdi Mo deposits) in the southeastern margin of the WYOB. These deposits are distributed in a belt parallel to the coast line of the present-day SCB, which makes all the researchers to link their genesis to the westward subduction of the Paleo-Pacific plate ( In Late Yanshanian period, the southeast coastal regions became an active continent margin, resulting in the formation of the felsic volcanic rocks, granitoids and synchronous porphyry Mo deposits, as well as epithermal systems (  The Mo deposits of porphyry, skarn and quartz vein types and combinations thereof in the South China Block occur in the Lower Yangtze River Belt, the Northern Jiangnan Orogenic Belt, the Wuyi-Yunkai Orogenic Belt and the Southeast Coastal Volcanic Belt. The NE-, NW-, and E–W-trending regional faults and their subsidiary fractures are the major ore-controlling structures. The orebodies occur in the causative porphyries, contact zones and the wall-rocks. Mo orebodies are hosted by a variety of igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. High permeability provided by clastic, granitic, volcanic and breccia rocks are favorable for fluid transportation and ore precipitation. The South China Block is characterized by outcrops of thick flysch sequences, which could result in high-grade ores. Hydrothermal alteration assemblages and styles mainly include K-feldspar, sericite, chlorite, epidote, carbonate, fluorite, greisen and skarns. The alteration in most porphyry-skarn Mo deposits is zoned outward or temporally evolved from high-temperature assemblage of K-feldspar, silicification, biotite and albite, through moderate-temperature phyllic alteration, to low-temperature argillic and/or carbonate alteration. According to the metal inventory, the Mo deposits in South China Block can be divided into three groups, i.e., the Mo-only or Mo-dominated, the W-Mo-dominated, and the Cu–Mo systems. The Cu–Mo systems are mostly associated with (high-K) calc-alkaline I-type adakitic granitoids significantly contributed by the mantle, while the other two groups are mostly related to granites of S- or A-types which mainly sourced from the continental crust. These two groups of granitoids exhibit contrasting geochemical features. The Mo deposits in the South China Block were mainly formed by the magmatic fluids with high temperatures and high salinities. The aqueous (NaCl-H The molybdenites from the skarn-type systems generally show lower Re contents than those from the porphyry-type deposits in a same tectonic unit. The Re contents in molybdenites from porphyry or porphyry-skarn Cu–Mo systems are > The Mo deposits in South China Block were mainly formed in Early Yanshanian (170–130 This is a contribution from the Working Group on Mineral Deposits in Collisional Orogens (IAGOD), and has been financially granted by the