Ab initio calculations were performed to study the interaction of different sulfhydryl surfactants such as 1,1,1-butanetrithiol, diethyl dithiocarbamate and ethyl xanthate with a covellite (001) surface. Calculations showed that 1,1,1-butanetrithiol interacts more strongly than diethyl dithiocarbamate or ethyl xanthate, which makes it a promising collecting candidate for covellite flotation. Different covellite cluster models were tested and a suitable cluster model for the local adsorption studies is proposed.The development of effective concentration methods for sulphide minerals is important for the mineral processing industry. The most important and widely used method is froth flotation Collector development is a crucial part of flotation studies Computational methods offer an effective tool in the study of the properties and energies of the various collectors. Cluster models are suitable for examining the local adsorption phenomena The scope of the present work was to compare the local adsorption of different sulfhydryl collectors ( All calculations were made using the Gaussian98 program Final calculations were performed, after testing also other basis sets, using the standard 3-21+G* basis set for the surfactant atoms in the optimisations. The 6-31G* and 6-311+G* basis sets were used for the surfactant atoms in the energy calculations. Stuttgart semiempirical relativistic large core effective-core potentials i.e. RLC ECPs without polarization function were used for the surface sulphur atoms Relativistic effects can be important when calculations contain heavy metals. For the first transition metal row the relativistic effects are usually ignored. However, the copper atom belongs to group 11, where the relativistic effects can play an important role in a complex formation Covellite has hexagonal crystal structure with cell parameters Because the main scope of this study was to compare relative local interaction differences between various collectors on the surface of covellite, two-layer cluster models were chosen in order to represent the surroundings of the local adsorption site accurately while keeping the computational requirements reasonable. The cluster models are presented in Because of the inevitable strong edge effects in the case of Cu In a symmetrical covellite model there exists an unequal number of Cu and S atoms. In consequence, hydrogen atoms were added to the cluster in order to obtain a neutral model. The directions of the hydrogen atoms from the Cu and S atoms follow the covellite bulk structure preserving the angles of the experimental crystal structure. The distances of the hydrogen atoms from the nearest Cu and S atoms were optimised with B3PW91 method using Stuttgart RSC ECP for copper and 3-21G* basis set for sulphur and hydrogen. The hydrogen sites in a cluster were chosen according to the test calculations obtained with two Cu The hydrogen atoms in model 2a are arranged more symmetrically than in model 2b, and the influence can be seen in the DOS curves. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the DOS curve of model 2a is at a much lower energy, and the HOMO–LUMO gap is broader than in model 2b. The test calculations also indicated that model 2a was energically (about 100 kJ/mol) more stable and the SCF convergence was faster than with model 2b. The Mulliken analysis The calculation method and basis sets were selected from the test calculations made using the Cu  The B3PW91 optimisation and energy calculation for the unrelaxed surface model produces the interaction energies −461 and −185 kJ/mol for the BTT and EO molecule, respectively. The HF optimisations, whose energy calculations have been made using the B3PW91 method with the Stuttgart RSC ECP for all copper atoms, produce energies that are rather close to the values obtained for the B3PW91 optimisation. The Test optimisation for relaxed surface model was performed with B3PW91 method using 6-31G* basis set for collector C, O atoms and all H atoms in the model, 6-311+G* basis set for collector sulphur atoms, Stuttgart RSC ECP for all copper atoms and Stuttgart RLC ECP with polarization functions for surface sulphur atoms. Three surface Cu atoms at the adsorption site were allowed to relax during optimisation. Interaction energies were −374 kJ/mol for the BTT and −129 kJ/mol for the EO. The difference between energies was −245 kJ/mol, which is close to Δ The absolute Test calculations using B3PW91 methods showed that correlation and relaxation during optimisation had no significant influence to the Δ  In the flotation process the air bubble can attach more easily to the collector, which has a hydrocarbon chain pointing vertically away from the particle surface. Hydrocarbon chains, which lie along the surface, prevent other collectors from adsorbing to the surface. The tridentate bridge-like starting coordination of the sulphur atoms of the BTT collector was chosen since the coordination mode is appropriate for the covellite (0 The difference in the distances from the surface and in the changes in bond lengths may provide information about the strength of the interaction of the collector with the covellite surface. The optimised distances of the sulphur atoms of the collector from the surface Cu atoms were 2.54, 2.56 and 2.56 Å for the 1,1,1-butanetrithiol, indicating that the tridentate coordination mode was maintained during optimisation. The distances of the collector sulphur atoms from the surface copper atoms for E The interaction energy of 1,1,1-butanetrithiol, diethyldithiocarbamate and ethyl xanthate molecules with the covellite surface was studied using the larger Cu According to The charge analysis can provide information about the interaction energies of the collectors under examination. Charges were studied using the CHelpG The average value of the sulphur charges in the CS In the present computational study the interaction energy of the theoretical 1,1,1-butanetrithiol (BTT) collector was compared to the interaction energies of the commonly used diethyl dithiocarbamate (E The covellite cluster models were also tested in this study. The model in which neutralizing hydrogen atoms were attached symmetrically to cluster atoms, i.e. one hydrogen atom to the second layer copper atom at the centre and other hydrogen atoms to the sulphur atoms at the cluster edge was more stable and was selected for the interaction calculations. This study was conducted using local single-molecule adsorption on the surface of a covellite cluster. The interactions of other molecules have not been taken into account. The calculated energy values are also at most semiquantative in relation to the selected method and the cluster models. However, the interaction energies and changes in the properties of single molecules can be compared between the various collectors and the substrate in local adsorption studies involving cluster models. The relative differences of surfactants using computational ab initio methods provide an effective tool for the development of new collector molecules. By comparing the calculated properties with commonly used collectors it is possible to obtain information about the benefits and weaknesses of any new candidate designed for a collector molecule. Financial support provided by the Science Faculty of the University of Joensuu and the Academy of Finland is acknowledged with gratitude.