The processing of a Fe-containing anolyte produced by a copper electro winning process carried out in a reactive electro dialysis (RED) cell has been studied. The resulting anolyte was an acidic aqueous solution which contained FeIII species. This solution can be used: (a) as a leaching agent or (b) as a source of commercially valuable ferric sulfate. Two operations were studied in this work: (i) leaching of metallic copper and (ii) crystallization of iron sulfates. In both cases, the kinetics, optimum operating conditions, mass balance and efficiency were determined. As a result, two conceptual flow diagrams for copper electro winning-anolyte processing were proposed to help the development of new hydrometallurgical processes.A1: 29 A2: 39 A3: 42.0 C1: 42.0 C2: 39.0 C3: 43.0 C4: 42.3 The objective of this work was to establish processing routes for the FeIII-containing anolyte produced by a copper electro winning cell based on reactive electro dialysis. Two routes were studied: (a) leaching of metallic copper and (b) crystallization of ferric sulfate. Reactive electro dialysis (RED) is a modern electrometallurgical technique which allows the synthesis of commercially valuable products by means of a cell where an electric current is passed through the electrolytes (anolyte and catholyte); the latter are separated by an ion exchange membrane ( Ferric sulfate can be obtained from the spent anolyte by increasing acidity or temperature, both of which tend to saturate the solution, thereby favouring crystallization ( On the other hand, the ferric product could be reduced to ferrous sulfate in order to recycle it into the RED anolyte. This process could be carried out by leaching minerals or by-products of the copper industry, such as slag, cement, scrap, shavings and other ( The FeIII-containing anolyte was produced by an RED copper electrowinning cell ( The initial composition of the electrolytes was as follows: for the anolyte, 29–31 The specific energy consumption for the electrowinning operation ranged from 0.83 to 1.05 A 250 Crystallization experiments were conducted in a 250 Samples were taken at increasing intervals of 5, 15, and 30 Flow-charts were developed with the aim of matching the kinetics of the various unit operations which made up the process. Mass and energy balances were solved with Excel software using the lab-scale experimental results obtained for each process as input data. Results for the electro winning operation are presented in  Fe sulfate crystallization was carried out by saturating the solution with sulfuric acid. Experiments were carried out (a) with RED cell anolyte at 25 Crystallization rates increased with increasing sulfuric acid concentration in the 6–9 The crystallized solids corresponded to monohydrated ferrous sulfate (szomolnokite, FeSO The conceptual design for the copper electro winning process was carried out for two possible uses of the spent anolyte. In the first case, shown in  In the second case, shown in The two conceptual process designs were balanced and results are presented in Results presented by Further studies of the proposed RED process are needed in order to evaluate the long term operation of the membrane and its tolerance to electrolyte impurities (Mn, for instance) present in industrial circuits. A conceptual design for copper electro winning in a reactive electro dialysis cell was carried out considering two possible uses of the spent ferric anolyte: (a) leaching of copper shavings with recycling into the RED cell and (b) saturation with sulfuric acid in order to crystallize the dissolved ferric sulfate, which has considerable market value. The remaining, highly acidic solution could then be used for the leaching of minerals or other by-products of the copper industry. The empirically obtained rates for each operation were: for copper electro winning in the RED cell: 0.47 Leaching rates increased strongly with increasing ferric sulfate concentration. Crystallization rates increased sharply with increasing sulfuric acid concentration. The crystallized solids are fine, particulate hydrated phases of uniform morphology. The identified crystalline compounds were rhomboclase and szomolnokite. This work was funded by the Chilean government’s CONICYT agency via project FONDECYT 103 0530. The authors wish to thank the Mining Engineering and Chemical Engineering Departments, Universidad de Chile, for their support. The contribution of Dr. Carolina Paipa and Mrs. Inés Godoy to the experimental work is gratefully acknowledged.