With the aim to recover precious metals (PMs) from spent automotive catalyst leachates into new catalysts, cells of Escherichia coli first reduced Pd(II) or Pt(IV) physiologically to nanoparticulate cell-bound Pd(0) and Pt(0). Metallised cells were then used as chemical catalysts for the reductive recovery of precious metals from model solutions and from aqua regia leachates of crushed spent automotive catalyst. Metal removal, which was slower from real leachate due to interference by other contaminants, was complete after 60h. Biofabricated PM catalyst from waste reduced 0.5mM Cr(VI) to a similar extent to commercial 5% Pd catalyst but at ∼half the rate. The hydrogenation of 2-pentyne was examined using commercial Pd on Al2O3 catalyst and biofabricated Pd/Pt catalyst, the latter showing more than 3-fold enhanced selectivity towards the desired cis-pentene product. Hence, biorefined PMs offer a clean route to waste treatment and effective neo-catalyst biomanufacture.Platinum group metals (PGMs) are scarce high value metals with a wide range of applications from jewellery and commercial catalysis to use within car catalytic converters for atmospheric protection ( All new motor vehicles are fitted with a catalytic converter, each containing up to 2.4 Under load the PGMs on the catalytic surface become abraded from the support and become deposited within road dust ( We take automotive catalysts as an example as these are the source material from which environmental PGMs are derived. A continuous biorecovery system for PGMs from waste was pioneered by Recovery of metals from very acidic solutions such as waste leachates is difficult. This is due to the strength of acid required to dissolve PGMs (noble metals typically require An early study showed that 5% by mass loading of Pd(0) onto The dual aims of this study were firstly to use a microbial biorecovery method to convert a waste leachate into catalytically active biomaterial and secondly to show that the biorecovered metal gave catalytic activity over and above that of metallised bacteria bearing only the initial ‘seeds’. Previous work has focused on Pd (e.g. Many studies have reported the application of microbial processes to the recovery of base metals and precious metals from wastes but relatively few have progressed from model solutions to actual wastes, i.e. that contain also other metallic and non-metallic components. Bio-conversion of a metal recovered from a waste into a neo-catalyst has received little attention; examples include bioconversion of a relatively benign PGM-processing wastewater into a catalyst for reduction of toxic Cr(VI) (  Cells were metallised as described by The seeded cells (1%, 2% or 5% of Pd, or Pt as specified; 16 The reducing agent (H Catalyst prepared as described above (10 2-pentyne hydrogenation experiments were carried out in a three-phase 500 The major products from 2-pentyne hydrogenation are partially hydrogenated Hydrogenation experiments were done twice, independently, with a difference between them of within 10% throughout and pooled data are shown. Preparation of catalyst leachate was developed from methods described by For leaching The procedure for making the catalyst from leachate was as follows. Due to the low level of Pd(II) (see Results and Discussion) the leachate used in this study was ‘spiked’ to 400 In order to implicate compound(s) responsible for the slower PGM deposition from the waste (see Results and Discussion) a simple test was carried out. Model leachates (Pd(II) and Pt(IV)) were prepared as above using fresh Commercial analysis of the leachate gave 24 Optimal leaching conditions were initially developed as described by A full description of the data with respect to catalytic activity of bio-catalyst made on cells that were ‘seeded’ to 1  It is concluded that supplementing the initial Pd ‘seeds’ with additional Pt and Pd from the model mixture produced a catalyst comparable to a commercial catalyst. Due to the high acidity of the leachate native cells were not used to make catalyst from waste leachate, as the low pH was not physiologically compatible. Instead, recovery of PGMs from the waste leachate used ‘seeded’ cells (5 In order to implicate the compound responsible for the inhibition of PGM reduction. Model leachates were spiked with Pd(II) as before, and were also spiked with silica (SiO These preliminary tests suggest that, since the actual composition of a waste is likely to vary according to source of the material (and any upstream processing) there is little to be gained by an in depth model study of critical inhibitory concentrations. This is because the potency of the inhibitory agent(s) may be synergistic (or moderated) by other agents present in the waste. Such studies are beyond the scope of this work but the preliminary results we describe suggest that wastes would need to be evaluated on a case by case basis for their amenability to ‘biorefining’. Despite this, this combined biochemical and chemical approach shows potential for recovery of PGMs from leachates, albeit with longer contact periods. Although samples in this study were diluted (precluding re-use of the acid in this case) a previous study ( Cells pre-palladised with 5 This study shows that via use of microwave assisted leaching Pd is recovered with high efficiency from spent car catalyst using 50% this work was supported by grants from