Economic diversification is important for building sustainable economic growth. Thus, an economy that is highly dependent on income from a natural resource is in danger of instability or even collapse if the price of such commodity decreases in the global market. Additionally, economic diversification contributes positively to creating jobs, fighting corruption, and improving the institutional quality of countries. The Saudi government has issued 10 development plans since 1970, each covering five years, and economic diversification is a main objective of all these plans. This paper examines the government׳s efforts to diversify the economy using four variables: oil share of gross domestic product (GDP), share of private sector in GDP, oil exports as a percentage of the country׳s exports, and oil revenues as a percentage of total revenues. The current analysis covers nine development plans from 1970 through 2013. The analysis concludes that, after more than 40 years of development plans aiming to diversify the Saudi economy, oil is still the main engine driving the economy. The Saudi government needs to fully consider economic diversification as a tool for better governance.According to the Saudi Arabian government׳s first development plan (1970–1975), one of three objectives was: “[D]iversifying sources of national income and reducing dependence on oil by increasing the share of other productive sectors in gross domestic product” ( While many methods have been used to measure diversification in an economy, such as the Ogive Index, the Entropy Index, the Gini-Index, and the Herfindahl Index ( The current paper uses changes in four variables—oil as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), private sector as a percentage of GDP, oil as a percentage of the country׳s exports, and oil revenues as a percentage of total government revenues—to study the Saudi economy׳s diversity over the period of 1970–2013. Even though economic diversification has been the main goal of development plans in Saudi Arabia since 1970, the result of the current analysis shows that the oil sector remains the engine driving the economy. Many reasons have been suggested to explain the government׳s lack of success in diversifying the economy. Among them are the absence of a clear plan that addresses in detail the process of diversifying the economy, the government support provided to industries that are profoundly dependent on oil (e.g., petrochemical industries), the almost complete dependence of the private sector on government spending and projects, and the lack of a clear and specific plan to support non-oil sectors (e.g., agriculture, service). The paper is organized as follows. First, it discusses the importance of economic diversification for economies. Then it outlines the structure of the Saudi economy; this is followed by a justification for the approach used in this paper to evaluate the effort of the Saudi government to achieve a certain degree of economic diversification. The paper continues by discussing reasons behind the government׳s lack of success in its efforts to diversify the economy through nine development plans from 1970 through 2013. The paper concludes with suggestions regarding the economic diversification process in Saudi Arabia and notes a possible topic for further research. Economic diversification has been connected to stability and sustainability in economic growth. An economy׳s reliance on one income resource puts at risk that economy׳s ability to maintain a certain level of economic growth in the long run since the economy is profoundly dependent on income from that resource ( Balanced development between urban and rural areas is recognized as one benefit of economic diversification. As many studies have shown, in less diversified economies, development and job creation tend to be concentrated in urban areas or near oil fields or mines and mineral processing plants ( Similarly, Economic diversification not only affects economic growth but also positively influences political stability, social development, and institutional quality ( Corruption and inequality in income distribution have been linked to a low level of economic diversification in an economy, which is a negative outcome in natural resource curse theory ( According to natural resource curse theory, “not only may resource-rich countries fail to benefit from a favourable endowment, they may actually perform worse than less well-endowed countries” ( Consequently, In this paper, economic diversification and the resource curse theory are not used interchangeably; however, we argue that there is a connection between the two. Economic diversification emphasizes the importance of having a diversified economy where more than one sector plays an important role in economic development; similarly, natural resource curse theory identifies the negative impact on economic development of having a single national income source as the main engine driving the economy. For decades, the Saudi Arabian economy has been based on oil revenues as the main source of national income; thus, economic booms in Saudi Arabia historically have been the result of high oil prices. Therefore, one can argue that the price of oil directs growth in the Saudi economy (  The private sector in most developed and developing countries plays a major role in economic diversification and economic growth ( In the case of the Saudi economy, the government fully owns big companies like the Saudi Arabian Oil Company (ARAMCO) and is also the majority shareholder of other companies like the Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC) and Saudi Electricity Company (SEC). Additionally, more than 70% of the shares of most banks and companies traded in the Saudi stock market is owned by government agencies, including the Public Pension Agency, General Organization for Social Insurance, and the Public Investment Fund (PIF), a fund managed and supervised by the government through the Ministry of Finance ( Additionally, the non-oil sector׳s share of GDP is not consistent over the development plans, as presented in  The main goal of this paper is to examine the Saudi government׳s efforts to diversify the economy. Since 1970, the Saudi government has adopted development plans that call for “diversifying sources of national income and reducing dependence on oil through increasing the share of other productive sectors in gross domestic product” ( Data from the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA) and Central Department of Statistics and Information (CDSI) are used to answer the research question. The current paper uses changes in four variables—(1) oil as a percentage of GDP, (2) private sector as a percentage of GDP, (3) oil as a percentage of the country׳s exports, and (4) oil revenues as a percentage of total government revenues—over nine development plans (1970–2013), with the exception of the last year of the ninth development plan (2014) since data are not yet available for that year. The starting and ending years of each development plan presented here follow the government structure without intervention from the author. By looking at the structure of the Saudi oil-based economy and by examining similar economies, the mentioned four variables are used to help examine the extent to which the Saudi economy has been diversified since the first development plan in 1970 ( Many methods have been used to measure the diversification of an economy, such as the Ogive Index, the Entropy Index, the Gini-Index, and the Herfindahl Index ( The Saudi government has adopted economic policies and strategies toward economic diversification. For example, from 1970 to 1995, supporting the agriculture sector was one of the main tools in diversifying the Saudi economy. The government adopted policies that included providing loans and subsidies to farmers and offered to buy agricultural crops at a competitive price to support the agriculture sector. However, even though these policies succeeded in attracting investors to the industry, the effort failed in building a strong and independent sector that contributes to economic growth in the long term. In addition, the plan target was an annual growth of 4.6% in the agriculture sector to reach 27% of GDP; however, by the end of 1975 the sector had achieved only 3.6% growth. Also, in 1995, the government realized a huge loss of irrigation water, which affected the reserve water levels and led the government to cut support for the agriculture industry to reduce water consumption in this desert country, where few water sources exist ( By the end of the first development plan (1970–1975), the annual growth of the non-oil sector was 11.4% even though the target was 14%. Thus, the service sector was considered a tool for diversifying the Saudi economy during the second development plan (1975–1979). Although the target was set for the service sector to have a 13% share of total GDP during the second development plan, by the end of the plan (1980), the service sector had only reached 8% of GDP ( Economists consider the fourth development plan (1985–1989) a model of success in the Saudi government׳s efforts to diversify the economy. Many reasons have been put forward to explain the fourth development plan׳s success (1985–1989), where all measures of economic diversification improved; compared to the previous plan (1980–1984), oil׳s share of GDP declined 23.24%, the private sector׳s share of GDP increased 11.56%, oil exports as a percentage of the country׳s exports declined 17.51%, and oil revenues as a percentage of total revenues declined 10.48% in the fourth plan. First, oil prices have tended to decline since 1985, which has affected oil׳s contribution to GDP and enhanced the private sector׳s. Also, in 1975, Jubail and Yanbu were established, both of which are industrial cities created by the Saudi government in a promise to employ the comparative advantage of the Saudi economy, which is oil, and to help in providing jobs for citizens. Accordingly, many businesses and factories began operating in these cities during the fourth plan, which resulted in increasing the private sector׳s contribution to GDP. Consequently, creation of these cities has absorbed a lot of Saudi job seekers and contributed to reduced unemployment. Overall, the fourth development plan is considered the most successful plan in achieving the government׳s goals; subsequent plans have seen a decline in the level of economic diversification. Conversely, in the sixth development plan (1995–1999) and beyond, the Saudi economy faced different challenges such as unemployment rising among youths accompanied by population growth, which led to high demand on health care, education, and jobs. In 1999, the unemployment rate was 8.1% and it has climbed since then. Thus, in recent years, the Saudi government has issued many initiatives to achieve diversification of income sources, control and reduce the unemployment rate for citizens, and transfer advanced technologies to the Saudi economy; one of these initiatives involves attracting foreign investors to the Saudi market. Establishing the General Authority for Investment to attract foreign investment in 2000 and supporting non-oil sectors such as tourism and service sectors to absorb unemployment among citizens are examples of Saudi government policies to achieve economic diversification. However, these policies have not succeeded in creating jobs or diversifying the economy. According to the Ministry of Economy and Planning, unemployment among Saudis reached 12.1% in 2012; also, 0.8% (481,600) of the non-Saudi workers, who usually do types of work that Saudis will not do, is unemployed (seventh and eighth development plans, 2000–2010). The lack of success in utilizing the tourism and service sectors was a result low-quality education and training system outcomes and the need to improve regulations that organize these sectors (e.g., tourism, investment). The following section examines the Saudi government׳s efforts to diversify the economy. Four variables are presented and discussed regarding economic diversification in Saudi Arabia: the oil sector׳s share of GDP, the private sector׳s share of GDP, oil exports as a percentage of the country׳s exports, and oil revenues as a percentage of total revenues.  The oil sector׳s share of GDP reflects how the sector influences the economic growth in any country ( Diversified national income is considered an important factor in economic diversification and economic development. Profoundly relying on one source of income means the economy is held hostage to the fluctuations of that commodity׳s price in the global market ( A country׳s export of goods and commodities is used by economists to measure its economy׳s structure and productivity. Economies with a broad range of exports of goods and services are healthier and more productive than economies that depend on only a few commodities as their main exports ( Oil in Saudi Arabia accounted for more than 86% of the country׳s total exports in the 2010–2013 development plan period. While only a small decline compared to the previous development plan (2005–2009), this percentage has remained fairly constant since the 1985–1989 development plan. Thus, the government׳s efforts to reduce dependence on oil have not succeeded if we take the amount of oil exported as a percentage of the country׳s total exports as our measure.  To better understand economic diversification in Saudi Arabia, a comparison with similarly structured economies is presented using selected economic indicators. GCC countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and United Arab Emirates (UAE)) share similar political, cultural, and economic structures. Additionally, while oil and gas are the natural resources that drive the economies of most GCC countries, all these countries have an economic diversification plan ( As To conclude, as shown in In answering the research question of whether the Saudi economy has been diversified since the first development plan published in 1970, the analysis in this study has concluded that there is a long road ahead before the Saudi economy can be considered a diversified economy, even in comparison to similar economies. As In answering why diversification is needed in GCC countries, Additionally, having a strong and independent private sector that is not reliant on government spending and projects is a step toward economic diversification ( The Saudi government has issued 10 development plans since 1970, each covering a period of five years; economic diversification has been a main objective of all these plans. This paper has examined changes in four variables—the oil sector׳s share of GDP, the private sector׳s share of GDP, oil exports as a percentage of the country׳s exports, and oil revenues as a percentage of total revenues—from 1970 through 2013 to study whether or not the government has succeeded in achieving economic diversification after more than 40 years of aiming to do so. The analysis concludes that, despite all the development plans being aimed at diversifying the Saudi economy, oil is still the main engine that drives the economy. Having an appropriate and measurable development plan that supports the non-oil sectors׳ contributions to economic development, developing—through regulations and financial support—a strong and independent private sector that does not rely on government spending and projects, and learning from the experiences of similar economies whose national wealth benefitted from diversifying their economies are some of the steps needed to build a diversified economy. Importantly, since the influence of economic diversification goes beyond sustainable economic growth by also fighting corruption, creating jobs, and improving institutional quality, the Saudi government should fully consider economic diversification as a tool for better governance. Finally, future research can examine the role of the non-oil sectors (e.g., agriculture, service) that have a competitive advantage in the Saudi economy in the process of diversifying the economy and creating job opportunities for citizens.