 Copper rivals gold as one of the oldest metals employed by humans. Its first use about 10,000 More purposeful recovery of the metal by mining occurred as early as 3800  From these early beginnings world copper production reached about 8,100 Much larger scale mining and smelting of formerly substandard ores (ores having too low a content of copper for smelting) became feasible following the development of froth flotation methods for ore enrichment in around 1920. World production reached levels of 1 Copper occasionally occurs naturally in elemental forms (e.g., native copper deposits of the “thumb” of Michigan, near Lake Superior, and at Afton Mine, near Kamloops, British Columbia). However, the bulk of the commercial In the Americas, the minerals that contain copper occur chiefly in porphyry form (i.e., they are igneous in origin and are widely dispersed in the rock). In Africa and Russia, however, porphyry ores account for less than 20% of the total. In all areas copper Open pit mining is used wherever feasible to minimize ore recovery costs. For instance, in the U.S.A. in 1970, open pit mines accounted for 84% of mine output (e.g., by Kennecott Copper Corporation, Salt Lake City) and only 16% was recovered from underground mining. By the use of low-cost explosives such as ammonium nitrate/fuel oil and large-scale loading and haulage units, mining costs to withdraw the ore are kept to less than 25% of the cost of the refined metal. Overburden containing little or no metal value is removed to a spoils disposal area, and the ore with some preselection proceeds to the concentrating circuit. To access the mineral of value in the mined lumps of rock first requires size reduction. Crushing in two stages in gyratory cone ( Froth flotation is used to raise the low mineral concentrations in ores to concentrations that can be more economically processed. A concentration of 25–30% is suitable for economical smelting of copper. The froth flotation technique was originally developed in about 1910 to raise the copper concentrations of the strip-mined ores of Bingham Canyon, near Salt Lake City In general, flotation separation relies on the attachment of properly prepared mineral surfaces to air bubbles in water. Surfaces which are easily wetted by water, such as ordinary ground rock, are not attracted to bubbles and thus sink. Elemental sulfur, graphite (and other forms of elemental carbon, such as the pigment in printers’ inks), and talc (minerals with layer lattice type structures) have hydrophobic surfaces, which are attracted to the surface of an air bubble and, if small enough, may be lifted to the surface of the water and separated from the water as a froth layer. This distinction in behavior in aerated water is primarily dependant on the surface activity, or more precisely wettability, natural or induced, of the material under study. Three types of behavior are observed If the test surface is neither readily wetted nor hydrophobic (i.e., it is indifferent to water), the contact angle is about 90° and poor differentiation of the unprepared surface can be expected. However, the behavior of wetted and indifferent surfaces can often be modified by treatment with surface active agents to obtain either a sink or a float behavior, as desired. If the solid surface is hydrophobic it will tend to develop contact with the air of a bubble pressed against it to give distinct contact angles. For example, the contact angle for paraffin wax is 104°. In this situation there is a significant force component perpendicular to the solid surface to γLA, the liquid–air interface of the force vector diagram ( The specific reduction in energy, WSA, from particle adhesion to, rather than release from a bubble by interaction of the three relevant interfaces is given by This equation is credited to Dupré and S, L, and A represent the solid, liquid, and air surfaces, respectively ( For water γLA is readily determined to be about 70 Fine particles of many sulfide minerals including sulfur itself, and sulfides of copper, are naturally hydrophobic. If they are subjected to flotation soon after grinding they will tend to stick to bubbles and to be raised to a froth. Silica and gangue are wetted by water and will tend to sink. The natural differentiation of valuable mineral from gangue in this way is very good, but the “sticking” of sulfide minerals to air bubbles can be improved by the addition of a collector to the water phase. Typical collectors for sulfide minerals are xanthates (ROC(S)S If a bubble carrying air-avid mineral particles reaches the surface of the flotation unit and then bursts, the raised mineral particles will sink again. Bubble stability is maximized by addition of a foam stabilizer or frother, which assists in generating a sufficiently stable foam layer on the flotation unit to enable the foam plus associated mineral to be skimmed from the water phase. The frother also puts an oily phase on the surface of each bubble as it forms, which helps the mineral-gangue differentiation function of the collector. Typical frothers are oily materials of no more than slight water solubility such as pine oil (a mixture of terpenes) or a long chain (C5 or higher) alcohol such as 1-pentanol, and are used at the rate of 20–45 In addition to the two primary flotation agents there are also a number of modifying and conditioning reagents, which control a variety of ore and flotation circuit variables Separation of copper sulfide minerals from the gangue is normally carried on in a series of large rectangular steel tanks of capacities from 2 to 28 Copper (or metal) recovery percentages of the flotation circuits of a copper mine/mill are extremely important. For example, it is estimated that for a plant processing 50,000 Much of the copper smelted today still employs procedures, which may be divided into four more or less discrete steps, very similar to those developed by the early Welsh copper smelting industry Roasting involves heating the concentrate in the presence of air to temperatures of 750–800°C in a multiple hearth, or fluidized bed roaster ( Some external fuel, usually oil or gas, is required initially to raise the roaster temperature to the desired range for these processes to occur. Less is required later since the sulfur combustion is highly exothermic and provides some of the heat. If the concentrate contains more than 25% sulfur and is dry, sufficient heat is evolved from the sulfur combustion to maintain the roaster Some sulfur trioxide also forms in the roaster, though this is not the objective of the process. This forms small amounts of ferrous sulfate in the roaster output ( Many modern roasting operations now collect and use the sulfur dioxide present in roaster exit gases to produce sulfuric acid. Fluidized bed roasters are favored since they can give 15% sulfur dioxide concentrations, compared to the 3–6% range expected from earlier designs. Roasting is followed by reverberatory smelting, carried out on the still solid, hot roaster output. Silica, as a fluxing agent, and slag from a previous converter stage are added to the roasted concentrate and then external heat is applied by the combustion of powdered coal, oil, or natural gas. The flames and hot gases are reflected down from the ceiling of the furnace onto the mixed charge (hence, “reverberatory” furnace). This stage of smelting, where the charge temperature is gradually raised from about 600 to 1,000°C, accomplishes removal of more of the sulfur, by burning. Much of the iron is also removed as it combines with the fluxing agent to form a lighter ferrous silicate slag, which floats on top of the copper melt, as it forms ( The transfer of a part of the iron-bound sulfur to copper, which is an objective of this stage, is the result of the change in the relative heats of formation of cuprous and ferrous sulfides at these high temperatures (e.g., at 1,300°C, ΔH = −174 and 34.4 The product of the reverberatory smelting stage is matte copper, containing primarily copper metal and cuprous sulfide. The analysis will range from 15% (particularly with nonconcentrated ores) to 50% copper In converting, the third stage of copper smelting, air is blown through the mass of molten matte copper to complete the oxidation of sulfides, since by this stage the bulk of the iron has been removed ( Any residual iron present is oxidized and forms a slag layer with an additional small portion of added silica ( Fire refining, the final stage of copper smelting, is used to reduce the small percentage of cuprous oxide present in the blister copper back to elemental copper. It is often carried out in the converter itself, once the air flow has been cut off and while the charge is still molten. Originally fire refining was accomplished by the addition of coke and green wood poles, which were firmly pushed under the surface of the melt to bring about reduction of cuprous oxide by the carbon of both additives. Vaporization of the moisture and partial combustion of the green wood also vigorously agitated the melt via the subsurface release of steam, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and hydrogen. The hydrogen contributed to the reducing action of the carbon ( “Poling” is now usually carried out by passing natural gas or ammonia into the melt by water (or gas) cooled, hollow steel lances. Fire-refined copper, the product of this smelting stage, gives a copper analysis of 99% or better. Fire-refined copper can be used directly for about 15% of copper uses, including some alloys whose properties are not seriously affected by small amounts of impurities. Metal properties are seriously impaired for some uses, however, by the presence of traces of impurities, which makes further refining necessary. Phosphorus, arsenic, aluminum, iron, or antimony in particular decrease electrical conductivity (e.g., some 6% loss is experienced with as little as 50 Electrolytic purification of smelted copper removes contaminants which adversely affect electrical conductivity, malleability, and other properties. It also permits recovery of the precious metal content of the fire-refined product. Anode slabs are connected in parallel to heavy bus bars (high current conductors) and placed in the electrolytic cells. These are long rectangular vessels of wood or cement lined with lead or plastic ( So there is no overall electrochemical reaction, hence, the theoretical (equilibrium) voltage required is zero. The applied voltage of about 0.2 During the electrolysis the metals present in the anode, which are of lower electrochemical activity than copper, chiefly silver, tellurium, gold, and traces of platinum, are precipitated as slimes on the floor of the electrolysis cells as they are released from the anodes ( During normal cell operation the anode contaminants that are more electrochemically active than copper (and less than hydrogen), mainly arsenic, Incidentally, the elemental copper formed by Most of the excess copper present in spent electrolyte is electrolytically removed from solution in liberator cells, which are very similar to the electrolysis cells used for electrowinning. These have a pure copper cathode, on which copper is deposited ( Antimony and bismuth tend to precipitate on the bottom of the cell toward the later stages of this electrolysis, and arsenic reacts with the acid present under electrolytic conditions to form highly toxic arsine gas ( For this reason, liberator cells are normally hooded and well vented to avoid problems from the evolution of these gases. The “liberated” electrolyte is then further treated to remove nickel, either by crystallization as nickel sulfate or by dialysis, before it is returned to the electrolysis circuit for reuse. Vigorous air agitation has been found to boost cathode purities when electrorefining at very high (ca. 226 For uses of pure copper or for critical alloys the 99.95% copper cathodes obtained from electrolytic refining have to be washed, dried, and remelted before being cast into stock shapes useful for fabrication. The cast ingots can then be rolled into sheets (or foil), or hot or cold drawn into wire or pipe. Working the metal in these ways hardens and strengthens it, that is it raises the tensile yield point from 30,000—40,000 The high electrical conductivity of copper, 0.586 The relative thermal conductivities of the metals quite closely parallel electrical conductivities, so that again copper, with a conductivity of 0.934cal/cm Excellent resistance to corrosion both promotes the use of copper in some of the applications mentioned above and favors its use as an expensive, and Its malleability and corrosion resistance are factors in the extensive use of copper as a coinage metal, although undoubtedly here its beauty is an important contributing factor. The attractive red color is also the stimulus for its use in many types of decorative interior fittings. About one-quarter of the copper produced goes directly into copper alloys, mostly as fire refined, plus some electrolytically refined. The two principal alloy groups are the brasses, which comprise copper alloyed primarily with zinc, and the bronzes which are mainly copper/tin alloys. Both of these alloy groups are stronger than copper, one motivation for their use, but there are other reasons which favor their choice. The brasses are less expensive than pure copper, hence their employment in such uses as cartridge cases for ammunition. While the brasses are less corrosion resistant than copper this property is still sufficiently good for brasses to be used in automobile radiators where its good heat transfer capabilities and higher strength and lower cost favor this choice. The zinc content of brasses ranges from 5%, in gilding metal, through to 30% and 40% in cartridge brass and Muntz metal, respectively, which are the brass alloys containing the highest proportion of zinc. Some brasses also contain 1–3% lead which improves machinability. The tin content of bronzes is lower, ranging from 1.25 to 8% in the phosphorbronzes, which also contain 0.25% phosphorus, and confer higher strength and better corrosion resistance than pure copper. These alloys are therefore ideally suited to marine exposure in such applications as ships’ propellers, exterior fittings, and water lines carrying saltwater, etc. A low coefficient of friction between bronze and steel and the superior strength of bronze over copper have led to its application as a bearing metal and as the casting metal for gears Two special copper alloys, beryllium copper and nickel silver, although only used on a small scale, contribute valuable metal properties for special uses. Two percent beryllium added to copper gives greater fatigue resistance to the metal and confers a nonsparking (on impact) quality to tools made of this alloy, important for impact tools in flammable or explosive atmospheres. Nickel silver, a copper/nickel/zinc alloy with an appearance very like silver, is important as the strong base metal for silver-plated tableware. A small amount of copper is consumed for copper salts such as copper sulfate, which are important as agricultural fungicides as a spray or a dust. Copper salts are occasionally used to correct local soil deficiencies. Copper sulfate itself is also an excellent algicide in swimming pools and fish rearing ponds. Problems at the mining stage center around overburden and waste rock disposal and the potential contamination of surface water courses from Percolate from such dry land disposal sites, and mine drainage waters, often contain traces of dissolved copper and other metals such as iron ( Copper may be recovered from such waste streams by cementation, or by cementation plus liming, which can reclaim the metal and decrease the toxicity risks on stream discharge ( Cementation: Liming: Cementation involves passing the solution containing copper ions over a large surface area of scrap iron, followed by settling. Finely divided copper is precipitated. Subsequent liming removes most of the iron as the hydroxide, and raises the pH to more normal values before discharge. Four-stage solvent extraction in the presence of proprietary complexing agents has also been tested and found to be capable of decreasing aqueous Cu A large fraction of the water used for froth flotation may be recirculated by decanting a clear supernatant liquor from a settling lagoon, or from a Other types of water effluent problems can arise from froth flotation operations. For example, with multimineral flotation when separate concentrates are required for copper, lead, and zinc, copper would normally be floated first, then lead, and finally zinc sulfide. This separation sequence requires addition of sodium cyanide as a depressant. The waste water stream from this process can contain 50 When treatment is undertaken on a large scale, however, chlorine addition has been found to be both more convenient and more economical ( If the chlorine addition is undertaken prior to pH reduction with lime the reaction sequence is thought to involve intermediate formation of cyanogen chloride which is decomposed to cyanate on addition of base ( This waste treatment sequence can reduce feed values of 68 Ozonation has also been found to be effective for the neutralization of cyanide in waste waters Disposal of the waste pulverized gangue may be to underground or strip mined areas. However, excess disposal volumes can be a problem. Dry land disposal followed by aesthetic contouring and reestablishment of plant life may be used. This method requires monitoring and control measures for any dissolved metals in leachate from the tailings. Drainage directly to a small lake or a water course is not permitted by pollution control agencies (e.g. Solution mining can generate complex recovery problems, particularly with in-place leaching methods. When mining has been completed the fractured deposit requires extensive flushing to remove residues of leaching solution. Deep well injection or various procedures for concentrating solution are used for ultimate disposal of waste solutions from flushing operations. Copper smelting is associated with dust production from materials handling and grinding, and sulfur dioxide from sulfides. A tonne of sulfur dioxide gets dispersed for every tonne of copper obtained from sulfidic ores. In the early days of the industry the sulfur dioxide was discharged from stacks to dissipate in the air around a smelter. The severe effect on local air quality prompted mixing of the smelter gases with large volumes of air before discharge to decrease ground level sulfur dioxide concentrations. Stack heights gradually increased over the years to exploit dilution effects for larger volumes of sulfur dioxide, culminating in the construction of the world’s tallest stack, 380 Crushing and dry grinding stages as well as final rotary drying are likely to contribute the most to dust losses. Ore grinding wet avoids dust problems for this stage, and improves control of the final particle size. For all processing stages the proportion of copper present, about 10% in roaster dusts, 25% in reverberatory furnace dusts, and 45–55% in converter dusts, is sufficiently high to provide material recovery and emission control incentives for capture. Simple gravity settling of dust has for many years provided about 84% mass containment success for copper blast furnace discharges The problem with sulfur dioxide containment is that many smelter processing units produce sulfur dioxide concentrations of 1–2% whereas the minimum economic concentration for sulfur dioxide conversion processes (e.g., for sulfuric acid or sulfur production) is 3.5–4%. Thus, the economic solution to containment requires either modification of the smelter process to obtain higher sulfur dioxide concentrations, or capture of sulfur dioxide at relatively low concentrations followed by some means of regeneration of a high concentration of sulfur dioxide ( A switch from chain grate or multiple hearth type roasters to fluidized bed types with improved air to hot sulfide ore particle contact and less entrained air can raise the sulfur dioxide from 1 to 12% in the roaster “off-gases.” If the sulfide content of the ore is high enough, a fluid bed roaster can accomplish autogenous (self-heating) roasting. The need for added external fuel for roasters using low sulfide ores dilutes the sulfur dioxide to less than economic concentrations, which has led to the abandonment of roasting as a separate smelter operation under these conditions Continuous, or flash smelting processes using oxygen-enriched air are being employed to combine two or three smelting stages, roasting, reverberatory smelting and/or converting, into one Smelter acid is not as pure as the acid produced from sulfur combustion, so it fetches a lower price. Nevertheless, this product is quite suitable for uses such as fertilizer phosphate production, which gives a by-product credit to the process. Smelters which exercise this choice produce about 4 Sulfur dioxide capture and subsequent reduction to a sulfur product has also been tested. The American Smelting and Refining Company’s process involves combustion of the cooled and cleaned smelter gases with methane ( Carbonyl sulfide and some of the residual sulfur dioxide are then reacted at 450°C in the presence of a bauxite catalyst to raise the yield of sulfur ( After electrostatic precipitation of the products of these two steps, the remaining 2:1 ratio of hydrogen sulfide and sulfur dioxide are reacted in the presence of a Claus-type catalyst to add to the sulfur yield ( The U.S. Bureau of Mines has tested a pilot-scale sulfur dioxide to sulfur conversion process which involves initial absorption of sulfur dioxide in an aqueous solution of citric acid, HOC(CH The filtrate is returned to the absorber for reuse. A part of the product sulfur is reacted with methane and steam to produce the hydrogen sulfide required for reduction of the citrate complex ( This is over 90% efficient for reverberatory furnace flue gases containing as little as 1.5% sulfur dioxide. Emission standards for several smaller scale, but more hazardous discharges of copper smelters, such as arsenic and lead compounds have recently been set by the U.S. EPA Hydrometallurgy refers to the application of aqueous solutions for metal recovery from ores, and has been practiced for copper recovery for many years. The original impetus for solution methods for copper extraction before the development of froth flotation technology was the existence of large ore bodies of low copper content which were uneconomic to work using Hydrometallurgical copper recovery can be conveniently considered in two stages: the leaching stage, in which the various forms of copper in the ore are placed into an aqueous solution, and the recovery stage, where dissolved copper is recovered as solid, nearly pure copper metal ready for fabrication or final smelting. The most common solvent is 5–10% sulfuric acid in water. Diluted smelter acid can provide this at low cost. This can dissolve a number of copper minerals, not just the oxide ( These reactions, in particular carbonate solvation, deplete the sulfuric acid content of the extraction solution. Later metal recovery from the solutions, however, returns an equivalent acid strength to the water. Also, Metal may be extracted by leaching in place, by heap or percolation leaching, or by leaching with mechanical agitation in separate tanks Heap and percolation leaching are used with low-grade ores which are crushed to an average 1-cm particle diameter for this purpose. Heap percolation is practiced on a large-scale, 100,000-tonne by 35-m-high flattened top ore heaps, which are constructed so as to allow even distribution of liquor and air throughout the heap. Percolation leaching is conducted in a series of vats containing the crushed ore through which leaching solution is pumped to gradually put the metal into solution. Agitation leaching is used with very finely divided ores which may have already been partially processed and would pack too tightly for percolation Cementation involves precipitation of the copper by passage of the leach solution over scrap iron ( Copper may also be recovered from leach solutions electrolytically. Electrowinning requires the use of an insoluble anode such as hard lead, comparable to the liberator cell used for liquor purification in copper electrorefining. Consequently, there More selective, cleaner copper recovery from leach solutions may be obtained by solvent extraction using a copper-selective complexer, such as an hydroxyoxime ( The Sherritt–Cominco hydrometallurgical process makes the method applicable to chalcopyrite (CuFeS The hydrogen sulfide is recovered for processing to sulfur and the iron-containing solution is separated for precipitation of iron. The copper, now as Cu Metallic copper is then obtained either by electrowinning or hydrogen reduction. At least 98% copper recovery, gold and silver capture equivalent to conventional smelting, and recovery of 60–90% of the sulfur in elemental form has been demonstrated Cymet’s use of aqueous ferric chloride leaching solution has also been proven to work with chalcopyritic ores Ammonia complexation has also been employed, primarily for nickel-copper separations but also for copper recovery, when this is from native copper or copper oxide ores    Explain the meaning of the term “contact angle” and its relevance to the beneficiation of low-grade copper ores. Why are good recoveries obtained with froth flotation of sulfide ores of copper, while the oxides are poorly reclaimed? What influence(s) does the particle size of the ore have on the efficiency of copper recovery from froth flotation, and how does time since grinding affect this?  From first principles, what is the theoretical power required (kWh/tonne) for the electrolytic production of 1.00 What is the actual power required for 1.00  Why does the pH of the copper-containing electrolyte drop during electrowinning? How does this pH change help the hydrometallurgical component of the process?  What mass of iron is required theoretically to recover 1.00 What factors contribute to the higher than theoretical amount of iron required for cementation in practice, and how do these affect the process? Compare and contrast the niches served in copper recovery and production by froth flotation, hot smelting, hydrometallurgical extraction, electrowinning, and cementation. Include consideration of environmental factors. Toxic sulfide ion (S Give the equations which describe the chemistry of this neutralization. What rate of chlorine addition (g/hr) would be required to neutralize an alkaline waste stream of 35  With a 2.5:1 Write the balanced equation for this process. What amounts of sodium hydroxide and chlorine would be required to neutralize 100 If one were tempted to carry out a similar neutralization using hypochlorous acid made by dissolving chlorine gas in water, what serious exposure risk could arise? If this were to be adopted, what precaution(s) must be taken to avoid this hazard?