In striving to refine the clinical utility of different markers of bone metabolism, we should take into account numerous confounders, many of which are well known, such as sampling time, fasting status, and bone density. One further confounder may be ongoing fracture healing and/or post-fracture immobilization, which at least theoretically should impose an increased bone formation and resorption. Since both recent fracture and high bone turnover are independent predictors for new fracture, we thought it of importance to define the potential influence of such fracture on markers of bone turnover.
                  From a population-based cohort of 1604 women, all 75 years old (the OPRA-study), 1024 women attended a clinical examination. The bone metabolism was assessed in serum, by three markers of bone formation [bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (S-Bone ALP), intact and N-Mid osteocalcin (S-Total OC), and total carboxylated osteocalcin (S-cOC)], two markers of bone resorption [C-terminal cross-linked telopeptides of type I collagen (S-CTX) and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase type 5b (S-TRACP5b)], and in urine by one marker of bone resorption [deoxypyridinoline/creatinine (U-DPD/crea)] and two putative markers of bone resorption [urinary osteocalcins (U-OC/crea)]. Current physical activity and retrospective fracture data were recorded by questionnaires. The fracture data, for the entire cohort of 1604 women, were validated with radiographic referrals and reports, saved since the beginning of the last century. All data provided, except date of occurrence of retrospectively sustained fracture, were thus obtained cross-sectionally and in all women at the age of 75.
                  Fracture had ever been sustained by 727 of the entire cohort (n = 1604), and by 523 of the attending women (n = 1024). All markers were marginally higher (significant only for U-DPD/crea, P = 0.027) in women who had ever sustained fracture, compared to women without fracture. In women with recent retrospective fracture (since 2 years) (n = 100), the levels of all markers, except the two S-OCs, were significantly higher (r = 0.20–0.33, P = 0.049–0.001) the more recently the fracture had been sustained. Women with low current physical activity had elevated levels of U-DPD/crea (P < 0.001) and one U-OC (P = 0.014), while the other markers were unaffected.It is reasonable to believe that recently sustained fracture has implications on bone turnover. It has been shown by us and by others In spite of the well-grounded body of evidence for the general existence of a post-traumatic skeletal high turnover condition, researchers have, by using biochemical markers of bone turnover, not succeeded to fully demonstrate this condition. One reason for this has been a lack of knowledge about baseline levels, before the fracture event, when fractured patients have been followed longitudinally Biochemical markers of bone turnover have been used, in groups of individuals, for prediction of fracture, by us and by others This study was done in order to elucidate whether a retrospectively sustained fracture would have any influence on biochemical markers of bone formation or resorption, and if so, whether such an effect is time dependent. Furthermore, we wanted to find out whether a relative immobilization, taking place after fracture, has any implications on biochemical markers of bone turnover. Invited to the study were 1604 women, all 75 years old. The women were identified at random from the city files of Malmö, Sweden. No exclusion criteria were used. The invitation letter was sent out the week following the 75th birthday of each woman. Of these, 1024 (64%) women participated in a clinical investigation, where blood and urine samples were collected for assessments of biochemical markers of bone turnover. Reasons for not participating have been reported earlier All retrospectively sustained fractures from birth to age 75 were ascertained by three means. Firstly, the files of the department of radiology at the Malmö University Hospital were searched for all fractures in the 1604 invited women. This is the only hospital serving the city (260,000 inhabitants), and there is, and always has been, only one department of radiology and one department of orthopedics, which is the only department where fractures are treated in the city. Due to the personal identification number of each Swedish citizen, retrieval of such data is possible, as is avoidance of double entries. This system also allows us to ensure fracture data when a citizen of Malmö has been treated for fracture at another hospital. Secondly, participating women responded to a questionnaire about retrospectively sustained fractures. Thirdly, this information was confirmed against the files of the departments of radiology and orthopedics. Non-fasting blood samples were obtained between 08:00 and 13:00. The blood samples were centrifuged and processed within 2 h after phlebotomy, and stored at −80°C. The urine samples were obtained as first morning void and stored at −80°C. All samples were analyzed at the same time. Inter- and intra-assay coefficients of variation (CV) for the assays have been determined previously at our laboratories. Serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (S-Bone ALP) was determined using the Metra BAP immunoassay (Quidel Corporation, San Diego, CA, USA), with inter- and intra-assay CV of 4.4% and 3.6%, respectively. Serum intact and N-Mid osteocalcin were determined using the Elecsys N-MID Osteocalcin immunoassay (S-Total OC; N-MID®; Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany), with inter- and intra-assay CV of 2.4% and 2.3%, respectively. Serum total carboxylated osteocalcin (S-cOC) was determined by a previously published, in-house assay Serum C-terminal cross-linked telopeptides of type I collagen (S-CTX) were determined using the Elecsys ®-CrossLaps immunoassay (Roche Diagnostics) (intra-assay CV 5.9%, interassay CV 5.8%), serum tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase type 5b (S-TRACP5b) by a solidphase, immunofixed, enzyme activity assay as described earlier (intra-assay CV 1.8%, interassay CV 2.2%) Urine osteocalcin (U-OC) was analyzed using two novel, two-site assays, U-MidOC/crea and U-LongOC/crea modified from previously described protocols for serum human osteocalcin Urinary creatinine was determined in accordance with the kinetic Jaffé reaction with a Beckman synchron LX20-4, with CVs of 3% or less. In addition, body weight and time of specimen collection were recorded, as was serum creatinine analyzed by standardized methods. A self-assessed questionnaire (earlier validated The frequency of retrospectively sustained fracture between the whole population ( We used Statistica 6.1 from Statsoft Inc., OK, USA, for all statistical calculations. Of all 1604 women invited, 727 (45%) had had at least one retrospectively sustained fracture. The comparing figure for the women who had their blood and urine sampled ( The total number of fractures sustained by all 1604 women was 1225 (71 hip, 360 distal radius, 109 vertebral, 76 surgical neck of the humerus), and by the 1024 sampled women, 908 (53 hip, 212 distal radius, 62 vertebral, 45 surgical neck of humerus). Of the 100 women who had sustained fracture after the age of 73.0, there were 30 hip, 75 distal radius, 39 vertebral, and 26 fractures of the surgical neck of the humerus. All formation and resorption markers were marginally higher [significant, only for U-DPD/crea ( When statistical comparisons were done between women who had fractured themselves after age 73.0 with all other women, S-TRACP5b ( One of the 1024 sampled women was always confined to bed (physical activity class 1). This single woman was therefore excluded from further analysis. Women with ever a retrospective fracture were currently less physically active, than were the never-fractured women ( We have failed to find any studies in which the specific aim was to demonstrate levels of different markers of bone turnover in relation to earlier sustained fracture. In a few studies dealing partially with this subject, a firm conclusion has not been reached, partly due to insufficient number of individuals followed up The most significant finding in this study is that women with recently sustained fracture have high levels of bone markers, in particular, S-TRACP5b and U-LongOC/crea. Furthermore, within 2 years, also the formation marker, S-Bone ALP, and the resorption markers, S-CTX and U-DPD/crea, and the urinary Osteocalcin, U-MidOC/crea, were higher the more recently before sampling the fracture had been sustained. The cutoff limit of 2 years prior to sampling was chosen based on clinical and scintigraphic experience of fracture consolidation. Interestingly, the results were the same, except for S-CTX which no longer was time dependent, had the cutoff limit instead been chosen to 1 year prior to sampling (data not shown). On the other hand, this study shows that having ever sustained a fracture seems to influence marker levels in a limited way. Although the absolute levels were somewhat higher in the ever-fractured women compared to the never-fractured women, a significantly higher level was only found for U-DPD/crea. Neither total (S-Total OC) nor the carboxylated form (S-cOC) of osteocalcin seemed to be influenced in any way by a recently sustained fracture, while the third marker of bone formation analyzed, S-Bone ALP, was increased. This is in line with earlier findings that osteocalcin seems to be involved in the early phase of mineralization after fracture, while its presence seems not to be a requirement for the continuous mineralization process It is obvious, from a theoretical point of view, that not only bone formation, but also bone resorption, should be increased compared to baseline after fracture. Bone resorption was evaluated in this paper by three generally accepted biochemical markers of resorption (S-CTX, S-TRACP5b, and U-DPD/crea), and by two markers for which we have some evidence to believe that they are also markers of resorption rather than formation (U-LongOC/crea and U-MidOC/crea) There are some specific advantages with the study design used in this paper. All women had the same age, 75, making age corrections unnecessary. In addition, all women were of Caucasian ancestry and recruited from the same catchment area, Malmö city, Sweden. Fracture registration throughout life was made possible by the quite unique situation at the department of radiology, in this city, where all radiographs, referrals, and reports have been saved for 100 years. This situation throughout the 20th century has resulted in a considerable number of papers on fracture epidemiology There are also some limitations with this study. Since all the women were of the same age, we cannot generalize the results to be valid for both sexes and at all ages. We find no reason to believe, however, that the results should not be commonly valid for elderly women well above menopausal age. On the other hand, given the wide scatter of the data, the clinical impact of the data presented remains unclear for the individual patient. For some of the markers, in particular, S-CTX, there is an influence of non-fasting status on the serum concentration There is evidence that retrospectively sustained fracture is a strong independent predictor of new fractures Financial support was obtained from the Swedish Research Council, The Academy of Finland and the National Graduate School for Musculoskeletal Diseases (K.K.I., S.L.A.).