Chronic kidney disease (CKD) alters the metabolism of several minerals, thereby inducing bone lesions and vessel-wall calcifications that can cause functional impairments and excess mortality. The histological bone abnormalities seen in CKD, known as renal osteodystrophy, consist of alterations in the bone turnover rate, which may be increased (osteitis fibrosa [OF]) or severely decreased (adynamic bone disease [AD]); abnormal mineralization (osteomalacia [OM]), and bone loss. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is related to early phosphate accumulation (responsible for FGF23 overproduction by bone tissue), decreased calcitriol production by the kidneys, and hypocalcemia. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is associated with OF. Other factors that affect bone include acidosis, chronic inflammation, nutritional deficiencies, and iatrogenic complications.Chronic kidney disease (CKD) causes early alterations in phosphorus and calcium metabolism that eventually lead to secondary hyperparathyroidism (HPT II). CKD affects many other functions, including blood pH regulation and nutrition, and also results in varying degrees of inflammation, which combine to induce bone lesions of variable specificity. Thus, the bone lesions seen in CKD result from an accumulation of toxic effects related to CKD, as well as from iatrogenic factors in some patients. The pathophysiology of CKD-mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD) extends far beyond the abnormalities in phosphorus and calcium metabolism long viewed as the sole culprits. In the past, the bone symptoms and phosphorus/calcium metabolism dyshomeostasis seen in CKD were known as “renal osteodystrophy”. In 2006, the kidney disease improving global outcomes (KDIGO) consensus conference suggested the term CKD-MBD instead, to designate the systemic disorder of mineral and bone metabolism due to CKD  The turnover rate is measured by the bone formation rate (BFR) and may be normal, high, or low. High bone turnover is associated with increased levels of bone resorption markers. The parameters used to assess primary mineralization are the amount of osteoid tissue (collagen that is not yet mineralized), mineralization rate, and mineralization lag time (MLT). Primary mineralization may be normal or diminished. Bone volume (or mass) is evaluated based on the bone volume/tissue volume ratio for cancellous bone and on thickness and porosity for cortical bone. Bone volume is normal, high, or low. Various combinations of turnover and mineralization alterations produce four patterns of bone disease: osteitis fibrosa (OF), adynamic bone disease (AD), osteomalacia (OM), and mixed bone disease. In each of these four patterns, bone mass may be increased or decreased. Bone lesions characterized by low turnover are more common in CKD than those characterized by high turnover. The order of appearance of the various factors that induce or exacerbate CKD-MBD remains debated ( Nephron loss results in decreased calcitriol production by the kidneys, despite the increase in PTH, which activates renal 1-alpha hydroxylase. The increase in intracellular phosphorus levels diminishes the efficacy of 1-alpha hydroxylase, thereby worsening the calcitriol deficiency Secondary hyperparathyroidism is due to multiple interlinked factors ( FGF23 production is suppressed locally by dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1), which is produced by osteocytes and acts via the FGFR1 receptor Furthermore, recent work has documented a key role for osteocytes in regulating osteoclastic activity via modulation of the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL)/osteoprotegerin ratio by the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway Thus, the osteocyte seems to play a central role in the dysregulations characteristic of CKD-MBD. However, the respective roles for, and the hierarchy of, the proteins expressed by osteocytes remain unknown. Bone tissue is affected by the disorders in phosphorus and calcium metabolism seen in CKD. HPT II activates osteoblastic bone formation and osteoclastic bone resorption, leading to an increase in the bone turnover rate. In severe forms of CKD-MBD, marrow fibrosis occurs also, causing OF. Minerals are released by the bone tissue, increasing the serum calcium levels, sometimes to values above the normal range, and promoting the precipitation of calcium and phosphorus outside the skeleton. One consequence is the development of calcifications in the vasculature, to which many other factors contribute also In the absence of full-blown HPT, when PTH levels are low, normal (< Thus, bone turnover plays a pivotal role in the extraskeletal complications of CKD-MBD, most notably in patients with calcium balance abnormalities and in those receiving chronic dialysis Primary bone mineralization consists in hydroxyapatite deposition along collagen fibers. This process depends not only on the amount of available calcium and phosphorus, but also on the level of osteoblast activity. The number of molecules known to affect osteoblast activity is growing steadily; these compounds include alkaline phosphatase, ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase 1 (E-NPP1), phosphatase orphan 1 (PHOSPHO1), sodium-dependent phosphate symporters (Pit1/2), and cell-associated ankylosis protein (ANK). Recent work has established a major role for osteocytes via SIBLINGS and SOST expression Bone loss is related to the excess bone resorption compared to bone formation that is due to the high serum levels of PTH. Trabecular bone mass may be increased or decreased. The cortical bone is fragile as a result of both thinning and increased porosity CKD-MBD is a combination of abnormal bone turnover, abnormal bone mineralization, and bone loss due to alterations in calcium and phosphate homeostasis. Research is just beginning to unravel the complex pathophysiological relationships that link the various clinical manifestations of CKD-MBD, which cause both functional impairments and excess mortality in patients with CKD. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.