The effect of a commercial electroless Ni–P deposit on the fatigue properties of an SAE 4140 steel in the quenched and tempered condition, has been investigated when the substrate is in a notched and an unnotched condition. The application of such a coating to the substrate gives rise to a significant reduction of the fatigue life in comparison with the uncoated samples. The coated specimens in the as-deposited condition showed a reduction of approximately 88%, whereas in the notched uncoated and coated conditions it was of approximately 94–95%. The decrease in fatigue properties in the unnotched coated samples is comparable to that reported for the notched uncoated specimens. It has been observed that the dominant crack responsible for the fracture process is nucleated at the root of the notch, regardless of the presence of the deposit. A rough estimate of the fracture toughness of the material has been determined from the results of the experiments conducted with the notched uncoated specimens, together with the values of the critical crack length at different alternating stresses. The material constants involved in the Paris relationship, for the description of the fatigue crack growth rate as a function of the stress intensity factor at the crack tip, were also determined from the results obtained with the notched uncoated samples.Electroless Ni–P (EN) deposits have been reported to diminish severely the fatigue properties of high-strength steels Thus, the present investigation has been conducted with two different purposes. Firstly, to corroborate the hypothesis put forward above, by comparing the fatigue curves that are obtained in a quenched and tempered SAE 4140 steel, both in a notched and an unnotched condition, uncoated and coated as-deposited with a commercial EN plating of 20 μm thickness and a P content ranging approximately between 12 and 13 wt.% deposited industrially. Secondly, to test a method for obtaining an approximate estimate of the fracture toughness of the substrate material as well as the material parameters involved in the Paris relationship for the description of the fatigue crack growth rate as a function of the stress intensity factor. The present investigation has been carried out with samples of a SAE 4140 steel of the following composition (wt.%): 0.39 C, 0.75 Mn, 0.24 Si, 0.24 Cu, 0.95 Cr, 0.17 Mo and 0.15 Ni. This material is widely used in the automotive industry, for the manufacture of connecting rods, crankshafts, knuckles, rear axle and trailer axle shafts. Also, in the aircraft industry it is employed for making shapes and tubing, and in the oil industry for the production of bits, core drills, reamer bodies, drill collars, tool joints, piston rods and pump parts. The material was provided as bars of approximately 14 mm diameter and 6 m length. Such bars were cut to pieces of approximately 120 mm length for machining tensile specimens and of 90 mm length for machining the fatigue samples. Both type of specimens had a gage diameter of 6.35 mm, gage length of 12.7 mm, fillet radius of 25.4 mm and shoulder diameter of 12.7 mm, according to the ASTM standard E-606. The alloy was already provided in the quenched and tempered condition. The specimens were subsequently ground with successive SiC papers grit 80–1200 and polished mechanically to a mirror-like finish. Sixty fatigue samples were notched by spark machining employing a copper electrode, applying a potential of 45–50 V for 2 min. The stress concentrators thus produced were of a hemispherical shape with a radius of 0.5 mm. In order to maintain this geometry, the electrode was remachined every three notches. The samples to be plated were degreased in a 5% HCl solution at 348–353 K for 7 min, rinsed in distilled water, rinsed in a sodium bicarbonate (100 g/l) solution and rinsed again in water. The EN deposition was conducted industrially at Tecnologı́as Aplicadas C. A. (San Diego de los Altos, Venezuela), employing a bath composed of 30 g/l of nickel sulfate, 30 g/l of sodium hypophosphite, 35 g/l of malic acid, 1.5 ppm of lead sulfate, 10 g/l of succinic acid and a stabilizer. During deposition the pH was maintained at approximately 4.6–4.8, at a mean temperature of approximately 363 K. The deposition rate was of approximately 12 μm/h. The deposit applied had a phosphorous content of the order of 12–13 wt.% and a thickness of approximately 20 μm, which was corroborated by means of the ball cratering technique (Calotest, CSEM) and image analysis (LECO 500). The chemical analysis of the plating in the as-deposited condition was determined by means of SEM techniques (Hitachi S-2400) with EDS facilities. The observations were conducted at a constant potential of 20 kV. Tensile tests were carried out on a computer-controlled servohydraulic machine (Instron 8502, USA) at a cross head speed of 3 mm/min. At least three samples were employed for characterizing the monotonic mechanical properties of both the coated and uncoated substrate. All the fatigue tests were carried out under rotating bending conditions (Fatigue Dynamics, RBF-200, USA) at a frequency of 50 Hz and alternating stresses of 474, 510, 545 and 580 MPa, which corresponded to approximately 50, 54, 58 and 62% of the yield stress of the unplated substrate. A total of 24 samples were employed for evaluating the fatigue properties of the material under the four different conditions investigated. The number of fatigue samples employed to determine the fatigue life curves fulfills the ASTM standard 739 (12–24 samples) for reliability data required in S–N testing. Thus, the testing procedure employed in the present investigation allowed a replication of more than 80%. The meaningful comparison of the fatigue life of the materials under different conditions was possible by machining and polishing all the specimens in order to have similar mirror-like polished surfaces before testing. SEM techniques were employed for the examination of the fracture surfaces of the samples, especially regarding three important aspects of the present investigation: (a) the role of the EN deposit in the nucleation of cracks in the unnotched coated specimens; (b) verification of the stress concentrator dimensions; and (c) estimation of the critical crack size, at each stress level, at which the final fracture of the fatigue samples occurred.  The influence of the EN deposit employed in the present study on the monotonic mechanical properties of the composite coating–substrate material was evaluated by conducting a number of tensile tests with samples both in the uncoated and coated conditions. For the substrate material, the yield stress was found to be approximately 817±6 MPa, whereas the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) was found to be approximately 941±2 MPa. In the as-deposited condition the material had a yield stress of 819±2 MPa and a UTS of 939±2 MPa, which indicates that the deposit plated onto the substrate does not give rise to any change either in yield stress or in the UTS. Such a result is not surprising given the small thickness of the coating in relation to the diameter of the sample. As reported by Garcés et al. As far as fatigue testing is concerned, the evaluation of the monotonic mechanical properties of the material allowed to determine a stress amplitude range of 474–580 MPa to conduct the fatigue tests of both coated and uncoated materials. Such stress interval corresponded to a fraction of approximately 0.50–0.62 of the yield strength. Firstly, the linear relationship between the alternating stress and the number of cycles to failure in a double logarithmic scale for all the conditions analyzed indicates the validity of the simple parametric expression of the type earlier proposed by Basquin Also, it can be observed from As expected, the presence of a hemispherical notch in the uncoated samples also gives rise to a significant reduction in the fatigue life of the substrate material since the time required for the nucleation of the crack is virtually suppressed. The decrease in fatigue life varies between 69 and 94% in the alternating stress range employed in this investigation. It is interesting to observe that at 580 MPa the reduction in fatigue life induced by the stress concentrator is comparable to that found for the coated samples in the as-deposited condition. At low alternating stresses (474 MPa), the notch gives rise to a reduction in the fatigue life slightly greater (6%) than that produced by the EN deposit. These observations lead to the conclusion that the EN deposit acts as a surface notch or stress concentrator either because its lower mechanical properties enhance the nucleation of cracks that are subsequently transferred to the substrate or due to the presence of cracks within the deposit that were nucleated during its synthesis, which reach the critical size for propagation after few cycles of loading. If the notched samples are also coated with the EN deposit, the fatigue life of the substrate is decreased further, particularly at elevated alternating stresses where such a reduction can reach up to 78%. At low alternating stresses the decrease in fatigue life reaches approximately 95%, which is marginally superior than that induced by the stress concentrator alone, but within the experimental scatter of the results. Under low and elevated alternating stresses, the notch is the site initiation of the dominant crack that gives rise to the final fracture of the sample and therefore, as discussed later, the fracture surfaces of the notched specimens, both uncoated and coated, display a single crack site initiation and a flat surface. The above results could be interpreted more clearly in terms of the estimated number of cycles required for the nucleation of a fatigue crack of 0.5 mm, which at each alternating stress would be given by the difference between the number of cycles to fracture of either the uncoated or coated substrate and that corresponding to the notched uncoated specimens, which represents the number of cycles required for the propagation of such a crack. The relevant data, based on the mean of the number of cycles, is reported in The fracture toughness of the substrate material can be estimated from the classical expression that relates the stress intensity factor, at the crack tip, Δ In the above equations, Thus, by measuring experimentally the critical crack length from the fracture surfaces of the samples it is possible to estimate the The early work conducted by Paris and Erdogan In Several specimens tested at different alternating stresses were examined after failure by SEM in order to verify the size of the notch machined, to measure the crack length at fracture and also to study more closely the sites of crack initiation, particularly in the coated specimens. For example, The photomicrograph of Finally,  Thus, the present results corroborate those previously discussed regarding the fatigue tests conducted on coated and uncoated samples in the sense that EN deposits are bound to undergo fatigue failure before the substrate and to allow the transference of the fatigue cracks to it, giving rise to a reduction in its fatigue strength, particularly if the substrate has better mechanical properties than the deposit, as in the present case. Such a detrimental effect is almost comparable to the presence of a notch or stress concentrator from which the fatigue cracks nucleate and propagate. However, in the case of the coated materials the situation could be even worse than in the uncoated notched samples since it has been observed that at elevated stresses the presence of the deposit could accelerate the nucleation of the cracks that lead to the final fracture of the specimen. A number of fatigue experiments conducted on samples of a quenched and tempered SAE 4140 steel showed that plating this material with an EN deposit led to a significant reduction in the fatigue life. It has been determined that if the coating is in the as-deposited condition, at a stress amplitude of 580 MPa, such a reduction can reach up to approximately 68%, whereas at 474 MPa it could reach up to approximately 88%. The experiments conducted on the uncoated notched samples revealed that the presence of a stress concentrator of 0.5 mm in length, gave rise to a reduction in fatigue life that varied between approximately 69 and 94% depending on the alternating stress applied to the material. This decrease in fatigue properties is comparable to that reported for the coated specimens, which suggest that the EN deposit effectively acts as a surface fatigue crack source, causing a significant decrease in the fatigue properties of the substrate material. If the notched samples are further coated, then at elevated alternating stresses the reduction in fatigue life is increased up to approximately 78%, whereas at low stresses it remains at a similar value to that observed for the notched and uncoated specimens. The analysis of the fracture surfaces of the coated and uncoated notched samples tested, revealed that at low alternating stresses, the dominant crack responsible for the fracture process is nucleated at the root of the notch, regardless of the presence of the deposit. Such study also revealed clear evidence of fatigue striations within the deposit and the continuity of certain fracture features between coating and substrate. Therefore, it has been concluded that the decrease in fatigue life in the as-deposited samples occurs as a result of the passage of fatigue cracks from the coating to the substrate. Extensive secondary cracking along the coating–substrate interface has been revealed after fatigue testing, which indicates that the adhesion of the EN deposit is somewhat poor and therefore the interface is not able to sustain the stresses applied to the material. The experiments conducted with the notched and uncoated specimens, together with the experimental measurement of the critical crack length at different alternating stresses, allowed to conduct a rough estimation of the fracture toughness of the substrate material which agrees satisfactorily with the values reported in the literature for this important property. Also, based on the information provided by the results obtained from the notched samples, a non-linear regression method has been presented by means of which it has been possible to estimate satisfactorily the parameters that enter in the Paris relationship for the description of the crack growth rate of the substrate, in terms of the stress intensity factor at the crack tip. The two methods advanced here, which can be easily implemented, can provide both useful and reliable information about the fracture properties of the material being tested before conducting the more elaborated procedures already standardized. This investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the Venezuelan National Council for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICIT) through the project LAB-97000644 and the Scientific and Humanistic Development Council of the Central University of Venezuela (CDCH-UCV) through the project 08-17-4595-2000. The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Mr E. Batoni and B. Lozada in the conduction of the experimental work. J.A. Berrı́os is deeply grateful to the School of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture of the University of El Salvador.