Enargite (Cu3AsS4) is a common penalty mineral in the copper mining industry. Different treatment methods have been proposed to passivate the enargite surface for effective flotation of non-arsenic copper minerals, including pulp potential control, pre-oxidation and chemical depression. Magnesium ammonium mixture (MAA) has been previously tested, showing good selectivity for arsenic rejection. It was hypothesised that MAA would make the enargite surface hydrophilic by adsorption of magnesium ammonium arsenate hexahydrate (MgNH4AsO4·6H2O). Here we show that MAA does not selectively adsorb onto the enargite surface as conjectured. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry show that magnesium compounds do not precipitate onto the enargite surface at pH 10, whereas magnesium hydroxide on the enargite surface is formed at pH 12. MgNH4AsO4·6H2O was not observed at either pH 10 or pH 12. The effect of pre-oxidation to promote dissolution of (AsO4)3− before conditioning with MAA, which could help catalyse the formation of MgNH4AsO4·6H2O, was also tested. However, the results were the same as those without pre-oxidising the sample. Our investigation shows that under alkaline conditions it is not possible to passivate the enargite surface in MAA solutions for effective flotation of non-arsenic copper minerals.Arsenic contamination from smelting of concentrates is a major issue in the copper industry. Arsenic trioxide (As It is useful if arsenic bearing minerals can be removed from concentrates during froth flotation, preventing downstream contamination. Among these, enargite (Cu Selective flotation is one of the main alternatives to remove arsenic-bearing minerals in the early stages of the copper production process. Nevertheless, the problem arises in that xanthate collectors, which are non-selective sulphide collectors, are also absorbed to enargite, forming cuprous xanthates according to the following reaction ( Flotation of arsenic bearing minerals may be either hindered or promoted using pulp potential control or chemical depression. Enargite and other non-arsenic bearing copper sulphides are oxidised at different potentials under alkaline conditions. Enargite can be floated above −75 There is disagreement about the effect of MAA on enargite flotation. While some investigations show good selectivity, others contradict these results. For example, in a work conducted by As can be seen, all the investigations of enargite in MAA solutions have had a practical approach, aiming to evaluate flotation separation efficiency. Nevertheless, the results are contradictory, and there is not a full understanding of the species that occur on the surface of enargite during flotation. In this investigation we studied the effect of MAA on the surface of enargite under different conditions including variations of concentration, pH and potential. We focused not only on the possible precipitation of MgNH A high purity enargite sample from Wright’s Rock Shop (USA), embedded in epoxy resin and cut into a thin section, was used for cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical preparation for XPS analysis. The available surface area was approximately 1.0 Cyclic voltammetry was carried out in the electrochemical cell described previously. The enargite working electrode was installed in the cell and connected to the Gamry potentiostat. The counter electrode and the reference electrode were also connected and placed into the cell. Finally, 5 Chronoamperometry was used to prepare the sample for X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The enargite electrode was immersed into the testing solution similarly as in the cyclic voltammetry. A specific potential was applied for 30 A Kratos Axis ULTRA X-ray photoelectron spectrometer with incident monochromatic Al Kα X-rays (1486.6 A number of cyclic voltammograms were generated using different concentrations of MAA, pH values, and with or without pre-oxidation. We used this information to determine the conditions under which passivation of the surface occurs, from which the method of electrochemical preparation for XPS was established. Voltammograms at pH 10 are shown in Voltammograms at pH 12 are shown in Voltammograms at pH 10 are shown in Voltammograms at pH 12 are shown in To understand our results, it is important to know the electrochemical reactions occurring on the surface of enargite at different potentials. A typical voltammogram obtained for enargite in borate buffer is shown in Surface analysis using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of samples prepared at potentials between point 1 and point 2 ( More evidence is presented by This equation is consistent with Velasquez’s findings ( At point 2 there is dissolution of arsenic as AsO They point out that even though arsenic oxides may be present on the surface of the enargite, this is not confirmed by oxygen spectra, and more dissolution of arsenic as arsenate is claimed, which is also consistent with the findings of It is clear that oxidation of enargite promotes dissolution of arsenate, which is stable at high pH and may promote precipitation of magnesium as MgNH Dissolution of arsenic was also suggested by All voltammograms for MAA using different concentrations, pH and potentials were similar to those reported by In conclusion, these two peaks are likely to represent dissolution of arsenic, which may interact with magnesium and precipitate onto the surface of enargite as a result of a non-electrochemical process. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was performed on samples prepared under those conditions that, as discussed previously, were more likely to promote precipitation of magnesium compounds on the surface of enargite. Pre-oxidation at 710 Enargite was conditioned in a solution of 10 Due to the absence of magnesium found previously, a second experiment was performed increasing the concentration of MAA to 100 Results are shown in Neither the effect of pre-oxidation at 710 A third experiment was performed which involved conditioning the sample in a solution of 100 Results of this experiment are shown in High resolution spectra for this experiment are shown in In contrast, copper and arsenic account for 0.64% and 0.48% respectively of the elements on the surface. Furthermore, the existence of Mg(OH) The Cu 2p spectrum reveals small amounts of copper. The Cu 2p High resolution spectra for As 3d reveals a low amount of arsenic. Typically, spectral lines for this element are found at binding energies between 41 and 42 In summary, precipitation of magnesium hydroxide occurs on the surface of enargite, resulting in passivation of copper, arsenic and sulphur, which are found in small proportions, possibly forming Cu(OH) The objective of this experiment was to evaluate the effect of pre-oxidation. The preparation of the sample was similar to the previous experiment but the mineral was put in contact with the MAA solution in an open circuit configuration for 10 Nevertheless, the high resolution spectra in As in the previous experiment, the Mg 2p spectrum at 49.3 Regarding to the spectral lines for sulphur, copper and arsenic, which are in quantities lower than 1%, there is a significant shift of BE toward lower values if compared to the experiment without the pre-oxidation stage. The fact that this effect is only observed for the elements forming enargite (Cu, S, As) may reveal that the mineral is not fully oxidised. This phenomenon is known as chemical shift and results from the movement of electrons in the core level. Thus, when atoms are involved in chemical reactions with electronegative species, such as oxygen, the outermost electron is removed from the valence level, causing the remaining electrons to move to a higher potential, and the BE’s to increase ( It is clear that pH was the critical factor in the precipitation of magnesium compounds. At pH 10 magnesium is not adsorbed. XPS spectra under these preparation conditions show a typical profile for an oxidised sample of enargite. In contrast, when the pH is increased to 12, the atomic proportion of magnesium on the surface increases to around 10%, indicating the formation of Mg(OH) On the other hand, pre-oxidation does not affect adsorption of magnesium either at pH 10 or at pH 12. In both cases the results were similar, revealing no precipitation of magnesium at pH 10, whereas precipitation occurred at pH 12 both with and without pre-oxidation. In both cases magnesium precipitated as Mg(OH) As mentioned before, An electrochemical and surface study of enargite in magnesium ammonium mixture solutions was carried out. XPS complemented with cyclic voltammetry proved to be an effective approach to analyse precipitation of compounds on the surface of the enargite electrode under diverse conditions. We found that pH is critical to the adsorption of magnesium compounds on the surface of enargite, revealing precipitation of Mg(OH) The authors gratefully acknowledge the Chilean Government for a postgraduate (ME) scholarship awarded to Mr. Daniel Pineda for his studies at The University of Queensland, Australia, where the research reported in this paper was conducted.  E E E