In this work a heterocoagulation in fluorite ore slurry from a Mexican mine has been experimentally studied through measurements of granulometric analysis and scanning electronic microscope (SEM). The experimental results have shown that there was a strong heterocoagulation in the form of slime coating in the fluorite ore slurry at pH 9, which might be attributed to the electrical double layer attraction between particles of fluorite/quartz and calcite/quartz in aqueous solutions, and very weak electrical double layer repulsion between fluorite/calcite particles in aqueous solutions. Also, the elimination of the heterocoagulation has been investigated through using chemical dispersants, CMC (carboxymethyl cellulose) or water glass, in order to improve the beneficiation of the fluorite ore by froth flotation. It has been found that the dispersion processing with CMC as dispersant could effectively improve the fluorite flotation, increased the fluorite recovery from 72% to 78.5% at the same concentrate grade of 98% CaF2.Heterocoagulation is commonly observed in ore slurries, in which two or more kinds of mineral particles in aqueous suspensions aggregate if there are a few of particles in the fine size range ( The elimination of the heterocoagulation is usually achieved by dispersion processing with a specialized dispersant ( In this work, we attempted to study the heterocoagulation in the fluorite ore slurry from the Minera de los Cuervas fluorite concentration plant, located in the state of San Luis Potosi in Mexico, as well as the effect of dispersion processing on the fluorite flotation. The fluorite ore contains about 85% CaF The ore sample used in this work was collected from the feed ore of the fluorite flotation circuit in the Minera de los Cuervas (MLC) concentration plant. The sample contained 85.86% CaF In this work, water glass from the Productos Químicos Panamericanos S.A. (Mexico) and CMC from the Química Amtex (Mexico) were used as dispersants; PQM-1710 (an oleic acid) as collector and PQM-1704 (an alcohol) as frother from the Productos Químicos Monterrey (Mexico) were used; quebracho from the BARMEX (Mexico) was used as depressant; soda ash was used to adjust slurry pH. All of them were of industrial purity. The water circulated in the fluorite flotation circuit of the concentration plant was used throughout the tests in this work. A series of Tyler screens were used for the granulometric analysis of the sample. First, 200 A Philips MICROSPEC WDX electronic scanning microscopy (SEM) was used for the observation of the coagulation and dispersion of fine mineral particles in the ore slurry. The SEM images of coagulates and dispersed particles were taken. In addition, the EDAX energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) attached to the SEM was used to determine the minerals particles in SEM images. Flotation tests were carried out with a Denver laboratory flotation cell. First, a slurry with 500 In this work, granulometric analysis and SEM imaging have been used to study the heterocoagulation (slime coating) in the aqueous slurry of the fluorite ore. As already stated, fluorite, calcite and quartz were the main minerals in the fluorite ore. These minerals have their isoelectric point (IEP) at pH 9.0–10.0 for fluorite ( The SEM micrographs of mineral particles in the fluorite ore slurry without dispersion processing at pH 9.0 are given in The fluorite ore samples in each size fraction obtained with or without dispersion processing were also chemically analyzed to obtain the grades of CaF From the experimental results mentioned above, it might be helpful to the fluorite flotation through eliminating the heterocoagulation in the ore slurry. Accordingly, a study for improving the fluorite flotation by dispersion processing has been carried out in this work. The fluorite flotation is performed by using oleic acid as the collector and quebracho as the depressant, which is a commonly used chemical scheme for fluorite flotation (   The particles in the fluorite ore slurry after being treated by the dispersion processing with CMC as dispersant were photographed by using SEM. As it is known, CMC (carboxymethyl cellulose) is a long chain polymer with β- It is shown that there was a strong heterocoagulation in the form of slime coating in the fluorite ore slurry at pH 9 from the flotation circuit of the Minera de los Cuervas concentration plant, which would be detrimental to the beneficiation of the fluorite ore by flotation. The mechanism of the heterocoagulation might be attributed to the electrical double layer attraction between particles of fluorite/quartz and calcite/quartz in aqueous solutions, and very weak electrical double layer repulsion between fluorite/calcite particles in aqueous solutions. A dispersion processing with chemical dispersants could effectively eliminate the heterocoagulation, and thus improve the beneficiation of the fluorite ores by froth flotation. It has been found that the dispersion processing with CMC as the dispersant in the fluorite flotation could increase the fluorite recovery from 72% to 78.5% while the concentrate grade was kept the constant of 98% CaF The financial support from the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACyT) of Mexico under the grant 485100-5-38214-U is gratefully acknowledged.