There are few experimental data on the consequence of varying the composition and diversity of soil animals communities, or soil food-webs, on ecosystem properties. Here, we tested the hypothesis that varying the diversity and composition of soil animals within a trophic group, the microbial-feeders, affects litter decomposition and nutrient flux in grassland. Microcosms containing grassland plant litter were inoculated with individual species of Collembola Folsomia candida, Pseudosinella alba, and Protaphorura armata,and all possible two and three species combinations of these species. Our data show that towards the end of the experiment individual species of Collembola, and especially F. candida, had markedly different, but positive, effects on measures of litter mass loss, microbial activity (CO2 respiration) and the leaching of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and nitrate-N. Two and three species combinations of Collembola revealed that effects of fauna on ecosystem processes were due to differences in the composition of the collembolan community, rather than the number of species present. In comparison to a treatment that had no fauna, significantly higher rates of litter mass loss, microbial activity, and DOC and nitrate release were detected only in microcosms that contained F. candida. There was no evidence of effects of F. candida in combination with other species, relative to effects of F. candida alone, on the above properties. These findings support the notion that changes in the diversity of microbivorous fauna may not have a predictable effect on decomposition processes rates and that the functioning of the microbial-feeding trophic group is influenced mainly by the physiological attributes of the dominant animal species present, in this case F. candida.The decomposer food web has a primary role in determining the mineralization of nutrients in soil, and hence plant nutrient acquisition and plant productivity. Although most mineralization of nutrients is governed directly by the activities of bacteria and fungi, their ability to do this is affected strongly by soil animals of higher trophic levels. Numerous studies highlight the way that soil animals can affect the biomass and activity of the microbial community, either directly through selectively feeding on fungi and bacteria, or indirectly by comminution of organic matter, dissemination of microbial propagules, and the alteration of nutrient availability ( Although there is widespread recognition that soil animals influence nutrient transformations, and hence ecosystem productivity, there is little experimental data on the consequence of varying the composition and diversity of soil animals communities, or soil food-webs, on these ecosystem properties. There is some evidence from soil/litter microcosm studies that species of mites ( There is a dearth of information available on the effects of varying species composition and diversity within soil animal trophic groups on ecosystem processes such as organic matter decomposition and nutrient cycling. In particular, few studies have specifically tested whether there is redundancy within soil animal trophic groups or whether soil processes are independent of which faunal species are present. Here we address these questions, and test the hypothesis that varying the diversity and composition of microbial-feeding fauna affects litter decomposition and nutrient flux and, hence, potentially ecosystem productivity in grassland. To achieve this, we constructed microcosms containing a composite sample of senescent plant litter taken from a herb-rich grassland ( The experiment was carried out using a microcosm-based approach ( Three species of fungal-feeding Collembola that were taken from cultures ( Treatments consisted of the addition of either none, one, two or three species of Collembola added to each microcosm. Six replicates of each of the three possible combinations of one or two species and the three species treatment were established. This design allowed for a balanced test of the effect of species number, yielding 18 replicates of each of the one, two, and three species treatments. The same total biomass of Collembola was added to each Collembola treatment whilst a control was established with no Collembola added ( At each sample date, nutrients were leached from each microcosm by adding 100 All statistical analysis was performed using the StatView™ package. Since the measurements over time were repeated on the same microcosms a Repeated Measures Analysis of Variance (RM-ANOVA) was used to examine effects of treatments on measured variables over the whole course of the experiment. Single species and their paired combinations, and the three species treatment were taken as single treatments in this analysis. Fisher's protected least squares difference (PLSD) was used to identify means of these treatments that were significantly different at the 5% level. All species of Collembola survived and reproduced when added to microcosms in single species treatments ( For respiration, there was a significant interaction effect between animal treatment and time ( Although there was no main effect of the diversity and composition treatments on DOC release ( Amounts of NH At the end of the experiment, litter mass loss was significantly greater in all treatments to which Our objective was to determine whether varying the diversity and composition of animals within a soil trophic group (microbial-feeding Collembola), has potentially important effects on ecosystem processes. The findings of our study are three-fold. First, we have shown that individual species of fungal-feeding Collembola have markedly different effects on ecosystem processes of litter decomposition and nutrient release. Second, our data showed that varying the species composition of the collembolan community within a trophic group can substantially alter these ecosystem properties, and that these effects are related to the inclusion of a particular, fast-growing, species of Collembola. Third, we showed that changing the number of species of Collembola per se within a trophic group has no predictable effect on ecosystem processes over the experimental period. We will discuss each of these findings in turn. In agreement with Positive effects of Collembola on decomposition processes and nutrient release are likely to be indirect, through a positive effect of their feeding on the activity of microorganisms and through the excretion of nutrients ( It is of note that The different effects of individual species on litter decomposition, microbial activity and nutrient release are most likely due to differences in their life-history strategy. The species that had the greatest effect on decomposition processes and nutrient release, The two and three species combinations of Collembola revealed that effects of fauna on litter decomposition processes and nutrient release were due to differences in the composition of the collembolan community, rather than the number of species present. In comparison to the control, significantly higher rates of litter mass loss, microbial activity, and DOC and nitrate release were detected only in microcosms that contained In drawing conclusions from our study, it is important to note that we did not examine across-trophic group interactions which have previously been shown to have important effects on ecosystem processes ( In conclusion, our data show that individual species of microbivorous fauna may have markedly different effects on soil processes in grassland. We also show that soil processes are mainly driven by the physiological attributes of the dominant animal species present ( This work was carried out thanks to a PhD studentship from the UK Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF). We are grateful to Hefin Jones and the ECOTRON team at Imperial College, Silwood Park, for supplying cultures of Collembola, Mrs Atherton for permission to use hay from her field, and David Wardle and Juha Mikola for providing critical comments on the manuscript. We also wish to thank Vladimir Krivtsov, Gary Porteous, and Pisit Chareonsudjai for their patient assistance with the analysis of inorganic nutrients and dissolved organic carbon, and Louise Innes, Lisa Cole and Simon Balance for general assistance in the laboratory. We thank the referees for their useful comments on the paper.