The design of alternative strategies for water and ecological quality protection at the Lake Verde of Sete Cidades should be coupled with the assessment of future trophic states. Therefore, a mathematical model was developed to make prospective scenarios to reduce the risk of environmental degradation of the lake, and a modified Psenner scheme was used to characterize P distribution in the sediments. The model was able to describe thermal stratification, nutrient cycling (P, NH4 and NO3), dissolved O2, and phytoplankton dynamics in the water column and adjacent sediment layers. Internal P recycling, resulting from thermal stratification and sediment anoxia, was identified as the main cause for the increase of P concentration in the hypolimnion followed by slow transfer to the epilimnion (about 20μg/L annual average). Cyanobacteria blooms during spring were explained by the availability of P and increased water temperature verified during this season. The most sensitive model parameter was sediment porosity. This parameter has a direct effect in dissolved O2 and P profiles and also in phytoplankton biomass. Finally, different water quality restoration scenarios were identified and their effectiveness assessed. Without the adoption of remediation measures (scenario control), Lake Verde water quality would deteriorate with annual average concentrations of total P and phytoplankton biomass (dry matter) reaching 34μg/L and 2mg/L, respectively, after 10 years of simulation. The reduction of P loads (scenario PORAL) into the lake would improve water quality comparatively to the scenario control, reducing the annual average concentrations of total P from 34μg/L to 26μg/L and of phytoplankton from 2mg/L down to 1.4mg/L after 10 years of simulation. In scenario sediments, corresponding to a decrease in the organic content of the sediments, a reduction in the concentrations of total P and phytoplankton is expected in the first two years of simulation, but this effect, would be attenuated throughout the years due to organic matter sedimentation. The best strategy is obtained by combining external and internal measures for P remediation. Finally, it is recommended that the model be used to integrate the results of water quality monitoring and watershed management plans.Eutrophication of surface water bodies results mainly from anthropogenic activities occurring in their watersheds and constitutes one of the most serious water quality problems, with repercussions on lake chemical and biological characteristics. Nutrient loads from intensive fertilization and livestock manure are difficult to control and have increased in recent times. This human environmental disturbance has become a major problem, particularly during intense precipitation due to the transport of nutrients through the watershed lotic system and ultimately into downstream water bodies. As a result of increased nutrient availability, increased phytoplankton and cyanobacteria can form blooms, causing the release of cyanotoxins, and thus affect multiple water uses. Another measure of eutrophication is the content of P in lake sediments. Indeed, when the external nutrient sources are controlled, the sediments can act as a source of P and such mobility along the sediment/water column interface is a well known problem for remediation success ( Water quality conditions of Lake Verde in the Azores islands (Portugal) are influenced by local agricultural watershed activities. Algae blooms and the release of P from the sediments during the summer are recurrent events in the lake ( Biological processes in aquatic ecosystems are complex. The application of mathematical modelling is necessary in order to design management strategies, test functional hypotheses and simulate future states for the system in response to environmental alteration. Several models have been developed in past years for the modelling of different restoration measures in lake ecosystems. For example, PAMOLARE I, a structurally dynamic model based on the UNEP software ( The design of alternative strategies for water and ecological quality protection at Lake Verde should be coupled with the assessment of future trophic states. Therefore, the goal of this research was to evaluate the response of the Lake Verde ecosystem to different environmental protection measures. Lake Sete Cidades is located in the Western part of São Miguel Island, in the archipelago of Azores (Portugal). The lake occurs inside a volcanic crater and has an area of 4.5 Water quality data used in the present work was obtained in 2004 during quarterly sampling field campaigns. Water samples were collected, at surface, 2.5 Phytoplankton cell counting was performed in water samples collected at the surface of the lake, after settling, using the inverted microscope method ( Sediment samples were collected at the deepest location of Lake Verde using a gravity Uwitec-corer. The Uwitec-corer tubes, with a diameter of 6 For P speciation in the sediments, a modified scheme from The use of mathematical models in environmental management should lead to the development of lake management policies to reduce the risk of environmental degradation. The model used in the present study is based on the one developed by The present model is based on horizontal average changes in nutrient concentrations The model state variables were O  Model calibration was carried out using a heuristic method; the temperature profile was adjusted firstly, followed by dissolved O Eutrophication caused by P loads into surface water bodies can be minimized by the implementation of external measures (reduction of incoming loads) and internal measures (reduction of organic content of sediments). Therefore, in order to carry out an evaluation of policies based on external and internal measures, four scenarios for the next 10 years were developed for the Lake Verde. The scenario A sensitivity analysis of the model parameters was carried out using the absolute-relative sensitivity function (Sens AR). The Sens AR measures the absolute change in a state variable for a 100% change in a model parameter and does not depend on the parameter units ( A sensitivity analysis was conducted for all model parameters ( The sediments of Lake Verde have a density of 2.44 Lake water quality models often describe the processes occurring in the sediments in less detail than the ones occurring in the water column. Usually, only the mineralization process is considered in the sediments ( Temperature, dissolved O To assess the organic P fraction in the sediments, the maximum concentration of P predicted at the lake bottom was compared with the one obtained by the maximum solubilisation potential (MSP) assessment test described in In general, species belonging to the diatom and cyanobacteria groups dominate the Lake Verde phytoplankton. The community was mostly composed of The predicted results of phytoplankton dynamics indicated that diatoms were the predominant group in the lake during autumn and winter, while cyanobacteria dominated during spring and summer, with the exception of September. The cyanobacteria bloom was simulated in late March, beginning of April, and occurred when P concentration at the lake surface reached its highest value (4.4 The results of the sensitivity analysis carried out to assess the effect of the different parameters on state variables are presented in As depicted in In order to achieve the goal of the present work, four prospective scenarios for water and ecological quality assessment of Lake Verde during the next 10 years were developed: the scenario Regarding the dynamics of phytoplankton growth ( Briefly, the reduction of P external load into Lake Verde as put in perspective by scenario A mathematical model of Lake Verde was developed to make prospective scenarios of water quality and ecological status. The present study has shown how a calibrated mathematical model can be used to support the decision-making processes in aquatic restoration programmes. The following conclusions can be drawn: The water quality tends to deteriorate unless a strong policy of environmental protection is adopted: annual average values of 34 A reduction of P load into the lake to half of the actual value will improve water quality: an average concentration of total P of 26 The reduction of both internal P loads from sediments and external P load into the lake will lead to significant improvements in water quality. Finally, it is recommended that the present mathematical model is used to integrate the results of future water quality monitoring programmes and to assess the efficiency of the current Lake Verde watershed management plan. The authors are indebted and grateful to the Regional Department of Water Resources and Land Planning and staff, namely José Gouveia, Margarida Medeiros and Andrea Malcata, and recognize the strong encouragement of Ana Paula Marques, head of the Regional Secretary of Environment and Sea. Gilberto Martins acknowledges Grant SFRH/BD/25639/2005 from the Science and Technology Foundation.