A rock mass is a heterogeneous and discontinuous medium. This means that its properties in terms of strength and deformation cannot be directly determined by laboratory testing since, if a simplification of the problem is not permitted, there will be a considerable discrepancy between the values obtained in these tests and those carried out on site. This difference is a consequence of the volume of soil tested in each case and is known as the “scale effect”. The Poisson coefficient can be determined by laboratory testing of specimens The most relevant methods for determining the deformational properties of a rock mass in-situ are pressuremeter testing The test using flat jacks is carried out on the walls of excavations or corridors and makes it possible to estimate the deformation modulus of the mass and the initial stress state of the soil. It involves inserting two nails into the material to be tested with a determined separation. The initial separation is measured and a slit is drilled between the two points. At this point, the distance between the nails reduces as a result of the deformation caused by the release of stress created by drilling the slit. The distance is measured again and a new measurement is taken between one and three days later. The The plate loading test has been in use since the second half of the last century. It consists of placing a plate on the soil, applying determined pressures and measuring the resulting settlements. The Young modulus is obtained based on the empirical correlations with the dimensions of the plate, the pressure applied and the settlements produced. The test is carried out in trenches or on the surface of the soil and is primarily used in the design of surface foundations, both in highly strong rock and granular soil. Similarly, it is not possible to determine the Poisson coefficient using this method. The dynamic deformation moduli of the rock masses can be obtained using seismic methods Vasarhelyi Finally, it should be noted that there is a method based on measuring the radial displacements detected within one of the boreholes made in the rock mass, which makes it possible to determine its stress state The test has been devised by the Soil Engineering Research Group at the University of Oviedo (GIT, abbreviation in Spanish) to determine the Poisson coefficient in rock masses by taking quick and simple measurements inside the openings created by three non-collinear boreholes. The boreholes will be drilled with a diameter between 40 and 150 It begins by drilling three non-collinear boreholes (S1–S3) in the rock mass, with a diameter between 40 and 150 The radial deformation experienced by each of the boreholes is then measured. The final value will be the average of the three values provided by the measuring device inserted into each borehole from three different positions each rotating at an angle between 35° and 45°. Finally, the measurements that have been taken are related to the Poisson coefficient using the following procedure. A global coordinate system is established ( The vector Hence The stress matrix The matrix Σ Expressing this change of basis using a matrix representation gives It is now possible to obtain the main stresses For any of the three boreholes made, and on a plane perpendicular to their axes at a distance of between 20 and 50 To determine the values of the main stresses and the angle  The tensions acting on the faces perpendicular to the plane Diagonalising the previous matrix gives the main stresses Under these conditions, the radial displacement The radial displacements obtained from the experiments are measured along three diameters on any three radii, which form angles Solving the system gives the values of A specific solution to the system above results from giving the angle The previous values make it possible to determine the stresses acting on the faces perpendicular to the plane Hence the elements of the stress matrix Similarly, following the procedure used for borehole S1, it is possible to obtain the elements of the stress matrix under the local coordinate system for boreholes S2 and S3. Dor example, the values for S2 are: Following the same reasoning used for borehole S1 in the previous section, the main stresses on the planes normal to the axes of boreholes S2 and S3 are obtained. Furthermore, the stress matrices are obtained under the local coordinate systems for both boreholes. Using the values obtained in sections (d) and (e) gives a new system with nine equations and seven unknowns whose solution allows us to determine the Poisson coefficient. This system is as follows: The above system of equations can be expressed as follows: Operating with the Eqs. Hence, The system of Eq. The seven unknowns are: Solving this system of Eq. The procedure described in this paper makes it possible to obtain the value of the Poisson coefficient without a priori estimates. All that is needed is the actual stress state of the soil, given by the three boreholes. The main applications of this procedure lies in sectors of the extraction and construction industries. A procedure has been devised for calculating the Poisson coefficient of rock masses quickly and simply using an in-situ test that consists of making three non-collinear boreholes directed towards a single point. The only measurements required consist of determining the radial deformation experienced by the soil at the bottom of each borehole using deformation transducers. Putting this procedure into practice does not require the prior determination of a guidance value for the Poisson coefficient to find an approximation by means of successive iterations. By measuring the radial deformations observed at the bottom of the three boreholes, the stress state of the rock mass being tested is also determined.