 Unstable proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint fracture dislocations in which more than 50% of the palmar base of the middle phalanx is fractured. Comminuted lateral plateau fractures of the base of the middle phalanx. Joint salvage after failed treatment of complex fracture-dislocations of the PIP joint. Candidates for the procedure must have integrity of the dorsal cortex of the middle phalanx to allow fixation of the graft. Additionally, the cartilage surface and head of the proximal phalanx must be undamaged so the graft has good opposing surface with which to articulate.  The finger is inspected for position both extended and flexed. Examine the sagittal alignment with the finger extended, looking for colinearity of the proximal phalanx and middle phalanx. Evaluate coronal plane alignment, assessing for lateral deviation that suggests asymmetric compression of the articular surface ( Record active and passive range of motion of the affected finger.  Standard radiographs can be done initially to evaluate the cortical and articular surfaces. The base of the middle phalanx as well as the proximal phalanx head should be evaluated. It is important to note the integrity of the proximal dorsal cortex of the middle phalanx as this will be a site of graft fixation. A loss of continuity of the articular surface is noted on the lateral x-ray (white arrow). The anteroposterior (AP) film illustrates asymmetric compression of the middle phalanx leading to ulnar deviation of the finger (black arrow) ( A computed tomography scan can be helpful in determining more detailed anatomy. Severe impaction of the articular surface can be clearly seen (white arrow) as well as comminution of the volar cortex and articular surface (black arrow). In noncomminuted circumstances, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) may be favored over arthroplasty in acute or subacute cases (  The PIP is composed of the bicondylar articular head of the proximal phalanx and the concave base of the middle phalanx. A box of ligamentous structures aids the stability of the joint. The volar plate forms the floor, the radial and ulnar collateral ligaments serve as the sides, and the extensor mechanism is the lid. The PIP joint is a sloppy hinge joint where the middle phalanx actually glides more than rotates on a fixed point. Stability during initiation of flexion relies on an intact articular surface and the volar lip of the middle phalanx. Fracture or loss of this volar stability can lead to dorsal subluxation. This dorsal subluxation creates a “V” sign that can be noted on lateral x-rays. Additionally a dorsally subluxated middle phalanx will lose its gliding motion and lever at the fracture site, leading to a hinge motion and loss of flexion ( The rationale of this procedure is based on the anatomy of the hamate and the base of the middle phalanx. The distal dorsal surface of the hamate has a central ridge between its articulations with the bases of the ring and small metacarpals. This bicondylar articular surface of the distal hamate has been shown to have contours similar to the base of the middle phalanx. The dorsal lip has a cup-shaped architecture that allows for replacement of the volar lip of the middle phalanx ( The hemi-hamate arthroplasty replaces a damaged middle phalanx articular surface and provides stability to the PIP joint by recreating the integrity of the volar lip.  The patient is placed supine with the arm extended on a hand table. A tourniquet is placed on the upper arm.  The finger and PIP joint are exposed with a volar approach. A Bruner incision is designed from the distal interphalangeal (DIP) to the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint ( The skin and subcutaneous tissue are incised and a flap is raised on the flexor sheath protecting the neurovascular bundles. The A3 pulley is divided on its lateral edge to expose the flexor tendons. The A2 and A4 pulleys are preserved. The tendons are retracted away exposing the volar plate ( The A3-pulley tendon sheath, if left attached on one side, can also be used as a flap interposed between the graft and flexor tendon at the end of the procedure. Minimizing the incision is likely to lead to poor visualization and inability to safely mobilize the joint.  The volar plate is detached distally from the base of the middle phalanx. The volar plate is separated from accessory collateral ligaments and these are divided to allow the joint to be hyperextended and “shotgunned,” exposing the articular surfaces of the proximal and middle phalanges ( The proximal phalanx is inspected for any major articular wear. Mobilization of the volar plate in a distal to proximal manner allows it be draped over the hamate graft at the end of surgery. Avoid excessive manipulation of the tendons: this can create postoperative adhesions leading to poor outcomes.  The joint surface is inspected for wear. The articular damage is often irregular ( A volar box resection that includes all the damaged articular surface is designed. A box design is easier to both resect and fill with a contoured graft piece. Resecting only the damaged area will make graft fitting difficult. A power saw or osteotome is used to make parallel cuts, resecting the damaged articular surface ( Making a symmetric cut aids in measurement and contouring of the graft. During excision of the joint, it is important not to fracture the dorsal cortex of the middle phalanx. This is important for fixation of the replacement piece.  A c-arm can be used to locate the fourth and fifth metacarpal interval ( A transverse incision is designed over the area of interest. The longitudinal sensory nerves and veins are retracted and protected. The extensor tendons are retracted away radially and the joint interval is exposed ( A measurement is taken of the middle phalanx defect ( A template is then designed on the distal hamate centered over the fourth and fifth metacarpal interface. This interface will articulate with the central groove of the proximal phalanx joint surface. The dorsal aspect will serve as the volar lip of the middle phalanx. A small trough is made proximal to the horizontal cut. This trough aids in the placement of a curved osteotome to make a volar osteotomy parallel to the dorsal cortical surface ( The cuts should be designed 1 mm larger in all dimensions to ensure a large graft is harvested. The piece can be trimmed if necessary to fit.  The hamate graft is fashioned to fit the predesigned previously made recess ( The hamate is secured with 1-mm screws to the dorsal cortex ( A properly placed piece is angulated to enhance the volar lip. In the case presented here, the piece had too much height and needed to be tilted more to create the volar lip (  The tourniquet is released and hemostasis is obtained with bipolar cautery. At the graft harvest site, the dorsal wrist capsule skin is approximated with 4-0 nylon suture. The finger is reduced from the shotgun position to its anatomic position. The released volar plate is laid distally over the newly secured hamate graft, as the flexor tendons naturally resume their anatomic position. Movement and stability of the finger is manually tested in the operating room. The Bruner incision is closed with interrupted 4-0 nylon. The patient is placed in a dorsal splint with the wrist neutral and finger immobilized in 20 degrees of flexion. The tendon sheath (A3 pulley) can be interposed between the tendons and volar plate as an added layer of soft tissue if the volar plate is thin or shredded.  The splint is removed at 1 week. Active PIP joint flexion is started with an extension block splint that prevents full PIP joint extension. Active and passive motion is started for the MCP and DIP joints. Radiographs are obtained at 2 weeks and 6 weeks to evaluate the graft position and bone healing. Unrestricted use of hand is allowed at 12 weeks.  Early active motion is essential to optimal outcome. 