Proximal phalangeal fracture stability is crucial for the initiation of early and effective exercises designed to recover digital and especially proximal interphalangeal joint motion. Active digital flexion and extension exercises are implemented by synergistic wrist motion. Joint blocking exercises and active tendon gliding exercises in protective blocking splints are instrumental elements of early treatment. Dynamic splinting and serial finger casting are used in recalcitrant, severe, and late presenting cases. Surgical release is a last resort in regaining proximal interphalangeal joint motion. This measure is reserved for a failure of treatment when residual proximal interphalangeal joint contracture is persistent and severe enough to cause serious impairment of digital motion and hand function. J HAND THER. 2003;16:129-142.The most common complication after proximal phalangeal fractures is proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint extensor lag. There are two major causes of PIP joint extensor lag: soft tissue adhesions and persistent skeletal deformity. Fracture hematoma permeates the zone of injury. The injury soon incites a proliferative fibroblastic response of the multiple surrounding collagenous structures that is proportionate to injury severity. Scar tissue tends to involve all of the structures within the zone of injury (“one wound-one scar”). Persistent fracture deformity may contribute to the problem. Fractures of the proximal phalangeal shaft typically exhibit an apex palmar angulation with the fracture gap wider volarly and compressed dorsally. The intrinsic muscles flex the proximal fragment, whereas the distal fragment is extended by the attachment of the central slip to the dorsal lip of the middle phalanx. The axis of rotation of proximal phalangeal fractures lies on the fibro-osseous border of the flexor tendon sheath. The moment arm from the rotational axis of the fracture site to the extensor tendon is greater than that between the axis and the flexor tendons, further contributing to apex palmar angulation. If volar angulation is >15°, the dorsal gliding surface of the proximal phalanx (P1) is shortened relative to the length of the extensor mechanism. A thorough account of the circumstances of the injury and a physical examination targeted at the hand are important in establishing the cause and mechanism of the fracture and the likelihood of other injuries. A careful history also clarifies significant personal, social, and demographic data, such as the age, dominant hand, personal responsibilities, recreational preferences, and occupational status of the patient. It is important to establish the patient's dependence on others for activities of daily living or survival. Examination of the hand should identify the area of maximal tenderness; the location, type, and severity of any deformities or wounds; the functional status of all flexor and extensor tendons; and the neurovascular status to the extent that the patient's condition will allow. Angular, rotational, and shortening deformities should be catalogued with regard to direction and extent clinically and radiographically. Digital or wrist block anesthesia may be helpful in the static and dynamic assessment of fracture stability, digital motion, and deformity and in determining whether there is any impingement of the injured digit on another during motion. Standard x-rays usually are sufficient for evaluation of phalangeal shaft fractures and should include anteroposterior or posteroanterior and lateral views of the involved digit. A true lateral view is especially important in accessing articular fractures and angulation in the sagittal plane. Additional oblique views may be helpful in defining fracture configuration, displacement, deformity, fragment relationships, and intra-articular fracture extension. Successful treatment of proximal phalangeal fractures, the prevention of restrictive adhesions, and a favorable outcome are based on achieving stable anatomic (or near-anatomic) position of the fracture that either is inherently stable or is supported by fixation and an early controlled motion program that focuses on tendon gliding and joint mobility. Despite the difficulty of achieving this goal, the best opportunity lies with a combined effort between the patient, hand surgeon, and hand therapist. The hand surgeon and therapist must communicate with and even inspire the patient. The patient must embrace enthusiastically and comply with the rehabilitation program. Because surgery represents a second and additional injury, operative treatment must be selected prudently. The principle of minimizing operative trauma when applying internal fixation is essential for successful operative intervention. Nevertheless, phalangeal fractures that require open reduction and fractures that are open owing to injury, especially those with complex wounds, comminution, or bone loss, require secure (and often even mini-plate) fixation for any chance of successful repair or reconstruction and rehabilitation. The surgeon must assess the variables and formulate the treatment plan that he or she believes would suit best a particular fracture (and patient) situation. There may be more than one method that would provide comparable results. In these instances, judgment, the surgeon's training and experience, and available resources may enter into the decision-making process. The method, implant, or implant configuration chosen may be less important than treatment supervision, patient compliance, and adherence to the aforementioned principles of fracture management. The need for biomechanical stability must be balanced with the need to preserve biologic integrity and blood supply, while minimizing the risk of scarring. In each instance, there is no substitute for arming the physician with the facts while allowing him or her to select the methods that correlate best with his or her skills and with the patient's unique circumstances. Hand fracture treatment is a combination of science and the art of its application. Most closed simple phalangeal shaft fractures are undisplaced or minimally displaced and tend to be stable. Buddy taping or splinting to an adjacent uninvolved finger may be sufficient treatment for stable undisplaced or minimally displaced simple transverse or nearly transverse phalangeal shaft fractures in a compliant patient. When at rest or immobilized, fingers should be positioned functionally so that the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints are supported at 50° to 70° of flexion and the PIP joints are supported at 0° to 15° of flexion to minimize the risk of joint contracture. These positions also allow relaxation of the intrinsic muscles, facilitating balance at the fracture site. Early progressive active ROM exercises are delayed 3 to 4 weeks only in patients treated with static splints; they may be initiated at any time in patients treated with buddy splints. Simple phalangeal fractures treated nonoperatively usually may be presumed sufficiently healed to initiate gentle (not exceeding the patient's pain tolerance) progressive active ROM exercises ≤4 weeks after injury. The x-ray appearance of fracture callus further verifies this presumption. Normally, fracture callus calcification begins 10 to 21 days after injury. There may be a little delay beyond that time in the x-ray appearance of phalangeal fracture callus, but rehabilitation may proceed rigorously when it is seen. Dynamic functional splinting may be selected for any anatomically positioned simple fracture of stable configuration (transverse or nearly transverse) or of unstable configuration (oblique) that is stable by virtue of spanning fracture callus as visible on x-ray. Functional positioning permits immediate active flexion of the interphalangeal joints and enables the extensor mechanism to act as a tension band over the proximal phalanx. A minimally displaced fracture has displacement within one or more of these x-ray parameters: <15° of palmar angulation in the sagittal plane, <10° of angulation in the coronal plane, <4 mm of shortening, and <5° of rotation. Although phalangeal fractures have some tolerance for shortening, loss of rotational alignment quickly translates into unacceptable deformity. Additionally, the finger must flex to within 1 cm of the distal palmar crease and have ≤30° extensor lag, and it must not impinge on or overlap an adjacent finger during digital flexion. These guidelines should be considered as approximate rather than absolute because there are individual exceptions, extenuating circumstances, or individual patient requirements in some cases. A digital block with local anesthesia may help the physician to determine which patients meet these criteria. Patients who meet these criteria and whose fractures are stable either before or after manipulation may be treated by closed methods and without fixation, similar to patients with stable undisplaced fractures, at the discretion of the responsible physician. If a simple proximal phalangeal shaft fracture of stable configuration (transverse or short oblique) has only a palmar angular deformity, there is usually an intact periosteal hinge dorsally opposite the angulation. Manipulative reduction is usually successful. The fracture may be treated similarly to its undisplaced or minimally displaced counterpart. Kirschner wire (K-wire) splinting may be added to ensure a stable reduction during early fracture healing. When phalangeal shaft fractures are intrinsically unstable or require open reduction or when deformity recurs after an initial closed reduction without implants, fixation is indicated. Displaced oblique and comminuted fractures are unstable owing to their configuration and periosteal disruption. Periosteal disruption and the resulting instability often correlate with the amount of fracture displacement. Bone loss also causes instability. Internal fixation may also be preferable to external splinting in patients with polytrauma, patients with systemic impairment, or older patients to avoid a cumbersome splint, cast, or dressing. Reduction should be established and maintained by combining the most reliable and least intrusive techniques appropriate to the situation. Stability need not be rigid and it does not require employment of the strongest of available fixation choices. The fixation method or implant selected need only provide a threshold level of strength that reliably holds the fracture securely until it has healed sufficiently so that it is no longer implant-dependent and would allow simultaneous early rehabilitation. Surgical incision, especially when accompanied by periosteal elevation and particularly in the zone of the flexor tendon sheath, risks additional scar formation and fracture fragment devascularization. The physician must weigh the potential benefit of the increased biomechanical stability of the fracture gained through surgical incision against the additional risk of consequent digital stiffness and delayed healing. This may be especially true of late presenting displaced fractures that are stable and show callus formation on x-ray but are pain-free and functional despite mild and functionally nonobstructive deformity. Operative treatment to achieve an improved or more perfect reduction in these instances risks a double dose of soft tissue damage that may result in digital stiffness and a poorer outcome than that achieved by accepting the initial presentation and the mild deformity and impairment. It is a shallow accomplishment to have an anatomically aligned fracture on x-ray and a stiff finger. Most unstable displaced simple phalangeal shaft fractures may be treated successfully by transcutaneous K-wire insertion. One or more intramedullary wires act as internal reduction splints and reliably support transverse or short oblique fractures. In fractures of the proximal portion of the phalangeal shaft, transcutaneous K-wires may be inserted from proximal to distal for more secure fixation of the smaller proximal fragment to the main body of the phalanx. Conversely, in fractures of the distal portion of the phalangeal shaft, the wires may be inserted from distal to proximal. This latter technique also protects the proximal phalangeal growth plate in children. In the mid portion of the phalanx, either technique may be used (Figure 2). If closed displaced simple oblique fractures can be manipulated into a reduced position, they may be stabilized by percutaneous transfixation pinning (Figure 3). Phalangeal shaft fractures traditionally have been approached through a dorsal skin incision. K-wire configurations have been described. Pins may be inserted transcutaneously as previously described after open fracture reduction or crossed retrograde through the intra-medullary canal of one fragment preceding reduction. When the latter technique is used, the fracture is reduced and the pins are driven across the fracture to complete the fixation. In the clinical setting, mini-screws have been shown to provide stable fracture fixation and little interference with tendon gliding. Mini plates may be used selectively on phalanges. Many surgeons advocate the treatment of unstable phalangeal fractures with mini-external fixation. The refinement of mini external fixators allows stabilization of phalangeal fractures, while permitting a relatively uninhibited ROM of adjacent digits. The pins are inserted dorsolaterally between the extensor tendon and lateral band whenever possible, and the extensor mechanism may be incised longitudinally for a short distance on either side of each pin to avoid tenodesis of the extensor mechanism to the adjacent phalanx. Ideally, there should be a minimum of two pins on either side of the fracture. Each pin should engage two cortices whenever possible. Adjunctive independent supplementary K-wire insertion may be used (Figure 7). The advantages of the mini-external fixator in finger fractures include minimal or no surgical exposure of the fracture site, adequate stability, and the ability to manipulate an inadequately reduced or secondarily displaced fracture. Because transfixion of part of the extensor mechanism is often unavoidable in the proximal phalanx, functional results of external fixation at the phalangeal level are less reliable than when mini-external fixators are used at the metacarpal level. Open fractures present dual problems: the fracture and the wound. Complex wounds may require a “second look” to ensure cleanliness at 48 to 72 hours after initial surgery before proceeding with reconstruction. Open fractures may require extension of the wound by incision to apply adequate fixation. Bone defects may be filled with bone graft or bone graft substitute. When open fracture reduction and secure internal fixation are required, repaired digits are capable of and require more accelerated and intense mobilization to optimize functional recovery. Secure fixation and early motion may help to reduce the risk of joint contractures and tendon adhesions in these severe injuries. Low-energy gunshot injuries to the hand often result in significant comminution or bone loss. Soft tissue damage is generally limited, however, especially when compared with severe crush or high-energy bullet injuries. Primary closure of the surgically clean wounds, internal fixation, and autogenous bone grafting do not appreciably increase the incidence of infection. Cancellous bone may be used for incomplete bone defects and for complete bone defects of approximately 1.5 cm. The ipsilateral distal radius is an excellent donor source. Cancellous bone may be compacted in a small syringe with a plunger, then tapped out with a long spinal needle. Compressing cancellous bone increases its structural integrity, may provide more potentially viable bone-generating cells per unit volume, and may help to ensure timely bone healing. Intercalated corticocancellous bone grafts are used for larger defects. Bone carpentry techniques, such as dowels and sockets and mortising, are used to enhance stability and healing at the fracture-bone graft interfaces. The purpose of phalangeal fracture treatment is to achieve stable anatomic (or near-anatomic) position that controls pain and allows early progressive rehabilitation to proceed commensurate with the patient's tolerance (Figure 8). The recovery of digital motion may be the most important determinant of final functional outcome in all hand fractures. Theoretically, because there are no fibroblasts in a closed injury or wound for 48 hours and no fibrin of any strength for 4 to 5 days, this inflammatory period should be respected with immobilization and edema control measures. Edema draws tissues into predictable patterns of deformity. Distended joint nociceptors, through selective facilitation or inhibition of muscles, causes the joint to rest in its most comfortable position, one that accommodates the most volume of effusion. Positioning of the hand after injury may be used to assist in biasing tension from strong to weak soft tissues. Casts or removable splints have the goal of fracture protection yet allow the controlled motion necessary for tendon gliding. Radial or ulnar gutter splints that totally immobilize the digit and encase the PIP joint are indicated only for displaced fractures that remain unstable after closed reduction (Figure 10). Functional positional splinting with the wrist placed in slight flexion increases tension in the extensor mechanism and simultaneously relaxes flexor tendon tension. The extensor hood moves distally with MPJ flexion providing circumferential compression to the proximal phalangeal fracture. Hyperextension at the MPJ with proximal extensor tendon glide is prevented. Extensor tendon tension is focused at the PIP joint. In MCP jointflexion, the flexor tendons rest farther away from the proximal phalangeal fracture site. If the patient has difficulty recovering or maintaining full passive PIP joint extension after the initial 3 weeks of functional positioning splinting, specific PIP joint extension splints can be applied to achieve full joint mobility (Figures 14 and 15). Tendon gliding exercises are performed to glide the tendons differentially, reestablish joint motion, and prevent restrictive adhesions overlying the fracture (Figure 19). The central slip and lateral bands work in concert to extend the PIP joint. Micks and Reswick The normal finger extensor mechanism requires 20 mm of glide for full digital motion Evans and Thompson The functional positioning splint prevents MCP joint hyperextension and directs extensor tension distally to the PIP joint. While in the splint, the distal PIP joint extension strap is released for gliding exercises, and the patient relaxes the PIP joint into flexion. The emphasis initially is on full 0° active extension with progressive PIP flexion as the starting point. Evans and Thompson Later when out of the cast, active digital flexion and extension exercises are implemented by synergistic wrist motion, and the patient is instructed to block manually the MCP joint from full extension and slightly flex the wrist while performing PIP joint extension exercises (Figure 21). Both flexor tendons, the flexor digitorum profundus proximally where it lies along the proximal phalanx and the flexor digitorum superficialis distally as it divides into two insertions that wrap around the profundus, can become adherent to the fracture callus. When splints are removed, synergistic wrist and finger exercises can be initiated. Patients are instructed simultaneously to extend the wrist while flexing the fingers then flex the wrist while extending the fingers (see Strengthening and conditioning exercises are phased gently and progressively into the rehabilitation program beginning at 6 weeks after fracture, depending on the adequacy of healing as judged by clinical and x-ray evaluation. Bone remodeling in response to stress is not predicated on the method of fixation. Fractures treated by either closed or rigid methods of fixation must be protected from excessive stresses initially during the inflammatory and repair stages. Although rigid fixation methods allow for earlier, unprotected motion, they do not accelerate the fracture repair process. During the remodeling phase, progressive loading of the fracture assists in callus conversion to bone and strength development in primary bone healing. Most phalangeal shaft fractures are closed, either undisplaced or minimally displaced, and stable. They may be treated nonoperatively and with supportive and symptomatic treatment. When necessary, phalangeal shaft fracture fixation needs only to be strong enough to immobilize the fracture until the strength of the healing callus surpasses that of the fixation. Generally, this takes about 4 to 6 weeks for uncomplicated simple hand fractures and longer for comminuted fractures and fractures with complex wounds, including those in which there is bone loss that requires bone grafting. The selected implant also should be able to withstand the rigors of early digital motion. The decision of whether or not to open and consequently to devascularize the fracture and potentially expose the adjacent moving and gliding structures to restrictive scarring is of equal or more importance than that of implant selection and configuration. The additional stability provided by the implant must offset the risks of operative dissection. Early postfracture controlled motion programs focus on hand positioning and tendon gliding as the best measures in preventing the pseudo-claw deformity common to proximal phalangeal fractures. Functional positional splint techniques are used to provide soft tissue tension compression to the fracture site, protect the healing fracture from excessive stresses, direct contractile forces to distal joints, and prevent joint deformities. Specific differential tendon gliding exercises are performed for the extensors (central slip and lateral bands) and for the flexors (flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum profundus). Synergistic wrist motion may be used to bias tension in the desired direction of digital motion. This therapy regimen seeks to balance the requirements for preservation of fracture stability, while achieving soft tissue mobility through a program of progressive and controlled digital motion.