Natural organic/inorganic composites, such as nacre, bones and teeth, are perfectly designed materials with exceptional mechanical properties. Numerous approaches have been taken to synthetically prepare such composites. The presented work describes a new way of mineralizing bulk materials on a large scale following the approach of bioinduced mineralization. To this end, a series of polymer conetworks with entrapped urease were prepared. After polymerization, the entrapped urease shows high enzymatic activity. The bioactive polymer conetworks were then treated with an aqueous mixture of urea and CaCl2. The urease-induced calcification indeed allows formation of carbonate crystals exclusively within the hydrogel even at room temperature. The influence of network composition, degree of cross-linking, immobilized urease concentration and temperature of calcification were investigated. By varying these parameters, spherical, monolithic clusters, as well as bar-like nanocrystals with different aspect ratios in spherical or dendritic arrays, are formed. The grown nanocrystals improve the stiffness of the starting material by up to 700-fold, provided that the microstructure shows a dense construction without pores and strong interaction between crystals and network. The process has the potential to generate a new class of hybrid materials that would be available on the macroscopic scale for use in lightweight design and medicine.Hybrid nanocomposites are an important class of materials with advanced properties. They has been successfully utilized in the evolutionary process of nature, resulting in high-performance hybrid materials such as bones, teeth and nacre Nacre is a natural CaCO The structure-controlling additives can also be immobilized on surfaces. Treating such surfaces with CaCO For instance, poly(acrylic acid)-modified polyethylene has been coated with a dense calcium carbonate layer using a soaking method. According to this method, the template is alternately dipped in a calcium ion-containing solution and a carbonate-containing solution, which leads to well-calcified surface layers Such techniques can also be used to form microstructures on surfaces Another approach used in this field is the immobilization of urease with a layer-by-layer technique. The addition of a solution to a coated sample containing urea and Ca In order to create nacre-like structures, several groups used surface mineralization in a layer-by-layer fashion In order to prepare large-scale materials, it seems necessary to calcify bulk matrices. Polymer hydrogels in particular offer the possibility of producing hybrid materials on the macroscopic scale, through the mineralization of pores inside swollen networks. The interaction of the crystals with the polymer, the suppressed convection and the slowed diffusion of reactants all play important roles in the crystallization process. These limitations usually result in complex, non-classical and kinetically controlled crystal growth that affords complex morphologies. Corresponding to this, the structure and habit of the grown crystals in a polymer matrix can be influenced by changing the gel’s density and composition, the temperature of mineralization or the concentration of the reactants In almost all of the cases to date, the gels were calcified to a low degree, which might be due to the diffusion limitations of the mineralization strategies, such as the vapor diffusion technique, the Kitano method, the double diffusion strategy and the soaking method. All have in common that at least one compound has to migrate into or out of the hydrogel, which will eventually lead to irregularities, because the precipitating CaCO For instance, modified poly(acrylamide) gels were used to investigate the influence of different functional groups on CaCO The soaking method and the Kitano method were combined for the calcification of chitosan hydrogels to increase the nucleation and growth of CaCO Gehrke et al. Unfortunately, in most cases the preparation of calcified bulk materials is very elaborate and time consuming, and usually results in composites with microscopic dimensions. This makes the production of larger scale materials unlikely. Approaches to calcifying hydrogels with larger dimensions result either in poorly calcified products (double diffusion) or in composites where the majority of the crystals are located at the surface. A big difference between biological and synthetic mineralization processes of large-scale polymer networks is that organisms (such as mollusks) are not only able to create super saturation, but can also control the location of crystallization and morphology of CaCO In the present article, we describe a new method to selectively calcify a hydrogel bulk material via bioinduced mineralization using an enzymatic reaction. 2-Hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA; 96% purity) was obtained from TCI Europe. The monomer was distilled, stored at −25 The high-molecular-weight cross-linking pre-polymer, consisting of poly(2-ethyl oxazoline) with terminal acrylamide functions, was synthesized according to a previous work by cationic ring-opening polymerization of 2-ethyl-2-oxazoline, starting with α,α′-Dibromo-p-xylol (Sigma–Aldrich) and terminating with N-[3-(dimethylamino)-propyl]-methacrylamide The urease formulation was dissolved in water to give a concentration of 50 The polymer network with entrapped urease (20 Bidistilled water was boiled and cooled to room temperature under argon bubbling. Then, 10 The calcified samples were broken in liquid nitrogen. The fracture surface was investigated with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). To this end, the samples were mounted on aluminum stubs with double-sided carbon tape and recorded using a Hitachi S-4500 scanning electron microscope with an Oxford Link ISIS System. The acceleration voltage was set to 1 The quantification of CaCO The goal of this work was to design a bioactive hydrogel system that affords selective precipitation of calcium carbonate into its matrix. Usually CaCO Further, the enzyme urease can be used to bioinduce the crystallization from a solution that contains Ca Since surface-immobilized urease has also been found to control the precipitation of amorphous calcium carbonate, we decided to transfer this concept to selectively calcify a polymeric matrix. Urease is a high-molecular-weight enzyme of 500 It was recently discovered that mixtures of telechelic methacrylate-terminated poly(2-ethyloxazoline) (PEtOx) and HEA are capable of dissolving enzymes, such as lipase We chose to use this conetwork system to entrap urease. Additionally, a polymer matrix based on HEA and TEG was explored as an oligomeric cross-linker to produce polymeric matrices for urease. In order to entrap the enzyme in the polymer conetworks, the UF was dissolved in water and added to a mixture of HEA/PEtOx (PEtOx 30–70 The conetworks were formed by UV polymerization of the monomer mixtures between two glass slides. The activity of the entrapped urease in the resulting polymer films was measured by following the urea hydrolysis in water. The activity of the dissolved urease was found to be 18.8 Having established the entrapment of active urease within two different polymer conetworks, we investigated the potential of these bioactive materials for bioinduced calcification. As an initial experiment, PHEA- As seen in the cross-sections in As seen in Further investigations into the calcified PHEA- Having established that the urease-loaded conetworks have the ability to selectively calcify the bulk of a polymer conetwork, we determined the content of formed CaCO Comparing the results of these initial experiments reveals that chemically different polymer conetworks with similar degree of crosslinking, degree of swelling ( In the following, we explored the influence of parameters such as degree of crosslinking, urease concentration and temperature on the calcification process. First, the influence of the degree of cross-linking on the calcification was investigated. To this end, the amount of the cross-linking agent TEG was varied from 0.1 to 8 Next, the influence of the enzyme loading on the mineralization process was investigated. First, the UF concentration in PHEA- We expected that heat would have a strong influence on the bioinduced calcification process, because the crystal growth and possibly also the nucleation rate increase with temperature. Further, carbonate formation is increased with temperature, as the urease activity increases up to its optimum temperature of 60 Exploring the microstructures of the films calcified at different temperatures for 48 With respect to mechanical properties, the dendritic structures are the most promising, because the inorganic structures can interlock upon mechanical deformation. However, the SEM images in Further lowering the enzyme content to 0.3 The major reason to design inorganic/organic hybrid materials is to improve the mechanical properties of the softer (often the organic) material. The stiffness and tensile strength of the material is strongly controlled by the amount, shape, size and distribution of the inorganic compound. Further, the adhesion strength between the inorganic and organic elements is of utter importance. As known from previously published data, it is generally possible to obtain nacre-like mechanics with elaborately organized composites (Young’s moduli of 10–70 The PHEA- If the samples shown in The growth of dendritic structures composed of rather irregular long nanobars, even with the best possible distributions throughout the whole material ( A different behavior was found for the PHEA- The theoretical range of Young’s moduli of this sample was calculated to be 1.27 This work was aimed towards bioinduced calcification of organic polymer films using the urease-catalyzed formation of carbonate ions by hydrolysis of urea. According to our working hypothesis, the urease entrapped in a swollen organic polymer film might induce selective calcification within the material by locally increasing the carbonate concentration in the presence of a soluble calcium salt. This should cause local precipitation and crystallization. We found two different compositions of monomers with polymeric and oligomeric cross-linkers that allow the entrapment of active urease within the conetwork. Treatment of these films with aqueous CaCl Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 2,3,6, is difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at