Fractures of the talar body include a spectrum of injuries that vary in severity. We report the case of a 24-year-old man who sustained an inversion injury to his left ankle after slipping on an open manhole cover. He initially attended another unit before being transferred to us 6 days later. After elevation and ice compresses the swelling of his foot resolved sufficiently to consider undertaking surgical intervention. CT scanning revealed severe comminution of the posterolateral body of the talus with a die-punch fragment from the subtalar joint and the displacement of articular fragments to be greater than 1–2 He underwent an open reduction and internal fixation through a medial incision. This was a complex fracture to reconstruct, and the use of a chevron medial osteotomy greatly facilitated the exposure without jeopardising the talar blood supply further. The die-punch fragment was reduced to reconstitute the subtalar articulation, the body fragments were elevated and the cancellous deficit filled with autologous bone graft from the iliac crest. The fixation was secured with screws. He made an uneventful recovery with no wound healing problems. Postoperative radiographs and CT scan confirmed anatomical reconstruction of the talar body and sub-talar joint ( Talar body fractures are rare. The body of the talus articulates with tibia, fibula and the calcaneus. Complexity in the blood supply to the talus itself makes it one of the bones in the body vulnerable to avascular necrosis. Haliburton et al. The intra-osseous blood supply to the body of the talus comprise of vessels that enter through the superior and inferior surface of the neck, antero lateral and medial surface of the neck and the posterior tubercle. The artery of the tarsal canal and its anastomoses provide all the blood supply to the lateral two thirds of the talar body. The medial third of the talar body is supplied by deltoid branches entering the medial surface of the talus. Shear fractures of the body of the talus are subdivided into coronal,sagittal and horizontal fractures. A shear fracture to the body of the talus is defined as one that has its dorsal fracture line extending into the articular surface of the dome of the talus. A coronal fracture is a more posterior location of a talar neck fracture. The prognosis after these fractures is poor. Skin necrosis and osteomyelitis can occur after talar body fracture. Nonunion is uncommon because even in the presence of avascularnecrosis of the body, the viable neck or remaining body fragment of the talus usually heals to the avascular segment. Malunion occurs more commonly because it is related more to the lack of reduction at the time of operative fixation. All patients with these severe injuries are at a risk of ankle and subtalar joints. Arthritis in the ankle and subtalar joints can occur in the absence of avascular necrosis of the talus and joint incongruity. Sneppen et al. The diagnosis of talar AVN was described by Hawkins in 1965. The incidence of avascular necrosis is almost certainly dictated by the fracture pattern and its disruption of the intrinsic blood supply to the talus. Talar fractures are uncommon and talar body fractures are rarer still. Complication abound in such injuries and make it challenging to treat displaced intra-articular injuries. Open reduction and internal fixation in the appropriately selected patient can be performed safely in the hope of reducing complications. Adequate visualisation and preservation of a fragile blood supply necessitate a medial malleolar osteotomy. Successful surgical reconstruction can produce a pain free mobile patient with a good range of movement.