The inspiration for this research was an attempt at the numerical simulation of the process of mass loss of char particles during its combustion in the upper zone of a CFB boiler furnace. In the first part of the research an experiment was carried out, during which singular char particles were burned in a flow of heated sand. During the course of this test manually polished spherical particles chosen from arbitrary real coal particles were used whose diameter amounted to 10mm. The mass loss of burning particles was recorded with a tensometric branch scale. The measuring equipment applied enabled the observation of the mass loss both as a result of combustion and erosion resulting from the contact of inert material accelerated particles with the upper surface of the motionless particle being tested. The results of the experiment were compared with the results of numerical simulation, where for the first time the mass loss of a coal particle was presented as the superposition of two separate processes i.e. combustion and surface erosion. The values obtained indicated a good level of conformity which may illustrate the possibility of applying this model in real conditions.surface area of a char, m oxygen concentration, kg/m concentration of inert material, m diameter, m flow rate of inert material, kg/m hardness, N/m reaction rate constant, m/s fracture toughness, Nm mass, kg mass of ash, kg mass of char particle, kg initial mass of coal particle, kg time, s temperature, K, °C velocity of inert material, m/s density of char, kg/m density of inert material, kg/m stoichiometrical coefficient (0.375 for CO Until now many authors have attempted numerical simulations of the comminution of coal in the bed of the fluidized combustion In order to determine the real coal particle mass loss in the process of its combustion in a flow of inert material a laboratory model of a fluidized bed combustor chamber was constructed. The schematic diagram of the test stand is shown in The tests were carried out on Polish hard coal from Sobieski mine whose properties are presented in The first stage of the investigation was the combustion of coal particles without the influence of the inert material in atmospheric air at a temperature of 850 In the previous chapters it was shown that the presence of the flow of inert material during the combustion process of coal particles plays a significant role in the intensity of its mass loss the char particle possesses a homogeneous structure and does not undergo fragmentation during the combustion process, the spherical shape of the particle stays invariable till the end of the process, the density of the particle does not depend on the temperature, the density of the char particle is constant in the whole volume, the diameter of the coal particle stays invariable during the devolatilization and combustion of the volatile matter, the rate of flow of inert material the model did not take the heat exchange between a solid and the surface of char particle into consideration, the processes of char combustion and erosion of its surface are independent.  the cumulative particle size distribution was accepted ( the parameters of Rosin–Rammler distribution for the tested class of particles were determined, the Rosin–Rammler distribution on having overall  the velocity of free fall the concentration of the inert material In order to solve the equation of mass loss of char the method of Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg was used. The Eq. (1) was presented as the following expression: The first stage of the model verification was a comparison of the results received on its basis with the results of the combustion of the char particles in the atmospheric air. The module generating the mass loss as a result of erosion was turned off. The results obtained for the tested char of hard coal are presented in Following this, the particle size distribution was divided into the appropriate amount of The computations leading to the determination of the sensitivity of the numerical model to a change of temperature for two cases i.e. the constant and the variable value of fracture toughness The modelling of the combustion process of coal particles in fluidized bed presents a lot of difficulties both in the area of the combustion mechanism, as well as the real image of the effect of a fluidized bed on a burning coal particle. Hence, in this research it has been decided to model this complex process as a superposition of two processes generating the mass loss of a coal particle, i.e. the combustion as well as erosion of the surface of a particle surface as a result of interaction with the inert material. The results obtained show that it could be an effective method of representation of the aforesaid research experiment, especially with a low flow rate which occurs in the upper area of the combustion chamber. On the basis of this it can be possible to determine both the individual share of the combustion and erosion process, as well as their total value. Two factors were introduced into this equation of mass loss, i.e.: hardness The work described in this paper was part of a project sponsored by the