We describe the structural features and mineralogical and geochemical compositions of the fault rocks recovered from boreholes at the Golden River site on the Yingxiu–Beichuan fault, which activated and slipped along a 240km-long main surface rupture zone during the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake. The fault, which accommodated co-seismic slip, cuts granitic rocks from the Pengguan complex, in which this earthquake most likely nucleated. Fault rocks, including cohesive cataclasite, unconsolidated breccia and three fault gouges with distinct colors, were identified from the drilling cores. On-going uplift and erosion in the area means that the fault rocks, formed at different depth, were exhumed to the shallow surface during the uplift history of the Longmenshan fault zone. A clear change from fracturing and comminution in the cataclasites and breccia to more pervasive shear/formation of fine grained materials in the gouges has been observed. The gouges are distinct and have accommodated significant displacement in multiple increments of shear. Furthermore, fault rocks recovered from the boreholes display numerous features indicative of fluid infiltration and fluid–rock interaction. Toward the fault core, clay minerals have replaced feldspars. The element enrichment/depletion patterns of the fault rocks show general fluid infiltration trends, such as 1) mobile elements are generally depleted in the fault rocks, 2) the microstructural, mineralogical and geochemical results of the fault rocks consistently indicate that pervasive fluid infiltration and fluid–rock interactions altered feldspars and mafic minerals to clay minerals. The fluid was Mg2+- and Fe2+-rich, facilitating formation of chlorite. Isocon analyses further reveal that a large rock volume has been lost, which is attributed to the removal of mobile elements associated with fluid infiltration and perhaps enhanced by pressure solution. These results reflect the accumulated effects of cataclasis and fluid infiltration/fluid–rock interaction during the long evolution history of the Longmenshan fault zone.Fault zones have been demonstrated as areas favoring crustal fluid migration. Abundant fluids can infiltrate into fault zones during multiple cycles of co-seismic rupture and inter-seismic creep periods ( Fault rocks could preserve a great deal of information regarding the nature of the infiltrating fluids and the processes of fluid–rock interactions, including the migration of soluble cations ( The focus of this study is to investigate the fluid related chemical and physical processes involved in the faulting and fault zone evolution of the Yingxiu–Beichuan Fault (YBF), which hosted the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake. We have examined the internal structures and fluid–rock interactions of a fault zone hosted by granitic rocks at the Golden River (GR) outcrop along the YBF to determine how fluids interacted with the fault-related rocks at depth. Core samples collected from the boreholes, which are expected to be less weathered than those from surface outcrops, are employed for detailed microstructural, mineralogical and geochemical analyses. These observations are used to investigate the behavior of fluids associated with faulting and fluid–rock interactions and their effects on the fault zone's evolution. Finally, a conceptual model coupling mechanical comminution, fluid infiltration, geochemical alteration and mass transfer is proposed to describe the fault zone processes. The 2008 Mw 7.9 Wenchuan earthquake occurred within the Longmenshan Fault Zone (LFZ) ( The GR outcrop (31°27′41″N, 103°59′56″E) is located along the middle segment of the YBF ( The fault here strikes at an azimuth of 40° and dips 70–87°, with the fault plane exhibiting slightly reversed inclination at the surface ( At the GR outcrop, two shallow boreholes (hole-A and hole-B) were drilled ( The recovered cores were described and pictured immediately after retrieval from the boreholes in the field, and then the cores were wrapped in plastic and PVC tubes for preservation. The cores are 78 The granitic host rock mainly consists of quartz, plagioclase and K-feldspar. Under a microscope, cracks healed by calcite can be occasionally observed. Some feldspar are altered into secondary minerals and changed in color from pale white to brown or greyish white. In contrast, the quartz grains are relatively clean ( Crosscutting relationships demonstrate that the granitic rock was intruded by mafic dykes, which are dark green in color and mainly composed of feldspars, pyroxene, hornblende, biotite and clays. Microscopic observations reveal subhedral lath-shaped plagioclase crystals set in a finer matrix of pyroxene, constituting a sub-ophitic texture. Some of the mafic minerals (pyroxene and hornblende) are altered to either chlorite or other clay minerals ( The protocataclasite is weakly fractured and is characterized by gradually changes in color from light green to dark grey. Under a microscope ( The blackish cataclasite is highly broken, with intensive fractures in both hand specimens and micro-scales. The broken surfaces are smooth and present a greasy luster. This cataclasite predominately consists of quartz and feldspars with minor amounts of biotite and clay minerals ( The boreholes did not encounter the footwall carbonate rocks; therefore, samples from the surface outcrop were used for the analyses. As shown in The granitic breccia is greyish-white in color ( Three different color gouges, namely, a yellow-greenish gouge (YGG), grey-greenish gouge (GGG) and blackish gouge (BG), were found in both the outcrop ( The YGG is about 10 GGG is present at depths of 47.4 To investigate the variations in chemical and mineralogical compositions across the fault zone, X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) methods were used in this study. As described in XRD analyses for the bulk-rock relative mineral content and semi-quantitative analyses for clay minerals were performed by a Dmax X-Ray powder diffractometer (12 The isocon method ( XRD mineralogical analyses were performed on 76 core samples recovered from hole-B and 4 core samples recovered from hole-A. The bulk and clay mineral variations in hole-B are presented versus the depth ( The clay fraction in the granitic host rock is composed of illite and chlorite ( XRF geochemical analyses were performed on 22 and 79 core samples recovered from hole-A and hole-B, respectively. The bulk composition and trace element composition in hole-A (Fig. S1 and S2) and hole-B ( In hole-A, the element concentration is obviously correlated with the lithology (Figs. S1 and S2). Compared to the granite protolith, the major elements MnO, MgO, Na In hole-B, the variations in major and trace element concentrations are obvious ( The correlations between the concentrations of TiO Thirty-eight samples were chosen for REE analyses. The eigenvalues of the REEs in the main kinds of rocks are listed in Upper crustal brittle fault zones have been generally divided into a fault core, surrounding damage zone and host rock based on field observations and laboratory experiments ( The fault rock distribution and petrographic analyses clarify that the GR fault zone is lithologically complex, with the hanging wall's granitic rocks and intruded mafic dyke juxtaposed against the footwall's magnesian dolomitic rocks. The granitic fault rocks exposed in the surface outcrop are all also observed in the boreholes. In hole-A, the granite and mafic rocks are the same as those in the surface outcrop, and the protocataclasite corresponds to the fractured granite and protocataclasite in hole-B. The blackish cataclasite, which was observed in the surface outcrop and in hole-A, was missed in hole-B during the drilling project, perhaps due to the intensively developed fractures. The granitic breccia and three different colors of fault gouges along with the two cataclastic lenses ( Although the rock sequence is consistent, the observations on the fault rocks also show that the internal structure of the fault zone exhibited in the drilling cores is different from that in the surface outcrop. In the outcrop, the three gouges lie together and are adjacent to the granitic breccia ( Paleoseismic studies suggested that multiple earthquakes have occurred along the LFZ during its long-term uplift history ( The protocataclasites and blackish cataclasites seen on the outcrop are only fractured ( As seen in both the drilling cores and surface outcrop, different types of fault gouges were developed at the GR fault zone. In spite of the difficulties, we infer that the YGG to be the principle slip zone that has accommodated most of the co-seismic slip of the Wenchuan earthquake, due to the following reasons: 1) compared with the BG and GGG, the YGG shows a relatively homogeneous texture, with weak preferred orientation. Previous experimental studies have shown that the random texture was more likely to form at high slip rates ( Finally, it is important to note that neither continuous, undeformed pseudotachylite nor reworked pseudotachylite vein or clast was found in the fault zone studied here. There is no strong evidence supporting the presence of high-temperature melting process in the principle slip zone. We infer that the absence of pseudotachylite in this fault zone may be attributed to 1) the low permeability of the gouges (see Our observations on the mineralogy of the drilling core samples across the fault zone indicate that extensive fluid–rock interactions occurred and modified the mineralogical architecture of the fault zone. Toward the YGG and GGG, the plagioclase and quartz contents decrease ( Within the fault core, several diagnostic minerals that commonly form in certain hydrothermal systems occasionally occur, such as pyrite, gypsum and palygorskite ( The formation of phyllosilicates, which enhances the development of foliated fault rocks, is driven by the penetration of fluids into fault zones ( Clay minerals are common constituents of fault gouges. Enrichment of phyllosilicates in fault zones has been taken as one of the key factors influencing the mechanical properties of seismogenic faults ( Another general trend of the clay minerals is enrichment in illite and smectite-rich I/S in the BG ( The major and trace elements have been classified into two broad categories based on their behaviors in fault zones ( As shown in the Harker diagrams ( Support for these interpretations also comes from the observations that the mixed samples from the YGG and GGG are generally intermediate in REE composition between the granitic and mafic rocks ( In summary, with the exception of the carbonate-related outliers in the BG, the element behaviors of the granitic protolith, fractured granite, blackish cataclasite, granitic breccia and BG show consistent evolution trends. The elemental trends exhibit increasing concentrations toward the fault core with the exception of feldspar-related elements, which generally become depleted. In addition, the mixing of mafic clasts into the YGG and GGG has changed their bulk element composition, but their element behaviors display general fluid infiltration trends, with the immobile elements commonly becoming enriched and the mobile elements becoming depleted ( The correlation analyses of TiO The volume losses of the fault zone relative to the granitic host rock were estimated. The blackish cataclasite is found to have had a minimal degree of volume loss (7.6%) ( Several mechanisms have been adopted to explain the mass transfer and rock volume loss in fault zones, including chemical dissolution ( Multiple earthquakes have occurred along the LFZ during its long-term uplift history ( First, the alteration of mafic minerals in the granitic and mafic rocks liberated Mg Based on studies of the microstructures, mineral compositions and geochemical features of the fault rocks recovered from borehole-A and borehole-B at GR (LMFD-3), we arrive at the following conclusions: The GR fault zone is complex, with granitic rocks and a mafic dyke juxtaposed against dolomitic rocks. The fault rocks, including cohesive cataclasite, unconsolidated breccia and three fault gouges with distinct colors, were identified from the drilling cores and surface outcrop. They were formed at different depths and times during multiple earthquake cycles and were exhumed from the subsurface. The cumulative nature of repeated seismic events stacked the fault rocks together and produced the complicated fault zone structure we now see. Some host rock fragments were mixed into the slip zone during the thrust history of the LFZ. The mixing of carbonate clasts in the BG did not change its main elemental behavior, as demonstrated by correlation analyses and the REE patterns. However, the YGG and GGG compositions were modified to show intermediate geochemical compositions between mafic and granitic rocks as mafic source clasts were incorporated into them. Overall all element behaviors exhibit general fluid infiltration trends. Pervasive fluid–rock reactions occurred and dissolved the soluble minerals, resulting in the formation of clay minerals in the fault core. The infiltrated fluid was rich in Mg Petrographical, microstructural, mineralogical and geochemical examinations of the fault rocks consistently indicate that a combination of mechanical and geochemical processes accompanying fluid infiltration modified the architectural and compositional evolution of the fault zone. The element depletion/enrichment displayed in this granitic fault zone is dominated by the alteration of soluble minerals and fluid infiltration, which results in the transportation of mobile elements and rock volume loss. A mass removal model associated with fluid infiltration and likely enhanced by pressure solution is accordingly proposed to interpret the observed signatures in this granitic fault zone. The authors thank Yang Yongxin, Dang Jiaxiang, Yao Lu and Zhang Lei for their help with the field work. This study was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at