Policy makers in a number of countries have proposed or are considering proposing CO2 emission standards for new fossil fuel-fired power plants. The proposed standards require coal-fired power plants to have approximately the same carbon emissions as an uncontrolled natural gas-fired power plant, effectively mandating the adoption of carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) technologies for new coal plants. However, given the uncertainty in the capital and operating costs of a commercial scale coal plant with CCS, the impact of such a standard is not apparent a priori. We apply a stochastic generation expansion model to determine the impact of CO2 emission standards on generation investment decisions, and in particular for coal plants with CCS. Moreover, we demonstrate how the incentive to invest in coal-CCS from emission standards depends on the natural gas price, the CO2 price, and the enhanced oil recovery price, as well as on the level of the emission standard. This analysis is the first to consider the entire power system and at the same time allow the capture percentage for CCS plants to be chosen from a continuous range to meet the given standard at minimum cost. Previous system level studies have assumed that CCS plants capture 90% of the carbon, while studies of individual units have demonstrated the costs of carbon capture over a continuous range. We show that 1) currently proposed levels of emission standards are more likely to shift fossil fuel generation from coal to natural gas rather than to incentivize investment in CCS; 2) tighter standards that require some carbon reductions from natural gas-fired power plants are more likely than proposed standards to incentivize investments in CCS, especially on natural gas plants, but also on coal plants at high gas prices; and 3) imposing a less strict emission standard (emission rates higher than natural gas but lower than coal; e.g., 1500lbs/MWh) is more likely than current proposals to incentivize investment in coal CCS technology, but only at high gas prices and to a lesser extent than a stringent standard (e.g., 300lbs/MWh).Concerns over climate change and a reliance on CO However, a weak or non-existent climate policy and a lack of public financing have resulted in significant difficulty in bringing commercial-scale power plants with CCS online ( Individual investors in new electricity generation projects in market-based power systems such as those existing in parts of the U.S. and elsewhere will invest in the technology that maximizes profit. When a significant component of the cost is uncertain, as in CCS, this becomes an investment problem under uncertainty. The value of any single investment depends critically on the characteristics of the whole power system, which determine the electricity prices that drive the revenue from delivering electricity and the expected utilization of the new asset. To account for these characteristics of the problem, an assessment of the impact of regulatory standards on investment decisions requires formal analysis of the electric sector capacity investment problem. There is a notable literature analyzing the impact of different policy mechanisms on investments and innovation in low-carbon technologies in general (see In general, previous power system level analyses have restricted their attention to the incentives from carbon prices and assumed that CCS plants capture 90% of the carbon. For example, In contrast, generation unit level analyses have explored the impact of emission standards on coal and gas generators with CCS, and have demonstrated the cost impacts of capture rates over a continuous range (e.g., In the U.S., another important factor that could influence the effect of emission standards on the adoption of coal with CCS is the presence of markets for CO Here, we present an approach to modeling the impact of emission standards on coal-CCS investments consisting of an innovative combination of three elements: a stochastic generation expansion model that considers the entire power system, representation of the carbon capture rate as a continuous decision, and extensive sensitivity analysis of natural gas prices, EOR prices, and carbon prices. We apply a stochastic generation expansion model to determine the effect of different emission standards on investment decisions in new power plants, particularly coal-CCS power plants. In contrast to approaches that consider an individual investment such as real options, we explicitly model the entire generation mix for a system. This allows us to represent endogenous feedbacks on electricity prices and capacity factors. Although generation expansion models were first developed for long-term planning for vertically integrated utilities, they are also a useful representation of a competitive market under the assumption that no producer has market power, that there are no economies of scale and that investments are not lumpy ( A second critical feature of our approach is that we represent the rate of carbon capture and its costs as a decision over a continuous range. As opposed to the majority of system-level studies, which explore only one or two possible capture rates (e.g., 30% and 90%), the capture rate is chosen to meet each emission standard at minimum costs, assuming that capital would be sized and operations would be adjusted to achieve the mandated emission rate. We show that the flexibility of designing a unit to achieve a given capture rate has important consequences for the impacts of varying the level of the emission standard. A third critical feature of our analysis is that, while the uncertainty in CCS costs is treated as uncertainties within the stochastic optimization, we repeat the analysis for a broad range of values for natural gas prices, CO The paper is structured in five sections. In The effect of CO We use three indices in this formulation: The objective of the model is to determine, for a given emission standard, the vector To model a generation unit with CCS requires two additional parameters to determine the investment and operation costs, relative to other generation technologies. The first is the energy penalty, which measures the amount of electrical energy from the unit that is used to operate the fans, pumps, and compressors of the capture process ( We model the uncertainty in the commercial-scale cost of CCS by generating a set of cost scenarios Because the amount of CO The minimization problem in Eq. The complete formulation of the model is given in Because some of the parameters that determine CCS cost are uncertain, we generate a set of possible realizations, each corresponding to a specific scenario. As the number of scenarios increases, solving for all scenarios simultaneously (known as a “deterministic equivalent” formulation) would become very large with increasing numbers of variables and constraints, and the solution time would be prohibitively long. To reduce the solution time, we use a Benders' decomposition formulation (e.g., A recourse function As a case study, we calibrate model parameters to data from the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT). ERCOT has the feature that it can be considered as effectively isolated from the rest of the U.S. power system ( The technologies that are included in the model and the accompanying cost assumptions are shown in The stochastic capacity expansion model chooses one optimal (i.e., least cost) set of plants to build under uncertainty in future costs. In this study, the only uncertainties explicitly included in this stochastic optimization are the uncertainty in the incremental capital costs of carbon capture and the uncertainty in the energy penalty from carbon capture. Current estimates of the overnight cost of power plants with CCS and the energy penalty associated with capturing CO The uncertainty in the incremental overnight capital cost of power plants with CCS and their energy penalty are represented with scenarios and associated probabilities in the stochastic programming model. To construct the scenarios, we first construct a joint probability distribution, from which we sample, and then use those samples to construct discrete scenarios as follows. The uncertainty in the overnight cost of power plants with CCS is represented as uncertainty in the overnight cost multiplier for a capture percentage of 90% (i.e., how many times greater is the overnight cost of a power plant with 90% CO The incremental overnight costs of CCS applied to coal-fired and gas-fired power plants differ, but are closely correlated. The overnight cost multipliers for the respective technologies are therefore modeled through a truncated joint lognormal probability distribution ( To generate a set of representative scenarios, we first sample one million pairs of cost multipliers with correlation using Monte Carlo simulation. The feasible realizations of the joint distribution are then discretized into a 15 In order to limit the number of scenarios, and therefore reduce the solution time, the energy penalty of natural gas-fired power plants with CCS is assumed to be a function of the energy penalty of coal-fired power plants with CCS. We adopt this simpler approach for the energy penalty because it has less impact on the final results Finally, the uncertainties described here in terms of a 90% capture plant, must be scaled to the rate of capture determined endogenously for a given emission standard. For the capital cost uncertainty, each scenario defines an uncertainty factor, which is used to multiply the endogenously determined incremental capital cost of the unit with capture. The incremental capital cost for different capture rates is described below. The value for the energy penalty in each scenario is used to determine the sample efficiency of a 90% capture plant, which is then scaled to obtain the net plant efficiency at the given capture rate, also described in detail below. Despite the dependence of the net plant efficiency, variable O&M cost and overnight cost on the capture percentage, many CCS cost studies report cost data only for a capture percentage of 90%, or for a few discrete levels. In this section, we describe our formulation and assumptions to allow the capture percentage to be chosen from a continuous range. Depending on the emission standard imposed, plants would be designed to capture different CO It has been shown by Our model approximates the net plant efficiency and the variable O&M cost for coal-fired power plants with CCS as a linear function of the capture percentage. The coefficients of the functions are derived using data for 0% and 90% CO The linear approximation is based on the results from Natural gas-fired CCGT plants are assumed to require CO The overnight capital cost of a power plant with CCS that captures 90% of its CO However, for small capture percentages, there can be significant nonlinearities in the capital cost of CO CO The energy penalty for a given capture percentage is the relative decrease in power plant efficiency To meet a specified emission standard, the net emission rate must equal the emission standard. In reality, emissions will be higher due to shutdown, startup, load following, and other operating conditions, but for simplicity, we neglect this effect. We assume that the net CO As shown above, the unit efficiency for a given capture percentage, By combining expressions  In this section, we present the results of using the stochastic generation expansion model in which the capture percentage is determined endogenously to meet the emission standard at minimum cost. We focus our results and discussion on the price of natural gas that would be required for at least one coal unit with CCS to be part of the least-cost generation mix. We first present the least-cost technology mix to meet several different emission standards at two different prices of natural gas. We then explore the impact of EOR prices, the emission standard, and carbon prices on the minimum gas price for which coal with CCS would be economic. We then demonstrate the impact of endogenously treating the uncertainty in the capital costs and efficiency of units with CCS, by comparing to a deterministic version that uses mean cost estimates. To investigate the impact of emission standards on investment in coal-fired plants with CCS, we solve the stochastic generation expansion model described above repeatedly for a wide range of possible emission standards, natural gas prices, EOR prices, and other assumptions. The model result in each case indicates the least cost set of generating units that should be built to meet demand and the emission standard. To illustrate the impact of emission standards, The result shown in To further illustrate this effect, we show in For emission standards slightly below 1000 For emission standards above 1000 lbs, natural gas units (without capture) are lower cost than coal with CCS. However, at some natural gas prices there may exist an emission standard above which the incremental cost of carbon capture at that rate of capture (which would be small) is less than the price differential between natural gas and coal. For emission standards beyond that upper threshold level, the cost of generating from coal with CCS will be lower than generating from a natural gas unit even though the gas unit is not constrained by the emission standard. For the remainder of the paper we focus on the minimum natural gas price for which the capacity share of coal with CCS is non-zero. Corresponding to each result shown below is a mix of generation technologies similar to those shown in the previous section, but we will not show the results for the rest of the system. We first explore the impacts of an emission standard of 1000 Next, we consider a range of alternative emission standards from 300 to 1500 First, consider the case in which there are no EOR revenues available (solid black line in Below 1000 The primary effect of EOR revenues, if available, is to reduce the minimum natural gas price for which coal with CCS is economic, as shown above in Note the presence of a discontinuity in We also consider the impact of CO A critical feature of the decision whether to invest in coal with CCS is the uncertainty in the actual cost to build a plant and the actual operating cost. These costs are not known at the time the investment decision must be made. In contrast, much of the systems-level analysis in the literature is deterministic, using the average or best guess cost estimates. Here we demonstrate the bias that results from neglecting the uncertainty in CCS costs. We repeat the analysis from The qualitative trends from the deterministic version are the same as from the stochastic version. However, considering only the expected value of the uncertain parameters, rather than their full probability distributions, leads to underestimating the natural gas price for which coal with CCS is competitive ( The bias from neglecting uncertainty is greatest for 1000 The analysis presented above leads to three main conclusions. First, the impact of the U.S. EPA's proposed emission standard of 1100 Second, a less stringent emission standard, for example 1500 Third, even under an emission standard that requires CO An important caveat to these results is that we only consider new power plants. These insights are unlikely to apply to retrofits, and formal analysis is required to address the issue of retrofits of existing power plants. The model also simplifies many of the key dynamics of power markets that affect an investment's attractiveness, and which would be required for actual capacity planning purposes. For example, we do not consider network constraints, location-specific costs, the numerous incentives for renewable generation other than CO Given the economic and political challenges for CCS and its potential value in a low-carbon future, experience with even a small number of commercial-scale power plants with CCS would make a significant contribution to developing the technology and lowering future costs. Granting a limited number of coal-fired power plants a higher CO We thank the editor of Energy Economics and an anonymous reviewer for the helpful suggestions. We would like to acknowledge the  The effect of CO Fixed costs A special note should be given to calculate the overnight cost of power plants with CCS. There are two notable reasons for why CCS overnight costs are higher relative to similar plants without CO The overnight cost of power plants with CCS for a given scenario The overnight cost of the capture equipment, As mentioned in Uncertain overnight costs for CCS are modeled with one deterministic element, The load duration curve is based on historical demand in ERCOT for 2010, and is discretized into a 5-block approximation as shown in As mentioned in The expected value of the recourse function, Ε[ The solution method is iterative, and on the Here, A Benders' formulation of the stochastic generation expansion consists of the master problem: and the subproblem: The optimization algorithm is iterative. First, the master problem is solved, yielding a lower bound on the cost. Second, the subproblem is solved given the master problem investments. The sum of the objective function in the master and subproblem minus the recourse function yields an upper bound on the total cost. In addition, as mentioned above, a point and slope approximation of the expected recourse function Ε[ In this section of the Appendix, we present additional details of the results shown in Corresponding to the optimal investment, there is an optimal generation pattern to meet the demand in each of the five demand blocks. In A second set of result from these cases is the endogenously determined capacity factors of each technology for each emission standard case. We present the resulting capacity factors in