Mineralogical and chemical characters of ore strongly affect the efficiency of chromite sand physical concentration. Usually chromite ore enrichment is based on the assumption that all Cr in the rock is hosted within chromite, but alteration in metamorphic conditions can lead to partial redistribution of Cr from chromite to silicates. Such redistribution was studied on the Vavdos chromite deposit (Greece) where more than 3% of whole rock Cr2O3 can be found in silicates. The effect of Cr2O3 redistribution is to lower the efficiency of gravity plants as Cr2O3 contained in silicate phases will be preferentially discharged into the tailing during enrichment. Tests confirm the effect of Cr redistribution on enrichment and show that preferential separation of different silicates does not occur or is negligible. As the redistribution of Cr within the rock is not indicated by any change in whole-rock chemistry only the study of mineralogy, texture and mineral chemistry of the ore can provide a reliable basis for final product quality and Cr2O3 recovery prediction.Chromite ore beneficiation is mostly achieved by physical methods (mainly tabling, jigging and magnetic separation) in order to separate chromite from gangue minerals ( Mineralogical and chemical parameters used to set up enrichment plants for chromite sands and/or to predict final product quality are based essentially on texture, whole-rock analyses, mineralogy and average mineral chemistry of chromite (e.g. Mineralogy is used to predict behaviour of gangue minerals during beneficiation, according to their specific weight and habitus but mineral chemistry of gangue minerals is never taken into account, because of the generally accepted assumption that all the Cr Such assumption is valid for unmetamorphosed chromite ores but is not valid for chromite ores that were metamorphosed in presence of aqueous fluids and that show a partial metasomatic redistribution of chromium within gangue minerals. The most common metasomatic alteration of chromitites is related to the formation of a ferritchromite  Cr-chlorite is an important Cr-bearing phase where Cr On the other hand ferritchromite is usually slightly to highly enriched in Cr The purpose of the present work is to study and to quantify the effect on chromite sand concentrate grade and recovery of Cr metasomatic redistribution within chromite ore. The effect of chromite metasomatic alteration on enrichment efficiency and final product quality was studied on an altered chromitite ore from Vavdos Mine, Halkidiki peninsula, Greece. The Vavdos Mine is located inside the Vavdos ultramafic massif, one of several, NW–SE aligned ultramafic bodies belonging to the Halkidiki ophiolite in the Circum-Rhodope orogenic belt ( Eleven samples were collected from three different chromitite lenses labelled as VV-A, VV-B and VV-C. Microscopy revealed the ubiquitous presence of Cr-chlorite and ferritchromite in all lenses ( Whole rock major elements content was analysed with X-ray-Fluorescence, and Electron Microprobe (EMP) microanalyses of all phases were carried out with a JXA – 8100/8200 JEOL probe both at Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, University of Milan. The assessment of the distribution of Cr Enrichment tests were performed using a laboratory shaking table working chromite sand from Vavdos chromitite lenses. 10 X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) whole-rock analyses of all samples together with average data for the three lenses are shown in Average values of Cr Results of modal analysis are shown in Mass abundances of each phase are calculated according to the following equation: Normative Cr Average Cr The wt.% amount of total Cr The distribution of Cr As the Cr Previous equation can be used practically in the following form ( If we consider a chromite ore where the valuable metal is present in both chromite and gangue with concentrations Analogous calculations on Finally Eq. Effect of Cr redistribution on Vavdos chromite ore enrichment was tested by tabling 30 Now it is possible to compare Eq. It is also possible to compare Eq. In both cases the result gives a mistake in the evaluation of SE. More interesting is to reverse the problem and to find the amount of And again, using collected data, we get from Eq. Enrichment tests were used to check validity of the Eq. For each test SE was determined by modal analysis of feed and concentrate using Eq. Results in A detailed mineralogical study of the Cr-chlorite bearing chromite deposit of Vavdos showed that during metamorphism more than 3 The effect of such redistribution on chromite ore enrichment was experimentally tested by tabling Vavdos chromite sand. Results confirmed that separation efficiency and metal recovery equations that take into account the Cr As Cr-chlorite can host even higher Cr The effect of this wrong assumption is a mistake in the calculation of plant efficiency, that will be overestimated, or, if plant efficiency is known, a mistake in the prediction of the Mistakes due to redistribution of Cr This study was supported by UT Unitech & United Corporation. Authors also wish to deeply thank Mr. Simone Sacco of UT Unitech & United Corporation for technical support, Miss Anna Batsi of UT Unitech & United Corporation Group and Mrs Annie Rassios of IGME, Kozani branch, Greece, for their logistic support during field work in Greece.