Fine minerals, mostly clays, are known to have a detrimental effect on coal flotation. This paper focuses on the effect of mechanical and chemical removals of fine minerals by hydrocyclone and dispersants on coal flotation. The experimental results showed that the flotation recovery slightly increased from medium acidic to medium alkaline ranges. The flotation experiments carried out with dispersants at different dosages showed that the dispersants did not enhance the flotation recovery significantly. However, the removal of the fine fraction from the feed using a hydrocyclone significantly increased the flotation recovery. The bubble–particle attachment tests also indicated that the attachment time between an air bubble and the coal particles increased in the presence of clay particles. These attachment time results clearly showed that the clay particles adversely affected the flotation of coal particles by covering the coal surfaces which reduced the efficiency of bubble–coal attachment. An analysis based on the colloid stability theory showed that the clay coating was governed by the van der Waals attraction and that the double-layer interaction played a secondary role. It was also concluded that the best way to increase the flotation recovery in the presence of clays was to remove these fine minerals by mechanical means such as hydrocylones.Fine particles less than 10 There have been many studies conducted to investigate the negative effects caused by fine particles ( Dispersants are widely used to modify the colloidal interactions between particles by creating electrostatic and/or steric repulsion which counterbalances the contribution of the van der Waals attraction to the total net force. These dispersants are mostly anionic polymers and adsorb on mineral surfaces, making them more negative ( In the coal industry, clay particles have also a significant effect on filtration ( The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of slime particles on the flotation of coal samples from BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance (BMA). Specifically, the research focused on comparing the efficiency of slime removal using hydrocyclone and slime dispersion by chemicals on the coal flotation. The combined effect of pH and dispersants on the coal flotation was also studied. Finally, the effect of fine clay particles on the bubble–particle attachment was investigated using the attachment time measurements to identify the physics underlying the effect of clays on coal flotation. The coking coal samples, moderately hydrophobic, used for the flotation tests were obtained from a BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance mine in Central Queensland, Australia. The flotation experiments were carried out with −0.5 Diesel and methylisobutylcarbinol (MIBC) were used as the collector and frother, respectively. The diesel dosage was 100 The flotation experiments were carried out with −0.5 In order to remove the fine fraction from the feed, the hydrocyclone separation was conducted using an AKW hydrocyclone (AKW Apparate Underflow and overflow products for the separations were collected at the same time during the tests. After the separation, the particle size distributions of the underflow and overflow products were determined using a Master Sizer 2000 (Malvern, UK). The data obtained from the results are presented in The bubble–particle attachment tests were carried out with coal samples containing fine fraction, mostly clays, in order to see the effect of these particles on the bubble–particle attachment time. The coal sample (212–150 pH is one of the most important factors in controlling slime coating due to electrostatic attraction between the clays and coal particles. For this reason, in the first set of experiments, the flotation of coal was carried out as a function of pH. Shown in Prior to the flotation tests with hydrocyclone-sized samples, the effect of the polymeric dispersants including sodium hexametaphosphate (HMP) and sodium silicate (SS) on the coal flotation was investigated. The results are shown in The results for coal flotation carried out with coal sample deslimed using the hydrocyclone are shown in The efficiency of flotation critically depends on the ability of air bubbles to collect hydrophobic particles from the suspension (  In order to gain a better understanding of clay coating on coal particles, an analysis of the coating using the Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory of the aggregate stability of colloidal particles was completed using forces of colloidal interaction ( The van der Waals force, The electrical double-layer force can be predicted from the solution of the Poisson–Boltzmann equation with the boundary condition at constant surface potential or constant surface charge ( The surface (zeta) potential of the particles were measured by the micro electrophoresis using an ZetaSizer Nano-ZS (Malvern, UK). The zeta potential of the bubbles was determined using a zeta meter (Rank Brothers, UK) using a procedure available in the literature ( The DLVO theory predicts the interaction force by the sum of the van der Waals and double-layer forces described by Eqs. The available literature indicates that fine clay particles attach to the negatively charged coal particles and increase the ash content of the product ( The study by Polymers are mostly used to prevent the slime coating on the coal surface. It was thought that if the positive charge on the edge of clays was reduced or negative charges on the surface of clays increased, both the coal and clay surfaces would be negatively (average) charged. Therefore, this negative charge for coal and clays would increase the repulsion force between the clay and coal particles and would reduce the clay coating on the coal surface. However, the results from the flotation experiments with polymers showed that the flotation could not be improved, re-confirming that the double-layer interaction only play a secondary role in the clay coating. There are some studies showing that the anionic phosphates may be used to remove slime coatings from valuable minerals ( Our results show that the fine clay minerals can be eliminated from the coal sample using a hydrocyclone. The test work showed that the deslimed sample significantly increased the flotation recovery. On average, the total recovery was 25% higher than the recovery of the raw sample without the desliming. However, the ash content of the concentrate was still relatively high ( The effect of fine particles on coal flotation was investigated. The flotation experiments were carried out with the raw coal samples and the deslimed coal samples to examine the effect of mechanical and chemical removals of fine clay minerals on coal flotation. The flotation experiments showed that the flotation recovery of the raw coal samples slightly increased with increasing pH and that sodium silicate and sodium hexametaphosphate used as the dispersants did not enhance the flotation recovery significantly. However, the removal of the fine fraction from the feed using a hydrocyclone significantly increased the flotation recovery. The bubble–particle attachment tests with coal particles also indicated that fine clay particles increased the attachment time between an air bubble and the coal particles and significantly reduced the efficiency of bubble–coal attachment and the coal flotation recovery. The clay coating was analyzed based on the colloid stability theory which incorporated the van der Waals and double-layer interactions. Micro electrophoresis was used to obtain the coal and clay surface potentials required in calculating the double-layer interaction force. The van der Waals interaction force was calculated using the refractive index of the coal and clay particles, and water. The theoretical analysis showed that the clay coating was governed by the van der Waals attraction and that the double-layer interaction played a secondary role. It was also concluded that the best way to increase the flotation recovery in the presence of clays is to remove the fine clay minerals by a hydrocyclone. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Australian Research Council for financial support through a Discovery grant and BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance (BMA) for funding the BMA Chair of Minerals Processing at the University of Queensland and the coal samples. The authors would like to thank Dr. Marc A. Hampton for his assistance in obtaining the SEM images of the coal samples.