Coffee is one of the top commodities produced and commercialized worldwide, and the processing of coffee generates significant amounts of agricultural waste, ranging from 30% to 50% the weight of the total coffee produced, depending on the type of processing. Coffee husks and pulp are the major solid residues from the processing of coffee, for which there are no current profitable uses, and their adequate disposal constitutes a major environmental problem. Thus, in compliance with the concept of sustainable development, innovative techniques and products for the profitable and adequate use of this type of residue are being sought. Several research works presenting proposals for such endeavors have been published in the literature and are reviewed herein.Activated carbons Bacterial cellulose Coffee husks Carbon-to-nitrogen ratio Coffee pulp Dry basis Carbon 13 nuclear magnetic resonance Hydrogen 1 nuclear magnetic resonance Point of zero charge Remazol Brilliant Orange 3R Solid state fermentation The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the following Brazilian Government Agencies: CNPq and FAPEMIG. Coffee, a commodity ranking second only to petroleum in terms of currency traded worldwide, is quite relevant to the economy of its major producing countries such as Brazil, Vietnam, Indonesia, Colombia, Ethiopia, India, and Mexico. Brazil is the largest coffee producer and exporter in the world and the second largest consumer. Coffee processing generates significant amounts of agricultural waste, ranging from 30% to 50% of the weight of the total coffee produced, depending on the type of processing. A brief description of the types of coffee processing is necessary to understand the different proposals for adequate exploitation of CHs available in the literature. A schematic view of a coffee cherry is displayed in The general steps involved in the processing of coffee cherries are displayed in Wet processing does not require drying of the cherries themselves. In this type of processing, first the outer skin and pulp are mechanically removed, generating the solid residue denominated CP (see Dry processed CHs have moisture contents ranging from 7% to 18%; such an extensive range is attributed to variations in processing and storage conditions. CHs and CP are rich in organic matter and nutrients and contain compounds such as caffeine, tannins, and polyphenols. Because of the presence of the latter compounds, these residues have a toxic nature that not only adds to the problem of environmental pollution but also restricts its use as animal feed. Caffeine, one of nature’s most powerful stimulants, is present in CHs at approximately 1.3% concentration (db). Agricultural residues are commonly reused as livestock feed but, in the case of CHs, its low digestible protein content, in addition to the fact that the starch equivalent is comparable to low-quality hay, has prevented its use as animal feed. The precise nature of the antiphysiological effects of CHs and CP is still unknown, but they are mostly attributed to the combined effect of compounds such as caffeine, which has stimulatory and diuretic effects, and tannins, which decrease protein availability and inhibit digestive enzymes. CHs and CP are rich in potassium and other mineral nutrients, which has resulted in studies of their application as organic fertilizers without any treatment or after composting. Composting can be defined as a solid-waste management system that accelerates the process of decomposition of biomass. Decomposition occurs spontaneously for CP and, if not controlled, can result in severe problems, including the proliferation of flies and foul odors, soil infiltration, and others. Raphael and Velmourougane CHs have been deemed a source of cheap fuel, with an approximate calorific value of 16 Wilson et al. Bioethanol is a biofuel regarded as a promising substitute for gasoline in the transportation sector. To make it competitive with fossil fuels, however, it is necessary to reduce production costs by using alternative biomass feedstock. Current industrial processes for bioethanol production use either sugarcane or cereal grains as feedstock, directly competing with the food sector. Also, projected fuel demands indicate that alternative, low-priced feedstocks are needed to reduce ethanol production costs. Furthermore, it is estimated that ethanol production from agricultural residues could increase to 16 times the current production. Early studies indicated that biofuel fermented just from CP contained only 2.5–3.0% ethanol (w/v), which would require high energy costs during the distillation stage. Kefale et al. The potential of using biogas as a viable alternative source of energy has been widely recognized. Several applications of CP and husks in fermentation studies have been reported, including the production of enzymes, citric acid, gibberellic acid, gallic acid, flavoring substances, and bacterial cellulose (BC). The majority of these works have already been reviewed by Franca and Oliveira, Murthy and Naidu A few studies have focused on the use of CHs and pulp as substrates for mushroom growth and were reviewed by Franca and Oliveira. The association between CHs and the production of charcoal has been considered first in terms of fuel, given that the calorific value is practically doubled after carbonization. ACs were prepared by pyrolysis of CHs in the presence of phosphoric acid as an activating agent. Oliveira and collaborators Ahmad and Rahman Prata and Oliveira Characterization of anthocyanins, polyphenols, and the biological properties of coffee skin/pulp were recently investigated. The process of recovering phenolic compounds from CP, husk, silver skin, and spent coffee, and their respective antioxidant activities, were investigated by Murthy and Naidu. Bekalo and Reinhardt Studies evaluating the sustainable and profitable use of CHs and CP as animal feed, solid biofuel, a component for structural materials, a source of bioactive compounds, and raw material for the production of liquid and gaseous biofuels, mushrooms, low-cost adsorbents, and fermentation products such as enzymes, flavor, and aroma ingredients for food products and others have been conducted. The overall conclusion of the studies with applications in animal feed is that using CHs as a diet supplement is significantly restricted by the presence of antinutritional compounds such as caffeine, tannins, and others. Some studies with the purpose of removing these antinutritional substances from CHs have been successful, but they all involve processing steps that will add to the costs of producing a material that has no significant value added to it. Production of compost and vermicompost, although deemed a feasible solution for the adequate disposal of CHs and CP, present problems: the market demand is not able to keep up with the voluminous supply of husks and pulp, and the composting processes currently used do not guarantee the destruction of the coffee borer that may be infecting some of the CP. Although using CHs as solid fuels on the coffee-producing farms has become a common practice in major coffee-producing countries, it has been demonstrated to present several problems; the major issue is the excessive emission of pollutants during combustion. Even though solid coffee residues have been reported to perform better in terms of biogas production in comparison to other agricultural residues, recent studies related to biomethanation of coffee processing residues indicated that this alternative use still does not seem to be viable because of either technical or economic setbacks. The production of bioethanol by fermentation of CHs constitutes a promising alternative for their adequate use, but there still is a need for significant research to make it both technically and economically viable. The production of fermentation products is also a promising alternative, but studies dealing with proper scale-up of the laboratory processes and with their respective economic feasibility are necessary for its implementation on a large scale. Significant research also is needed to produce adsorbents from CHs that can be implemented as a value-added alternative for their adequate use.  CHs and CP are generated in large amounts during coffee production. No adequate methods are available for the disposal of CHs and CP. CHs and CP constitute a rich source of bioactive compounds. Proposals for adequate exploitation of CHs and CP are plenty, but the majority are not yet suitable for implementation. There is still need for research in alternative and profitable uses of CHs and CP.