Modeling the high velocity impact of ice was a requirement in the safety calculations for the return-to-flight of the Space Shuttle on July 26, 2005. Ice, however, is not a common structural material and commercial finite element programs did not have any appropriate models. A phenomenological model with failure was developed to match experimental ballistic tests. The model has a relatively small number of material constants, most of which have been measured experimentally. A description of the model and comparisons of calculations to experiments are presented.The destructive effects of the impact of ice at high speeds is well known. For man-rated vehicles, experiments are usually required to certify the safety of the design. Jet engines, for example, are required to pass ice ingestion tests by the FAA. Concern about the impact of ice on the Space Shuttle dates back to at least the 1983 test program described by Analyses were rarely carried out previously for many reasons, including the absence of sufficient computer power, software that could handle both the extreme deformations of the ice and accurately model the structural response of the vehicle, and an accurate model for ice. Low cost PC clusters have provided the required computer power. Finite element methods have advanced dramatically since DeWolfe’s investigation. There has been, however, little effort previously in the development of a constitutive model for ice that can be used in finite element calculations. The Columbia Space Shuttle tragedy motivated a large scale safety review of the Space Shuttle, and included in that review was a requirement for certifying the ability of the leading edge of the wing to safely sustain impacts of various types of debris ( After calculating the relative velocity of the leading edge and debris, analyses were limited to low density materials that would rapidly decelerate in the atmosphere. Dense objects, such as bolts, are not believed to endanger the leading edge since the relative impact velocity would be low. Low density materials, such as the foam that brought down Columbia, rapidly decelerate to the point that the Shuttle flies into the debris at a velocity up to 3000 Constitutive models for reinforced carbon–carbon composites and the low density foams covering the external fuel tank are reasonably mature, and validation experiments using the shuttle materials demonstrated their accuracy. Ice, however, is not a commercial structural material, and aside from high velocity impact situations of interest to the aerospace industry, is rarely subject to high strain rate impact conditions. Although ice has been studied extensively, e.g., The ice model presented here was developed under the deadlines required to return the Space Shuttle to flight. It is phenomenological in nature, and its value was judged based on how well it modeled the ballistic experiments. As far as possible, the material parameters have been measured by experiments that are independent of the experiments used to validate the accuracy of the ice model. No attempt has been made to include micromechanical or first principles models of the comminution of ice or its response after impact. More sophisticated models could and should be developed. This section relies heavily on the review papers by Ice should be regarded as a class of materials rather than a single, specific material with well defined properties. It has thirteen different crystal structures and two amorphous states. The ice of interest to us is ice Ih, which has a hexagonal crystal structure and forms at ambient pressures. In the literature ( The ice used in the experiments, and characterized for NASA by Like many brittle materials, ice is stronger in compression than in tension. Unlike most brittle materials, it exhibits its brittle behavior up to the melting point at strain rates that are too low for inertial confinement to play a role. Both  Failure in ice that does not initially contain flaws requires a nucleation mechanism in addition to crack propagation. Ice can exhibit a variety of behaviors, ranging from ductile to brittle, as a function of strain rate in compression (see  In recent single crystal tests using thin samples in a Hopkinson bar, To summarize the rate sensitivity tests, polycrystalline and single crystal ice is strain rate sensitive from 10 Experiments (see Ice, like rock, concrete, and ceramics, typically exhibits residual strength after damage. The mechanism is usually hypothesized to be intergranular friction due to a positive pressure. A simple model for this type of behavior is the Mohr-Coulomb criterion where the failure stress and/or the residual flow stress are assumed to be linear functions of the pressure, Experiments ( Damaged ice has been observed to sustain strains of 10% in high strain rate experiments by The literature for modeling high velocity ice impacts is very small, which is not too surprising considering that only recently has the computational power become available for this type of simulation and the market for this research is a narrow segment of the aerospace industry. Two papers ( A simple isotropic elastic–plastic material model with failure was used in the calculations. To handle the large rotations, the Jaumann stress rate, The pressure in the ice is The failure model sets the deviatoric stress to zero and limits the pressure to be positive after In terms of the engineering properties discussed in the previous section, the limitations of the model are: The yield stress is not a function of the strain rate or pressure. The plastic hardening modulus, The failure stress, A number of factors account for the success of this simple model in modeling the hail impact. First, the moderate impact velocities only produce moderate strain rates. Second, Hertzian contact between the spherical projectile and the flat target result in the maximum stress, where the failure occurs, always being compressive. Since most of the projectile remains intact, the failure model has less of a role than in a problem where the projectile completely fragments. Finally, the properties of this ice material model were tuned to the response of their particular test. When this model was implemented for use in ballistic impact at velocities of interest to our program, using a cylinder instead of a sphere, the ice in the simulation did not fragment. As a result, the calculated force in the load cell model did not match the measured test data. Safety calculations are naturally conservative; the ice model presented here was developed to model a strong ice with repeatable properties. In particular, the ice examined here is a single crystal, optically clear ice free of initial cracks. The model presented here does not include a temperature dependency despite ice being a temperature dependent material. Given that the duration of an impact experiment is measured in milliseconds, the temperature of the ice is assumed constant during the simulation. The temperature of the ice that forms on the Shuttle varies with its distance from the cold source, and is almost impossible to measure in situ. The temperature of −10 This model uses tabular data, and interpolation between the specified points, in preference to analytical functions for defining the dependence of the flow stress on the strain rate and pressure. The direct use of tabular data eliminates the time consuming intermediate step of fitting the experimental data to the analytical relations, and eliminates the error between the measured response and the analytical relations. To emphasize which functions are tabular, a caret The flow stress has a product form, Two different norms for the strain rate have been evaluated. The first is based on the deviatoric part of the deformation rate, The pressure is evaluated using a tabulated equation of state with compaction, Although the pressures in the ice are below the shock pressures where a nonlinear response would be expected and ice/water is volumetrically elastic, the compaction feature of the equation of state has facilitated the matching of the calculated response to the experiment. In the analysis using the linearly elastic equation of state (Eq. We have implemented two failure models. The final stress is Two additional features have been implemented in the model but have not been used in the safety calculations due to the absence of sufficient data to calibrate them. Nevertheless, we believe that they will improve the accuracy of the calculations once the appropriate values have been determined. The first allows the failed ice to retain some small amount of residual strength after the ice has failed according to The second addition is a visco-elastic term, The material model was implemented in LS-DYNA ( Since the multi-material Eulerian formulation is less commonly used than the Lagrangian formulation in solid mechanics, a brief summary of the formulation is presented; more detail about the numerical algorithms is presented in The equations have the same form as the model conservation equation for a variable The transport during the Eulerian step is often viewed (and implemented) as an incremental projection or “rezone”. The similarities between material transport algorithms and rezoning are well known ( In order to validate the analytical ice model, a short series of impact tests on an instrumented fixture, inside of a vacuum chamber, were conducted by Tests were conducted with the plate normal to the trajectory vector, and at a 45° angle to the trajectory vector. Immediately behind the plate was a single pre-loaded, washer type PCB 260A13 load cell. The data was processed using a 25 The steel target plate was rigid in the frequency range of interest, but the load cell, bolt, and backup structure assembly was not. A modal survey was conducted of both the normal test configuration and the 45° test configuration. A photograph of the 45° test configuration during the modal survey is shown in The design of the target plate was a compromise between rigidity for load transfer, and low mass for contact force transmissibility. While the plate is sufficiently rigid, its inertia is large enough for the contact force to be somewhat attenuated before it reaches the load cell. In order to accurately compare test and analysis, the finite element model of the test included the target plate, and simple representations of the load cell, the bolt, and the backup structures, which were correlated with the results of the modal survey,as shown in To a certain extent, matching the test with the analysis is made somewhat easier by the attenuation due to the inertia of the target plate. The actual contact force partially consists of a very short duration impulse which is difficult to capture in the ballistic test laboratory. Additional testing will be performed in an alternate test setup to try to capture this impulse. A plot of the calculated contact force is shown in Comparisons of test and analysis for the 45° configuration were also made. Again, the comparison is good and is shown in Additional comparisons were made at much lower velocities in the drop tower at NASA Langely Research Center (LaRC) ( It should be noted that at the lowest initial velocities, there was a significant test to test variance in the measured LaRC drop tower forces. At the lowest initial velocities the static properties of the ice, such as shown in Some of the experiments described in The physical phenomena which are important to capture, and are included in this ice model, are: The separate failure stresses when the ice is in tension or compression. This is a well known property of ice ( Compressive failure is a function of the strain rate. The importance of this feature is amply demonstrated by the test results at varying velocities. Once failure has occurred, the ice’s ability to carry deviatoric stress is sharply curtailed, or eliminated. Omitting this feature produces unrealistically high peak stresses in calculations that are not shown. Once the deviatoric stresses have been scaled, or eliminated, the ice flows like a fluid, and this can only be modeled using an Eulerian formulation or periodic rezoning. Once failure has occurred, the ability of the ice to carry hydrostatic stress is not altered, allowing it to maintain load on the impact target. Omitting this feature and the deviatoric stress after failure would results in the ice exerting zero stress. The tabulated equation of state with compaction has been utilized to reduce physically unrealistic stress waves in ice which has failed, but has not yet impacted the target. Based on the less extensive testing of this model for weaker ice, the model appears to be reasonably accurate if the compressive strength of the ice is set to the static compressive failure value for that particular ice structure. Weaker ice tends to have less consistent properties than the strong, single crystal ice used in the model development. As a result matching impact experiments with any deterministic ice model becomes more difficult, particularly at lower velocities where the structural properties of the ice dominate. A phenomenological model for ice has been developed and its predicted results compared to experiments. The agreement between the two is both quantitatively and qualitatively better than with other ice models we have tried. Based on the experience gained during the development of this model, the critical aspects of its success are the independent failure stress in tension and compression, the strain rate sensitivity of the flow stress, the ability of the failed ice to continue to carry hydrostatic stress and the use of the Eulerian mesh. The model has been shown to work for multiple conditions and test setups. The input to the model is primarily based on clearly defined mechanical property tests, and requires no adjustments based on ballistic test data. For other than single crystal ice, the model appears to be reasonably accurate, if the material parameters are selected accordingly. Experiments have shown that the phenomenology of ice at high strain rates has some qualitative similarities to other brittle materials, however modeling it with classical ceramic models has not produced accurate results. Additional experimental work is necessary for building the data base needed to develop a better model of ice based on physically motivated failure mechanisms. The authors would like to thank the following people who significantly contributed to this effort; for providing test data and insight into ice, Erland Schulson (Dartmouth), Mike Pereira, Santo Padula, Duane Revilock, Jeff Hamel, Brad Lerch, Matt Melis (Glenn Research Center), Vikas Prakash, Mostafa Shazly (Case Western Reserve University), Ed Fasanella, and Sotiris Kellas (Langley Research Center), and for providing assistance in the analysis, Mike Bennett (U of Akron) and John Hallquist (LSTC).