Posterior malleolar fractures are relatively common and usually result from rotational ankle injuries. Although treatment of associated lateral and medial structures is well established, several controversies exist in the management of posterior malleolus fractures. We performed a systematic review of the current published data with regard to the diagnosis, management, and prognosis of posterior malleolus fractures. A total of 33 studies (8 biomechanical and 25 clinical) with >950 patients were reviewed. The outcome of ankle fractures with posterior malleolar involvement was poor; however, the evidence was not enough to prove that the size of the posterior malleolus affects the outcome. Significant heterogeneity was noted in the cutoff size of the posterior malleolar fragment in determining management. The outcome was related to other factors, such as fracture displacement, congruency of the articular surface, and residual tibiotalar subluxation. Indirect evidence showed that large fracture fragments were associated with fracture dislocations and ankle instability and, thus, might require surgical fixation. We have concluded that the evidence to prove that the size of the posterior malleolar affects the outcome of ankle fractures is not enough, and the decision to treat these fractures should be determined by other factors, as stated previously.Ankle fractures account for about 4% of all body fractures, with an annual incidence of 124 per 10,000 persons in the United Kingdom Although the management of associated medial and lateral structures is well established, the management of the posterior malleolus fractures remains controversial. Currently, no clear consensus has been reached regarding the indications of the operative and nonoperative management of these fractures with the decision often determined by the size of the fragment. We performed a systematic review of the English-language published data to assess the outcome of ankle fractures treated operatively and nonoperatively and involving the posterior malleolus. We also assessed the factors affecting the outcome, including the fragment size, which could guide the treating surgeon in the management of these injuries. The review incorporated an electronic search of the Medline The data extracted included the demographic details of the patients, diagnosis, and treatment, including nonoperative and operative treatment. When assessing these patients, we included all the methods of nonoperative and operative treatment, irrespective of the method of treatment and fixation and the approach used. We included all the outcome measures described in the present study, including ankle osteoarthritis and objective measures such as the visual analog scale for pain The initial search identified a total of 158 relevant citations; however, further scrutiny led to the exclusion of 125 studies (79.1%). Thus, 33 studies met the inclusion criteria, of which 8 (25.2%) were biomechanical and 25 (75.7%) were clinical studies. All the studies assessed were case series, and no randomized trials were identified during the analysis. A total of 8 studies (25.2%) were identified that assessed the role of the posterior malleolus in ankle stability and joint loading. A synopsis of these studies follows. Scheidt et al Papachristou et al Fitzpatrick et al The results of the biomechanical studies have confirmed that posterior ankle stability is predominantly provided by anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament, posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament, and medial and lateral structures with little contribution from posterior malleolus. Although in itself the posterior malleolus might not be involved in significant load bearing at the tibiotalar joint, with posterior malleolus fractures, the redistribution of the load is abnormal, which might predispose the patient to the development of post-traumatic arthritis. A total of 960 patients from 25 studies with posterior malleolar fractures were included in the present review. Of the 960 patients, 288 were female and 219 were male patients from 16 studies; however, 9 studies with 453 patients did not report the gender distribution. The mean age was 45.48 (range 13 to 84) years. In most of the studies, the diagnosis and size of the posterior malleolus fracture was made from the lateral radiograph of the ankle. In 915 patients, the posterior malleolus was a part of combined injuries (i.e., anterior, medial, lateral, and/or syndesmotic structures), and in 45 patients, it was isolated Standard anteroposterior and lateral ankle radiographs were used in the diagnosis of these injuries in most of the studies. However, the reliability of using lateral radiographs in accurately determining the size of the posterior malleolus fragment has been questioned Haraguchi et al Posterolateral oblique type (67%) Medial extension type (19%) Small shell type (14%) Two studies (17 patients) described a separate variant of the posterior malleolus fracture that involved the posteromedial distal tibial articular surface Three separate studies involving 45 patients assessed isolated posterior malleolus fractures We examined the results of both operative and nonoperative management strategies to determine their benefit in the treatment of posterior malleolus fracture. In all, 419 patients (45.8%) from 13 studies ( In general, smaller posterior malleolus fractures were treated nonoperatively The overall prognosis for conservatively treated trimalleolar ankle fractures was poorer than that of conservatively treated bimalleolar fractures. The incidence of post-traumatic arthritis was reported to be 29.8% in the nonoperatively treated group A total of 16 studies with 452 patients ( Several methods of fixation and surgical approaches were described; however, anteroposterior screw fixation was the most common method of fixation The incidence of post-traumatic arthritis was reported to be 40% in this group. Just as with the previous group of patients, we did not find any association between the size of the posterior malleolar fragment and the incidence of post-traumatic arthritis. However, the outcomes were associated with congruity of the joint surface and stability of the ankle joint after fixation The analysis confirmed a high overall rate of clinical and/or radiologic osteoarthritis after these injuries (33.5%). Although the incidence of post-traumatic arthritis was greater in the surgical group ( Although numerous studies have confirmed a poor prognosis for ankle fractures involving the posterior malleolus, controversies still exist regarding the appropriate management and indications for fixation in these fractures. Traditionally, the size of the posterior malleolus has been used as a guide for the management of these fractures. However, a recent study by Gardner et al The evidence available regarding identifying the role of the posterior malleolus size as a prognostic indicator is weak, which was reflected by the poor stratification of these fractures. For isolated posterior malleolar fractures, 2 studies reported good outcomes for most of the patients when treated conservatively, irrespective of the size of the fragment In combined injuries, we identified that conservative treatment was a default choice when the fragment size was small; however, this was not based on strong evidence. de Vries et al Most of the studies reported no association between the posterior malleolus fragment size and the long-term outcome, with either conservative or surgical treatment. The study by Mingo-Robinet et al The biomechanical studies and some clinical studies have established that isolated posterior malleolar fractures are inherently stable and become unstable with sequential injuries of the medial and lateral columns. Even when these columns are reconstructed, anatomic models have demonstrated increased point loading or stress on the anteromedial joint surface, which might induce arthritic changes. From our assessment of the clinical and biomechanical studies, we identified the following 3 factors that will prognosticate these injuries: Presence of fracture dislocation at injury Articular surface congruity Residual talar subluxation The present review has confirmed that presence of a posterior malleolus fracture in the setting of fracture dislocation indicates significant energy was imparted at the injury, with a relatively large posterior malleolar fragment, and was associated with increased comminution Similarly, intraoperatively, once the medial and lateral structures have been anatomically fixed, the posterior malleolus fragment should be reduced using ligamentotaxis, provided the posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament is intact. In the presence of articular incongruity, several investigators have recommended fixation of the posterior malleolus fractures with a size of ≥10% of the distal tibial articular surface Overall, it is difficult to reach a consensus, because the published data are fragmented in terms of the method and reporting of results, with no standardized outcomes measures used. The short-term period of some studies meant that primary outcomes such as osteoarthritis could not be fully assessed. The lack of a strict definition and grading of ankle arthritis also made it difficult to assess the numbers requiring future joint salvage surgery. We would advocate a longitudinal study or registry with accurate computed tomography analysis of the fracture site, size, and shape to assess the full implications of these fractures and to record the prognostic markers of reduction such as articular surface congruity, residual talar subluxation, and the presence of fracture dislocation at the injury In conclusion, the present review has highlighted the finding that posterior malleolus fractures involving the combined medial and lateral column have a poor prognosis compared with bimalleolar injuries. The diagnostic test should be a computed tomography scan to allow for accurate planning of the fixation. Uncertainty still exists regarding the true prognostic value of the fracture size, reflecting the lack of standardized studies with long-term follow-up data to exclude primary endpoints such as osteoarthritis. When a posterior malleolus fracture is associated with fracture dislocation of the ankle, the surgeon should have a low threshold for surgical fixation. This should be confirmed intraoperatively after assessing residual talar subluxation and joint congruity.