Objective
                  To evaluate the efficacy of AO mini-fragment implants and 1.25-mm Kirschner wires using fragment-specific fracture fixation and double-column plating for displaced or unstable distal radial fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Design: prospective and consecutive. Setting: level II trauma hospital. Participants: 28 people with 30 fractures and an average follow-up of 21.1 (range 12–41) months, treated with fragment-specific fracture fixation. Outcome measurements: anatomical assessment using anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, graded according to Sarmiento's modification of Lidstrom's scoring system. Clinical outcome assessment: DASH and Modified Gartland and Werley scores.
               
                  Results
                  There were 24 excellent and 6 good radiological results. Final mean grip strength was 83% of uninjured side, and mean wrist range of motion was 61° dorsiflexion, 54° palmar flexion, 85° supination and 83° pronation. Gartland and Werley's demerit point system revealed 13 (43%) excellent, 12 (40%) good, 5 (17%) fair and no poor results. The mean DASH score was 18, with a standard deviation of ±18.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This fixation method is a reliable and low-cost alternative with good clinical and anatomical results, particularly useful in open reduction and internal fixation of comminuted intra-articular distal radial fractures.Distal radial fractures are the most common fractures of the upper limb; about 50% involve the articular surface. Outcomes following treatment of distal radial fractures are closely correlated to the achievement of anatomical reduction, restoration of articular congruency, stable internal fixation and early mobilisation. Medoff In our institution, we applied the concept of fracture fragment identification as stipulated by Medoff, and combined it with the concept of double-column fixation to achieve a stable result that would allow early wrist motion. In addition, we used commonly available implants such as 1.25-mm Kirschner wires and AO mini-fragment plates as implants. We thus aimed to achieve fracture fragment buttressing and adequate fixation for the restoration of the cortical envelope in the distal radial anatomy as well as to enable early wrist motion. The experimental protocol was approved by the medical ethics committee of our hospital before the start of the study. We present our radiological and functional results using this novel technique. Between July 1999 and September 2002, 33 people with 35 fractures of the distal radius were treated by open reduction and internal fixation using AO mini-fragment implants according to the principles of fragment-specific fracture fixation. The implants included a combination of 2.0-mm straight plates, 2.0-mm T-plates, 2.7-mm plates and 1.25-mm Kirschner wires. Five of the participants left the country before completion of the study protocol and were excluded from the study. The remaining 28 participants with 30 wrist fractures formed the study population. Four orthopaedic surgeons (the four senior authors) were involved in these procedures. Participants included 19 men and 9 women, with a mean age of 46 years (range 25–74 years). The dominant wrist was fractured in 13 (43%) of cases. Two people had bilateral distal radial fractures which were both operated. Some participants also had multiple injuries, including closed head injuries, sustained during simple falls (47%), falls from height (27%), motor vehicle accidents (7%), sports (10%) and other situations (9%). The fractures were classified according to the AO system for the distal radius using standard radiographs. There were three simple extra-articular fractures (A2), one extra-articular fracture with metaphyseal comminution (A3), three simple articular fractures (C1) and 23 complex articular fractures (C3); hence 26 (87%) were intra-articular fractures. The decision to operate was based on the presence of inadequate fracture reduction, failure to maintain reduction by conservative means and articular incongruity. The guidelines for unacceptable reduction were: >0° of dorsal tilt, 2 Mean time to surgery was 5.78 days, with 75% of cases operated within 3 days of admission. Surgery was performed under general anaesthesia for 27 wrists and under regional anaesthesia for 3 wrists. The mean operative time was 1 A 6-cm longitudinal incision was made over the dorsum of the wrist just ulnar to Lister's tubercle. The exposure was extended through the extensor retinacular sheaths with special attention to avoiding injury to the extensor tendons. Arthrotomy into the wrist joint was not required. For reduction of dorsal wall fragments, exposure through the third and fourth dorsal compartments was selected. Exposure through the fourth and fifth dorsal compartments allowed good access to the dorsal ulnar fragment. Reduction of the fracture fragments was achieved through a combination of traction, manipulation and careful use of periosteal elevators. Reduction of the dorsal wall fragment was maintained by using a 2.0-mm AO T-plate as a buttress plate. Fixation to the distal fracture fragment was obtained with 2.0-mm screws, if the fragment was large. Alternatively, a 1.25-mm Kirschner wire was inserted, using a pin-plate concept for fragments which were not suitable for screw fixation. For the dorsal ulnar fragment, initial fixation was by a 1.25-mm Kirschner wire; a 2.0-mm precontoured straight plate was used to complete the ulnar pin-plate construct. The Kirschner wire should penetrate the far volar cortex of the proximal fragment. A 6-cm longitudinal radiodorsal incision was made, with special attention to conserving the branches of the superficial radial nerve. After raising the skin flaps, the bare area of bone on the radial styloid dorsal to the sheath of the first dorsal compartment was exposed. The brachioradialis insertion on the distal fragment was also released. After the fracture end was exposed, radial height and angle were restored under fluoroscopy guidance, and a 1.25-mm Kirschner wire was inserted from the radial styloid to the far ulnar cortex of the proximal fragment. A 2.0-mm straight plate with seven to eight holes was contoured to hug the radial styloid as a pin-plate. In some cases, a plate was required to buttress the volar fragment to prevent volar displacement of the fracture fragment. This was achieved using 2.0-mm T-plates. The volar fragment was exposed through the same radial incision as was used for the radial styloid fragment. In such cases, the radiodorsal incision was usually sited at a more radial-neutral position, to facilitate hardware application to the volar fragment. The radial neurovascular bundle was raised off the bone, together with the pronator quadratus. This was repaired A 25-year-old woman fell down a flight of stairs, sustaining a comminuted intra-articular distal radial fracture. Anteroposterior ( A 24-year-old pillion rider of a motorcycle was involved in a road traffic accident. Anteroposterior ( In cases with bone loss, autogenous bone grafts or commercially available bone substitutes were used to provide immediate subchondral structural support. In this series, five fractures (16.7%) were grafted, two with autogenous cancellous grafts from the iliac crest and three with commercially available bone substitute chronOS granules (Synthes, PA, USA). All participants were reviewed at 6 weeks and at 3 months from the date of index surgery, and a final review was conducted at least 12 months after the operation. The mean follow-up was 21.1 (range 12–41) months. Radiographs taken immediately after surgery and a second radiograph taken at least 3 months after surgery were compared to assess anatomical stability of fixation. The final radiological outcome was then evaluated using a system based on Sarmiento's modification of Lidstrom's scoring system. Review at 6 weeks, 3 months and at final follow-up included range of wrist motion and grip strength using the JAMAR hand dynamometer. Significance of change for radiographic parameters, range of wrist motion and grip strength at 6 months and at final review were evaluated by two-tailed, paired Student's Postoperatively, participants were referred for hand therapy and were seen within 1–3 days thereafter. Therapy was directed at reducing oedema of the wrist and digits and maximising range of motion. Oedema control consisted mainly of elevation of the upper limb and active range of motion exercises. Tubular compressive bandages were also applied for persistent oedema. Active wrist range of motion exercises were started 1–3 days postoperatively and passive range of motion exercises were added gradually over a 6-week period, to maximise range. At week 6, strengthening exercises were started to restore muscle mass and strength and enable participants to return to work. All fractures united by 6 weeks. In this study, early wrist mobilisation within 3 weeks of the surgery was enabled in all cases; 14 wrists were mobilised immediately postoperatively. The fracture pattern and surgical fixation constructs are summarised in The parameters of radial height, radial angle, palmar tilt and articular step in the immediate postoperative and final radiographs are summarised in The grip strength and range of wrist motion at 6 weeks, 3 months and final review are summarised in At final review, participants had an average of 61° wrist dorsiflexion, 54° palmar flexion, 85° supination, 83° pronation, 28° ulnar deviation and 15° radial deviation. There were significant improvements in grip strength and range of motion when reviewed at 6 weeks and at final review ( Gartland and Werley's demerit point system revealed 13 excellent, 12 good, 5 fair and no poor results. Four out of the five patients with fair results had type C3 fractures. The mean DASH score was 18 with a standard deviation of 18. There was no intraoperative complication or early wound infection. Temporary paraesthesia of the superficial radial nerve was the most common complication and was seen in 7 cases. One participant developed chronic regional pain syndrome of the affected hand and required intensive physiotherapy; one had progressive collapse of the fracture with positive ulnar variance that required a secondary ulnar shortening procedure at 6 months after index surgery; one had a backing out of the Kirschner wire in the radial pin-plate construct that required removal of the pin; four had prominence of the Kirschner wire at the radial pin-plate that required removal of the wire at between 4 weeks and 3 months after the index surgery; one had impingement of the volar buttress plate that required removal at 3 months after the index surgery; and one had sensitive cheloid over the radial column incision that necessitated scar revision by a plastic surgeon. Numerous methods have been described for the treatment of distal radial fractures. Closed reduction is useful for simple fractures, but in more unstable fractures loss of reduction often occurs before bone healing commences. To address this problem, non-bridging and dynamic external fixators have been developed which allow some degree of early wrist motion. However, non-bridging external fixators are not easily applied, particularly in juxta-articular fractures or intra-articular fractures, whereas dynamic external fixators may not achieve sufficiently stable fracture reduction, notably in certain AO type C fractures. Fragment-specific fixation is another approach to distal radius fixation, which seeks to identify and provide rigid fixation of each individual fracture fragment. This allows the surgeon to anatomically reduce the most comminuted and unstable distal radial fractures, allowing almost immediate mobilisation. The TriMed wrist fixation system uses low-profile plates and wire forms that minimise soft-tissue problems traditionally associated with bulky implants. Pin fixation enables fixation of comminuted fractures with poor quality bone and small fragments. The modularity of the system provides flexibility for the surgeon to modify the fixation according to the patient's specific fracture pattern and surgeon's level of expertise. The efficacy of fragment-specific fixation has been borne out in various studies. Dodds et al. compared the biomechanical stability of fragment-specific fixation and augmented external fixation in simulated unstable AO C2 and C3 fractures in cadavers. In four-part fractures, fragment-specific fixation was shown to be significantly more stable when compared with external fixation in four of six axes of motion. The technique described in this paper combines Medoff's concept of fragment-specific fracture fixation together with the two-column fixation concept of Regazzoni, to achieve stable fixation after adequate reduction and to allow early wrist motion for a better clinical outcome. By combining the two concepts, we have a versatile system of fracture fixation of difficult distal radial fractures, using readily available implants. The AO 2.0-mm implants can be contoured easily with or without simple pliers. By placing the radial pin-plate in the coronal plane and the dorsal buttress T-plate or dorsal ulnar pin-plate in the sagittal plane, with each at an angle of 50–80° apart, the fractures are held in a stable position and are able to resist the axial loads and bending forces generated by an early range of wrist motion. This concept is similar to Regazzoni's method of using two 2.0-mm titanium plates placed on the radial and intermediate columns, angled 50–70° apart. The 2.0-mm plates and screws, 1.25-mm Kirschner wires and AO mini-fragment plates used are low-profile; they not only enable the fixation of small fracture fragments, but also have the theoretical advantage of not interfering with tendon gliding. In addition, these implants are generally available and much cheaper than commercially available fixation systems for distal radial fractures. In our study, the fixation construct appeared strong enough to maintain fracture reduction. Immediate postoperative radiographs showed restoration of radial height, radial inclination, palmar tilt and articular congruency, which remained stable at final review. Radial height and articular step-off, in particular, were shown to be strongly related to functional outcome. Our study is limited by the small number of participants. In addition, the operations were performed by four different surgeons, albeit following the same surgical principles within the same hospital. This might have created some variation in outcome depending on surgeon experience and familiarity with the fixation method. There was also a lack of controls (participants with similar fractures fixed using other methods), which would have allowed for direct comparison of outcomes. Future studies would be required to address these issues. We recommend our fixation method, using the principles of fragment-specific fracture fixation together with double-column plating, as a reliable and low-cost alternative to commercially available fixation systems. This method obtains good clinical and anatomical results, and is particularly useful for open reduction and internal fixation of comminuted, intra-articular distal radial fractures.