A critical state line is presented for a crushable numerical soil, which is parallel to the isotropic normal compression line. A previous theory for the normal compression line, which correctly predicts the slope as a function of the size-effect on particle strength is extended to justify the slope of the critical state line. The micro mechanics behind critical states are examined, leading to a theory for a relationship between the volume of smallest particles and mean effective stress. A unique relationship exists for crushed states, leading to a two-dimensional interpretation of the state boundary surface for soils looser than critical.Following Pestana and Whittle It is a well-known phenomenon that the critical state line (CSL) for soils is parallel to the normal compression line The simulation results presented here were performed using the software PFC The work uses a simple crushing model and realistic particle strengths, which the authors have previously used to produce normal compression lines The strength data used here (and previously) is for a silica sand. From particle crushing tests The particle breakage model replaces broken particles with 2 smaller fragments whilst obeying conservation of mass. The new fragments are placed within the boundary of the broken particle, aligned in the direction of the minor principal stress and therefore overlap. The fragments therefore move apart immediately following breakage (which requires a number of timesteps to be completed to allow energy dissipation, via friction and mechanical damping), details of which are given in This initial sample is first isotropically compressed to establish a compression line, and shear tests are performed from various points along the loading path. The sample is also unloaded from different stresses, and further shear tests performed from along overconsolidated states. During normal compression, the simulation proceeds by applying isotropic stress increments (100 kPa) using the wall servo-controls. Once a stress is applied, all particles are checked and allowed to break if their strength is exceeded. At this point a number of timesteps are completed to allow the overlapping fragments to move apart. If this breakage results in a drop in the applied isotropic pressure, then the stress increment is reapplied. Once a stress is sustainable without any further breakages, the simulation progresses to the following increment. The shear tests are strain-controlled. The upper platen is gradually accelerated (to 0.01 m/s) then decelerated, applying an axial strain increment of 0.1%. During this process the membrane servo-control acts to adjust the radial stress: the confining pressure is adjusted to ensure either constant To enable the extensive number of simulations required in an acceptable timeframe, the initial sample contained only 723 particles ( Isotropic compression results and two unloading lines from 20 and 30 MPa are presented in The critical states obtained from these tests are shown in   The parallel nature of the CSL and NCL at high stresses suggest that the principles that govern the slope of the normal compression line also apply to the critical state line. The  One interesting observation from the simulations was that both the normal compression line and critical state line appear to possess unique coordination numbers at high stresses. The average coordination number is plotted as a function of The kinematics behind the compression law in Eq. In deriving the compression law in Eq. For a discrete particle size distribution, using the smallest particle size The fundamental assumption invoked in the derivation of the compression law given in The rationale for this is that as the smallest particles become smaller and fill the available voids, the available voids become smaller and the typical void space must be more closely related to the volume of one of those particles, as opposed to, say, the largest particle volume or the median one. Substituting Considering that the CSL is parallel with the NCL, with a constant critical stress ratio, it seems logical that the same relationship between the volume of smallest particles and voids ratio The theoretical derivation by McDowell However, as shown in It was found previously Considering random packing, the minimum contacts that a particle may have whilst mechanically loaded is 4, and this was used as the criterion to define the ‘smallest’ particles when investigating the above assumptions during normal compression In the present analysis, it is found that using 5 contacts to define the smallest particles (and calculating their cumulative volume) leads to the best agreement in Eq. The term ‘smallest particles’ will now be used to refer to all particles in a simulation that have An interesting observation in The equation  A similar relationship exists for critical states—there also is a direct proportionality between Two constant- During the 8 MPa test, in which there is negligible crushing, During the 20 MPa constant- The observation that This diagram can also explain the observed behaviour of constant-volume tests. For contractile constant-volume tests, such as that at Equally, for dilatant constant-volume tests, in which negligible breakage occurs, the mean stress increases to suppress dilation. As shown in  A cylindrical sample of spheres was isotropically compressed to establish a normal compression line, and then a large set of shear tests were performed from various states to establish the critical state line, which was parallel with the NCL at high stresses, in accordance with general experimental behaviour. From analysis of the particle size distributions at critical state, it was shown that the crushing resulting from shearing contributed to the emergence of fractal PSDs with a fractal dimension of around 2.5, similar to what occurs during normal compression. This observsation, coupled with the parallel nature of the CSL and NCL, suggested that the same principles behind the compression law could be used to reveal the micromechanics behind critical states. An assumption of the compression law is that on the NCL, the available void space is proportional to the cumulative volume of the smallest particles. What constitutes the ‘smallest’ particles has previously been examined, and the best measure was found to be using the coordination number to define the smallest particles. In the simulations presented here if the smallest particles are defined as those with 5 or fewer contacts, then the total volume of such particles appears to be directly proportional to the voids ratio for both isotropic compression and critical states. Thus, the parallel critical state line is a result of the fractal crushing of particles, where the slope is a function of the size-effect on particle strength. The voids ratio at a critical state is determined by the extent of the fractal PSD, caused by crushing due to the applied stress. The value of 5 is, however, unimportant. What is important is the dynamic definition of the smallest particle size in a constantly evolving PSD. Using a minimal value of coordination number seems a logical way of defining the (locally) smallest particles in the sample, and enables an explanation from a micro mechanic point of view of the slopes of the NCL and CSL as well as the observed behaviour of compacted, normally consolidated and overconsolidated sands. This is a scientific approach to defining the smallest particles, which includes information about the surrounding pore space; more primitive definitions might use the physically smallest particle(s), which may have no load-bearing ability or there may only be 1 such particle, as soil does not crush hierarchically at discrete stresses. The proportionality between current voids ratio and the volume of the smallest particles was valid for all states on the plastic, high-stress normal compression or critical state lines, but the coefficient of proportionality is different for each stress ratio. It was shown however that a single, unique relation exists between the volume of the smallest particles and the current applied stress, for any stress ratio. When plotted graphically, this single relation represents all states on any plastic loading line (e.g. CSL or NCL), and therefore could be used to explain the behaviour of any sample subjected to triaxial shearing. This newly established unique relationship between This work was supported by the