A new elution process for recovering gold thiosulfate from resins is described, and is based on the concept of synergistic ion exchange. In the presence of sulfite, Au(S2O3)2
                     3− is converted to Au(S2O3)(SO3)3−, which has a reduced affinity for strong anion exchange resins and is shown to be readily eluted by weaker eluants, such as chloride. Chloride has several advantages over other systems: it is significantly cheaper and more stable than trithionate, and the return of chloride loaded resin to the adsorption circuit is less problematic than nitrate. Using the proposed chloride+sulfite system, the majority of the gold is stripped within 2BV of elution, and the gold can be readily recovered from the concentrated eluate using electrowinning. The copper is pre-eluted using ammonium thiosulfate, with stripping of 99.7% of the copper, and only 2.7% of the gold. The new elution process was operated in closed loop with a continuous 7 stage adsorption mini-rig, and a solution gold grade of <0.02mgL−1 is obtained within 6 tanks. The composite solution tail over 24h is 0.005mgL−1 gold, indicating that the elution process produces a resin which is ideally suited for recycling without regeneration.Research into gold recovery using thiosulfate combined with resin in pulp (RIP) recovery has increased in recent years as it has the potential to be utilised for a number of niche applications. These include carbonaceous (preg-robbing) ores, and in locations where cyanidation is not possible due to political or environmental factors. The leaching of gold in thiosulfate solutions has been investigated extensively and is reasonably well understood ( Three main systems for the elution of gold thiosulfate from anion exchange resins have been previously proposed: thiocyanate, polythionates, and nitrate ( Thiocyanate elution is costly and also requires a complex regeneration procedure to recover the thiocyanate and recycle it. Concentrated trithionate solutions used in the polythionate elution system are unstable as they undergo hydrolysis, leading to loss of trithionate. Regeneration is required following trithionate elution, since the barren resin is completely loaded with trithionate, and its addition back to the adsorption circuit will reduce the gold loading. For the nitrate elution, the resin is returned to the adsorption circuit loaded with nitrate, leading to the accumulation of nitrate in the process water. This may ultimately impact on gold adsorption. Other systems have also been proposed, including halides (such as chloride) and sulfite as eluants ( Each of these systems also requires a concentrated solution to effectively elute the gold as the gold thiosulfate complex has a strong affinity for the resin and requires a strong anion for effective exchange. Thus, research has focused on developing an elution technology based on the concept of synergistic ion exchange and is similar to the approach taken during the development of the so-called synergistic solvent extraction system for nickel/cobalt ( It has been reported previously ( The investigation also found that Au(S A Waters 2695 HPLC separation module was used for the analysis of all samples, with the separation being effected using a Dionex IonPac AS16 ion exchange column with 125 For the equilibrium loading experiments, 0.5 For the initial elution experiments, 5 For the copper pre-elution testwork, 6 The electrochemistry was conducted using a rotating disc electrode (RDE), and a rotation rate of 300 The loading of resin was conducted using a continuous mini-rig with seven stages of adsorption. Each adsorption stage contained 500 This paper describes a number of individual research activities aimed at developing a new resin elution technology for the recovery of gold thiosulfate from leach solutions. The adsorption and elution of gold thiosulfate from strong base resins is an ion exchange mechanism, where there exists an equilibrium between the gold thiosulfate complex and a counter anion. It is known that trithionate competes strongly with adsorption of gold thiosulfate ( Therefore a plot of log Preliminary batch elution experiments were conducted using sodium sulfite solutions, and it was found that only a small proportion of the gold was stripped from the resin, despite the significantly reduced affinity of the gold for resin in the presence of sulfite. This indicated that the sulfite ion only weakly competes with gold as a counter anion. Therefore mixed elution systems were investigated, which consisted of sulfite to convert the gold thiosulfate to the mixed thiosulfate–sulfite complex, and a stronger counter anion to affect ion exchange with the gold complex. Batch elution studies for these systems proved very successful, and therefore column studies were undertaken, as outlined below.  As mentioned in the introduction, the use of mixed polythionate eluants ( Both Sodium chloride has not been adopted as an eluant for gold thiosulfate as the chloride ion has only a weak affinity for strong base resin, which is why the anion exchange resins still adsorb gold in saline solutions. Despite this, chloride solutions alone have been patented for the elution process ( Another important advantage of the sulfite enhanced elution is in the reactions of sulfite with higher polythionates, such as tetrathionate, pentathionate and hexathionate. These species adsorb very strongly on the resin, and hence the adsorption process is benefited (particularly at the tail end of the circuit) by the removal of these species during elution. When sulfite is present, the higher polythionates adsorbed on the resin are converted to thiosulfate (in solution) and trithionate (on the resin). For example for tetrathionate: Testwork has shown that these reactions are very rapid and that the eluted resin does not contain any higher polythionates when the eluant solution contains sufficient sulfite. Copper(II) is commonly used as the oxidant during gold leaching using the thiosulfate system and thus some copper thiosulfate will be present in the leaching circuit. Copper thiosulfate is known to also load onto anion exchange resins ( Oxygenated ammonia solutions have been investigated previously as a means of pre-eluting copper ( Attempts were made to increase the oxygen availability in the column by connecting a pure oxygen gas line at the base of the column, and feeding together with a solution containing ammonia and ammonium sulfate. This led to a significant improvement in pre-elution efficiency ( It has been previously observed that ammonium thiosulfate is very poor at eluting gold thiosulfate from strong base resins ( It has been observed in the past that the formation of gold sulfide can occur during the reduction of gold thiosulfate. However, in the presence of sulfite, the chemistry of the gold thiosulfate complex is changed ( Deposition experiments were carried out at constant current for 1 A small scale electrowinning cell was used to further investigate the recovery of gold from eluate solutions. The cell had two carbon rod anodes, and one stainless steel wool cathode. The solution was circulated through the cell and deposition carried out at constant current, with the gold concentration measured as a function of time. As shown in Following on from the development of each stage of the process, the elution of gold together with gold electrowinning and recycling of the eluate was coupled with the recycling of eluted resin to a continuous adsorption circuit. To provide the makeup requirements for sulfite in each cycle; To provide a feed stream of high sulfite and no gold or thiosulfate at the conclusion of the elution in order to produce a low gold barren resin; and To remove some chloride from the barren resin, so to reduce the build up of chloride in the water circuit. The sulfite on the barren resin is also beneficial, as it will convert any higher polythionates in the last adsorption tank to trithionate and thiosulfate, hence improving the adsorption of gold prior to the leach solution entering the tailing dam. The performance of this flowsheet was initially verified by conducting a number of multiple cycle batch loading experiments coupled to: Repeated loading and elution of recycled resin using fresh eluant, Electrowinning and recycle of eluate using fresh resin, and, Closed loop elution with recycling of resin and eluate. The performance of the new chloride The continuous adsorption, elution and electrowinning trial was run for 22 The steady state profiles for gold in solution are shown in The profiles for trithionate and tetrathionate are shown in The loading of gold, copper, and polythionates on the resin was determined by stripping a small quantity (0.5  A new sulfite enhanced chloride elution technology has been developed for the recovery of gold thiosulfate from resins. The addition of sulfite to a base eluant is effective in improving the elution efficiency of gold through synergistic ion exchange. It has been demonstrated that in the presence of sulfite containing eluant, the gold has a reduced affinity for the strong anion exchange resins and thus is more readily eluted; a potential explanation for this phenomenon is the formation of the Au(S The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the