In fundamental flotation studies often the contact angle with water is used to describe wettability of a mineral surface and it is correlated with flotability. A more fundamental parameter however is the specific surface free energy related to the contact angle via Young’s equation. Inverse gas chromatography (iGC) has recently been proven to be a suitable method to determine specific surface free energy components and their distributions of particulate surfaces. In this study the pure minerals quartz (SiO2), fluoro-apatite (Ca5[F,(PO4)3]), and magnetite (Fe3O4) are examined for flotabilities and surface energy component distributions considering different methods of sample treatment and the effect of the collectors sodium oleate and dodecyl ammonium acetate. The parameter of specific net free energy of interaction between bubbles and particles immersed in water ΔG
                     pwb resulting from the complex surface energy analyses is introduced and used to evaluate the hydrophobicity of the mineral surface in correlation to microflotation recoveries. The results lead to the hypothesis that only small fractions of the surface and their change of wettability by flotation reagent adsorption will inherently define the flotability of minerals. Consequently, the main purpose of the amphiphilic collector molecules seems to be the reduction of high specific surface free energies of small fractions of the surface that lead to a strong attraction between particle surface sites and water molecules rather than the hydrophobization of the entire mineral surface, a new paradigm in flotation science.Flotation is a well-established and widely used separation process in minerals engineering and recycling. Nevertheless, scientifically, the complex synergistic and antagonistic micro processes are underlying ongoing research and controverse discussions The total specific surface free energies of the interfaces (solid (s) or liquid (l) in gas) in a three phase contact To thermodynamically evaluate whether the particle-bubble contact in water (pwb) is favorable, the specific free energy of interaction Δ The more negative Δ Consequently, there should not be a search for the relation of flotation response (recovery of hydrophobic particles) based on the parameter of contact angle with water but rather the net energy of interaction between a bubble and a particle immersed in water taking the specific surface free energy components into account. The iGC method not only allows for determining the specific surface free energy components of the entire powder surface but can also determine the heterogeneity of surface energies by detecting the specific surface free energy over the fraction of particle surface coverage One draw back of iGC for flotation studies is that the measurement takes place on dried powders but flotation is characterized by particle bubble interactions in a pulp. Therefore we investigated how the preparation of the mineral particles, after collector conditioning to achieve a dry powder, influences both the flotation response after resuspending and the specific surface free energy results of iGC. We tested washing the collector covered minerals with water only and with water and subsequent acetone before drying in an oven at 50 The direct comparison of iGC results and flotation has so far only been reported by the McGill group of Kristian Waters by Ali As a result of this study of surface free energy components distributions we present the hypothesis that the collector molecules’ main purpose is to reduce the small area fractions of high energy surface sites of naturally hydrophilic mineral particles which lead to a strong particle-water attraction. Intriguingly, only a small fraction of the naturally heterogeneous surface of mineral particles is relevant for a particle to attach or not attach to a bubble and thus be flotable or not. This is similar to the discussions by Ho et al. in The minerals used are pure large crystalline samples of fluoro apatite and magnetite from Minas Gerais, Brazil and quartz from Madagascar. They were crushed using a lab jaw crusher (Fritzsch, Germany), milled in a continuous screen outlet lab ball mill with a 500 mm sieve (FIA, Germany) and lab sieved to achieve a fraction between 71 To investigate the effect of the fine adhering particles we prepared additional samples of all particles after ultrasonication (US) of water based suspensions in a bath and subsequent filtration and drying before conditioning, microflotation and iGC. The following We used sodium oleate (NaOl) from Fluka as received. The water is in any case demineralized tap water with 10 For the flotation recovery studies a single gas capillary Hallimond tube is used with a volume of 110 These samples are the pure minerals used for Conditioning of the samples in 5 One part of the conditioned particles in II is filtered and washed on the filter with 110 Another part of the particles of II is washed with water as in III and then furthermore washed with 110 For studying the effect on sodium oleate conditioning concentration with the finer apatite APA* the particles were water washed only as in procedure III. The samples of the preparation steps (above) I, III and IV are investigated as dry powders using inverse gas chromatography. The measurement device is the surface energy analyzer SEA of the company Surface Measurement Systems for determination of the disperse and Lewis acid/base components of the specific surface free energy The principle of determination of the specific surface free energy components using the Schultz method The basic measured parameter in iGC is the net retention time of the gas molecules which is used to calculate the retention volume For the calculations in Eq. The microflotation results for the samples prepared are presented for apatite and both collectors in It can be seen that the pure (collectorless) apatite has a relative high recovery of about 10% which is most probably due to entrainment of the fine particles enriched in the apatite fraction more prominently than for the other two minerals with 10% quantile particle of only 24 For the chemisorbing combination of NaOl on magnetite ( The microflotation results of the second campaign of apatite APA* with varying sodium oleate concentration in the conditioning step and with the water wash only procedure (III in One can see a clear dependency with higher recovery and thus better flotability, thus higher hydrophobictiy, for a higher sodium oleate conditioning concentration. Surely there is a lack of experimental data for the residual NaOl concentration on the particle surface after the conditioning and water washing procedure. Nevertheless, the microflotation recovery shows an indirect expected effect that can be checked with the specific surface free energy components distribution as measured with iGC and the particle bubble interaction parameter as seen in the next paragraphs. The heterogeneity of the three specific surface free energy components of all the samples of the three minerals with their respective collectors are summarized in the nine graphs in For small surface coverages higher energies are detectable especially for the pure samples and stronger for apatite and magnetite than quartz which is due to the occurrence of high energy surface sites due to the finest particles attaching. The average surface energy of all surface sites as a limit value of the declining functions seems to be reached at 10% surface coverage already looking at the apatite sample and the disperse component. The limit values of the disperse component often used to describe the surface energy is lowest for apatite and highest for quartz, so the natural hydrophilicity of quartz is expected to be highest and for apatite lowest. This might additionally explain the rather high flotation recovery for apatite without collector. The effect the collectors have for apatite and magnetite is most significant at low surface coverages for the disperse component of interactions. Consequently, the collectors tend to adsorb primarily on a small fraction of the particle surface on high energy sites reducing the high energy and thus reducing the hydrophilicity of those sites. A clear tendency for the effect of the collector action on the Lewis base components is not to be seen, however as reported in the literature For all three surface energy components a decrease for all iGC probe molecule surface coverages is noticeable with increasing sodium oleate conditioning concentration and thus increasing floatabilities. As for the results above the decrease is more pronounced for smaller surface coverages, i.e. for small area fractions of higher surface energy sites. This systematic evolvement leads to the conclusion that the collectors are mostly responsible for the reduction of high energy surface sites and thus a more energetically homogeneous surface. It is this effect that prominently leads to an improved flotability. In the next paragraph the flotability is correlated with the thermodynamic quantity presented in Eq. As mentioned in the introduction, the flotation response, i.e. the recovery of particles, should be put in context to a fundamental parameter to account for hydrophobicity other than some contact angle with water. This paper introduces in this context the free energy of interaction Δ The following three graphs in For apatite APA and both collectors the assumed relation of increasing flotation recovery with increasing absolute (negative) energy of interaction holds true for the small surface coverages The results clearly approve and emphasize the well working concept of correlating the specific surface free energy component results (as with iGC) with flotation using the concept of the free energy of interaction Δ The data of Holysz et al. from The novel findings of this study can be summarized as follows: Through inverse Gas Chromatography iGC it is possible to assess the distribution of the specific surface free energy components of particulate solid surfaces, i.e. disperse, Lewis base and Lewis acid, respectively. The specific surface free energy components can be used to calculate the free energy of interaction between a particle and a bubble in water as a measure of hydrophobicity which is due to the distributed character a function of fractional surface area (iGC probe molecule fractional surface coverage). The measure of hydrophobicity is an important factor in the flotation process and an important part of the flotability characteristic of a particle, i.e. the separation parameter in flotation (amongst size and shape). In order to perform iGC analyses the solid particle phase needs to be dry, contrary to flotation separation which is occurring in the pulp phase. We presented the impact of sample preparation necessary for dry iGC measurements on the flotability by means of resuspending particles in microflotation studies. We showed that both physi- and chemisorbing ionic collectors dodecyl ammonium acetate and sodium oleate, respectively, on the salt type mineral apatite, the oxidic mineral magnetite and the silicate mineral quartz remain on the surface after the washing procedures as shown by higher recoveries than without collectors involved. We showed that it is more logical to compare the results of iGC with the resuspended flotation recoveries of the dried particles. The energy of interaction between a particle and a gas bubble in water using all specific surface free energy components of the three interacting phases is best to describe the particle hydrophobicity as the fundamental value of flotation to be correlated to the flotation recovery. The iGC method presented cannot account for potentially flotation determining effects occurring in the suspended state of particles, e.g. through double layer interactions Thus this study brings up the following conclusions, which are graphically summarized as a Gedankenexperiment in The collector mainly causes the reduction of the high specific surface free energies of only a small fraction of the particle surfaces, most probably the edges and surface morphological heterogeneities. Consequently, the heterogeneities of the surface free energies are reduced by the adsorbed collector. Even though the overall highest recoveries are achieved in this study with the chemisorbing collectors the relation of flotation recovery and free energy of interaction is shown for the small surface coverages for both cases. It is now important to gather more data and understand the impact of surface heterogeneity in terms of specific surface free energies for hydrophobization of mineral particles for flotation studies. This can only be achieved by continued investigations using inverse gas chromatography. Furthermore there is the task to develop flotation process models including the fundamental interaction parameters of wettability presented, instead of the contact angle Finally, this could also explain latest findings on the effect of the particle morphology on flotation of sand blasted quartz particles and the observed enhanced flotation for rougher surfaces Thanks to Prof. Dr.-Ing. Urs A. Peuker and his colleagues at the Institute of Mechanical Process Engineering and Mineral Processing of TU Bergakademie Freiberg for supporting the Helmholtz-Institute Freiberg (HIF) by shared facilities and equipment, Mrs. Kästner and Mrs. Teichmann of Urs Peuker’s lab for granulometric measurements. Thanks as well to Denise Kaden formerly at HIF for sample preparation (crushing, milling, sieving) and Klaus Meier of HIF for performing iGC experiments.