The precipitation of magnesium carbonate by the reaction of MgCl2 with Na2CO3, under the influence of polyacrylamide (PAM) was studied. Factors that affect the precipitation of magnesium carbonate, such as PAM concentration, reaction temperature, and stirring speed, were investigated comprehensively. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) methods were used to characterize the carbonate precipitate products. PAM concentration, reaction temperature, and stirring speed have significant effects on the morphology of the carbonate products. The product weight increases slightly with the increase in the amount of PAM added, but decreases slightly with the increase in the reaction temperature, and is almost irrelevant to the stirring speed. The products obtained at 25 and 50°C were all identified as nesquehonite, MgCO3·3H2O. At 75°C an unidentified amorphous product forms. The use of an additive is found to be an effective method to adjust the morphology of magnesium carbonate. The information gained in this study would be helpful for the preparation of magnesium carbonate or other magnesium compounds with specific morphology.Controlling the morphology and size of materials is of significance in the area of material engineering Synthetic water-soluble polyacrylamide (PAM) has a variety of applications, such as water treatment, mineral processing, soil erosion control, and oil recovery Magnesium carbonate salts include magnesite (MgCO Although there have been some reports on the preparation of magnesium carbonates and related compounds MgCl Distilled water was used to prepare aqueous solutions of 1.0 X-ray powder diffraction analyses of the samples were performed on an X' Pert Pro diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation, operating at 40 The effect of PAM concentration on the morphology of the precipitation products is shown in The XRD patterns of the products in During calcium carbonate crystallization, many additives can affect the product morphology In this study, in the reaction systems, PAM can present hydrogen bonding, electrostatic, hydrophobic, ion-dipole, and coordination interactions  In order to give more evidence, TG curves of the magnesium carbonate prepared with and without the addition of PAM (0.6 Based on the above results, in the magnesium carbonate product prepared with the addition of PAM, there would be no or very small amount of PAM. PAM is a basic substance with a formula of [–CH Reaction temperature influences the nucleation and growth rate of magnesium carbonate and therefore the morphology of the products. The effect of reaction temperature on the morphology of the products is shown in Our results demonstrate that the reaction temperature can affect both the morphology and composition of the products. Similar results were observed during the precipitation of nesquehonite, MgCO Based on our experimental results and the reported results During the reaction, there is a competition between CO The morphologies of the products prepared at different stirring speeds are shown in Magnesium carbonate precipitation by the reaction of MgCl ZW acknowledges the financial support by the foundation of