The titanium type lithium ion sieve (Ti-LIS) is usually considered as a promising lithium ion sieve (LIS) by the virtue of its superiorities in both stable structure and high adsorption capacity. Acidification process is a significant and necessary step for LIS application in the lithium adsorption from brine, which has raised two problems including partly dissolution of the Ti-LIS structure and the low lithium ions enrichment in elution solutions. Many reported works about the Ti-LIS focused on reducing the amount of loss of Ti-LIS but ignored the lithium ions enrichment in elution solutions. In this manuscript, an effective strategy that employing a proper weak polyprotic acid to replace the most widely eluting medium of hydrochloric acid was proposed, and the citric acid was selected on the basis of its superior properties containing low damage to the structure of Ti-LIS (titanium loss ≤0.05%) and high lithium ions concentration enrichment (4.06 g L−1) with 0.2 mol L−1 in elution solutions. Meanwhile, the adsorption performance of Ti-LIS treated with citric acid was also investigated by batch experiments, and the results revealed the adsorptive ability of the Ti-LIS could reach up to 52 mg g−1 in LiOH solutions (1.8 g L−1 Li, pH 12). Furthermore, the competitive absorbing and recycling results demonstrated that the Ti-LIS treated with citric acid still has a remarkable selectivity to Li+ and stable adsorptive function. Consequently, it elucidated that the citric acid was an effective eluting medium in the application of LIS.Lithium is one of the most important energy resources due to its wide application in diverse fields, including pharmaceuticals, ceramics and electric vehicles. The yield of lithium gradually cannot keep the pace with the growth of marked demands, especially considering the rapid development of the lithium battery in recent years ( The conventional process steps of the LIS adsorption method are as follows. First the precursor of LIS is synthesized by disparate methods with different raw materials. Secondly, the LIS can be obtained after having being treated with acid and then filtrated. Finally, LIS are put into lithium-containing solution to adsorb lithium and then the lithium was extracted by acidification. The detail flowsheet of the above mentioned steps was shown in Fig. S1. During the procedure of LIS application in lithium ions adsorption, acidification is an indispensable step to prepare the LIS and recovery lithium after adsorption and recycling the adsorbents ( In addition, the lithium ions enrichment in elution solutions is also a significant factor for the LIS application because the yield of the final product Li To find an effective eluting medium to replace HCl, the precursor of Li The raw materials employed in this research work were analytical grade without further purification. The precursor of Li The properties of the acidification process and lithium ions adsorption were investigated by a series of experiments in this study. The constant mass of 0.4 g of Li To determine the Ti content of the LIS, 100 mg of the LIS powders were placed in beakers containing 60 mL of 5 mol L A constant mass of C-Ti-LIS was added into 80 mL LiOH solution (1.8 g L The following equation was used to determine the acid-extracted quantities ratio ( Where During the procedure of adsorption, the filtered was diluted and then analyzed for residual Li Where To determine the selective adsorption ability of lithium compared with other ions, the distribution coefficient ( Where X-ray diffraction analysis was performed at a scanning angles ranging from 10-75 Based on the previous study works ( The lithium ion sieve (LIS) could be obtained from the precursor after acidification process ( In general, the weak polyprotic acids could be divided into two kinds, organic acids and inorganic acids. The common organic weak polyprotic acids include carbonic acid (H The precursor of Li The eluting medium of 0.2 mol L  To investigate the recycling performance of 0.2 mol L Based on the results as mentioned above, the eluting medium CA was selected to contrast with the most common eluting medium HCl to finalize one optimal eluting medium from them. The concentrations of both acids were kept constant (0.2 mol L  To determine the function of lithium enrichment of HCl and CA, various amount of the precursor of Li The lithium enriched solution was applied to uptake the final product lithium carbonate (Li Furthermore, the pH of the elution solution acidification by CA and HCl with different amount of precursor addition was also be investigated and the results showed in However, the lithium extraction would decrease with the pH increased gradually, Fig. S4 showed the influences of the pH to the lithium extraction. It could be found that the lithium extraction from the precursor was ≥92% when the pH of elution solution ≤4, then the lithium extraction decreased drastically with the pH increased continually. In addition, the LIS would have a good adsorption to lithium ions in high pH solutions based on previous works ( The CA was known as one kind of ternary weak acid and the hydrogen ion was ionization gradual showed as following equations, while the HCl was ionization by only one step. Consequently, the CA could ionize more hydrogen ions than that of HCl at the same concentration with the elution process going. The initial pH (0.66) of 0.2 mol L The Ti-LIS particles obtained after CA pickling were added into the LiOH solution (1.8 g L The influence of the lithium ions concentration on the adsorption procedure of Ti-LIS with CA (C-Ti-LIS) elution was examined and the results showed as The adsorptive performance of the C-Ti-LIS from the adjusted brine was investigated to determine the adsorption selectivity in different ions, including Li The adsorptive ability, distribution coefficient ( The stable adsorptive ability of the Ti-LIS is a significant factor to estimate if CA is a good eluting medium for the Ti-LIS, which could be determined by the performance in recycling adsorption experiments. The adsorptive capacity of the Ti-LIS in every adsorption cycle was measured and the results showed in In this study, the strategy that using a proper weak polyprotic acid to replace the most widely eluting medium HCl was proposed to solve the problem of part dissolution of Ti-LIS and the low lithium ions enrichment in elution solutions. Then the CA was selected from the competition among different kinds of weak polyprotic acids after a series of experiments. The CA has a better performance on both the damage to the structure of the Ti-LIS and the lithium ions enrichment after acidification than that of HCl. The titanium loss of Ti-LIS could be decreased to 0.05% and the lithium ions concentration in elution solutions could be improved up to 4.06 g L This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at