This study was conducted as part of the development of a novel process for copper recovery from chalcopyrite by chloride leaching, simultaneous cuprous oxidation and cupric solvent extraction to transfer copper to a conventional sulfate electrowinning circuit, and hematite precipitation to reject iron. Copper solvent extraction from chloride solution has been studied using four LIX® extractants (LIX84-I, LIX612N-LV, XI-04003 and LIX984N) from BASF with respect to copper extraction as a function of pH and A/O ratio, and behavior of the impurities. At a pH below 0.5, the copper extraction increased quickly with increasing pH while at a pH above 0.5, it increased only slightly with pH. The copper extraction in organic solution was virtually not affected by the impurities. The iron extraction in organic solution increased with decreasing A/O ratio from 2:1 to 1:8 as the copper extraction decreased. Conversely, the Cu/Fe ratio in organic solution increased as copper extraction increased. The extractions of silver and lead were 1mg/L or lower under all conditions tested. The other impurities (Zn, Ni, Cd, Cr, Hg, As and Sb) were virtually not loaded into the organic solution. The optimum copper solvent extraction conditions in chloride solution were proposed.Ferric and/or cupric chloride leaching processes have been extensively studied to treat sulfide concentrates of copper, lead, and zinc ( This process was first proposed by In this work, four LIX® extractants (LIX84-I, LIX612N-LV, XI-04003 and LIX984N) recommended by BASF (Cognis) have been studied since these extractants have a high copper loading capacity and high selectivity of copper over iron. The objective of this study is to develop the equilibrium data for copper solvent extraction from chloride solution for the selection of optimum solvent extraction operating conditions The tests for extraction isotherms were conducted in a 250-mL glass reactor with three baffles and a well at its base to allow collection and pH measurement of aqueous solution ( The A/O ratio was set at 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:4 and 1:8 for investigating extraction isotherms. The procedures for generating an extraction isotherm are as follows: Aqueous solution and organic solution are transferred to the reactor. The aqueous and organic phases are vigorously mixed and the pH is controlled by addition of NaOH. The pH is first adjusted close to a target value using 50% NaOH and then it is finely tuned to the target value using 10% NaOH. When the reaction reaches the equilibrium, the stirring is stopped. After the two phases are separated, the mixed solution is transferred to a separatory funnel. The separated aqueous solution is filtered using Whatman No. 42 filtration paper to remove entrained organic solution. The separated organic solution is centrifuged to remove trapped minor aqueous solution. Loaded organic solution is stripped three times using 6 The organic solutions were prepared on a volume basis (40% extractant and 60% Phillips 66 kerosene). The aqueous feed solution for extraction isotherms was prepared using deionized water, reagent grade cupric, calcium and ferric chlorides. The impurities (Zn, Ni, Pb, Cd, Cr, Ag, Hg, Sb) were added as their chlorides while As was added as sodium arsenite. The concentrations of Cu and Fe were analyzed using atomic adsorption. The other elements were analyzed using ICP. The free acid titration was conducted with oxalate masking. 2 In the cuprous oxidation–cupric solvent extraction system (CuCl/CuCl Not only is Cu(I) oxidized but also some Fe(II) is oxidized. It is difficult to accurately predict the concentrations of Cu(II) and Fe(III) under the conditions studied without very reliable equilibrium constants and activity coefficients of Cu(II)/Cu(I) and Fe(III)/Fe(II) chloride species. The extraction of Fe(III) into the organic phase can affect the copper extraction especially at a high pH. Therefore it is very difficult to develop copper extraction isotherms as a function of pH and Cu concentration (A/O ratio). By careful selection of initial CuCl Copper extraction in organic solution is dependent on aqueous solution pH. The accurate measurement of aqueous solution pH is important to develop extraction isotherms. When aqueous solution contains a significant amount of copper and calcium chlorides, the activity coefficient of hydrogen ion is significantly changed and the pH measurement is affected. To control the aqueous solution pH, the copper solvent extraction was conducted by addition of NaOH solution into copper chloride solution. The extraction reaction is expressed as: With increasing copper extraction, the CuCl The pH values measured at 40 The concentrations of CuCl As NaOH solution was added and copper was extracted, the aqueous solution was diluted due to addition of the solution and water formed by Reaction Four LIX extractants (LIX84-I, LIX612N-LV, XI-04003 and LIX984N) from BASF were tested. LIX 84-I is based on ketoxime. LIX 984 At pH − At a pH above 0.5, the copper extraction increased slowly with increasing pH. At a pH above 0.9, iron oxide or hydroxide began to precipitate from the solution with 20 The behavior of impurities is important to know. Fe, Zn, Ni, Pb, Ni, Cd, Cr, Hg, Ag, As and Sb were added as impurities. The feed solution composition is summarized in There is a virtually linear relationship between pH and free acid concentration (0.005–0.08 At a pH below 0.5, the copper extraction increased quickly with increasing pH while at a pH above 0.5, it only increased slowly with increasing pH. At an aqueous copper concentration below 10 The copper extraction in organic solution was virtually not affected by impurities except for Fe(III). The iron extraction in the organic solution increased with decreasing copper extraction. The Cu/Fe ratio in the organic solution increased with increasing copper extraction as iron extraction decreased. The selectivity of copper over iron is related not only to the extractant own properties, but also to the pH and copper extraction in organic solution. The extractions of silver and lead were 1 The recommended operating conditions are as follows: (1) pH should be controlled around 0.5 to maintain a high copper extraction and a low iron extraction, and prevent the precipitation of ferric hydroxide at a higher pH; and (2) copper extraction should be close to its full loading capacity to suppress iron extraction and maintain a high Cu/Fe ratio in organic solution. The authors would like to thank