Mixtures of spodumene + Na2SO4 with a mass ratio of 1:0.5 were prepared and milled using either zirconia or metallic media in a planetary ball mill for 5 h. The milled samples were heated in a furnace at temperatures ranging from 800 °C to 1000 °C for one hour under an air atmosphere. X-ray diffraction (XRD) results showed the traces of new phases such as LiNaSO4 and β-spodumene in the produced calcine after isothermal roasting. Increasing temperature resulted in increasing formation of LiNaSO4 and the XRD results were consistent with a thermodynamic assessment of the spodumene-Na2SO4 mixture. The results showed that changing the milling media did not have a significant role in formation of phase(s) during isothermal heating regime. The XRD results revealed that LiNaSO4 was the major phase after heating a 5 h milled mixture of spodumene-Na2SO4 in both metallic and zirconia media at 1000 °C. There were signs of β-spodumene observed in the sample heated at 800 °C however the peaks of this phase were overlapped with LiNaSO4 phase. The dissolution of lithium during leaching in water reached ~92% for the 5 h milled samples after heating at 1000 °C irrespective of milling media used.Among lithium minerals in nature, spodumene is the best known and most abundant and hence it has been the subject of the most studies concerning the extraction of lithium from concentrates. Spodumene, LiAlSi Spodumene has three crystalline modifications, α-spodumene which is the only naturally-occurring structure, β-spodumene which is formed when α-spodumene is heated at >850 °C, and γ-spodumene which is a metastable phase ( The α-spodumene phase is refractory to most chemical regents other than fluorides but can react with some chemical regents such as sulfuric acid, sodium hydroxide or sodium carbonate at high pressure and/or temperature ( Whilst many processes for recovery of lithium from α-spodumene have been proposed only one is commercially operated at present ( Numerous previous reports have shown that the extraction of metals from minerals/concentrate is typically improved due to mechanical activation/mechanical milling of starting materials using high energy ball milling. Mechanical activation is an important pre-treatment method which can affect the leachability of solid phase ( Due to the energetic cost of the α-β phase transition in spodumene, sulfation roasting of α-spodumene with sodium sulfate (Na In the absence of any publications, the influence of mechanical activation on the phase development during calcination of spodumene-Na The starting materials were α-spodumene concentrate (~%2.63Li) and high purity (>99.5%) sodium sulfate (Na Mixtures of spodumene concentrate and sodium sulfate (Na Preliminary experiments indicated that there was no discernible reaction occurring during 1 h of isothermal heating below 800 °C, confirming an earlier result ( To understand phase changes/formation in spodumene-Na On the basis of The XRD trace for the spodumene concentrate shown in  The XRD patterns of the spodumene-Na The milled mixtures were heated in air for 1 h at 800 °C, 900 °C and 1000 °C, preliminary runs indicated that lower temperatures resulted in little, if any reaction. The XRD traces for the products are shown in The peaks of the reactants, spodumene and Na After heating at 1000 °C for one hour it was noted that the colour of the calcine was darkish brown for metallic media and brown for calcine from zirconia media. These were somewhat different to the red brown colour of the other samples. It seems that the iron contamination after 5 h milling in metallic media may have had a significant effect on the colour and appearance of the calcines. The hardness of quartz and spodumene combined with the softer stainless steel would be expected to lead to higher abrasion of the stainless media than the harder zirconia media. Furthermore, heating at 1000 °C resulted in the calcines somewhat adhering to the walls and base of the ceramic crucible, something not evident during the runs at lower temperature. Clearly there is one, or more, reaction products at 1000 °C which were molten and had a sufficiently low surface tension to wet the alumina of the crucible. The melting point of Na The XRD results of A previous work showed that traces of mixed cation sulfate phases such as LiKSO The XRD results in It is reported that α to β phase transition in spodumene is sensitive to temperature ( The presence of β-spodumene (JCPSD 74-1106) traces in the XRD patterns of This is commensurate with the β-spodumene peak at 2θ ~ 29.7° being present at 800 °C, the traces in The XRD patterns in The extraction of lithium during water leaching of the calcines is shown in The XRD patterns of calcines produced at 1000 °C for both zirconia and metallic media and the dried leach residues of these calcines are shown in Phase changes were studied after heating 5 h milled mixtures of spodumene-Na The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research work was undertaken at Edith Cowan University (ECU) as part of a larger research project entitled ‘Lithium Ore Processing’ during Dr. Setoudeh's sabbatical leave from Yasouj University. The authors thank Yasouj University for granting sabbatical leave to Dr. Setoudeh and the School of Engineering at Edith Cowan University for hosting Dr. Setoudeh. Financial support for the project was provided by the