The surface deformation prediction system (SDPS) program has been developed as an engineering tool for the calculation of subsidence deformation indices through the implementation of various prediction methods. From basic user-defined input parameters, SDPS can determine subsidence indices, such as mining induced displacements, strains, tilt, etc., at any elevation between the seam and the horizontal or varying surface topography. A fundamental parameter in obtaining reliable ground deformation results is the determination of the edge effect offset. The value assigned to the edge effect offset corresponds to a virtual offsetting of boundary lines delineating the extracted panel to allow for roof cantilevering over the mined-out area. The objective of this paper is to describe the methods implemented in updating the edge effect offset algorithm within SDPS. Using proven geometric equations, the newly developed algorithm provides a more robust calculation of the offset boundary of the extracted panel for simplistic as well as more complex mining geometries. Given that an extracted panel is represented by a closed polyline, the new edge offset algorithm calculates a polyline offset into the extracted panel with respect to the user defined edge effect offset distance. Surface deformations are then calculated using this adjusted panel geometry. The Matlab program was utilized for development and testing of the new edge effect offset algorithm. After completing rigorous testing regimes, the new offset algorithm will be integrated into SDPS further increasing the speed and reliability of the program resulting in a retrospective increase in capability and flexibility.High-recovery underground coal mining methods, such as longwall mining, room-and-pillar mining with secondary extraction, longwall top-coal caving, etc., have the potential to initiate deformations within the surrounding rock strata often referred to as subsidence. As mining operations continue to develop within the reserve, mining induced movements within the strata propagate from the seam through the overburden to the surface Due to the potential impact to subsurface and surface structures and resources, the ability to accurately predict the potential and magnitude of mining induced subsidence is a complicated process. The prediction of subsidence indices such as vertical and horizontal displacements, tilt, strain, etc., is crucial during mine planning and reserves development as subsidence and mitigation plans is required by state and federal regulatory agencies to ensure the integrity of surface and subsurface structures and resources. Due to the complex nature and number of input parameters utilized in subsidence prediction, such as seam depth and inclination, surface topography, geological faults, etc., mine operators and planning engineers have been provided with a variety of modeling tools and software packages are available for the evaluation of mining induced subsidence and mitigation design plans for all stages of mining production The objective of this paper is to develop a self-sufficient algorithm that will be able to estimate the edge effect offset for a given mine plan and to provide a consistent offsetting calculation for users in contrast to the variety of offsetting methodologies present in third party programs. Through the application of a Gaussian bell-shaped influence function, SDPS is able to calculate strata deformations at any point in the three-dimensional space and, therefore, at any point along the surface and at any elevation between the seam and the surface. The influence function as implemented in SDPS for rectangular extraction areas is shown for a two-dimensional case with a unit thickness in Eq. Eq. In order to provide a more accurate means of predicting mining induced deformations, Eq. Upon determining the edge effect offset distance, the boundary of a given excavated panel is adjusted with respect to the offset distance. As shown in By taking into consideration the edge offset distance ( In SDPS, an algorithm is used to determine the edge effect offset distance with respect to user-defined input parameters. While the algorithm implements accurate offset distances when analyzing generic rectangular mine plans, it often becomes a hindrance in the analysis of mine panels with highly complex geometries. For example, if the edge effect offset distance is large enough such that two ribs will overtake each other as they are translated then a negative area is created between the locations of the offset rib lines. These negative areas introduce inconsistencies in the calculation of ground deformations. Due to these inconsistencies caused by the current implementation of the edge effect offsetting algorithm in SDPS, users often resort to third party programs to offset the rib line with respect to an empirical or calibrated edge effect offset distance and must import this information back into the SDPS analysis. While this method provides suitable results, it creates discrepancies between design input parameters across SDPS users which can significantly change subsidence prediction results. As previously discussed, the edge effect offsetting algorithm within SDPS often becomes cumbersome when analyzing complex mine geometries, therefore a new algorithm has been developed to appropriately handle these situations. Offsetting algorithms is widely used within automated machining in order to determine the accessible area for a given tool radius and in mining engineering for bench design. While several other software packages implement line offsetting mechanisms similar to that of SDPS, the newly developed offsetting algorithm utilizes several accuracy checks to ensure that that the offset extraction boundary replicates underground site-specific conditions. To improve upon machining accuracies, Chen and McMains developed an offsetting algorithm which utilizes winding numbers to detect and remove negative areas A common issue across multiple offsetting algorithms is determining the location of the adjusted polygon when sharp points or corners are encountered ( In order to enhance the SDPS edge effect offset a new algorithm was developed in Matlab which improved upon offset accuracies and efficiencies with respect to defined polylines and the coordinate point of their vertices. The flowchart of the edge effect offset algorithm is shown in The algorithm assumes that the panel is defined as a closed polyline comprising several vertices. Upon specifying the desired edge effect offset distance the polyline defined by the user is broken into smaller line segments to increase the total number of vertices. By increasing the number of vertices, the algorithm increases its negative area detection accuracy. This is done by first identifying two line segments in series and determining their locations post-offsetting. Conditional statements are then used to identify if the two line segments create a negative area. If negative area is to be created by the offsetting procedure, then the vertex shared by the line segments is deleted and the algorithm selects another pair of line segments in series. Next, the algorithm looks to combine the remaining line segments in series into large polyline. While this step may seem insignificant, it allows for a great reduction on computational algorithm run time. The rest of the edge effect offset algorithm involves a large for-loop for the offsetting the defined line segments. Here, two line segments in series are chosen and the direction of offsetting is determined with respect to the inward edge normal (IEN) of the two previously selected line segments as shown in Next, the adjusted locations of the two line segments are determined by translating the edges a distance A while-loop is utilized for determining the legitimacy of the line segment offset with respect to the edge effect distance. If a given raw offset vertex fails any of the following tests then it is considered to be incorrect and the algorithm repeats the previously described steps using a new pair of line segments. To start, the distance between the raw offset vertex and all of the original vertices and edges are determined. If one or more of these distances is less than the user-defined edge effect offset distance For example, as shown in Given that a raw offset vertex has passed the three previous tests described, it is considered a final vertex on the final offset polygon. However, an additional test is performed such that sharp angle inaccuracies can be avoided as previously discussed in As shown in Multiple case studies were utilized in evaluating the accuracy and effectiveness of the new edge effect offset algorithm. These case studies analyzed panels with complex geometries similar to that shown in  Through the utilization of the edge effect offset one is able to better predict mining induced subsidence and evaluate potential damage to surface and subsurface structures and resources. The edge effect offsetting algorithm previously implemented in SDPS often became cumbersome during the analysis of mine panels with complex geometries. This often required users to seek third party alternatives and then import the results back into their SDPS analysis. To integrate all required calculation steps within SDPS, a new offsetting algorithm was designed within Matlab. This algorithm is able to detect locations where negative areas will be created and will delete appropriate vertices from the original polygon in order to modify the excavated boundary to an effective boundary line that can be used for subsidence calculations. Additionally the new algorithm detects the presence of sharp angles within the original polygon and is able to mimic an arcing effect as it develops the final offset polygon alleviating any false intrusions into the panel. As a result, the new edge effect offsetting algorithm is able to perform an inward offsetting routine for the accurate offsetting of the mine boundaries with minimal run time. Following beta testing within the SDPS software package, the new edge effect offsetting algorithm will be integrated into the influence function method within SDPS providing a self-sufficient and reliable tool for predicting subsidence. An update to the SPDS software is planned for Fall 2018.