Numerical simulations with the discrete element method (DEM) and corresponding experimental investigations were carried out to understand and to quantify the heat transfer in indirect heated rotating drums. Monodisperse glass spheres (diameter 2mm) were used and the bulk movement was kept within the rolling motion mode (rotational speed between 1 and 9rpm). The focus is on the heat transfer between the covered wall and the particles in contact with this wall, as well as between the particles on the free bed surface and the adjacent fluid. Radiative heat transfer has been neglected due to the low maximum temperature within the system (474K). Effective heat transfer coefficients for the heat fluxes mentioned were derived from the DEM simulations, considering the actual particle velocities on the free bed surface and on the wall.
                  The particle movement and the heat transfer resulting from the simulations show good agreement with the experiments in general and thus allow the calculation of the effective heat transfer coefficients for the range of parameters considered in the current study.Heating or cooling of particulates is an essential step in many industrial processes dealing with granular materials. Depending on the properties of the material or details of the process envisaged, different equipment is employed. Especially in the basic materials and minerals processing industry, where large and continuous throughputs of bulk material are common, rotary kilns are the device of choice. In these kilns heat transfer may be performed by direct heating as in cement kilns, exposing the product to a flame, or—for more sensitive materials—by indirect heating where the hot wall of the drum supplies the heat to the granular material. The heat transfer in rotary kilns strongly depends on the combined transport of mass and heat within the granular material. While the design parameters (diameter, length and inclination) roughly determine the residence time for a given throughput, the operational parameters (e.g. rotational speed, filling degree) in conjunction with the material properties (particle size, particle shape, dynamic angle of repose) control the three-dimensional movement of the solid material and thus influence residence times in different regions or contact times with heating surfaces. Due to its industrial relevance the heat transfer to the bulk material in rotating drums has already been investigated for a long time Note that it has already been shown in The test rig shown in The left part of the drum was heated by an electrical heating band on the outside of the steel drum and insulated against the other drum by a closed split wall made of fibre alumino-silicate-glass coated with silicone. The unheated drum provides space for the measurement instrumentation of the heated drum. On the inner wall of the heated drum a friction thermocouple was installed to measure the wall temperature and to control the power supply to the heating band. A slip ring at one end of the drum ensured energy supply of the rotating heating band. A measuring rod with eight thermocouples (5 The particle velocity (particle velocity on the free surface of the bed as well as the slip velocity between particles and drum wall) is recorded by a video camera which allows the determination of particle movement relative to the drum wall. Note that these measurements were undertaken within an acrylic glass drum lined with sandpaper to provide the same roughness as in the sandblasted steel drum. Same mechanical behaviour was verified by a comparison of the dynamic angle of repose in both drums. A small sandpaper-free gap (30 The Froude number used in the following to characterize the individual experiments is defined as the ratio of centrifugal force to gravitational force: The drum was driven by an electric motor with 1.5 Monodisperse glass spheres with d In a discrete, particle based description the movement of each single particle in the bulk is described by simultaneous integration of Newton's, Euler's and heat conduction equations in the individual particles while incorporating all mechanical and thermal interactions among the particles, the wall and the free surfaces Depending on the material pairing (particle–wall and particle–particle) the coefficients of friction, rolling and restitution have different values. The required coefficients for the two pairings were determined experimentally The coefficient of rolling friction was calculated from measured rolling speeds following the energy balance procedure of Kuchling In contrast to the experiments, where the drum had a fixed length of 350 For the current study the following heat transfer mechanisms have been considered: Thermal conduction within solid particle Thermal conduction through the contact surfaces of two particles Thermal conduction through the contact surfaces of a particle and a wall Thermal conduction through the fluid film near the contact surface of two particles and a particle and the drum wall Heat transfer by convection from a gas surrounding the packed bed to the bed Radiant heat transfer is neglected due to the low temperatures within the bed of max. 474 Modelling of contact heat transfer between the particles (and a wall and the particles) and conduction through the interstitial gas (mechanism 2) and 4)) are based on the approach described by Vargas and McCarthy The required thermal constriction resistance  For r The stagnant gas zone resistance (which is assumed to be stagnant) in the void around the particle contact area is obtained from For the computation of the temperature distribution within the particles the unidimensional heat conduction equation is solved numerically for each particle. This is based on a radial discretisation, thus implicitly assuming spherical symmetry and averaging the heat fluxes over the individual particle surface. Simultaneous integration of the heat conduction equation for all moving particles results in a temperature field information combining the effects of heat conduction on both particle and drum scale. Eq. The boundary condition on the free bed surface is defined by the convective heat exchange with the particles on the surface of the so called “active layer” Due to the partially open left side wall of the drum convection between drum and surroundings can occur. Therefore the fluid above the active layer has a lower temperature than the bulk in the drum. Thus the heat loss of the i'th particles on the free bed surface can be defined as: The heat transfer can either be calculated by combining DEM simulation with a CFD code which increases the computational effort significantly Since in the case of the experiment mixed convection (overlap of free and forced convection) can be expected the approach of Churchill The determination of the Nusselt number requires the knowledge of the Reynolds number Re and thus the relative velocity between particle and surrounding gas. In the current context the surrounding fluid is assumed to be stagnant and the gas velocity corresponds to the particle velocities as known from the DEM simulation. For an indirect heated rotary drum the heat transfer coefficient between the covered wall and the particles in contact with this wall is of great importance. With DEM simulations an effective heat transfer coefficient can be derived which reflects the influences like particle sizes, drum diameter or rotational speed. This heat transfer coefficient can be used later on in continuum models for drum layout. Because continuum models always assume a uniform temperature within the bulk all further definitions are based on a mean bulk temperature T For the definition of the effective heat transfer coefficient the following three heat fluxes in a rotary kiln (see Conductive heat flux wall-bulk Heat flux absorbed by the bulk Convective heat flux gas-bulk The conductive heat flux between the covered wall and the particles at this wall is calculated as follows: The heat flux absorbed by the bulk is defined as: The convective heat transfer is defined as follows: The resulting As a reference situation the heat transfer without any influence of the bed movement with a static bulk is included. Note that the temperatures of the wall and the air just above the particle layer (fluid temperature) were measured in the experiments and used as time-dependent boundary conditions for the DEM simulations. As a first general insight into the development of the three dominating heat fluxes (Eqs. As Eq. The total heat flux between the bed surface and the adjacent fluid consists of free convection and forced convection. The Nusselt number calculation for forced convection as presented in chapter 3 requires the particle velocity of each individual particle which is known from the DEM simulations.  Evaluating the frequency distributions of the particle velocity in the steady state regime (values in the time span from t In  It can clearly be seen that the drum wall is heating the bulk and how the temperature profile from the wall to the inner bulk develops. The higher the number of revolutions the higher the bulk core temperature, an indication that particle mixing is accelerating bulk heating. A comparison with experiments for the static bulk (u The wall is heated with 1.5 Note that the fluid inside the drum is heated faster initially by the hot drum wall than by the bulk surface. This is why the temperature T8-simulated (close to free bed surface) is initially higher than T5-simulated (further within the bed) which indicates that initially heat is transferred from the gas phase to the bulk. When time is progressing T8 becomes lower than T5 (see for example at 6000  During heating of the bulk the simulated temperatures are slightly higher than the temperatures measured in the experiments (T1, T8) but the deviations are small; maximum deviation 5.8%. The deviations may stem from the fact, that the thermocouples in the moving bulk cannot actually measure the particle temperatures but rather reflect some mean value of particle surface temperature and interstitial air temperature next to the thermocouple. Differing therefrom the values extracted from the DEM simulations are particle surface temperatures and thus expected to be higher. However, the correspondence between the DEM simulations and the experiments is very good. Note that the small deviation of measured and calculated temperatures in steady state (t To further highlight the importance of correct convective boundary conditions This also shows the importance of correct convective boundary conditions for a precise calculation of the heat fluxes and the resulting effective heat transfer coefficients wall-bulk within the drum. For a rotational speed of U In The temperature difference between bulk in rest and U Macroscopic models for the particle movement in drums commonly assume no slip conditions between the drum wall and the adjacent particle layer. This is a crucial assumption because macroscopic correlations (Eq.  The contact time will be smaller for no slip conditions compared to particle slip. Since time-dependent trajectories of all particles are available from the DEM simulations, all particles close to the wall can be identified and the velocity component tangential to the wall (slip) can be computed. The simulation result as a function of rotational speed is shown in The rotational frequency of the drum in the simulation with the smallest Froude number (Fr In As can be seen, there is a good agreement between the simulations and the experiments. The particle movement relative to the wall increases continuously with increasing the Froude number and the particle rotation (rolling) shows a high level from the beginning and increases only slightly, indicating that the particles at the wall are rolling along the wall. The slight increase of the particle rotation leads to the assumption that the particles are not rolling faster with increasing Froude number though they are slipping stronger. The mean relative slip differs between 45.5% at U These results demonstrate that the assumption of no slip conditions between drum wall and adjacent particle layer in macroscopic models (Eq. In the following the effective heat transfer coefficient between the covered wall and the moving bulk is determined, again for the experiments and the simulations. The results, covering a range of rotational speeds from U In As shown here, the influence of rotational frequency is much more pronounced on the effective heat transfer coefficient between covered wall and bulk as between bulk and fluid. That is why the bulk is heating up faster with increasing rotational speed. Finally In the current study the heat transfer in indirect heated rotary kilns was experimentally investigated and compared with DEM simulations. Bed material were monodisperse glass spheres with a diameter of d The heat transfer model implemented in the DEM-code was initially verified by comparing simulations and measurements of the heating of a static bulk in the rotary kiln. The simulation of a static bed allows differentiating between conductive heat transfer and effects which stem from particle movement. With a maximum deviation of 9.6% between simulated and measured bed temperatures the validity of the heat conduction model implemented in the DEM-code was shown. In the current study the convective heat transfer coefficient between free bed surface and surrounding gas were incorporated by Nusselt number correlations for free and forced convection. The calculation of forced convection needs the knowledge of the relative velocity between particle and gas phase. By assuming that the gas phase is stagnant the problem reduces to the detection of the particle velocity. Frequency distributions of particle velocities at the free bed surface were extracted from DEM simulations. It could be shown that the mean value of the distribution rises and the distribution broadens for increasing rotational speeds. In case of a static bulk the heat transfer coefficient has a value of α In a further step the effective heat transfer coefficient between the covered wall and the moving bulk in dependence on the mechanical agitation of the bulk has been analysed. The results clearly showed that high heat transfer rates are already obtained at fairly low rotational frequencies (provided that the rolling mode can be established) and that any additional gain required progressive effort. The prediction of the effective heat transfer coefficients with DEM is satisfactory. A comparison of the simulation results with Li's correlation showed that the effective heat transfer coefficients are slightly overpredicted by the correlation. When correcting the contact time with the simulated contact time (including slip) the agreement improves.  The current study has been funded by the