It is known since the end of the XIX century that bromine is an excellent leaching reagent for gold but the research concerning its potential application as an alternative reagent has been relatively despised, mainly because elemental bromine is hazardous and extremely difficult to store or transport in safe conditions. We performed experimental tests in order to assess the feasibility of bromine produced in-situ, in the leaching reactor, to dissolve gold using ore samples from the unexploited Portuguese mine of Castromil. The reagents used in the production of bromine (NaBr, NaOCl and HCl) can be more safely stored than bromine. The ore sample was crushed and grinded in order to produce a particle size distribution (D80 = 0.48 mm) that would guarantee that most of the gold and electrum would be liberated in accordance with previous mineralogical studies. The following operating conditions were assessed: temperature, solid/liquid ratio, composition of the leaching reagent, stirring speed, residence time, effect of pretreatments and the addition of oxidants to the bromine solution. The highest gold dissolution (89%) was achieved with a previous roasting, although the simultaneous addition of H2O2 and FeCl3 allows for a similar recovery (80%) with much lower environmental impact. These results were achieved with the following leaching solution: 4.4 g NaBr, 30 mL NaOCl, 42 mL HCl and 28 mL H2O and with the following operating conditions: a solid/liquid ratio of 1, temperature around 95 °C, stirring speed of 450 rpm, natural reaction pH and a leaching time of 4 h. The comparison between bromine, cyanide and thiosulfate leaching for the same ore indicates that bromine is a good technical alternative for leaching this gold ore. The following advantages may be stressed: fast dissolution rate, non-toxic reagents, it does not require the use of pH regulator and can be performed with low quantities of leaching solution.The leaching is fundamental for processing gold ores. During many years the most applied method for gold extraction was cyanidation, due to its higher chemical stability and lower costs ( The use of bromine to dissolve gold from ores was first documented in 1882, by Schaeffer ( The concentration of bromide and gold, the pH and the electrochemical potential of the anodic and of the cathodic processes are the main factors that affect the dissolution of gold by bromide ( The gold is complexed by the bromide ion (Br Then, the gold is oxidized by the hypobromous acid, being dissolved as: However, due to the toxicity of bromine, this solution was not considered feasible. Alternative oxidants to eliminate the problems associated with high vapor pressure and corrosive reactions of bromine have been examined, with limited success ( Probably the best way to leach gold using bromide is preparing an aqueous solution of bromine, with chlorine and hypochlorite playing a key role in the leaching process. It is also possible that some oxidant agents, such as the ferric ion, the hydrogen peroxide and the hypochlorite could improve the gold dissolution increasing the gold dissolution rate ( It has also been reported that ferric ion alone is able to act as an oxidizing agent in the process, but the rate of the gold dissolution in the system Fe The leaching solution composition determines which species will be adsorbed on the gold surface and determines the dissolution mechanisms. The dissolution of gold could be classified into two categories: (a) dissolution under excess concentration of bromide ions and (b) dissolution under excess concentration of bromine. In the first alternative, the predominant adsorbing specie is Br In addition to the dependence on the bromine-bromide ratio, the dissolution of gold also depends on the associated minerals occurring in the ore. The presence of copper, zinc, and aluminum as sulfates has no effect on dissolution, but Fe Pretreatment processes can improve the gold dissolution ratio during the leaching stage, essentially when the ore is characterized as refractory, which means that gold particles are encased by sulfidic matrix minerals, essentially pyrite and arsenopyrite. This common type of refractoriness can be prevented by a pretreatment process such as fine grinding, pressure oxidation, roasting, chemical oxidation or bio-oxidation ( Our research focused in the leaching of gold in bromide solution giving a contribution to the worldwide quest to find a viable alternative to cyanide ( The samples of the ore, constituted by quartz, reduced and oxidized sulfide and iron oxides, from the eastern section of Valongo anticline of the Hercynian granite in the Castromil deposit (Portugal), were characterized and prepared to be used in the leaching tests. The main minerals present were pyrite, chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite, goethite, gold, galena and quartz ( Due to the hazardous and toxic properties bromine is dangerous to store and handle. Thus, an alternative method to produce a bromine solution from sodium hypochlorite was considered ( Production of chlorine  Production of bromine  Complexation of gold by bromine  Complexation of gold by chlorine regenerating bromine This is the original solution that will be applied in the leaching tests. All bromine leaching tests were conducted using a 500 mL DURAN reaction vessel, placed in a heating mantle with stirring provided by a Heidolph RZR 2021 agitator. The ore was added to the reactor followed by the water, hydrochloric acid, sodium hypochlorite and, finally, the sodium bromide. After that, the agitator and the heating mantle were switched on to start the tests. All of them were carried out at natural pH (3–4). At the end of the stipulated residence time, the agitator and the heating mantle were switched off. The reactor was removed from the heating mantle and kept for 30 min at room temperature. After that, the pulp was immediately filtered to obtain the leaching liquor. Then, the residue was re-pulped and filtered once more for washing purposes, prior to final drying. Thus, three products were obtained: 1 – leaching liquor (liquid), 2 – washing solution (liquid), 3 – residue (solid). The gold content into the liquid solution was analyzed with a flame atomic absorption spectrophotometer AAS Analyzer. The residues were analyzed with a X-ray Fluorescence X-MET7500 Mining Analyzer, to determine the content of main elements as Fe, As, Pb, K, etc. The experimental work started with a few exploratory tests, in which the temperature and the solid/liquid (S/L) ratio were previously defined. As mentioned above, it was known that this process is applicable over a wide range of pH values, and for this reason the variation of this parameter was not considered. The effect of the residence time was also not included in the exploratory tests because bromine leaching evidences a fast rate, reaching the maximum efficiency in a few hours. Then, slight changes in the composition of the bromine leaching solution were applied to determine the most efficient mixture of reagents, in conjunction with variations in the stirring speed. After choosing the most suitable operating conditions for bromine leaching, two kinetic tests were performed, the first with a residence time of 6 h, without sampling, and the second was performed in the same conditions, but with sampling. These two tests confirmed the fast kinetic ratio of the dissolution, and also allowed to conclude that the collection of samples during the tests did not interfere in the leaching performance. After that, different pretreatments were applied to the sample, regrinding and roasting, to assess its influence in the dissolution process. Finally, the influence of H Five preliminary tests were performed to guarantee the feasibility of the bromine leaching process for the ore from the Castromil deposit. Test B3 achieved the highest gold dissolution yield (74%), by heating the reactor to a temperature around 95 °C, with a solid/liquid ratio of 1. The results showed that higher temperatures are needed to obtain higher gold dissolution ratios, although serious volume losses of the leaching solution were observed (almost 50%) due to these temperatures. The yield of the leaching process increased when a solid/liquid ratio of 1 was applied, implying lower quantities for the leaching solution, which is economical advantageous in terms of reagents costs and plant design. Solid/liquid ratios higher than 1 were not tried due to the difficulty in keeping the pulp in suspension. These preliminary tests assessed the feasibility of bromine as a leaching agent for the gold ore. As a second step the optimization of the leaching performance was studied by considering the effect of other operating parameters. The first to be considered was the possibility to reduce the quantity of reagents – NaBr, HCl and NaOCl – on the leaching solution. Due to the vaporization losses a relevant change was implemented in the leaching reactor, with the installation of a steam condenser, thus reducing the losses by volatilization of the leaching liquor. Test B6 was a replica of test B3, upgrading the reactor efficiency. Tests B7 and B8 were carried out with a reduction of the concentration of NaBr, HCl and NaOCl on the leaching solution. The recoveries are presented in It is also clear that the reduction in concentration of the reagents that compose the leaching solution reduces the gold dissolution yield, as it can be seen in As stated above, variations in the stirring speed can affect the kinetic dissolution rate, so it was mandatory to evaluate the effect of varying this parameter to compare with test B6. Low stirring speeds can reduce the contact between the solution and the ore. High stirring speeds can create turbulence, which also affects the leaching performance. All the mentioned previous were carried out using 450 rpm, a common value for laboratory leaching tests that allows to keep the solution in suspension and avoids death-areas inside the reactor. In order to assess the stirring speed effect, two new tests were performed ( When the stirring speed decreased from 450 to 300 rpm, the gold leaching recovery also decreased from 73% to 68%, which represents a slight reduction. When the stirring speed was increased from 450 to 600 rpm, the dissolution of gold decreased from 73% to 60%. So, it was clear that 450 rpm could be an optimal stirring speed for bromine leaching processes, using a solid/liquid ration of 1 and a temperature around 95 °C. It has been reported that bromine leaching process presents a faster dissolution rate, which means that short residence times are required for the leaching operation. All mentioned tests were carried out for 4 h, which was predicted as sufficient to attain a high gold dissolution. A new test was performed with longer residence time of 6 h (test B11). A kinetic test was also performed (test B12) for 6 h, with samples collected at 1, 2, 4 and 6 h (tests B6 and B11 allowed for a global kinetic analysis, while test B12 allowed for a discrete kinetic multipoint analysis). This methodology also allowed for tracking potential sampling errors related to the continuous kinetic analysis, due to the necessity to open the reactor to collect the liquor samples. The kinetic analysis are presented in It is possible to affirm that bromine leaching presents a fast dissolution rate, with ≈40% of gold dissolved after 1 h, 60% after 2 h and 77% after 4 h. Between 4 and 6 h the gold dissolution ratio remained practically constant, thus 4 h could be the optimal residence time. These results are similar to those which were obtained with test B6 and test B11, indicating that the sampling methodology applied on continuous kinetic test (B12) was suitable for this kind of analysis, and could be applied for future works. The effect of fine grinding and roasting pretreatments were assessed. First, the original sample used in the previous tests, was comminuted in a closed circuit. Two new samples were obtained. Upon observation of the As mentioned before, the leaching efficiency of the bromine solution could be improved with the addition of other reagents, such as H When H The effect of FeCl The addition of FeCl Finally, the combination of H Upon observation of the The residues from the leaching stage were analyzed on X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), to determine the content of the main elements (Fe, As, Pb, Cu, K). With this analysis, it was also possible to determine which other elements were dissolved by the leaching solution. Comparing the tests B6 and B12, the latter, with longer residence time, originated a higher dissolution of gangue elements as Fe, As, Pb, Cu and K, while the quantity of gold dissolved remained almost the same. In relation to the pretreatment effect, it was possible to observe that fine grinding (B14) causes a slight increase in the gangue dissolution, while for the roasting pretreatment (B15) a higher increase was observed, that could be caused by the oxidation of the sulfide minerals. Finally, about the effect of H The X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) used to analyze the leaching residues, can also be used to obtain the spectrum of liquid samples. This equipment is based on the principle that individual atoms emit X-ray photons of a characteristic energy or wavelength when excited by an external energy source. Thus, the elements present on leaching liquor could be identified and quantified by counting the number of photons emitted for a sample for each energy level. So, the leaching liquor form tests B6, B14 and B22 were analyzed in order to obtain the number of counts for elements as Br, Fe, As and Pb, using a filter with 45 keV of voltage and 10 μA of current ( As expected from the residues analysis, the leaching liquor presents high concentrations in Fe, As and Pb that were dissolved. The quantity of Br was also determined to quantifying reagent consumption. Test B14 was developed after a fine grinding pretreatment and test B22 was carried out with addition of Fe The main objective of this study was to assess the feasibility of a bromine solution as leaching reagent for the auriferous gold ore of the Castromil deposit. It was then mandatory to compare the obtained results with other alternative gold dissolution reagents, specially cyanide and thiosulfate leaching. This comparison is presented on The cyanidation process showed the highest recovery (83.50%), against 80.30% and 44.70% achieved respectively by bromine and thiosulfate leaching. Nevertheless, cyanidation requires a residence time of 24 h, while thiosulfate and bromine require only respectively 12 and 4 h. Thus, for comparison purposes, the dissolution rate, defined as the percentage of gold dissolved by unit of time, could represent a better comparison parameter. In this case, it is clear that bromide leaching presents a higher dissolution rate, dissolving almost 20% in one hour. These results are related to the original sample. If a pretreatment is applied, namely roasting, the gold dissolution ratio increases both for the bromine and for the thiosulfate; this means that these alternative methods can be more efficient than cyanide leaching. So, it is clear that, the bromine leaching process could have a high potential to be applied as leaching alternative for the Castromil ore. An analysis of the most relevant operating conditions that could affect the performance of bromine leaching shows that: (a) high temperatures are required to increase the dissolution of gold; (b) higher solid/liquid ratio increases the gold recovery; (c) stirring speed should be about 450 rpm; (d) no pH adjustment is needed. Thus, the optimal operatory conditions were defined as follows: leaching solution composed by 4.4 g of NaBr, 30 mL of NaOCl, 42 mL of HCl and 28 mL of H It is possible to observe an increase in the bromine leaching performance when the ore is pretreated, particularly by the roasting (89% of gold dissolved) that reduced the sulfide content and increased the availability of leaching solution to dissolve the gold. The effect of adding oxidants, such as hydrogen peroxide and Fe The analysis of the residues and of the leaching liquors authorizes to conclude that the recovery of the gold dissolution could be enhanced optimizing the operating conditions that simultaneously allows for a lower consumption of Br. Finally, the comparison with other methods shows that bromine leaching attains recoveries similar to those obtained with cyanide and higher than when thiosulfate is used. It could also be concluded that the bromine leaching process presents a faster dissolution rate taking only 4 h to dissolve 80% of gold while cyanide leaching requires 24 h to obtain a similar yield. This leaching process has several advantages: it uses a gaseous mixture of chlorine and bromine that is generated in-situ by introducing hypohalides in the reactor itself; the capability of chlorine to oxide bromides implies that a low concentration of bromide is required in the leaching solution; gold is simultaneously leached by chlorine and bromine; and, finally, the hypohalides could be further regenerated, thus implying a very low cost in consumption of reagents, although this last possibility needs a deeper research. As main conclusion, the bromine leaching could be an alternative to cyanidation for the Castromil ore, even without any pretreatment stage, that would be obligatory in order to obtain similar results with thiosulfate leaching. This work is a part of a research project supported by the Portuguese National Funding Agency for Science, Research and Technology (