Due to the weak properties of W2C phase, its formation during the process of WC synthesis should be prevented. The aim of the present study has been the mechano-chemical synthesis of a WC–Al2O3 composite powder free from undesirable W2C phase through the addition of excess carbon to the WO3–2Al–C initial mixture. Based on the thermodynamic calculations and results of the supplementary experiments in W–yC and W2C–C systems, the possibility of the conversion of W2C to WC phase through the addition of excess carbon has been investigated. It has been shown that production of a WC–Al2O3 composite powder by 360min mechano-chemical treatment of an initial mixture of WO3–2Al–1.8C is possible. TEM observations and Williamson–Hall calculation revealed that the obtained WC–Al2O3 powder contains macro-size agglomerates in which each agglomerate consists of nano-size phases.Due to the strong W–C chemical bond, tungsten carbide (WC) and/or its composites can be used in a wide range of applications where the properties such as high hardness, high fracture toughness and good thermal stability are needed Ordinary method of WC production is the controlled solid-state reaction between W and C. This process requires a very long time of heating at high temperatures The produced WC becomes expensive. The size of particles or grains becomes large (macro-sized). In order to decrease the fabrication cost and particle or grain size of WC, researchers have proposed the use of different types of new materials such as tungsten salts Nano-size WC and/or its composite powders have been synthesized via three different mechano-chemical routes, by use of different raw materials. These routes are I) long time milling of commercial (macro-size) WC powder Among the synthesis routes mentioned above, the latter one is seemingly the most promising case; because it has the lower production cost. This is related to the lower price of tungsten trioxide or tungsten ores in comparison with elemental W. The product (e.g. WC–Al Mechano-chemical reactions in the WO On the basis of our above justification, synthesis of WC compound, free from W Decreasing the mixture maximum temperature which could increase the thermodynamic stability of WC phase and also could cease the carbothermic reduction reaction of WO Using extra amounts of carbon in the initial mixture. The role of excess C would be the compensation of the carbon loss as well as decreasing the mixture maximum temperature due to the absorption of heat released from alumonithermic reduction reaction. In the present research work, the applicability of route B for mechano-chemical synthesis of nano-size WC–Al Specifications of the starting materials used in this work, are given in Probable evolution of CO and CO Milling products were examined by X-ray diffraction instrument (XRD, Rigaku, RINT-2200/PC System) with Cu–Kα radiation. Attached to the pot Thermo Labels (NICHIYU GIKEN KOGYO Co, Japan) were used to observe the changes of pots outside temperature (T Size and distribution of particles were observed by means of a Zeiss 200 Williamson–Hall method was used for the calculation of crystallite size and lattice strain  XRD patterns of WO After this stage, the chemical reactions occurred in the mixtures and new peaks have appeared (see  Higher C amounts in the mixture, would decrease the chance of Al and WO Higher C amounts in the mixture, would absorb the heat of aluminothermic reduction reaction (e.g. decrease the system maximum temperature) and increase the thermodynamic stability of WC (see Formation of W This means that for the formation of 1 Regarding to Hence, increase in the amount of WC phase with continuation of milling of WO BF-TEM images of produced WC–Al The Williamson–Hall plot of WC–Al Formation of W Experimental results showed that the types of occurred reactions in the WO Excess carbon might decrease the intensity of heat release in the mixture through the absorption of some heat of aluminothermic reduction reaction. This phenomenon would decrease the mixture maximum temperature and hence, increases the thermodynamic stability of WC phase. Excess carbon compensates the carbon loss resulted from the side carbothermic reduction reaction of WO The obtained results showed that a W