The growth in the generation of the waste of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) has won global importance. Cell phones are highlighted between these wastes because of its short life cycle and its great amount of hazardous materials. Thus, this work aims to obtain an effective method for indium extraction from liquid crystal displays (LCD) screens of cell phones using alternative organic acids. For comparative purposes, leaching tests are performed with supercritical CO2 and co-solvents, as well as under conventional conditions using citric and malic acids. The results showed that at atmospheric pressure, 76.5% of indium was extracted after 180min. The use of supercritical CO2 besides providing a reduction in extraction time also provides a higher extraction, reaching 94.6% in just 30min. In summary, a novel method for indium recovery was developed. Furthermore, the process was more efficient using supercritical CO2, increasing the extraction and turning the process 6 times faster than conventional extraction.The industry of electrical and electronics equipment (EEE) continually launches innovative products and technological solutions that contribute to energy efficiency and to the productivity gain of almost all segments. However, the industry of EEE also has major challenges, as in Brazil, where it is still seeking the application of reverse logistics, ie, collect and provide environmentally appropriate destination to products that have reached the end of its useful life Currently, new models, sizes and configurations of electronic equipment arrive daily to the consumer market, and after their life cycle, begin to be considered as waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE). According to studies conducted by the European Union, WEEE are growing three times faster than other types of solid wastes The cell phones stand out among WEEE, the continuous introduction of new technologies in the cell phones, makes these devices to have short life cycles and increasingly are considered by users as obsolete in a short time. In the United States, for example, each year more than 130 million of cell phones reach the end of life and are discarded Cell phones are basically made up of keyboard, battery, liquid crystal display (LCD), printed circuit board, antenna and other accessories. The LCDs are composed of multilayers of different materials The production of LCDs has expanded and therefore increasing the demand for indium. However, the indium natural reserves are scarce and recycling of this metal is still incipient, so, with the increasing production of LCDs the depletion of natural indium resources will be inevitable. It is estimated that the known reserves are sufficient to just over 20 years of exploitation Indium is a rare metal of relatively limited resources, extraction occurs mainly as a byproduct of zinc ores, where the indium concentration ranges from 10 to 20 The methods most widely applied in the indium recovery are the pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes Likewise, the use of processes that do not cause a new environmental threat is necessary. The use of organic acids instead of the traditional leaching agents is an alternative, as these acids are less corrosive and therefore considered as an environmentally friendly alternative. Malic (C Other process that appears as an alternative to conventional extraction methods is the supercritical fluids extraction (SFE). SFE is an important alternative as it is usually faster and more efficient than conventional extraction, and much more environmentally friendly when using CO Supercritical CO In many environmental applications, water is often present in a supercritical fluids extraction system as a part of the original sample or added deliberately. Water in contact with carbon dioxide becomes acidic due to the formation and dissociation of carbonic acid Therefore, the water presence together with scCO Thus, even though the amount of indium by cell phone be small, the large amount of devices that are continuously disposed of, makes these residues become an important secondary source for obtaining indium A batch of discarded cell phones of different brands, sizes and designs was collected from technical assistance shops. The cell phones were manually dismantled with the use of tools. The main components were removed and classified. A sufficient amount of LCD screens, about 120 units, was employed to perform all the processes in this study using the same initial material. The polymeric frame that protects the LCD screen, connectors, adhesives and other polymers, which are not adhered so strongly to the ITO panel, were manually removed with the aid of tools. The polymeric polarizing film that remained strongly adhered to the screen glass surface was then removed by means of an acetone bath, for 24 The processed LCD screens (free of polymers), underwent a comminution in order to reduce the material particle size. The LCD screens were processed in a ball mill, Marconi MA-500, for 4 The atmospheric pressure leaching was performed by heating the samples in a flask connected to a condenser, with magnetic stirring at 400 The total concentration of indium was determined by leaching the powder from processed LCD screens, with aqua regia at 90 Subsequently, the powder from processed LCD screens was subjected to different leaching tests at atmospheric pressure using different acids and different conditions, to determine the best experimental condition for indium extraction. The leaching experiments were carried out in five stages, as shown in The H The system used for scCO Citric acid was used for all tests, because it presented results slightly higher than the results obtained using malic acid in the leaching experiments at atmospheric pressure. The leachate solutions were separated from the solids by means of the extraction valve at the reactor outlet. CO In order to define the optimal conditions for indium extraction, first was studied the effect of the time extraction. The experiments were carried out in times of 5, 15, 20, 30 and 60 After determining the best extraction time, tests were performed at different supercritical temperatures and pressures, as indicated in After the 24 The total concentration of indium in the sample, determined by leaching in aqua regia, was 602 Therefore, the value of 602 Tests were performed at different temperatures, keeping the other parameters fixed, as shown in Thus, it is evident that rise in temperature favors the indium extraction for both malic and citric acids. At 90 Similar results were obtained when citric and malic acids were used to recover Li and Co from spent Li-Ion batteries After determining the best temperature (T Li, et al. observed that for lithium and cobalt extraction, at 90 Virolainen, S. et al., when employed conventional acids such as sulfuric and hydrochloric acids to recover indium and tin from ITO panels, observed a significant increase in leaching efficiency by increasing the acid concentration from 0.1 to 1 The results obtained in this work is also consistent with the obtained by Silveira, A. et al. when used sulfuric acid to extract indium from LCD screens of obsolete cell phones With the temperature and concentration of the acids defined, tests were conducted to determine the best solid:liquid ratio. After defining temperature (90 The obtained results are shown in Li, L. et al. studied the recycling of Li-ion batteries using organic acids. They observed that the effectiveness of cobalt leaching, increased significantly with an increase in the H The importance of using H The effect of extraction time was conducted using previously set conditions, 90 The experiments carried out with citric acid in supercritical conditions, are shown in In addition, it was evaluated if the tin was solubilized in the extraction, however the presence of tin was not detected, indicating that the process is selective to indium. The influence of temperature and pressure in the amount of extracted indium can be seen in Regarding to the pressure, as can be seen from It is observed that the pressure effect is less significant for the increase in extraction than the effect of temperature. Comparing the tests performed at fixed temperature of 80 In addition, is observed that the use of supercritical CO Is worth mentioning that the high-pressure process is more expensive than conventional separation process. However, according Goodarznia, I. and Eikani, M., the operating cost is usually lower than the conventional, consequently the total cost can be comparable if the process is carried out at optimum conditions Furthermore, the supercritical CO WEEE recycling is a complex process that requires the application of various unit operations, especially when it is desired the recovery of a rare metal present in low concentrations as is the case of indium. The leaching of the processed LCD screens with aqua regia, at 90 The results obtained in the leaching tests at atmospheric pressure using organic acids showed that the citric acid is better than the malic acid for the indium extraction from processed LCD screens. For this reason, citric acid was used for scCO For the indium extraction using scCO It can be concluded that the leaching using scCO The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by