Mechanical activation of ilmenite in dry and wet milling modes was carried out by a planetary ball mill. Characterization of microstructural changes and their influences on the dissolution of Ti were studied. The characterizations were performed by XRF, EPMA, XRD, UV–Visible spectroscopy, SEM, particle size analysis and surface area measurement.
                  The results showed that the dry milling mode after 45 min led to an intensive agglomeration of particles with available pores for nitrogen gas. The specific BET surface area was steadily increased to 10.77 m2/g after 150 min of dry milling. The maximum BET surface area of 12.06 m2/g was measured after 150 min of milling in wet mode. It was found that the dry mode of activation has a pronounced impact on structural changes compared with wet mode milling as a result of intensive stressing. The X-ray amorphization degrees of 95.03 and 68.60% were achieved after 150 min of dry and wet milling, respectively. A minimum volume weighted crystallite size equal to 8.01 nm and a maximum lattice strain equal to 1.43 × 10−2 were obtained for the dry mode of milling after 150 min of activation. It was concluded that the dry mode of activation generated a deeper and more intensive distortion in ilmenite bulk compared with the wet mode of milling. Dissolution experiments indicated that, in comparison to the specific surface area, the structural distortion had the predominant effect on the reactivity of ilmenite. According to the leaching results, dissolution rate in dry and wet milled ilmenites after 150 min of milling, has been increased by 58.43 and 14.66 times, respectively. In addition, Ti extractions of 93% and 70% were achieved after 150 min of activation in dry and wet modes, respectively.Reactivity and dissolution rate of minerals in heterogeneous reactions are affected by their crystallographic and microstructural properties, interfacial area and geometry of the interface. Mechanical activation of minerals using high energy milling is a process that changes the morphology, size distribution, surface area and crystallographic and microstructural properties of minerals. Therefore, mechanical activation may affect the reactivity of a mineral in a reaction. Accordingly, the mechanical activation term has been defined as a process that increases the reaction ability of a substance ( Ilmenite (FeTiO The main objective of this study is to investigate the effect of mechanical activation mode on the structural changes of ilmenite at the same mill. In addition, the role of microstructural changes on the enhancement of the reactivity of ilmenite concentrate was studied in detail using sulfate process. An attempt is made to explore the effectivity of structural characteristics on the leaching reaction. Ilmenite concentrate was obtained from Ghara-aghaj flotation pilot plant. The XRD analysis (detected by Bruker Axs D8, Germany) mainly revealed hexagonal ilmenite reflection peaks, corresponding to JCPDS NO. 01-075-1210, and magnesium-hornblende reflection peak at 2ϴ=28.7 The initial and mechanically activated samples were characterized using XRD, laser particle size analysis, BET surface area measurements and SEM analysis. The XRD patterns were collected by an X-ray powder diffractometer (Bruker Axs D8, Germany) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) at 40 kV and 40 mA. The two theta range of 20–72°, step size of 0.02° and counting time of 3 s were set for all records. The X-ray diffraction patterns were indexed using JCPDS (Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards) files. Winfit software ( Dry and wet milling modes were applied through milling experiments. Ilmenite samples were activated in a planetary ball mill (Pulverisette 6, FRITSCH, Germany) by applying a rotation speed of 450 rpm. Ball to powder weight ratio of 15:1 and 12 stainless steel balls with a diameter of 19 mm were used in the milling process for 20, 45, 90, 150 min. In the milling experiments, the mill was at rest for 10 min after 20 min milling intervals and the material on the cup walls was softened. In wet milling mode, 15 cc of distilled water was added to 23 g ilmenite powder to reach a 65% solid (w/w). The milled pulp was filtered and dried in an oven. The powder samples from wet and dry milling were sealed and kept in a freezer. A series of leaching experiments were carried out using sulfuric acid of 50% (w/w) concentration to assess the effect of mechanical activation on the reactivity of ilmenite. For leaching experiments, a 250 ml three-neck flat bottom flask equipped with a reflux condenser and a thermometer was used. For each test, firstly a volume of 250 ml sulfuric acid solution was introduced in the flask and heated up to the desired temperature by a hot plate. Then, 2.5 g of sample was added to the acid solution and stirred by a magnetic stirrer. The XRD line profile analysis is a simple and powerful technique to estimate parameters such as crystallite size and lattice strain. In the present study, Winfit software was used for profile fitting and the eight most intensive reflection peaks related to ilmenite diffraction, namely (012), (104), (110), (11 After removing the instrumental broadening, the obtained physical broadening is the convolution of the strain and crystallite size components. These two components must be de-convoluted from each other. It is well known that de-convolution can be achieved using Williamson-Hall equation defined by Eq. Another structural characteristic is the amorphization occurring during mechanical activation. The degree of amorphization refers to transformation of long-range order to short-range order in material structure as a result of intensive milling. This short-range order could not been detected by XRD method. The X-ray amorphization of milled ilmenite was calculated using Eq. The chemical composition of ilmenite concentrate is shown in To clarify the chemical composition of ilmenite mineral, electron probe micro-analysis was conducted on 67 points on the ilmenite particles in the concentrate. The statistical parameters of mean values and their standard deviations were calculated as shown in The particle size distributions of the initial sample and dry and wet mode activated samples as a function of milling time are shown in For a better explanation of the agglomeration phenomena, granulometric surface areas obtained from laser particle size analysis and BET surface areas are compared in The SEM images in Microstructural changes of the initial and activated ilmenite samples were studied by X-ray diffraction analysis. Changes in XRD pattern characteristics attribute to increase of crystal defects and decrease of ilmenite crystallinity. The X-ray analysis results for the initial and activated samples are shown in The changes in the X-ray amorphization degree are depicted in High energy ball milling leads to broadening of reflection peaks due to decrease in the crystallite size and increase in the lattice strain. Generally, microstructural, granulometric and specific surface area studies indicated that in the case of dry activated samples, the changes occur simultaneously in the bulk and the surface of materials. These changes include severe structural defects, decrease in crystal order and increase of specific surface area. However, in the case of wet milled activated samples, the changes are mainly in the surface of materials. The average relative intensity of peaks versus specific surface area for activated samples are shown in Dissolution experiments were carried out to investigate the effect of mechanical activation and subsequently the structural changes on the reactivity (kinetics) of ilmenite leaching. Ilmenite dissolves in dilute sulfuric acid solution of <14 M concentration, as shown in Eq. The plots of Ti extraction from samples mechanically activated in dry and wet modes versus time of dissolution are shown in By examination of the common kinetic models for dissolution data, the semi-empirical Avrami-Erofeev equation ( The changes in leaching reaction rate constant have been depicted as a function of activation time in To investigate the effects and the availability of microstructural characteristics through the reaction, k/S ratio (S = surface area) was plotted against milling time as shown in Similarly, the changes in the dissolution rate versus the change of the specific surface area are shown in Microstructural changes during dry and wet milling modes and their effects on the reactivity of mechanically activated ilmenite were studied and the following conclusions were derived: Dry milling led to the agglomeration of particles during extended milling time but no distinguished agglomeration of particles was observed for wet mode of activation. The maximum BET surface area of 10.76 and 12.06 m It was found that dry mode of milling caused severe disorder of ilmenite structure in comparison to wet mode of milling, as the X-ray amorphization degree of dry and wet milled ilmenites after 150 min are 95.03% and 68.60%, respectively. As a result of structural disordering, the volume weighted crystallite size reduced from 346.63 nm to 8.01 nm in dry mode of milling and to 46.22 nm in wet mode of milling after 150 min of activation. After 150 min milling, the lattice strain of ilmenite increased from 0.13 × 10 The extraction yield of titanium into leach liquor for the sample mechanically activated for 150 min in dry mode increased by 93%, compared with extraction yield increase of 70% in wet mode. It is found that the structural changes during the mechanical activation have a pronounced effect on leaching process and they are available in the whole reaction time in contrast to the BET specific surface area. The dissolution rate has been increased by 58.43 and 14.66 times for dry and wet milled ilmenites, respectively. The support from the Mineral Processing Research Center of the