Rotating chutes are widely used to control the burden distribution and enhance the gas distribution in a blast furnace. The chute cross-section shape has a significant effect on the particle movement and distribution. Therefore, this study developed a three-dimensional model of a blast furnace top with rotating chute using the discrete element method. The effect of different chute shapes on the particle movement and radial burden distribution was then investigated. The results showed that the burden stream height at the chute discharge agrees well with the burden stream thickness at the burden surface. A semicircular chute had the largest main striking point, where the chute discharge joins the burden surface, and trapezoidal and rectangular chutes had successively smaller MSPs. The semicircular chute helped to obtain a uniform radial size distribution. The trapezoidal chute helped form an aggregated burden stream at low rotating speeds, while the rectangular shape chute achieved this at higher rotating speeds and different chute angles.Most blast furnaces use a rotating chute to charge the furnace with ore and coke and form the desired burden distribution. Therefore, theoretical calculations, experiments, and numerical simulations have been conducted on particle movement in a rotating chute and the resulting particle distribution. In particular, numerical simulation is an effective way to investigate the particle movement and segregation. The discrete element method (DEM), developed by Therefore, in this work, a three-dimensional model with rotating chute at the top of a bell-less blast furnace was established using DEM. Then, this model was used to investigate the effects of different cross-section shapes of the chute on the radial burden stream properties and burden distribution at the throat of a blast furnace. In the DEM, particle movements are described with an inter-particle contact model in which a particles may collide with neighboring particles or the wall ( At any time The geometric model is the same size as the No. 4 blast furnace at Baosteel (Shanghai, China), shown in The simulation process is as follows. First, three kinds of well-mixed burdens are generated in the hopper. Second, the flow control gate at the bottom of hopper is opened to discharge the mixed burden while the chute starts rotating. Finally, the simulation stops after 3 full rotations at a given chute angle. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of different cross-section shapes of the rotating chute on the burden movements and distributions at the top of a bell-less blast furnace. The cross-section shape of the chute used in the Baosteel No. 4 blast furnace is an arc (semicircle), which is widely used in blast furnaces. Other cross-section shapes studied in this work included trapezoid and rectangle; schematic diagrams of the three chute cross sections are given in The main operation to control the burden and gas distributions inside a blast furnace in practice is to change the chute angle and rotating speed. The chute angle is the angle between the chute baseline and the vertical centerline of the blast furnace, which is 30° in the base model. The rotating velocity is 45°/s in base model, which is the same as in practice. Therefore, chute angles and rotating speeds studied in the simulation were 20°, 30°, and 40° and 30°/s, 45°/s, and 60°/s, respectively.  A slice 0.2 The height and width of the burden stream were measured to quantify the movement of the burden stream on the chute. They are defined as the domain containing 80 It can be seen from To analyze the burden movement and distribution at the blast furnace throat, the width, thickness, and main striking point (MSP), where the chute discharge meets the burden surface, were introduced, and the results are illustrated in The measured width, thickness, and MSP of burden stream are given in The burden stream thickness generally increases as the chute angle increases, which coincides well with the burden height at the chute discharge. However, the burden stream thickness decreases at a 40° chute angle in the semicircular chute. The reason is that the MSP is very close to the furnace wall, which means that some particles strike the furnace wall before they strike the burden surface. Therefore, the burden stream thickness decreases at this large chute angle. Otherwise, the burden stream thickness increases if there is no interference with the furnace wall. As the chute angle increases, the MSP increases greatly for all shape chutes. The MSP for the semicircular chute was the largest, with successively smaller MSPs for the trapezoidal and rectangular chutes. The is because particles have larger velocity and higher position at the chute discharge in the semicircular chute, which is the result of longer particle residence time on the chute surface and larger Coriolis force. Particles have a lower velocity and position at the chute discharge in the trapezoidal chute, and lowest velocity and position in the rectangular chute. This indicates that the burden matrix or charging angle needs to be calibrated for different shape chutes. The margin between the MSP for different chute shapes also increases with increasing chute angle. The angle was as large as 0.69 The radial burden distribution was obtained as follows. First, 10 concentric cylinders with burden profile heights were adopted to extract the burden distribution data, and their radiuses were set as 0.1  At a 20° chute angle, the radial distribution of the burden weight for a semicircular chute is almost the same as that for a trapezoidal chute, with a maximum value at 0.45 At a 30° chute angle, the burden weight has a maximum at about 0.75 At a 40° chute angle, the burden weight is maximum at 0.95 The above results show that there are differences between the burden weight distribution and MSP position. Therefore, it is better to measure the radial burden weight distribution to understand the actual burden distribution inside a blast furnace.  At a 30° chute angle, At a 40° chute angle, To compare the burden size segregation degree along the radius, the standard deviations of the It was also found that the The standard deviation of   The height and width of the burden stream at the chute discharge for different rotating speeds are given in  The burden stream thickness increases for all chute shapes with increased rotating speed, which agrees with the corresponding height at the chute discharge. The rectangular chute has the smallest burden stream thickness at different rotating speeds, indicating that the rectangular chute makes it relatively easier to accumulate burdens around the MSP. It was also found that the MSP increases gradually for all chute shapes when the rotating speed increases. The semicircular chute has the largest MSP, followed successively by the trapezoidal and rectangular chutes. This also indicates that the burden matrix or charging angle needs to be calibrated to the rotating speed.  At a rotating speed of 30°/s, the maximum burden weights for all chute shapes is at about 0.65 The velocities in the circumferential and radial directions at the chute discharge are given in It can be seen from The standard deviations of Generally speaking, a larger standard deviation means a nonuniform distribution, but it also means that the distribution might be concentrating in a specific location. Therefore, a large standard deviation may correspond to a more accurate charging at some positions. In this way, the rectangular chute is better for performing precise charging. In contrast, semicircular or trapezoidal chutes are better for maintaining uniform distribution along the radial direction. Therefore, the choice of chute depends on the practical needs of industry. Since the height and width of the burden stream at the chute discharge are related to the thickness and width of the burden stream at the burden surface, it is necessary to investigate how particles in the chute form the burden stack. A slice 0.5 The burden weight proportions of the left parts for semicircular, trapezoidal, and rectangular chutes are 48.5%, 41.8%, and 54.8%, respectively. This indicates that the burden segregates more in the left part due to the Coriolis and centrifugal forces. Note that the burden weight proportion of the right part is the least, only 13.8%, for the semicircular chute, while those for trapezoidal and rectangular chutes are 23.1% and 20.0%, respectively. This may mean that the semicircular chute makes it easy for particles to roll in a direction opposite that of rotation. However, particles strike the flat bottom of the chute and may move in different circumferential directions, so it is hard to force them to all roll in the same direction despite the high rotating speed. As a result, the burden width on the burden surface for the rectangular chute is the largest; at the same time, it produces the smallest burden thickness. It can be also seen from Therefore, our findings suggest that a semicircular chute is better if uniform radial distribution is needed and that a rectangular chute is better if precise burden position is needed. It is thought that a damper can be added to the end of chute to control the burden height or width at the chute discharge. The damper should be designed to increase the burden height for semicircular chutes to obtain a more uniform radial distribution and to decrease the burden width for rectangular chutes to obtain a more aggregated burden stream. As  The paper describes a three-dimensional DEM model of a bell-less top blast furnace. The model was used to investigate the effects of different rotating chute shapes, including semicircular, trapezoidal, and rectangular shapes, on the radial burden distribution at a blast furnace throat. The conclusions can be summarized as follows: Chute shape has significant effect on particle movement and its radial size distribution, and the effect is more pronounced when the chute angle or rotating speed is larger. The burden stream height at the chute discharge agrees well with the burden stream thickness at the burden surface, while the burden stream width at the chute discharge does not agree with that at the burden surface. The MSP increases gradually for all chute shapes when chute angle or rotating speed increases. The semicircular chute has the largest MSP, successively followed by the trapezoidal and rectangular chutes. The burden weight maximum position is farther from the center than the MSP position. The margin between them increases when the chute angle or rotating speed increases. Chute angle and rotating speed have significant effects on the burden weight distribution and size segregation in the radial direction, and the effect of chute angle is greater than that of rotating speed. The burden matrix needs to be calibrated according to the chute shape and rotating speed. Particles generally maintain their original position at the chute discharge when they travel to the burden surface from a rectangular shape chute, while they continue rotating and roll across the burden surface after discharge from semicircular and trapezoidal chutes. A semicircular chute helps to obtain uniform radial size distribution at different chute angles and rotating speeds. A trapezoidal chute helps to form aggregated burden stream around the MSP at small rotating speeds, while a rectangular chute accomplishes this at medium and large rotating speeds and different chute angles. This work was supported by the