Novel and simple flow-sheet has been reported to process integrated circuits (ICs) for effective recovery of metals. The depopulated ICs from waste PCBs were pulverised, beneficiated and leached in nitric acid. From the nitrate leach liquor, Fe was removed at pH 3.5, temperature 60 °C and air sparging. Subsequently, 99.99% Ag was precipitated as AgCl using 5% NaCl in mixing time 10 min. Further, 99.99% Cu was extracted from the filtrate using 20% LIX 984 N along with 2% isodecanol (ID) diluted in kerosene at pH 2.97, organic to aqueous phase ratio 1 in 10 min, leaving Ni in the raffinate. From the obtained pure solutions, salts of Cu and Ni could be produced using evaporation technique. The developed hydrometallurgical process flow-sheet to recover valuables from the nitrate leach liquor of waste ICs has the potential to be commercialised after pilot/ scale-up trial validations.Recent advancement in modern technology is constantly replacing older electronic gadgets with newer, cheaper and more advanced ones. Increase in the consumption of electronic machines and their reduced lifespan has led to the generation of tons of e-waste worldwide. E-waste is a complex mixture of plastics, ceramics, glass and metals ( Among all the precious metals, due to unique properties and cheaper price, Ag is widely used in both industrial as well as technological applications such as jewellery, metallurgical, radiography, catalysis, batteries, silverware, electronics, photography, photonics, disinfectants in waste water purification, pharma and food/ beverages processes, etc. ( Several studies were reported to recover Ag from various resources using hydrometallurgical route ( From the literature survey it has been observed that no viable processes are reported to recover Ag from small components of PCBs surface i.e. ICs, microprocessors, MLCCs, etc. ( The integrated chips (ICs) of size ~10 mm which are mounted on the PCBs of scrap computers were depopulated by thermal treatment. Further, the ICs were pulverised to 0.5 mm followed by physical beneficiation to gather the metallic concentrate, which contained about 0.6–0.8% Ag, 12–14% Cu, 1–2% Fe and 1–3% Ni. Leaching of the metallic concentrate was carried out using 4.5 M HNO Fe precipitation from the leach liquor was carried out using NaOH followed by precipitation of Ag using NaCl. The Eh and pH were measured for each set of experiments. The leach liquor depleted with Fe and Ag was processed to solvent extraction to recover Cu. Equal volume (50 mL) of aqueous and extractant each were mixed for fixed time using magnetic stirrer. The loaded organic phase was subsequently stripped to obtain pure Cu solution using 10% (v/v) H In order to recover the precious metal (Ag) and other metals (Cu, Ni, Fe) from the leach liquor various experimental parameters were studied to optimise precipitation and solvent extraction process, which are discussed below: Presence of Fe affects the recovery and purity of precious and non-ferrous metals present in the in solution. Therefore, precipitation studies for Fe with scientific validations were carried out and presented in Three different reagents i.e. HCl, KCl and NaCl were initially studied to check precipitation behaviour of Ag. Each precipitant (HCl, KCl and NaCl) of 20% concentration was prepared in distilled water. 1 mL of each precipitant was added to 50 mL of the solution containing Ag with continuous agitation. More than 99% Ag was precipitated with all three precipitant under similar experimental condition. In view of, cost and environmental concerns NaCl was selected as the feasible precipitant. According to the concept of solubility, nitrate complexes are soluble. Furthermore, with the addition of NaCl to the solution containing AgNO Different concentration of NaCl varying from 1 to 5% (w/v) was added to 50 mL of the solution and mixed for 10 min at room temperature. With the increase in concentration of NaCl the precipitation of Ag was found to be increased. About 44.24% Ag was precipitated using 1% NaCl which further increased to 99.99% using 5% NaCl at mixing time 10 min ( Solvent extraction studies were carried out for the separation of Cu/Ni and optimise the process parameters using LIX 984 N, which are discussed below: Cu extraction was found to increase from 77.59% to 99.99% with increase in pH from 1.5 to 3.02. About 99.99% Cu was found to be extracted from leach liquor using 20% LIX 984 N in 10 min at an equilibrium pH 2.97, leaving all Ni in the raffinate. The distribution of Cu in organic/ aqueous phases, complex formation and stage requirements were scientifically validated and presented as K denotes the equilibrium constant Taking logarithm of Eq. The slope value is close to the theoretical slope value i.e. 2 indicates the requirement of two moles of extractant for the formation of [R Extraction of Cu increased from 38.28% to 99.65% with the increase in organic/ aqueous (O/A) ratio from 1/3 to 3/1 at equilibrium pH 2.97 in mixing time 10 min. Mc-Cabe Thiele plot was drawn to determine the number of stages required for maximum recovery of Cu from leach liquor using 20% LIX 984 N ( The optimized condition obtained for the recovery of Ag, Fe, Cu and Ni from model leach solution was validated with the actual leach liquor of pulverized ICs. About 99.81% Fe was precipitated as Fe(OH) The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors are thankful to Director, CSIR-NML and Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: