The physical and chemical characteristics of four commercial automotive brake shoe lining materials used in heavy vehicles have been investigated and compared. Relevant physical properties viz. density, water absorption and swelling characteristics were determined using standard test methods. X-ray diffraction, infrared spectroscopy and optical microscopic techniques were used to identify the constituents. It has been observed that all of the four friction materials contain phenol formaldehyde resin as the matrix. Other major ingredients were also the same in all the samples but their amount and size varied. These include asbestos as fibre reinforcement, barium sulphate as filler and brass particles as friction modifier. It was found that the swell resistance of the locally produced friction material compares favourably with that of the imported materials, but its bulk density was the lowest and its water absorption the highest.Most common types of friction brakes operate on the principle that friction can be used to convert the mechanical energy of a moving object into heat energy, which is absorbed by the brake. The essential components of a friction brake are a rotating part, such as a wheel, axle, disk, or brake drum and a stationary part that is pressed against the rotating part to slow or stop it. The stationary part usually has a lining, called a brake lining that can generate a great amount of friction yet give long wear life. The principal types of friction brake are the block brake, the band brake, the internal-shoe brake and the disk brake. All brake lining friction materials for a brake system should be designed to maintain stable and reliable friction force/coefficient at a wide range of pedal pressure, vehicle speed, temperature, humidity and others In this study physical and chemical characteristic of some commercially available brake shoe lining materials have been investigated in order to obtain the maximum information for better brake performance. Four phenolic based commercial brake shoe lining materials (BF1, BF2, BF3 and BF4) used in heavy vehicles have been investigated in this study. One of the samples designated as BF1 was manufactured by a local company in Bangladesh, which the three others designated as BF2, BF3 and BF4 were the imported ones. Water absorption of the friction material was measured following the method described in ASTM D 570-77. Bulk density was measured by the water displacement technique that was recommended by SAE J380 and swell test was conducted according to SAE J160 JUN80. X-ray diffractometry (XRD) was used to find out the phases that are present in the brake shoe lining materials. For this purpose, samples were pulverised an agate mortar. Fine powdered grains of each sample were packed tightly into the cavity of glass slide with random orientation of the powder. XRD was done in a JEOL DX-GE-2P X-ray powder diffractometer with MoK Infrared spectroscopy was used to identify the organic compounds present in the sample. Before the test, the sample was dried in an oven at 80 The test sample with the dimensions of The bulk density of the friction materials investigated is given in the bar chart in  The results of swell test performed on the four materials can be found in  In the case of all the four samples, the presence of asbestos and barium sulphate is positively identified. The observed Infrared spectra contain absorption peaks corresponding to different vibration/bending modes of atomic pairs present in samples. By recognising the vibration/bending of atomic pairs, identification of the organic compounds present in the sample can be made. In the present study all of the four brake lining materials were investigated by infrared spectroscopy. A typical infrared spectrum of the sample BF2 is shown in It may be mentioned that certain shift in the observed peak position can occur, reasons of which are discussed in reference Optical micrographs of the brake shoe lining materials under both normal and oblique illuminations were taken to determine number of particles and their size. The size and amount of brass particles vary from sample to sample. Brass particles are seen as very bright phase in sample BF3 and BF4. Samples BF1 and BF2 also contain brass particles but their size and amount are small. The average size and amount of brass particles (numbers cm The asbestos fibre contents of the four samples were determined by dissolution of the matrix resin and other ingredients. Commercial friction materials are complex composites and may contain from 5 to 20 different ingredients The physical and chemical characteristics of four commercial automotive brake shoe lining materials used in heavy vehicle have been investigated and compared. All of the four friction materials contain phenol formaldehyde resin as the matrix. Other major ingredients include asbestos fibre as reinforcement, barium sulphate filler and brass particles as friction modifier. The amounts of the ingredients were found to vary from sample to sample. It was found that the swell resistance of the locally produced friction material compares favourably well with that of the imported materials. The locally produced material, however, experienced highest water absorption which is thought to be related to its low bulk density. The authors would like to thank Professor M.S.J. Hashmi, School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, Dublin City University, Ireland for his suggestion.