Investigations were carried out on lime stone rejects (−1mm) generated at a lime stone washing plant in southern India. These rejects contain 12.09% CaO, 2.95% MgO, 10.73% Al2O3, 4.99% Fe2O3, 43.05% SiO2 and 24.92% LOI. Mineralogical studies including SEM-EDAX, XRD, FTIR and TGA were conducted to confirm relative distribution of minerals in the flotation feed and products. These studies revealed that feed sample consists of quartz and calcite as the major minerals with minor amounts of montmorillonite and dolomite whereas flotation concentrate dominantly consists of calcite, and tailings mostly of quartz and montmorillonite. A commercial grade sodium silicate, oleic acid and MIBC were used as depressant, collector and frother respectively in flotation studies. The effects of different operating parameters were evaluated for both conventional and column flotation. Two stage conventional cell flotation results indicate that a cleaner concentrate of 42.50% lime (CaO) content could be obtained at a yield of 15.65%. The lime (CaO) content of the concentrate was further enhanced up to 44.23% at 20.73% yield using single stage column flotation. The column flotation is more efficient in comparison to the conventional cell for treating this sample. A process flowsheet was developed to treat these rejects based on the studies carried out. This process can minimize the waste generation and the concentrate generated during this process can be directly utilized in the Indian cement industries.Limestone, primarily an essential raw material for cement and metallurgical industries, is a calcareous sedimentary rock formed by the accumulation of sediments composed mainly of calcium or magnesium carbonate. Also, has a wide application in sugar, textile, plastic, leather, glass and paper industries. The major constituent of limestone is calcium carbonate. In blast furnace and steel melting processes, it is used as a flux. In India, more than 60% of limestone is used in cement industry. Limestone is called the lifeline for any cement plant, which constitutes the major raw material component, i.e. around 1.5 The high grade limestone resources are depleting day by day and hence it is inevitable to utilize the existing low grade limestone with proper beneficiation to meet the present specification and demand Froth flotation is a well established fine particle separation process based on the difference in surface hydrophobicity of particles. Separation of required solids is achieved when valuable solid components are preferentially attached to the air bubbles. This can be achieved by using different types of flotation machines popularly known as flotation cells. In contrast to widely used flotation machines which resemble to continuous stirred reactors, there have been recent developments in flotation machines which are similar to counter-current reactors popularly known as flotation columns Keeping this in view, investigations are carried out to beneficiate the lime stone rejects generated at a lime stone washing plant in southern India. In this plant, beneficiation is done by simple crushing and scrubbing followed by classification at 1 The lime stone rejects (−1.0 The size analysis was carried out by using standard BSS sieves by wet method for the ‘as received’ sample as well as flotation feed material. Each size fractions was then dried, weighed, and analyzed for chemical constituents through XRF, using PHILIPS, MagiX PRO X-ray Fluorescence spectrometer at 30 The flotation feed and final products were examined by Scanning Electron Microscopy-Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDAX) technique. SEM of Zeiss Supra 55 was used to take the electron micrographs, while the EDAX analysis was carried by X-Max (Oxford make) attachment. The mineralogical compositions of the flotation feed and final products were evaluated by XRD analysis using PANalytical, X’Pert-PRO X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( Qualitative mineral identification was done by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) using Perkin Elmer, Spectrum-GX Spectrophotometer over the range 4000–400 The thermal characteristics and presence of total carbonates in the studied samples were determined by TGA analysis using METTLER TOLEDO make TGA/SDTA 851 A commercial grade oleic acid and MIBC (Methyl Iso-Butyl Carbinol) were used as collector and frother respectively. Commercial grade sodium silicate was used as depressant, whereas, hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were used as pH regulators. A standard laboratory Denver D-12 sub-aeration flotation machine with 2-l cell was used for the batch flotation studies. The sample was prepared at 40% solids by weight with normal tap water and conditioned with required dosage of commercial grade sodium silicate for 5 The column flotation studies were carried out using a 100 The detail chemical analysis of the ‘as received’ limestone plant reject sample is given in The results of the SEM-EDAX studies are given in X ray diffraction is one of the most reliable technique of characterizing fine particles. The feed and flotation products were characterized by XRD to find out mineral constituents and their relative abundance. The minerals are identified by standard JCPDS data file.  Thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) technique can characterize materials that exhibit weight loss or gain due to decomposition, oxidation, or dehydration on heating Some preliminary conventional cell flotation experiments were conducted to asses the stages of cleaning required for flotation of this limestone reject sample. Studies were carried out to evaluate the effects of various operating parameters such as collector concentration, frother concentration, depressant concentration, solids concentration and pH. One variable at a time was varied keeping other parameters constant. Based on the preliminary observations the other operating parameters were kept constant. Initially, two-stage cell flotation experiments were carried out at different collector concentrations without frother keeping all other parameters constant. The results of these experiments are shown in The effect of frother concentration was studied during the flotation experiments at 300 The results of the experiments carried out at different dosage of depressant concentration are presented in The conventional cell flotation experiments were carried out by varying the feed solids concentration and the results of these experiments are shown in The pH of the slurry during flotation before the addition of collector was varied to evaluate its effect on flotation. The results of these experiments are presented in The best results at effective operating parameters obtained during conventional cell flotation studies for this limestone reject sample are given in Single stage column flotation studies were carried out at the best conditions (such as collector concentration, depressant concentration, solid concentration and pH) obtained by the conventional cell flotation studies The results of the column flotation experiments carried out at different airflow rates to evaluate its effect on flotation are shown in The best results obtained at the best operating conditions during column flotation studies are given in Based on the studies carried out to beneficiate this limestone plant rejects for recovery of the additional calcium values, a process flowsheet was developed and shown in Characterization studies of the limestone plant rejects and flotation products were carried out using SEM-EDAX, XRD, FTIR and TGA to know their mineralogical characteristics. Compositionally, the as received sample consists of 12.09% CaO, 2.95% MgO, 10.73% Al Quartz and clay are the major gangue minerals present in the feed material. The flotation concentrate consists mostly of calcite with traces of dolomite, quartz and clay. Presence of dolomite is due to its entrainment with calcite particles during flotation with oleic acid as collector. Quartz and clay are the major constituents of the tailings. Traces of calcite in the tailing may be due to fine intercalation between quartz/clay and calcite. Two stage flotation in a conventional cell enhanced the lime (CaO) content from 12.09% to 42.50% at a yield of 15.65% as cleaner concentrate. Using single stage column flotation, the lime (CaO) content of the concentrate was further enhanced up to 44.23% at 20.73% yield. The present study reiterates that the column flotation is more efficient in comparison to the conventional cell A process flowsheet was developed to treat this limestone plant rejects for recovery of the additional calcium values, which can reduce the waste generation and maximize the utilization of the natural resources. The concentrate can be directly utilized in Indian cement industries for cement production The authors are thankful to Prof. B. K. Mishra, Director, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar and Mr. P. S. R. Reddy, HOD, Mineral Processing Department, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar, for their kind permission to carry out this work at CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar.