The purpose of this study was to evaluate the incidence of combined osteochondral and ligamentous injuries by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in 24 patients with an acute radial head fracture (Mason type II and III) without documented dislocation or tenderness at the distal radioulnar joint. Elbow radiographs (anteroposterior and lateral views) were obtained on all patients as well as magnetic resonance images in the sagittal, coronal, axial, axial oblique, and coronal oblique planes with the injured elbow in a splint. The incidence of associated injuries revealed by MRI was medial collateral ligament not intact in 13 of 24 (54.16%), lateral ulnar collateral ligament not intact in 18 of 24 (80.1%), both collateral ligaments not intact in 12 of 24 (50%), capitellar osteochondral defects in 7 of 24 (29.1%), capitellar bone bruises in 23 of 24 (95.83%), and loose bodies in 22 of 24 (91.67%). A high level of suspicion should be used when one is treating displaced or comminuted radial head fractures, because concurrent osteochondral injuries and/or ligamentous injuries may be present.Displaced (Mason type II) or comminuted (Mason type III) radial head fractures are considered rather severe injuries and hence present a worse prognosis than simpler types (Mason type I). The degree of ligamentous injury that occurs with a radial head fracture is not always fully appreciated. Previous investigators have reported various results with regard to the incidence of associated bony or ligamentous injuries. Occult or equivocal fractures and ligamentous or articular cartilage lesions are readily identified by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) but are not visualized in standard radiologic evaluations. The purpose of this study was to investigate the incidence of associated osteochondral and ligamentous injuries by MRI in patients admitted with a radial head fracture, initially presenting as an uncomplicated, fracture without additional associated pathologic lesions. A retrospective study was undertaken on 24 consecutive patients admitted to a level 1 trauma center with an acute radial head fracture (Mason type II and III) identified on the initial anteroposterior and lateral elbow radiographs. There were 13 male and 11 female patients. The mechanism of injury was a ground-level fall in 9 of 24, fall from stairs or ladder in 7 of 24, fall while roller skating in 3 of 24, fall from a roof in 1 of 24, jump from the 3 We investigated the integrity of both the MCL and and lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) and the presence of capitellar osteochondral defects, bone bruises, or loose bodies. Elbow joint structural integrity was assessed by use of MR images obtained from a GE Signa LX 1.5 = T magnet and associated software (Milwaukee, WI). Patients were imaged with a 5-inch surface coil. Elbow positioning was variable and primarily dictated by the trauma and pain. The joints were imaged in long arm splints with the elbow flexed to 90° and the forearm in the neutral position. As a result of deficits associated with a retrospective study and the nonstandard imaging techniques used, a variety of MRI pulse sequences were used to assess the structures in question. Bone bruises were assessed via inversion recovery. Ligament integrity was determined by use of gradient echo imaging, whereas fractures were best assessed by use of T To test accuracy, reliability, and repeatability, the original and repeat readings of MR images were made by 2 independent observers. Intra-observer and interobserver reliability in identifying the integrity of the MCL was assessed for 5 randomly chosen MR images from 3 trials, with results quantified by use of a scale ranging from 0 to 5 (0, intact, 5, complete rupture). One observer made 3 separate readings of the defined structure, and a second observer made a single measurement to provide assessment of interobserver variation. The coefficient of variance was measured for intraobserver reliability, and the F test was performed to test the homogeneity of the variance for interobserver reliability. The participants in our study did not present with clinical signs suggesting any gross elbow instability on initial clinical examination. The only clinical sign that was significant was the presence of a medial-side ecchymosis. No participants in this study presented with lateral-side ecchymosis. All of the patients who had MCL lesions on MRI had medial ecchymosis and opening on preoperative fluoroscopic examination (13/24 [54.16%]). Medial-side opening on clinical examination was not always possible to documented because of pain and restricted range of motion immediately after the fracture (9/13 [69.2%]). Clinical experience shows that sometimes an elbow that is apparently stable by clinical examination may open up on preoperative fluoroscopic examination. Although our initial decision was to ignore partial tears and not to include them in the study, such tears were not recognized. Insufficient resolution of the MR images was not a factor in the absence of any partial ligament tears identified. Our effort to test intraobserver and interobserver reliability in identifying the integrity of the MCL, with quantification of the results on a scale from 0 to 5 (0, intact; 5, complete rupture), did not reveal any partial tears. Disruption of the LUCL was seen in one of two patterns of injury: proximal avulsion in 15 and midsubstance rupture in 3. Concomitant rupture of the common extensor origin was found in 10 cases. The MRI evaluation revealed a high incidence of associated injuries ( When the subgroup of patients with a radial head fracture and an MCL tear (n = 13) was evaluated separately, the results were as follows: LUCL not intact in 12 of 13, osteochondral capitellar defects in 4 of 13, bone bruises in 12 of 13, and loose bodies in 11 of 13 ( When the subgroup of patients with a radial head fracture and an LUCL tear (n = 18) was evaluated separately, the results were as follows: MCL not intact in 12 of 18, osteochondral capitellar defects in 5 of 18, bone bruises in 17 of 18, and loose bodies in 17 of 18 ( Both MCL and LUCL were intact in only 3 cases (3/24). In one of these cases, capitellar osteochondral lesions were present. In all 3 cases, MRI identified loose bodies and capitellar bone bruises. The coefficient of variation was less than 5% for intraobserver reliability. The F test between the 2 observers was not statistically significant for each MRI set. The degree of ligamentous injury that occurs with a radial head fracture is not always fully appreciated. Elbow arthrography has been used to demonstrate capsular or ligamentous disruptions with various types of radial head fractures. MRI scanning can identify ligamentous or articular cartilage lesions that are not usually identified during radiologic evaluations. Although radial head fractures are usually classified according to the system of Mason, Morgan et al Our results showed that radial head fractures that initially present as uncomplicated— displaced or comminuted (Mason type II and III)—often have associated ligamentous and/or osteochondral injuries that may have significant implications on prognosis and appropriate treatment protocols. We strongly recommend a detailed clinical and radiographic examination in every case of radial head fracture. Careful examination under fluoroscopy should be performed and may be helpful in determining the presence of associated ligamentous injuries. Given the high incidence of intraarticular loose bodies, careful evaluation of the joint should be performed. MRI should be reserved for those cases that present any type of pathology after the initial radiologic and fluoroscopic evaluation. Radial head fractures represent a clinical entity that is common in everyday clinical practice and especially in busy trauma centers. A high level of suspicion should be used when one is treating these type of fractures, because concurrent osseous, osteochondral, or/and ligamentous injuries might be present. These associated injuries may have important treatment implications.