Introduction
                  The calcaneus is the largest and strongest tarsal bone. It is the most commonly fractured tarsal bone and accounts for about 2% of all fractures. The importance of the calcaneal angles in assessing the fractures of calcaneus and planning treatment has been highlighted.
               
                  Aim
                  The purpose of this study was to evaluate the normal calcaneal angles in the Egyptian populations who live in Alexandria and nearby governorates and compare their values to the published data.
               
                  Methods
                  Lateral plain radiographs of 220 normal feet and ankles of 103 males and 97 females with age ranged from 20 to 40years, were studied retrospectively at El Hadra University Hospital, Alexandria, Arabrepublic of Egypt between June and December 2010. Three of the normal calcaneal angles (Böhler angle–Gissane's angle–calcaneal compression angle) were measured and the mean and standard deviation of each angle were calculated. The relationships between each angle and age, sex, side of the body, occupation, weight, height, and residence of examined persons was tested and compared to previous researches and international figures.
               
                  Results
                  The mean of Böhler angle in the Egyptian population was 30.14±4.182 ranged from 22° to 40°. The mean of Gissane's angle was 122.92±6.952 ranged from 108° to 138°, while the mean of calcaneal compression angle was 31.03±3.82 ranged from 24° to 44°. The measured calcaneal angles are not significantly related to age, sex, and side of the body, residence and occupation of the examined persons except there is significant negative correlation between the Böhler angle and the age which not reported in the previous researches and studies.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The study showed that difference in the mean of the calcaneal angles from other previous studies that reinforce the importance of establishing the normal range of the calcaneal angles in a given population.The skeleton of the foot has three segments (the tarsal bones, the metatarsal bones, and the phalanges). There are seven tarsal, five metatarsals, and 14 phalanges. The calcaneus is irregularly cuboid in shape and its long axis is directed forwards, upwards, and somewhat laterally.      The trabecular pattern within the calcaneus reflects the static and dynamic stresses to which it is repeatedly subjected. The thalamic portion of the calcaneus is the condensation of bone trabeculae beneath the anterior and posterior facets. The calcaneus is composed mostly of cancellous bone and has a very thin cortical shell. It is formed between the large concave facet of the body of the talus and the convex posterior articular surface of the superior aspect of the calcaneus. Stronger ligaments connect the two bones as the medial, lateral, posterior and the interosseus talo-calcaneal ligaments. It is also called the Chopart's joint. It is composed of the talonavicular articulation medially and the calcaneocuboid laterally. These separate joints combine functionally to contribute primarily to the inversion–eversion action of the foot. There are important angles which are seen on the radiograph (AP and lateral) of the calcaneus and the measurements of these angles are good geometrical indices for assessment of the subtalar joint and calcaneal fragments alignment following calcaneal fractures and their treatment. BA was introduced by Dr. Lorenz Böhler in 1931 as the tuber angle and the range was in his article 30–35. It is a complementary angle subtended on the lateral X-ray by the intersection of two lines. On lateral radiograph, there are two thick and strong cortical struts that exist within the calcaneus and extend from the front of the bone to the posterior facet (the densities of the subchondral bone of the posterior facet and that of the anterior and middle facets). It is subtended by two lines originating at the lowest point on the calcaneus, one joining it to the head of fifth metatarsal bone and the other to the lowest point of the calcaneocuboid joint. It ranges from 15° to 44°, with an average of 28° ( It is derived from a line in the plane of the inferior surface of the calcaneus, while the other line is identical to the first line of the Böhler's angle. It is the angle between the long axis of the talus and that of the oscalcis. It measures the inclination of the talus over the oscalcis, so it can be used as a measurement of the hindfoot alignment. It increases with valgus angulation of the hindfoot and diminishes with talipes equino varus approaching parallelism ( The angle between anterior and posterior compression trabeculae groups which increases with osteoporosis and disrupted in comminuted fractures (  Traumatic variation of the normal calcaneal angles (calcaneal fracture). According to the distortion of the normal calcaneal angles, two types of calcaneal fracture: the first one (intra-articular) distorts the calcaneal angles while the second one (extra-articular) doesn't distort the calcaneal angles. Non-traumatic variation (pes-cavus, flat foot and hind foot deformities). The work included 200 adult cases (180 cases unilaterally examined clinically and radiologically and 20 cases bilaterally examined clinically and radiologically) taken randomly from persons presented to El Hadara University Hospital with problems affecting sites rather than the lower limbs. The youngest person in the study was 20 A full workup including history taking, clinical examination and radiological evaluation were performed for every person examined. All cases were assessed clinically and functionally and the cases with abnormal finding (gait abnormality, congenital, or acquired deformity, weakness of the muscle power) were excluded from this study. Angles of oscalcis (Böhler angle, Gissane's angle, and calcaneal compression angle) will be studied and analyzed. On these radiographs the reference lines were drawn for angle measurement with a chin graph pencil on translucent sheet placed over the radiographs. The angles were measured by two investigators separately also each one of the investigators measured the angles two times with different intervals by using hand-held geniometer. Angles of oscalcis were measured and the mean and the standard deviation of each angle were calculated. The relationship between each angle and age, gender, weight, occupation, residence, and side of body was tested and compared to international figures. The relationships between each measured angles were assessed. After data collection, the results will be tabulated as frequency distribution for different qualitative values. The arithmetic mean and standard deviation and median were calculated for quantitative variables. All that results were compared with results of previous studies. SPSS (statistical package of social sciences) 13.0 software was used in statistical analysis also dependent The mean of the Böhler angle in the study was 30.141 Our study revealed a wide range for calcaneal angles in the Egyptian population, as previously reported for other populations in previous studies ( Calcaneal angles have a wide range of normal limits and distribution in different populations. Therefore, their normal limits and distribution of should be defending for a given population. The range of 22°–40° for the BA and 108°–138° for the GA can be taken as the normal ranges for the Egyptian population. The calcaneal compression angle was not studied before. The range of the calcaneal compression angle was wide range from 24° to 44° also there was significant correlation between the Böhler angle and the calcaneal compression angle so can be used as reserve for BA in extensive communication of posterior facet of the oscalcis. There is no significantly correlation between the calcaneal angles and the sex, side of the body, occupation, residence, and body mass index; however, Böhler angle is significant correlated with the age which means that it decreases with aging. However, there is no correlation between both calcaneal compression angle and Gissane's angle with the age.