The effect of the molecular weight, reaction temperature and polymer concentration were investigated. The PEG coverage could be controlled by the selection of the polymer; the molecular coverage increased with decrease in polymer molecular weight. A method for synthesising PEG-coated magnetite particles for use in diagnostic imaging is described. Magnetite particles in aqueous conditions were reacted with Si(OR)2R′R′′ (trimethoxysilane-PEG, R=Me; R′=Ome; R′′=PEG). These PEG-coated magnetite particles showed greatly enhanced colloid stability properties with respect to the uncoated particles.Ultrafine magnetic oxide colloids have found application in a variety of fields that include engineering, biotechnology and medicine (e.g. diagnostic imaging). Ferromagnetic particles are used in magnetic recording media, and in the form of ferrofluids, can be used as magnetic seals The main medical application of ultrafine magnetite colloids is in the field of diagnostic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) These concepts of particle surface modification with PEG have now been widely utilised in the field of drug delivery for liposomes, emulsions and microspheres We have also evaluated a variety of different processes that were intended to provide stable ferromagnetic particles for lymph node targeting. The adsorption of block copolymers (polyoxyethylene-polyoxypropylene systems), PEG modified dextrans and PEG lipids to ‘naked’ and primed preformed particles has been studied Water was purified using an Elgastat Maxima filtration apparatus. All chemicals were general-purpose reagents from Aldrich (UK) except for the end-substituted trimethoxysilane-PEG (molecular weights of 350, 550, 750, 1000, 3400 (α, ω-substituted) and 5000 Da) which were supplied by Shearwater Polymers (Alabama, USA). Magnetite was made according to the method of Massart The particle size was determined by photon correlation spectroscopy (Malvern Instruments) by adding the stock colloid to 10 A general method was as follows:- aqueous dispersions of magnetite (Fe The excess soluble reagents were removed by magnetic decanting. The particles were first precipitated by adding saturated Na A portion of each batch was freeze-dried for analysis by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The effect of varying the temperature was investigated by coating magnetite with SiPEG 5000 at room temperature 50 and 80°C, respectively. A range of SiPEG coated magnetite particles, with varying molecular weight PEG groups (350, 550, 750, 1000 and 3400 Da), was prepared at 80°C. In preliminary studies, SiPEG 3400 and SiPEG 5000 particles were prepared at low polymer concentration ( A typical magnetite-citric acid complex used for control purposed (uncoated system) was prepared as follows. 1 M aqueous citric acid was slowly added to colloidal magnetite until the pH reached ∼2. Flocculation was observed due to the shifting of the isoelectric point (IEP) to a more acidic pH. The particles were repeptized by titration with N(me) The adsorbed amount of PEG polymer on the magnetite particles was determined by TGA (Perkin–Elmer TGA-7) scanning from room temperature to 800 at 20°C min The wt.% of the polymer component on the particles was taken to be the difference between the minimum wt.% values of the sample and the magnetite control plus a correction factor ( The particle size of the magnetite particles was measured by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) (Malvern 4700) and the electrophoretic properties were measured as a function of pH using a Malvern Zeta Sizer 4 (Malvern Instruments). Magnetite suspensions were diluted by adding the stock colloid to 10 The particle size of the dispersed particles was measured as a function of pH using PCS. The apparent particle size obtained by this method gives a good indication of the pH-dependence of the particle stability; an amphoteric system such as that used here typically have larger mean diameters at pH values close to the IEP due to the presence of flocs. In the least stable systems, where macroscopic flocculation occurred, the particle size was not measured but considered to be of infinite value and denoted on the graphs accordingly. The pH values shown are those measured immediately after the PCS measurements. Similar samples were used to obtain electrophoretic mobility data as a function of pH. Thermogravimetric analysis was used to measure PEG coverage ( The molar coverage increased with a decrease in polymer molecular weight, probably due to the corresponding reduction in the entropy effect, which tends to oppose the polymer coating reaction. The values for absorption, described in terms of The plateau values of These data correspond well with preliminary chemisorption studies where SiPEG 350, SiPEG 750, (α, ω) SiPEG 3400 and SiPEG 5000 were reacted with magnetite at 80°C at lower polymer concentrations. Here, the molar adsorbed amount decreased significantly with increasing molecular weight. The adsorbed amount values were: SiPEG 350 ( The area per attached PEG chain on the magnetite, and the wt.% of silicon were calculated from the maximum adsorbed amounts for SiPEG 350, SiPEG 550, SiPEG 750 and SiPEG 1000. The values for area per PEG chain were 1.26, 1.30, 2.08 and 2.91 nm These data on the area per PEG chain may be compared with values found elsewhere for other substrates and linkage mechanisms. For example, Burns et al. Our data indicate that the maximum molar PEG coverage on magnetite particles was relatively high for the lower molecular weight PEG systems when comparing our values with those in the literature. It can be concluded that the chemisorption process using the SiPEG materials provides an efficient process, due partly to the relatively low molecular weight polymers employed. Uncoated magnetite particles, similar to the systems prepared by Massart In general, SiPEG-coated particles showed greatly enhanced colloid stability compared to the PEG-free systems above (see following discussion). The effect of varying the reaction temperature was investigated. Thus, magnetite was coated with SiPEG 5000 at room temperature, 50 and 80°C, respectively. Particle size and electrophoresis data for these systems are shown in Particle size and electrophoresis data for a range of SiPEG-coated magnetite particles (varying molecular weight PEG groups: 350, 550, 750, 1000 and 3400 Da, coating reactions performed at 80°C) are plotted together as a function of pH in The corresponding data for 5000 Da PEG are shown in The coating of magnetite particles with SiPEGs leads to a greatly improved colloid stability as compared to uncoated systems that undergo flocculation at pH values close to the IEP of the colloid. These systems were also extremely resistant to flocculation induced by Na The particles coated with (α, ω) SiPEG 3400 and SiPEG 5000 in preliminary studies, were prepared using rather low polymer concentrations ( In addition, the magnitude of electrophoretic mobility values, at pH values far from the IEP, were lower for the PEG-coated particles than for uncoated particles. This is considered to be due to the shielding of the charge at the particle surface by the polymer. Examining the results for the monosubstituted polymers only (i.e. not ((α, ω) SiPEG 3400, which presumably adsorbs more strongly at a given A novel method of producing PEG-coated magnetite particles has been achieved by the reaction of Si(OR) R′R′′ with colloidal magnetite particles. It has proved possible to control the PEG coverage and in turn the colloid stability properties of the SiPEG-treated systems. Particles carrying high mass and/or molar coverage of PEG could be completely redispersed in aqueous media from the freeze-dried state. It is to be expected that these coated magnetite particles will demonstrate different properties when administered in vivo. In particular, it should be possible to prepare PEG coated magnetite particles that have optional properties for targeting to the regional lymph nodes following subcutaneous administration. These aspects will be considered elsewhere This work was funded by a grant under the European Community Value II Programme, Contract CTT-649. Helpful discussions with the Industrial partners, Danbiosyst (UK) Limited and Nycomed Imaging are gratefully acknowledged.