The Annual Energy Production (AEP) estimations are crucial to analyze the potential of wind energy projects. To calculate the AEP of a wind farm, it is necessary to accurately measure the wind speed, because small errors in these measures lead to significant deviations in the wind turbine power curve. In-field wind speed is usually measured by means of cup anemometers, which are calibrated within wind tunnels. In-field ambient conditions differ from those at the laboratory, which increases the uncertainty of the wind speed measures performed at the location of the turbine. The present work is focused on analyzing the effect of the following ambient parameters on the cup anemometer behavior: temperature, humidity and atmospheric pressure. In order to reach this target, experimental tests in a wind tunnel were performed, which allows minimizing the effect of the rest of influence parameters: turbulence, average flow inclination angle and flow direction. With this work it is determined how flow air viscous forces affect the cup anemometers, changing its rotation frequency. This explanation concludes that a variation on air temperature, humidity and/or pressure modifies moist air kinematic viscosity, which leads to change the friction between air and cups and, consequently, the cup anemometers rotational frequency. In most cases, the kinematic viscosity is inversely proportional to the air density and therefore, higher in-field densities, compared to those at the laboratory where the anemometer was calibrated, lead to underestimate the wind speed, and vice versa. The fact that this effect has been quantified during the calibration process is quite important, since it allows removing the influence of the environmental parameters studied; so that by modifying the calibration methodology, the accuracy of cup anemometers would be optimized. In order to clarify how the moist air kinematic viscosity influences the calibration curve, the calibration measurements of a real cup anemometer are mapped into a new dimensionless abacus, with the Tip Speed Ratio (TSR) and the Reynold’s number as coordinates. The key idea is that the rotation frequency of the cup anemometer is related to both wind speed and moist air kinematic viscosity. This relation is mathematically described by the equation of a hyperbolic paraboloid surface up to a value of wind speed of 15.3 m/s.Slope of the linear regression [m] Factor depending on the shape of the structure within the wind tunnel Annual Energy Production Intercept or offset for linear regression [m/s] Blockage ratio Coefficient of cup-anemometer air density sensibility Force coefficient of the structure within the wind tunnel Pitot tube head coefficient Power coefficient Slope coefficient of surface regression Cup anemometer rotor diameter [m] Coefficient of cup-anemometer air kinematic viscosity sensibility Enhancement factor, Eq. Anemometer rotation frequency [rad/s] Wind speed Weibull cumulative distribution International Electrotechnical Commission Wind tunnel calibration factor Blockage correction factor Number of measurements of Number of measurements of Molar mass of dry air [kg/mol] Molar mass of water [kg/mol] Electrical power in the bin i [W] Barometric pressure [Pa] Saturated vapor pressure [Pa] Ideal gas constant [J/(mol·K)] Correlation coefficient Reynolds number Coefficient of determination Air-dry bulb temperature [°C] Absolute temperature [K] Tip Speed Ratio Absolute wet bulb temperature [K] Standard uncertainty Wind speed [m/s] Mean flow field velocity inside wind tunnel, with blockage effect [m/s] Wind speed in the bin i [m/s] Mole fraction of water vapor Compressibility factor, Eq. Mean wind dynamic pressure. Fluid kinetic energy per volume unit [Pa] Moist air dynamic viscosity [kg/(m·s)] Moist air kinematic viscosity [m Moist air density [kg/m Air density at the calibration laboratory Relative humidity Psychometric constant pertinent to the existing wet-bulb temperature Psychometric constant pertinent to the standard wet-bulb temperature of 0 °C Cup anemometers, developed by Robinson in 1847, are reliable and robust devices that measure the wind speed. These devices help to assess the power performance of wind turbines and the Annual Energy Production (hereafter AEP), by means of the determination of wind kinetic energy through the rotor swept area, and because of that, the increment of installed wind power has fostered the use of these measuring equipment. The cup anemometer physical base consists of relating the anemometer rotation frequency The motivation of the present paper arose from the observation of a low repeatability (idem for reproducibility) in the calibration results of the same cup anemometer when the same wind tunnel is used in consecutive days. The dispersion of the calibration results can only be attributed to the air density variations between different tests because other parameters influencing cup anemometers are highly controlled inside the wind tunnel, since these facilities are specially shaped to decrease turbulence, average flow inclination angle and direction. A review of the available literature on cup anemometers reveals that other authors have discussed this lack of repeatability. Pindado et al. Researchers such as Diaz, Carta and Matias The AEP estimations are essential for the management of any wind farm. Furthermore, there are plenty of papers where AEP assessments are basic, for example, to validate an equivalent model for wind farms, as in the case of Jin et al. With regard to regulations review, the international standard IEC 61400-12-1, about “Power performance measurements of electricity producing wind turbines” The annex I of the aforementioned standard In summary, the international standard It is important to clarify that, in chapter 9.1 “Data Normalisation” of the discussed standard It is beyond question that the power curve of a wind turbine and the AEP are determined by means of the wind speed. Not considering any corrections to compensate for the ambient conditions variation between the calibration laboratory and the location of the wind turbine, leads to a very expanded uncertainty of wind speed measures and consequently, to high errors in energy production prediction. The present work contributes to explain and quantify the effect of air temperature, humidity and atmospheric pressure on wind speed measures obtained via cup anemometers. The effect of these ambient conditions, which was observed during the calibration process, seems to be greater than what users believe. In such a way, once these influence parameters are quantified, it would be possible to remove the uncertainty-covering factor due to the effect of air density and temperature on wind speed measures of cup anemometers. The current paper fills the gap of explaining the physical mechanism that relates the main ambient conditions during the calibration process to wind speed measurements and quantifies this relation. The conducted experiments demonstrate that the friction between air and cups decreases the value of wind speed provided by cup anemometers for those locations where the density is higher than that at the calibration laboratory, and vice versa. In fact, the influential parameter is the kinematic viscosity. This affirmation is demonstrated through the calibration of a small cup anemometer based on dimensionless variables. The experimental results obtained in the present work clearly show that, considering a set of constant wind speeds within the wind tunnel, Reynolds number is linearly related to the inverse of Tip Speed Ratio (speed coefficient). Taking into account the aforementioned dimensionless relationship, the mathematical function which relates wind speed, anemometer rotation frequency and air kinematic viscosity describes a hyperbolic paraboloid surface. In order to assess the proposed approach, the uncertainty of the new calibration parameters has been estimated. The resulting uncertainty is lower than that obtained by the conventional calibration curve (Eq. Finally, the present paper demonstrates that it is possible to reduce the uncertainty of the wind speed measured with cup anemometers by means of two alternative methods. Firstly, by including the new equation in the calibration process of cup anemometers, and secondly, by making corrections to the measurements provided by the cup anemometers that were calibrated without taking into account this new equation. A reduction of this uncertainty would significantly improve the estimations of power and AEP of wind turbines. The manuscript is organized as follows: the experimental equipment and the measurement strategy are explained in The device used to obtain experimental data is a cup anemometer extracted from a meteorological station Auriol model IAN 114,435 (see The cup anemometer was tested in the closed jet-type wind tunnel showed in In the present study, a Pitot tube is considered as the standard reference device for measuring flow velocity. This measurement instrument is a stainless-steel Pitot tube Testo (reference 06352045), 500 mm length and Pitot tube factor = 1. A Testo 512 2 hPa differential micro-manometer is connected to the Pitot tube. This micro-manometer has a 0.1 Pa of resolution, an accuracy of ±0.01 hPa in a measuring range from 2 to 17.5 m/s and is capable to provide two lectures per second. The rotation frequency of the anemometer is determined via a digital Photo Tachometer model RM-1501, with a sample rate of one second and an accuracy of ±0.2 rpm. Three thermometers allow obtaining the air conditions: two Tecpel 305 thermometers placed inside and outside the wind tunnel provide the dry bulb temperature in both places, and one alcohol thermometer placed inside the tunnel provides the wet bulb temperature. The ambient barometric pressure is determined via the barometer placed at the top of building where the wind tunnel is located. These data are published on the MATRAS webpage The testing wind speeds range from 1.6 m/s to 17 m/s at intervals of approximately 1.7 m/s, which means 10 values of velocity tested. This experimental sequence is repeated fourteen times under different environmental conditions; seven of these sequences are tested by increasing wind speed (tests 1 s to 7 s in During the tests, the dry bulb temperature inside the tunnel varied between 22.3 °C and 26.6 °C; the tunnel wet bulb temperature between 16 °C and 22 °C; and the laboratory barometric pressure between 1012.81 hPa and 1023.84 hPa. These changes in the variables correspond to the natural environmental changes recorded during five days of testing. Once the barometric pressure, dry and wet bulb temperature are measured for each operating condition, the relative humidity Once the relative humidity is known, the moist air density for each operating condition can be obtained via the CIPM-2007 revised formula  In According to the obtained results, the relative humidity during the tests was always within the interval 37.4%–66.8%; the moist air density within the interval 1.1738 kg/m The anemometer rotation frequency, for each tested wind speed, is recorded with a sampling frequency of 1 Hz during 50 s, so that steady-state conditions can be considered. The cup anemometer rotation frequency In the middle of the rotation frequency sampling interval, the dynamic pressure is recorded by means of the Pitot tube, which provides the mean value of The comparison between measurements from the Pitot tube placed at the reference position and at the anemometer position ( Finally, Eq. The uncertainties of the different magnitudes are obtained following the Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty, commonly referred to as GUM  In order to explain the discrepancies observed in the slope of the calibration lines in In order to overcome the large uncertainties showed in Reynolds number The resulting “dimensionless abacus” is presented in Considering a linear relation Finally, the slope coefficient The following assumptions have been considered: firstly, if air density remains nearly constant during a calibration test, kinematic viscosity remains constant as well, and consequently, it is possible to determine a constant value for The dimensional analysis provides the ρ - The observed low dispersions, at 95% confidence interval, explain the high determination coefficient Eq. Relative uncertainties are compared in Note that, with the exception of The Eq. Eq. Above  According to Eq. Finally, In order to consider the influence of air density on wind speed measurements, the IEC linear regression The abacus showed in Annual Energy Production AEP, which depends on the turbine power curve and the wind speed probability distribution during a year, is key to study turbines performance. The power curve relates wind speed and output power. According to the bin method described in the IEC 61400-12-1 international standard A study case is presented to understand the role of the aforementioned density variations in power curves definition. In this case, the power data and wind speed measures provided in page 67 of the IEC 61400-12-1 standard According to the observed results in In addition to the power curve, it is necessary a wind speed probability distribution for AEP estimation. This probability distribution is also affected by the ambient conditions. The same method previously discussed can be applied to correct this distribution considering the density of a specific place and the used cup anemometer. For the study case under consideration, It is worth to note that it is impossible to make rigorous comparisons between wind frequency curves of two different sites without accomplishing corrections for ambient conditions. The average annual wind speed (or the Weibull scale factor) should be corrected upwards at those places with air density above the calibration one (typically coastal locations), and otherwise it should be corrected downwards (typically interior or mountainous locations). Finally, according to the international standard IEC 61400-12-1 Regarding generic AEP, it is observed that the values at sites with ρ > ρ As explained above, the specific AEP for a particular location can be calculated from the mean power curve and the wind speed specific frequency curve. If both curves are measured at the same time and using the same anemometer, the resulting value of the specific AEP does not require a correction of the effect of air density during the calibration procedure (see The proposed correction procedure allows to study the wind energy potential of a wind turbine before installing it in a specific location. The idea is to correct a known power curve of the wind turbine considering the variation of air density between a specific place where the turbine could be installed and the calibration laboratory. This work provides an explanation for those cases where a cup-anemometer has different rotation frequencies for the same wind speed. According to a set of experimental measurements conducted in a wind tunnel, we concluded that the main cause of the abovementioned variations are the kinematic viscosity variations or, equivalently, the density variations when a constant dynamic viscosity can be assumed. Moreover, we verified that the experimental observations fit adequately to a hyperbolic paraboloid surface, which relates wind speed, rotation frequency and density. The proposed relation leads to more accurate wind speed measurements. Hence, it helps to improve the AEP estimations by reducing the error linked to the cup-anemometers calibration procedure. On the other hand, in view of the presented results, for those that prefer a conventional calibration (which is accomplished considering a constant density), we described a procedure to correct in-field wind speed measurements according the specific density conditions. Respect to the observations that foster this work, even for a low-density variation of 0.0267 kg/m In order to overcome the above drawback, we discovered that representing the information in a TSR Regarding wind turbine power curves, if in-field measurements of wind speed with a cup-anemometer are not corrected, a 50% variation in the power coefficient Additionally, using the power data and wind speed measures provided by the IEC 61400-12-1 standard for a 1 MW wind turbine, we computed the AEP with and without applying the developed equation for cup anemometers. The results of this computation showed for example, overestimations of 1000 MWh/year for an annual mean wind speed of 10 m/s measured at hub height in a location where air density is about 0.04 kg/m Just in case of determining the power curve and the wind speed specific frequency at the same location and with the same anemometer, specific AEP estimations don’t require anemometer correction. Therefore, this case is feasible only when measuring an existing wind turbine. Finally, the following bullets summarize the main findings of this work: The rotation frequency variations for constant wind speeds in cup-anemometers are due to kinematic viscosity variations. A hyperbolic paraboloid surface that relates wind speed, rotation frequency and kinematic viscosity provides a more accurate wind speed estimation than a linear regression between wind speed and rotation frequency at constant density. The accuracy of cup anemometers would improve significantly by correcting the calibration error and, consequently, wind speed measurements would lead to more accurate AEP estimations.” The novelty and interest of the summarizing findings are that they quantitatively explain the observed rotation frequency variations in a cup anemometer respect to ambient conditions. The proposed approach would improve the reproducibility of the measurements provided by cup anemometers, which would increase the reliability of these devices when they are used to perform power curves, statistical studies regarding wind speed and estimations of AEP. Since the proposed approach has been done using wind tunnel measurements and a specific anemometer, future works that would help to support the presented results could be to perform in field measurements with different anemometers, or do the cup-anemometer calibration in a wind tunnel that allows large variations in air density. For this last case, the wind tunnels must allow a regulation of air pressure, so that it can be slightly modified respect to the ambient pressure. None. The authors would like to acknowledge the usage of the wind tunnel provided by the fluid mechanics area belonging to the department of Mechanical and Mining Engineering of the University of Jaén.