The soil mass behind a retaining wall gradually yields and separates from the stationary soil mass with the complex shape of the slip surface depending on the mode of wall movement and roughness of the wall surface. In this study, the problem of a rigid retaining wall with a uniform surcharge acting along the horizontal backfill under active translation mode is investigated in a two-dimensional system of equilibrium. Exact stress solutions based on Janssen׳s approach are generalized in rectangular coordinates and are validated with boundary conditions on the retaining wall and at the Coulomb slip line behind the wall. Because the yield condition is not used in Janssen׳s approach, the proposed solution is a merely static stress solution, not statically admissible solution. New equations are developed to estimate the magnitude and distribution of vertical, horizontal and shear stresses in the failure zone behind a retaining wall. The proposed analysis indicates the arching effect behind the retaining wall because the maximum stresses do not appeared at the toe; but at some distance away from the toe of the retaining wall. The results of the proposed formulations are compared with both full-scale and laboratory-scale experimental data as well as the existing formulations. The proposed analysis provides comparable approximations for horizontal active stress distribution, the magnitude and the application height of the horizontal active force at the wall.horizontal distance measuring from the toe of the wall in a rectangular coordinate system vertical distance measuring the from toe of the wall in a rectangular coordinate system major, intermediate and minor principal stresses horizontal stress vertical stress shear stress horizontal stress at the wall vertical stress at the wall shear stress at the wall angle between the slip surface and the wall measured from the vertical ( bulk density of the retained soil unit weight of the retained soil internal friction angle of the retained soil interface friction angle between the wall and the retained soil coefficient of wall friction ( height of the retained soil height measured from the top of the wall height of application of the horizontal active force measured from the top of the wall   moment of the horizontal active stress about the wall base constant number defined by total active force on the wall horizontal active force normal to the wall uniform surcharge on the top surface of the retained soil shearing force on the wall Conventionally, the active earth pressure against rigid retaining walls has been calculated by using The arching theory is attributed to  Investigations of the silo effect have been extended to conical and wedge-shaped hoppers by Later, many authors also described earth pressure distributions in terms of arching action (action ( So far, all of those existing formulations have been investigated in a one-dimensional system of equilibrium by assuming a differential flat element between the wall and the Coulomb slip line behind the wall. Though these arching-based solutions were formulated in the bounds of the Coulomb wedge for a case of a smooth vertical wall and horizontal backfill, they are different from the classical Coulomb solution because not only the total force but the stress distribution along the wall are also obtained. The simplification of the formulations by averaging vertical pressure helps obtain the stress distribution only along the wall, but the stress distribution in the failure zone between the wall and the slip line still remains unclear. Active earth pressure distribution under horizontal translation, rotation about the top, and rotation about the base are typical modes of movement for rigid retaining walls conventionally considered ( Besides, outcomes of DEM analysis conducted by The proposed analysis takes account of the stress system only; not entering into the strain system because their governing equations are associated with static equilibrium of a rigid wedge-shaped body. Hence, the mechanisms of deformation of the soil at the grain scale are ignored. The aspects of the arching effect with reference to more recent works that delineate the mechanisms of deformation at the finer scale can be found in some literatures, e.g. shape of arch ( In this study, the problem of a retaining wall under an active translation mode is investigated in a two-dimensional system of equilibrium. Analytic stress solutions in a rectangular coordinate system are derived by adopting the assumption of uniform vertical stress in any horizontal plane, which is the ideal condition previously used in two-dimensional silo problems. As discussed in Since the method of filling greatly affects the vertical pressure across the horizontal floor, the assumption of uniform vertical pressure in silos is over-simplified. According to Under this simplistic assumption, new solutions for vertical, horizontal and shear stresses are developed, which make it possible to estimate the magnitude of stresses at any arbitrary point in a failure zone, including along a retaining wall. To validate the accuracy of the developed equations, for the particular case of no surcharge on the retained soil and at the wall, comparison is made with existing experimental results ( The results of this study could improve the knowledge of static earth pressures on rigid retaining walls under active translation mode, for a safer and more economical design of such structures. In this study, a rigid retaining wall is considered to be under a translating mode while retaining a granular backfill soil mass. The detailed analytical procedure for calculation of the active horizontal stresses applied on the wall under the arching effect is presented in this section. The state of stress in the retained soil is considered based on Janssen׳s arching theory. If a mass of granular soil is retained between two parallel rigid vertical walls, it is assumed that the settlement of the retained soil stage is large enough to fully induce friction between the walls and the soil. Therefore, the weight of any differential flat element of soil can be partially supported by the frictional resistance at the walls. Frictional resistance causes changes in the direction of the principal stresses acting on the differential element ( Coulomb׳s failure criterion, in which the slip surface determined from Mohr׳s stress circle and Coulomb׳s envelope is found to be a plane inclining at an angle of  Referring to Sign conventions and notations in geo-mechanics are applied throughout this study where compression is taken as positive. The two-dimensional rectangular coordinate system ( By imposing the assumption on uniformly distributed The general solution of Eq. Outward movement of the wall induces a small settlement of backfill soil; therefore, shear stress According to To satisfy both boundary conditions of shear stress at The expression of  Eq. Eq. Integrating factor A general solution of Eq. The special case Applying the boundary condition at the ground surface behind the wall where a uniform surcharge Substitution of Eq. Substitution of Eq. Finally, the horizontal stress behind the retaining wall can be derived from Eq. Note that according to Substitution of Eqs. For the case of zero surcharge A similar discussion is reported in The illustrative stress solutions normalized by Magnitude and direction of principal stresses in the failure wedge for the same retaining wall is illustrated in Though a physical model set-up was developed and a series of experimental tests were conducted for this study, stress measurement was restricted to the wall surface due to the technical limitation of pressure gauge installation. In addition, the numerical solutions given by Unfortunately, the stress distribution obtained using the proposed method is shown without direct validation with experimental solutions or numerical solutions. Therefore, further comparisons are recommended in subsequent research. The distribution of vertical, horizontal and shear stresses at the wall ( The variation of the horizontal active earth pressure along the depth of the retaining wall obtained from the proposed formulations as a function of the backfill soil internal friction angle ( The variation of the horizontal active earth pressure along the retaining wall as a function of the soil-wall interface friction angle ( The variations in the active vertical and horizontal stress with a change in uniform surcharge are shown in The horizontal active force ( Substituting Eq. For the type of retaining wall whose back is vertical, the total active force on the wall ( The height of the point of application of the total active force on the retaining wall coincides with the point of application of the horizontal active force. Therefore, this height can be calculated by dividing the moment of the horizontal stress about the wall base by the horizontal active force. Herein, the moment of the horizontal stress about the wall base ( By substituting Eq. Finally, the height of application of the horizontal active force ( Because the arching effect is more prevalent for a wall with a rough surface, the smoother the surface of wall, the closer the profiles of horizontal stress at a retaining wall obtained from both analyses approaches to Rankine׳s active earth pressure. Therefore, for a frictionless wall surface ( In order to check the performance of the proposed analyses over various length scales, their predictions are compared with a series of full-scale model tests and also a series of laboratory-scale model tests with various wall heights in the following sub-sections. The results are also compared with the theoretical predictions from Some full-scale experimental results of A comparison of the magnitude and height of the point of application of the horizontal active force on the wall is shown in The proposed analysis is compared with the results of With the aim of accuracy evaluation of each theoretical solution with the available experimental data, the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) is employed to evaluate dimensionless residuals between predicted and observed values. The solution proposed in this study is generally under 2 The problem of a rigid retaining wall with a uniform surcharge on the retained soil under active translation mode has been investigated in a two-dimensional system of equilibrium. Stress field solutions based on Janssen׳s assumptions were newly derived. These stress solutions were employed to calculate stress distribution at any arbitrary point in a failure wedge, including at the retaining wall and at the Coulomb slip line. The proposed analysis method indicates the arching effect behind the retaining wall because the maximum stresses did not appear at the toe, but at some distance away from the toe of the retaining wall. Because the arching effect is more prevalent for a wall with a rough surface, the smoother the surface of wall, the closer the profiles of horizontal stress at a retaining wall obtained from the proposed analyses to Rankine׳s active earth pressure. In order to evaluate the applicability of the developed formulation, predictions based on the proposed solution were compared with both full-scale and laboratory-scale test results and estimation values given by existing equations. The predictions from the proposed analysis provided comparable approximations for the magnitude and height of the point of application of the horizontal active force among the compared analyses. It is acknowledged that the non-zero horizontal stress at the top of the retained soil was a drawback of this analysis. This can be attributed to the fact that the yield condition is not used in Janssen׳s approach and is slightly violated in the proposed analysis for stress states near the top surface. This work was supported by