This paper is concerned with the behaviour of quasi-brittle materials eroded by water-driven particles (WDP). Determined are the compressive stress–strain curves for the material. The measured relations are approximated by parabolic regression. The areas under these curves are then used to characterise the specific energy absorption capability of the investigated materials. Erosion is then investigated by WDP with varying water pressures and exposure time. The depth of penetration, the material volume loss, and the kerf geometry are measured. Based on these measurements, the specific energy of the erosion process is calculated. A characteristic efficiency number Φ is then defined and estimated for all materials at different erosion conditions. It is shown that this parameter effectively characterises the erodability of the materials. Moreover, relations are found between the characteristic erosion parameters, such as threshold pressure, machinability number, depth of penetration, material removal rate, and the specific energy absorption capability. A preliminary phenomenological model based on the relationship between crack propagation processes and energy absorption capability is developed.constants kerf width constants focus diameter water jet nozzle diameter jet energy modulus of fracture absorbed energy per volume during compressive test dynamically absorbed energy Young's modulus specific removal energy depth of penetration kerf length abrasive flow rate water flow rate machinability number pump pressure threshold pressure hydraulic pump power water volume flow rate traverse rate volumetric removal rate volume removal nozzle efficiency parameter correction parameter efficiency parameter water density material density stress ultimate stress strain ultimate strain Water-driven particle erosion (WDPE) is the basic process of the abrasive waterjet technology – a newly introduced machining concept that offers some advantages over many other traditional and non-traditional machining technologies, such as no thermal distortion, high machining versatility, low cutting force, and high flexibility An injection jet is formed by accelerating small abrasive particles (usually garnet) through contact with a high-speed waterjet. The mixing between abrasive, water, and air takes place in a mixing chamber, and the acceleration process occurs in an acceleration focus. The abrasive particles leave the focus at velocities of several hundred meters per second. A high number of abrasives generates a high-frequency impingement on the material surface. The high-speed abrasive jets investigated are formed by this method. WDPE is a promising alternative method for the 3D-machining (milling, turning, drilling, polishing) of quasi-brittle materials, such as ceramics, concrete, rocks, and reinforced materials. Although several parameter studies have been identified for ceramics, concrete and rocks, the general mechanism of the material removal process, especially in multiphase, quasi-brittle materials, is not well understood. Conducted in It has been found Recently, the acoustic emission technique (AE) has been applied Performed in An elasto-plastic erosion model for brittle materials is developed in For the WDPE of brittle-behaving materials, a number of resistance parameters are introduced. First, there is the so-called ` For WDPE, a so-called ` The `  Generally, material behaviour can be categorised as brittle, ductile, and quasi-brittle. These types of material behaviour can be quantified by the ratio between the non-linear zone and the linear-elastic zone around an existing crack as illustrated in The foregoing subdivisions can also be illustrated by the stress–strain relations. A typical stress–strain curves for a quasi-brittle material is given in The area under the stress–strain curves is frequently assumed to represent the energy absorption capability of a certain material volume. This parameter is often termed as absorbed fracture energy, modulus of fracture, ultimate resilience, or strain energy density. Several attempts have been made to associate the stress–strain functions of a material to the resistance against erosive loading, mainly based on For the solid-particle erosion of materials, a material constant has been used in For WDPE, simplified stress–strain curves were used in It is assumed that the compressive stress–strain function of a concrete as shown in This relation holds only for stress–strain functions obtained from a `soft', less rigid testing machine. The quantity in The application of In this work, five different concrete mixtures were designed. Information on the mix designs is given in The test device used to perform WDPE consists of an intensifier pump, abrasive mixing and acceleration head, abrasive storage and metering system, catcher, and CNC-controlled positioning system. The position of the mixing and acceleration head was controlled using an  The curves can be divided into several stages 1–4, as shown in Dependent on the final failure mode, the specimen is separated at least into two major parts: A low number of It is also very significant that the number of broken aggregates on the surface of these cones depends on the concrete mixture. It is about zero for specimen 1 and about 100% for mixture 5. Additional results of these experiments including the discussion of secondary debris, can be found in Secondary debris have not attracted much attention in the past although they may contain information about the fracture process, especially about the energy balance during failure. This information was acquired in Assuming that the WDPE of quasi-brittle materials is characterised by the generation and intersection of a microcrack network The results of the erosion depth measurements are presented elsewhere, but not discussed in terms of erosion resistance As shown in Alternatively, it may be assumed that the visible material removal process starts if a certain (small) volume of material is removed. This `threshold volume' is a constant geometrical parameter for any material. If the pressure is lower than that of threshold, then the generated crack network is not dense enough and no intersection of penetrating cracks occurs aside from those occurred spontaneously. This period is assumed to be that of incubation. To erode this threshold volume, a certain amount of energy is required, i.e., The analytical curve is about five times higher than that of the experimental curve. The absolute influence of the absorbed fracture energy is overestimated by Since the absorbed energy characterises the behaviour of quasi-brittle materials in WDPE, it should be related to the machinability number being estimated between The efficiency of WDPE can be evaluated by relating the energy absorbed for the compressive test to the specific energy involved in material removal. Attempts were made in The estimated efficiency parameters are plotted against the absorbed fracture energy in As pointed out earlier, the concrete mixtures with the higher energy absorption capability show a more brittle failure with large fracture debris and transcrystalline fracture planes. This character prevails also for the WDPE as shown in The regression parameters By using waterjets for eroding concrete, An inspection of the surfaces arising from WDPE gives results similar to those obtained from the compression tests. These findings are supported by Volume removal rate and erosion depth can be estimated from a known stress–strain curves. An energy balance and A systematic study has been made for the energy absorbed during compression test of quasi-brittle and multiphase materials subjected to WDPE. The absorbed energy is estimated by calculating the area under the stress–strain curves of five concrete materials. Moreover, fracture tests for compression and erosion tests with WDP are performed to estimate the erodability. The following results can be concluded: The amount of energy absorbed during compression can be related to failure by crack propagation. In a material with high energy absorption capacity, the cracks run preferably through the aggregate. This process is more energy consuming because of the higher specific surface energy of the inclusions. The absorbed energy can be related to WDPE threshold pressure that may describe the establishment of a microcrack network at the final stage. There exists a relationship between the energy absorption capability during compression and erodability by WDP. Material removal rate and depth of penetration are related to the energy absorbed during compression. The efficiency of WDPE of quasi-brittle and multiphase materials is about The efficiency increases with absorbed fracture energy and decreases with machinability number. This suggests that WDPE is more effective for machining highly resistant materials. Material removal mode for WDPE depends on energy absorption capability. Materials with low energy absorption capability will be eroded by intergranular fracture. In contrast, materials with high energy absorption capability will be eroded by transgranular fracture. The author is thankful to the German Research Foundation, Bonn, for financial support. Thank is addressed to WOMA Apparatebau GmbH, Duisburg, Germany, and RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany, for administrative support.