This work presents an extension of the Modifier-Adaptation (MA) methodology for Real-Time Optimization (RTO), to include the available information of uncontrolled input variables in the estimation of plant gradients. The idea is to extend the applicability of this method for processes where disturbances affect the quantities involved in the necessary conditions of optimality of the process. The implementation was carried out in a simulated flotation column, including the effect disturbances coming from of contiguous units. The dual approach was used to estimate the process gradients. Results show that the system is able to follow the trajectory of the real optimum of the process under continuously changing scenario, unlike traditional MA.The global competition drives to improve the performance of processes in the industry. The RTO is a powerful tool to increase the efficiency of a process. However, there is an inherent difficulty to reach optimal operating points, due to the available models represent partially the process phenomenology. Modifier Adaptation is a RTO methodology capable to find a point that satisfies the necessary conditions of optimality of an uncertain process using models with structural mismatch. To do so, MA uses available measurements to correct the model-based optimization with experimental gradients of the objective function Where In the last few years, research has advanced focusing the efforts on improving the estimation of the modifiers, whether searching for a more reliable and robust gradient estimation ( Regarding MA applications, it has been performed with low numbers of input variables and with known noise characteristics. Also, in MA application it has been assumed that the rate of change of the disturbances is lower than settling time of the process ( In this work, it is presented a proposal to take into account the information of both decision variables ( The paper is organized as follows. In this work, we propose the extension of the dual methodology for experimental gradient estimation, to take into account explicitly the available information of Where To ensure identifiability, an additional constraint must be added to the modified optimization problem, as Where The process simulated in this work is the flotation of copper sulphides, which represent the species with more abundance in Chile. Industrial flotation has three main interconnected zones: rougher, scavenger and cleaner, plus a regrinding stage (  The decision variables of the process are the froth level ( The metallurgical model used in this work is a combination of phenomenological and empiric models of the flotation process, that represents a three-phase system with variable inputs conditions proposed by Although flotation can be described as a pseudo-first-order reaction, the physical dependencies for recovery are still not fully understood ( The objective function In Where In this section are shown the simulation results obtained in the flotation column system. In each graph, the optimum of the model ( For the simulation of the process, it is assumed that both decision variables and disturbances changes between each steady state. The The results presented in this work show that the optimal operation of the system changes under time-varying input conditions. Therefore, if the gradient estimation step does not consider the disturbances, the system could not converge to the desired operational point. In other words, the use of the proposed extended gradient estimation method allows tracking the optimal operational conditions with continuously changing disturbances, assuming that they can be measured or estimated. In the studied process, this represents an increase in the profit of 3.5%. Financial support of Chilean agency CONICYT (FONDECYT project No. 11160203).