Being crystalline materials, brittleness may be an important issue for granitic rocks, especially when they are subject to certain loading conditions. Therefore, in practice, more specifically in their usage as a natural building stone, there is a need for their brittleness characterization. This paper reports a study carried out on some selected granitic rock types in order to determine their relative brittleness index values and relate it to their mineral grain size. For this purpose, three different types of granitic rocks similar in mineral composition, but diverse in grain sizes were selected for the execution of the study. The relative brittleness index values of the studied rock types were determined from the size effect method by using the point load test apparatus. Based on the results of this investigation it is was concluded that, rather than the proportions of the rock forming minerals such as quartz and feldspars, the grain size of feldspars could be the dominant parameter affecting relative brittleness values of the tested rocks.The use of granite as a building material is continuously increasing around the world Many investigators have contributed to our knowledge of various aspects of crack propagation in granitic rocks. A literature review reveals that crack propagation mechanisms in rock can be affected by a variety of parameters such as mineral composition For the execution of this study, three granitic rock types were used for their relative brittleness characterization in relation to their grain size. These rocks were: G1 (monzogranite), G2 (granodiorite), and G3 (granodiorite), all currently being used as building or ornamental stones in the market. The selected rocks had all holocrystalline allotrimorphic texture, similar mineral compositions, but different grain sizes. Details of the modal compositions, mean grain sizes and some physicomechanical properties of these tested rocks are given in The studied rock samples were selected from a commercial natural stone processing plant, specializing in the processing of granitic rocks. Care was taken to select rock blocks that were large enough to obtain all of the test samples of a given rock type from the same piece. These blocks were then cored in the laboratory using an NX size (54 The point load test (PLT) is widely used in geotechnical practice, mainly for the strength determination and classification of intact rock materials. The test measures the Point Load Strength Index of rock samples in the form of either cores (the The PLT can also be conveniently used for the  To determine the relative brittleness index values of the granitic rock samples under study, a commercially available portable point load tester ( The relative brittleness index values ( The relative brittleness index The mineral composition of granitic rocks is primarily made up of quartz and feldspar grains (plagioclase and orthoclase) with minor mica and other accessory minerals. While quartz has no cleavage, plagioclase and orthoclase minerals both display two cleavage planes that intersect at 90°. As can be followed from Although the present work was undertaken with the aim of studying the effect of mineral grain size on the relative brittleness index of some selected granitic rocks, considering the reports of some previous researchers, an attempt was also made to investigate if the relative brittleness index of presently examined granitic rocks could be related to the proportions of main rock forming minerals present in the rock. Experimental works of several researchers Axial point load tests, incorporating size effect, were performed to determine the effect of mineral grain size on the relative brittleness index values of three granitic rock types. To achieve this goal, samples having thickness-to-diameter ratios ( When granitic rocks which have similar mineral composition are considered, grain size seems to predominantly influence their relative brittleness index values. This may be primarily due to the fact that well-developed cleavage planes that are present both in plagioclase and orthoclase minerals (feldspars) manifest better in larger-sized grains, leading to ease of crack propagation. Also, since longer grain boundaries are associated with large grain sizes, it is possible to suggest that they provide higher number of weakness planes, leading to reduced energy for crack propagation. The quartz/feldspar ratio, which has been recognized by some authors as one of the dominant factors affecting mechanical strength of granitic rocks, was not found to play an important role in the determination of relative brittleness values of the presently studied rocks. The findings reached in this study suggest that particular attention should be paid to grain size analyses in studies dealing with rock brittleness of granitic rocks. However, it is emphasized that further research on other types of rocks is needed to confirm the presently reached findings. The authors are most grateful to Granitaş A.Ş. stone processing company for supporting this research by kindly providing dimensioned rock blocks.