This work furthers the development of counter-current chromatography as an industrial separation process method. It was demonstrated that the industrial counter-current chromatography methods, in particular, for the separation groups of rare earth metals, can be implemented in a modified cascade of centrifugal mixer-settler extractors. The retention behavior of rare earth elements (samarium, europium, gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium and yttrium) on the pilot chromatographic unit consisting of 70 serially connected centrifugal mixer-settler extractors was experimentally studied under isocratic elution conditions using the mixture of 30 vol.% CyanexⓇ572 + 10 vol.% tributylphosphate in a hydrocarbon diluent as the stationary phase and aqueous nitric acid as the mobile phase. Theoretical analysis of experimental studies showed an acceptable agreement between the assumptions of the theory and experimental results.Extraction separation processes are widely used in hydrometallurgy, in particular, for the separation of rare earth metals. These processes are usually carried out in a cascade of mixer-settler extractors. A rare earth elements producing plant may contain hundreds of mixer-settlers Although the large retention volume of the stationary phase and the high surface area exposure between the phases in CCC devices allow preparative scale sample injections, it is not sufficient for applications in industries where it is necessary to process large volumes of solutions. In CCC, like most chromatography applications, the volume of the column is a limiting factor on batch processing amounts. Continuous chromatography methods do not necessarily have this same limitation. However, in industries, such as hydrometallurgy, where the rate of processed solutions is measured in cubic meters per hour, centrifugal chromatographs are not applicable. To expand the scope of CCC methods to industrial scale separation, in particular, for the separation of rare earth metals in hydrometallurgy, high-performance chromatographic equipment should be developed and studied. Previously, we suggested using a cascade of modified centrifugal mixer-settler extractors, assembled as a multi-stage chromatographic unit, for large-scale CCC separation to promote the application of CCC methods in the field of hydrometallurgy The pilot plant ( For the verification of the idea presented in the concept paper Experiments were carried out as follows: all the extractors were initially filled with the stationary phase, and then the mobile phase with the required pH value was pumped into the cascade at the flow rate (1 The results of the experimental and theoretical studies are presented in The significant difference in retention behavior between (Sm, Gd, Eu) and (Y, Dy,Tb) created by the shift in pH might be explained as follows: Extraction of lanthanides from nitrate solutions proceeds according to the solvation mechanism and can be represented by the following reaction: The stability of the nitrate complexes depends on the concentration of nitric acid. A shift in pH creates a significant difference in the stability of the metal complexes of (Sm, Gd, Eu) and (Y, Dy,Tb), so that separation is achieved due to the differences in stability of the metal complexes. Basing on the results of our previous studies [ For the element To calculate peaks in actual units of time and concentration, To calculate the total peak of all elements (the variation of the total content of elements in the eluent), the following equation can be used: In Due to the intense mixing and the efficient centrifugal phase separation, each extractor in the cascade can be considered as an equilibrium cell. Thus, the value of The values of partition coefficients  In The results in There are two likely causes for the experimentally observed tailed peaks compared to simulated ones: concentration dependence of the partition coefficients (non-linear chromatography) and the presence of dead zones in the cascade of extractors. Thus, the results of this study confirm the possibility of the operation of the modified cascade of centrifugal mixer-settler extractors in chromatography mode. Each mixer-settler of the cascade provides the efficiency of the chromatographic process corresponding to one theoretical plate. Above, we described the periodic chromatographic operating mode of centrifugal mixer-settler extractors, which is characterized by low performance. For industrial separation of REEs, high throughput steady-state operating modes based on the application of semi-continuous sample solution loading should be used In the present study, the retention behavior of rare earth elements in the pilot chromatographic unit consisting of serially connected centrifugal mixer-settler extractors was experimentally studied under isocratic elution conditions. It is established that the industrial scale counter-current chromatography can be realized in the modified cascade of centrifugal mixer-settler extractors. The application of the cascade of centrifugal mixer-settler extractors as a chromatography plant offers a variety of options for performing high throughput CCC separations. Large scale plants (large scale extractors, large tubing size, pumps, etc.) and large sample volumes are to be used to implement high-performance industrial CCC separation processes. Further experimental investigations are to be carried out to test various modes of operation of the new CCC equipment, such as continuous steady-state operations, different modifications of closed-loop recycling mode, multiple dual modes, etc. to promote the application of CCC methods in industries. The results of this study may find application both in natural ore separation processes and in the separation of processed ores.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work was carried out within the State Assignment on Fundamental Research to the Kurnakov Institute of General and Inorganic Chemistry.