The transport of gangue through flotation froth has been described by solving the convection–diffusion equation. Gangue recovery is predicted to be proportional to liquid recovery, which is consistent with experimental observation. In addition, it is seen that the dependency of gangue recovery upon particle size is due to processes within the pulp phase rather than the froth, insofar as the transport of particles in a given froth is approximately independent of size. The importance of maintenance of positive bias in column flotation, previously stressed by other workers, is reinforced. This model utilises a simplified representation of the froth and, as a consequence, it does not necessarily give accurate gangue recovery estimates for practical flotation processes. However, the convective–diffusive model does illuminate the physical processes behind gangue recovery in the concentrate which will aid the development of automatic control strategies.It has been noted by  There have been a number of published models for the entrainment of gangue into the concentrate stream. It has long been recognised that gangue entrainment rate approximately scales with the rate of water recovery ( It is apparent that the transport of gangue through the froth due to entrainment is as a result of two processes: (1) convection of particles due to net transport of liquid through the froth, and (2) dispersion of particles within the froth. Thus, if simplifying assumptions are made about the state of the froth, the transport of gangue can be predicted by solving the convection–dispersion equation for the gangue particles. Such analyses are very common, especially in the modelling of environmental transport of contaminants; for an example please see Both Mechanical agitation is provided to the pulp phase of a mechanical cell, whereas mixing of the gangue in the collection zone must come from the turbulence of the bubbly mixture in column flotation. The addition of washwater to the froth of mechanical cells is rare, but washwater addition to the surface of the froth in column flotation is universal. The depth of the froth in mechanical flotation is often small (i.e., a few centimetres in depth in rougher cells), whereas cleaning zone depths in column flotation are typically around one metre (  Before we can begin to consider the behaviour of particles within a pneumatic froth, we must first understand its hydrodynamic condition. Now, this simple equation for the liquid drainage rate from a stationary foam may be readily adapted to describe the hydrodynamics of a rising foam. In froth flotation, washwater is added at a superficial rate    Practical flotation froths are incredibly complex systems, with processes such as bubble coalescence, particle attachment and liquid drainage all inter-related. In order to proceed with the convective–dispersive model, we must first make nine simplifying assumptions, and therefore we do not claim to be able to capture the entire physical reality of a flotation froth. The validity of each of our assumptions will be discussed in There is no bubble coalescence. The volumetric liquid fraction is constant throughout the froth. The froth exhibits only one-dimensional behaviour. Washwater is perfectly distributed over the froth. The top of the froth is a perfect sink for gas, liquid and gangue. The pulp phase is perfectly mixed with respect to particle distribution. The gangue concentration is low everywhere in the froth to preclude consideration of hindered settling. Foam drainage parameters, The interstitial rheology is not modified by the presence of gangue. Because our aim is to develop an accessible theory, a number of variables, and their inter-relation, must be clearly defined. Let The bias rate, defined above, is By reference to Eq. Given that we invoke perfect mixedness in the pulp, we assert that the solids fraction of the liquid just entering the froth is the same as the solids fraction of the liquid in the pulp The volumetric fraction of gangue in the column is given by Eq. Eq. For Eq. It has been assumed in the above analysis that the bubble size is constant throughout the column, so that bubble coalescence (and indeed bubble coarsening due to Ostwald ripening) is zero. In fact, bubble coalescence can have a great effect upon the hydrodynamic condition of the rising foam as is predicted by the hydrodynamic theory of rising foam (Stevenson, 2007b). At steady-state, the liquid flux within the column is spatially invariant, and, since bubble coalescence increases the bubble size, the capacity for liquid transport through the froth diminishes. Bursting bubbles cause a release of liquid down the foam that is like an autogenous source of washwater. However, no matter what the bubble coalescence rate, washwater that is sufficient to ‘create’ a positive bias cannot be released. Thus, for flotation cells with no externally added washwater, such as rougher and scavenger cells (which are preliminary stages in a typical flotation circuit), the gangue recovery will be given by In the analysis given above, it has been assumed that the liquid fraction is constant throughout the froth. In fact, if the liquid fraction exhibits a relatively high value at the pulp–froth interface before relaxing, over a distance of a few centimetres, to an equilibrium value as described by It has been assumed that the froth travels up the column in a one dimensional fashion. In fact, gross convective flows in relatively wet foam have been observed ( The theory of The model assumes that the top of the froth, located at a distance of The model assumes that the pulp phase is perfectly mixed so the boundary condition of Particle settling velocity is required for Eqs. It should be noted that we assume that the particles settle at a constant velocity Estimation of the convection term in the model requires prior knowledge of the Because dilute concentrations of gangue have been considered in this theory, modifications to the rheology of the interstitial fluid due to the presence of particles has not been necessary. However, if many gangue particles are present, these will increase the effective viscosity of the fluid (and therefore the hydrodynamic condition of the froth). Such modification could be effected by employing the equation of At this juncture, it is appropriate to estimate We have presented a convective–dispersive model for the recovery of gangue from a simplified representation of a flotation froth both with and without externally added washwater. Although we do not claim that the model can give accurate Amongst the implications of the theory presented herein are: The gangue recovery rate is linear in liquid recovery, as observed by The recovery of gangue particles from columns with no externally added washwater, or if the washwater added is insufficient to create positive bias, the transport of gangue through froth is independent of particle size. The fact that smaller particles have been seen to be more easily recovered in the concentrate is due to physical processes in the pulp rather than in the froth. No gangue rejection benefit is achieved by adding washwater if If washwater is added such that  In fact, in column flotation, if washwater is provided such that 