This paper extends an earlier two-part review of bast fibres and their composites. The paper presents recent statistical models which have been applied to natural fibre reinforcements for composite systems. Recent research suggests that the rules-of-mixture should be extended to include the effects of porosity, fibre diameter and yarn twist. A new fibre area correction factor is introduced to correct for the over-estimate of fibre cross-section which occurs when an apparent cross-sectional area is calculated from the “diameter” measured normal to the fibre axis.Statistics is the mathematical science of collecting, analysing, interpreting and presenting data, especially where large quantities of numbers are available. Once the appropriate data set (population) has been identified, it may be possible to analyse the whole data set (population census) or for huge data sets it may be appropriate to consider a sub-set of the population (sample). Descriptive statistics use numerical descriptors including mean and standard deviation for continuous data types (e.g. height or weight), while frequency and percentage are more useful in terms of describing categorical data (e.g. race). Inferential statistics analyse patterns in the population and take account of randomness. A plot of the normal, or Gaussian, distribution presents a continuous probability distribution with a peak at the mean value, and is often referred to as the bell curve. The arithmetic mean ( The whole population has a population variance, The outer limits of a normal distributio can predict that unlikely values will exist, e.g. negative strengths. Stress is defined as force/area, and as the concept of negative area is alien to the physical world, that definition in combination with Gaussian statistics could predict compressive failure in tensile tests. Using a log-normal distribution will eliminate this anomaly. Harrop and Summerscales In data where numbers differ widely, it may be appropriate to use the geometric mean, The relationship between the geometric parameters and the arithmetic parameters is then gven by For example, the prediction of the shear modulus (Eq. The tensile strengths of both natural and man-made fibres are limited by the presence of critical flaws. In consequence, the fibres exhibit considerable variation in their strengths and strain/elongation-at-break. The probabilistic strength of a material is defined as the loading (stress/strain) which will lead to failure of the material under normal environmental conditions for a given probability (relative frequency of occurrence). The probabilistic strength of a material is obtained by repeating identical experiments to generate a data set of the strengths which is then used to estimate the distribution parameters and allow the probability of failure to be derived from the distribution. The Weibull distribution is widely used to model diverse life (failure) behaviours and to quantify the spread in the failure indicators of the tested subject (fibre, composite, material, system, etc.) The two-parameter Weibull Probability Density Function (PDF) is given by Eq. Integration of the PDF yields the two-parameter Weibull Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF): The mean of a Weibull distribution, The standard deviation of the Weibull distribution is given by Eq. The coefficient of variation, Reinforcement fibres for composites exhibit high variability in their mechanical properties. In order to quantify the variation, the probabilistic strength or fracture strain is modelled using the Weibull distribution (e.g. for synthetic The probability of a critical flaw increases with fibre length and hence, longer fibres have lower average tensile strengths and fracture strains. This follows from Griffith’s crack theory The MDS weak-link scaling model does not always represent/quantify the experimental observations The Weibull distribution parameters are normally estimated using the linear regression or the maximum likelihood methods Eq. The maximum likelihood method estimates the distribution parameters by maximising the likelihood function based on the given data set The state-of-the-art in bast fibres and their composites has recently been reviewed by a number of authors Virk et al. Virk et al. Aslan et al. Thomason et al. Cosson et al. The commercial use of natural fibres as the reinforcement for composites is constrained by a perceived high variability in strength. In an examination of tensile test data from 785 individual tests, Virk et al. Zafeiropoulos and Baillie Andersons et al. Andersons et al. Virk et al. The same authors In Ref. Andersons et al. Bast fibres differ from man-made fibres in that they are subject to damage due to exposure to the weather, harvesting and subsequent fibre extraction processes. The flexural loads encountered result in compression and shear failures. These Andersons et al. Experimental confirmation of this relationship between the distribution of defects and the fibre strength distribution requires further research. Guild and Summerscales The Young’s modulus of a solid decreases with increasing porosity. This was first analysed theoretically by Mackenzie Madsen and Lilholt Toftegaard and Lilholt The fibre orientation distribution factor can be predicted using the Krenchel equation The elastic modulus of bast fibres reduces with increasing fibre diameter. The data for fibres assuming a linear ( Summerscales et al. Using The models of Rao and Farris Madsen et al. Shah et al. Eq. The recently proposed models above have only been validated for limited data sets. It would be appropriate for other researchers to confirm or refute the applicability of these models. The development of these approaches should help to bring natural fibre composites to wider application. This paper has reviewed a number of models proposed for bast fibres and their composites. A major constraint on the adoption of these fibres as reinforcements is the reported variability of the mechanical properties. The variation is greater for modulus and strength than for strain to failure due to an assumption of circular fibre cross-sectional area (CSA) and the use of an “apparent diameter” in calculation of the stressed area. A fibre area correction factor (FACF) has been proposed for correction of the assumed fibre CSA. Weibull statistics are used to model the strength of bast fibres. New rules-of-mixture (ROM) have been reported which introduce additional parameters not normally required for synthetic fibre composites (porosity, fibre diameter distribution, FACF and yarn twist). In each case, these parameters default to unity when not applicable and the ROM reverts to the standard form. The evidence presented for each of the above models has only been validated for a small number of data sets. It would be appropriate for other researchers to confirm or refute the applicability of the recently proposed models. Successful development of these approaches should help to bring natural fibre composites to wider commercial application. The authors would like to thank the anonymous referees for identifying additional material during the review of the initial manuscript.