In this study, the interaction between cylindrical specimen made of homogeneous, isotropic, and linearly elastic material and loading jaws of any curvature is considered in the Brazilian test. It is assumed that the specimen is diametrically compressed by elliptic normal contact stresses. The frictional contact stresses between the specimen and platens are neglected. The analytical solution starts from the contact problem of the loading jaws of any curvature and cylindrical specimen. The contact width, corresponding loading angle (2θ
                     0), and elliptical stresses obtained through solution of the contact problems are used as boundary conditions for a cylindrical specimen. The problem of the theory of elasticity for a cylinder is solved using Muskhelishvili's method. In this method, the displacements and stresses are represented in terms of two analytical functions of a complex variable. In the main approaches, the nonlinear interaction between the loading bearing blocks and the specimen as well as the curvature of their surfaces and the elastic parameters of their materials are taken into account. Numerical examples are solved using MATLAB to demonstrate the influence of deformability, curvature of the specimen and platens on the distribution of the normal contact stresses as well as on the tensile and compressive stresses acting across the loaded diameter. Derived equations also allow calculating the modulus of elasticity, total deformation modulus and creep parameters of the specimen material based on the experimental data of radial contraction of the specimen.The indirect tensile testing method, known as the Brazilian test, provides an alternative to direct tensile testing of cylindrical rock specimens and other brittle materials clamped between two loading flats or arcs. The International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM)  The normal principal compressive stress The uniform distribution of tensile stresses (Eq. When the specimen is placed directly between flat platens, or between indenters with nonzero radius of curvature of contacting surfaces, the application of Eq. A number of scholars have paid attention to this problem shortly after the popularization of the Brazilian test method, e.g.  Along the  At present, most researchers usually assume a uniform distribution of contact stresses when using Brazilian tests. The uniform distribution of contact stresses seems highly unlikely. But many authors, e.g. As is noticed by Similar opinions are stated by There is recent work by Thus, the problem of the shape of the distribution of normal and tangential contact tractions for the standardized indirect tensile splitting (“Brazilian”) test, and its influence on the stress concentration, tensile strength and other mechanical parameters of the rocks and other hard materials still remain topical. The goal of this paper is to present some new insights into the Brazilian test. It provides a solution of a nonlinear interaction between the flat and curved loading platens and cylindrical specimens in the Brazilian test. The contact width, corresponding contact angle and elliptical contact stresses obtained from the solution of the contact problems are used as boundary conditions for the cylindrical specimen. The problem of the theory of elasticity for a cylindrical specimen is solved using the complex potentials method developed by Numerical examples are shown to determine the influence of deformability and curvatures of specimen and bearing platens on the normal contact stresses, tensile and compressive stress concentration factors across the loaded diameter. Suggested equations also allow calculating the modulus of elasticity, the total deformation modulus and the creep parameters of the specimen material on the basis of experimental data of radial contraction of the specimen. A cylindrical specimen with radius According to the developments of the contact problem of the theory of elasticity ( Consequently, the half loading angle can be written as Eq. When considering the joint deformation of the contacting bodies, the components of displacements of their surface points may be fully identical (“no slip”) and partially identical (“full slip”) in relation to limiting frictional and/or cohesion contact stresses. In the first case, there will exist normal and tangential contact stresses, which may be interesting as an example in the rock–support interaction problems. In the second case, when friction and cohesive forces could not provide fully identical joint deformation, tangential contact stresses may be ignored. Regarding the Brazilian test, the influence of dry friction stresses on disc-jaw contact surfaces is doubtful, because of several reasons, such as small contact width and possibility of the relaxation of the surface friction stresses. At last, the use of various types of soft loading pads ( If the tangential stresses are neglected ( Eq. Using series expansion, Eq. The following notations will be used: The points Corresponding analytical functions of a complex variable, Returning to the previous variable The combination of stress components at any point of the disk can be found by substituting these functions into the well-known equations of The equations of the internal stresses at points on the In the particular theoretical case of absolutely rigid platens and disk ( The components of displacements at any point of the cylindrical specimen may be determined by inserting the integrals of analytical functions (Eqs. It is also interesting to determine an explicit measure of the rock stiffness, e.g. in terms of its Young's modulus, on the basis of the simplest possible indirect tensile testing (e.g. The radial and tangential displacement components After simplifications of the bulky functions obtained by the use of boundary condition (Eq. Consequently, after substitution of the half width of contact surface (Eq. Using these equations, it is possible to determine the modulus of elasticity of the material if the half width of the contact surface, In this section, an analysis of equations derived above will be conducted in order to show how the practically existing elastic and geometrical parameters of the specimen and curved loading platens influence the width of the contact surface, the maximum of the elliptical contact stresses, the contraction of radius and finally, the normalized stress function Concrete practical examples with different initial data will be used for analysis of the proposed functions of stress factors. For a start, this study considers the case of compression of a cylindrical specimen with the radius The analysis of these functions can be easily made using the computer program MATLAB. Results of calculations are given graphically in  To determine the influence of elastic and geometric parameters on the loading angle and the stress concentration factors The specimen is compressed between planar ( If the specimen is compressed between curved ( From The influences of variation up to the theoretical limits of Poisson's ratio of the specimen on the loading angle and stress concentration factors are shown in The behaviors of the stress concentration factors  The relative distance The normalized vector sum The magnitudes of the normalized vector sum The action of the high intensity compressive stresses in the external areas of the diameter may somewhat impede the spreading of the cracks from the central part of a disk due to tensile stresses. At the same time, the development of the oncoming cracks due to shear stresses in the peripheral parts can complete the splitting of disk. These cases have been observed in experiments and are described in numerous publications, more recently by When the fracture deviates from the center too much due to shear stress effects, for example, in most of the more than a hundred experiments, The analytical solutions of the plane stress-strain state problem are developed for the elastic, homogeneous, isotropic cylindrical specimen compressed between jaws of any curvature. The contact width, corresponding contact angle, 2 The resulting relations allow estimating the stress state in the specimens and the tensile strength of the cylindrical specimens of rock, concrete and other brittle materials taking into account the shape and rigidity of the specimen, and stamps and indenters of different curvatures in the Brazilian test method. The derived equations can be used also for determination of the modulus of elasticity or total deformation modulus and the creep parameters of specimens based on the experimental data of contraction of specimen diameter. The main solutions takes into account the nonlinear interaction between the loading bearing platens and specimen, curvatures of the jaw surfaces, and elastic parameters of the materials. Numerical examples solved using computer program MATLAB are presented (a) to determine the influences of Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio and radii of curvatures of specimen and jaws on the loading angle 2 The application of models of concentrated loads and corresponding equation of tensile stresses always gives a greater or smaller overestimation of the maximum tensile stress in the center of disk where the initial crack is generated. Consequently, this causes the overestimation of the tensile strength of a specimen in the Brazilian test. Greater overestimation occurs for low-modulus material especially at the curved platens, and smaller overestimation occurs for a rigid, brittle specimen at the sharp indenters. The models with more realistically distributed elliptical contact stresses always give somewhat less tensile stress in the center of the disc, and therefore, the overestimation of tensile strength of a specimen is less than that obtained from the models with a concentrated load. But this difference depends on the rigidity and strength of the specimen material. It is greater for soft materials with low modulus and high strength, and smaller for rigid and brittle specimens with low strength. These relationships are demonstrated above in tabular and graphical representations and given in the The author confirms that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The author thanks Professor Jaak Daemen for help in the acquaintance with experimental and normative materials, and for review of this paper and valuable comments. Also, the author expresses his gratitude to anonymous reviewers for excellent and valuable comments and suggestions that have helped materially in improving this manuscript. This appendix includes calculation examples of tensile strength of the specimens by indirect method. Fig. A1 shows the graphical representations of the stress concentration factor The specimen of high rigidity in the flat loading platens. Parameters of Test 1 Radius of cylindrical specimen, Radius of loading platens, Thickness of the specimen, Peak load, Young's modulus of the specimen, Young's modulus of the platens, Poisson's ratio of the specimen, Poisson's ratio of the platens, The specimen of low rigidity in the curved loading platens. Parameters of Test 2 Radius of cylindrical specimen, Radius of curved loading platens, Thickness of the specimen, Peak load, Young's modulus of the specimen, Young's modulus of the platens, Poisson's ratio of the specimen, Poisson's ratio of the platens, MATLAB code for Test 2 The code is the same as that for Test 1, with the replacement of the value of E1 = 2*10ˆ4 and R2 = 4.5. Results When 