Due to the rising demand for minerals with high product fineness, new and innovative mill types are needed, which enable the energy efficient production of fine materials within the lower micron range. As fine grinding processes require mills with high energy densities as well as high production capacities, there is currently a great interest in research and development of dry operated stirred media mills. These mills are a promising option for energy efficient dry fine grinding especially due to their high stress energies and frequencies. While present studies on these mills mainly focus on the investigation of machine-related parameters, the impacts of product-related characteristics on the grinding process are still mainly unknown. Especially in continuous grinding mode, product properties are normally of high importance. Therefore, this study focusses on the investigation of the product flow behavior regarding the grinding performance in continuously and dry operated stirred media mills. This study revealed that the grinding performance is strongly determined by both, machine-related values like the choice of process parameters as well as product-related characteristics like the powder flowability. It was further shown that the flow behavior of the product influences the grinding process on different levels simultaneously. Thereby, both too high and too low powder flowabilities lead to inefficient grinding. Also, an overlapping retention mechanism of the grinding media deflector wheel was identified, which may lead to further crucial impacts especially at high powder flowabilities.The energy efficiency of dry fine grinding processes can mainly be increased by either (1) further development of mills and mill equipment, (2) improving classifiers as well as grinding-classifying-circuits or (3) enhancing the process behavior of the ground material ( As dry operated stirred media mills provide high stress energies and high stress frequencies, they have recently come to the fore in the field of research and development. It was already shown in different studies that these mills can lead to higher energy efficiencies compared to grinding in conventional tumbling ball mills ( Within the last two decades, first research groups started to study dry stirred milling in either vertical (e.g. In comparison to these machine-related parameters, the impacts of product-related characteristics on the grinding performance – such as the flow behavior of the product powder or the ball-to-powder-ratio within the mill – are still not understood sufficiently. Since these values may have a strong influence on the stressing mechanism between colliding grinding beads, as it was already shown for dry and batch-wise operated stirred media mills ( Within this study, the impact of the product flow behavior on dry fine grinding in a continuously operated horizontal stirred mill was investigated. Thereby, the product powder flowability was specifically adjusted by different grinding aids and grinding aid concentrations. In addition, the most important machine-related parameters were varied to identify their influence on the grinding result, and especially, their interaction with the product flow behavior. The grinding experiments were evaluated in terms of product particle size, energy efficiency as well as material hold-up inside the mill. A dry operated horizontal stirred media mill with a net grinding chamber volume of 6.6 L was used for the grinding experiments. The mill was originally constructed for wet stirred milling by the former company Draiswerke GmbH, Germany. Within this project, the mill was modified in order to enable continuous dry fine grinding. The shaft of the modified mill is equipped with a number of 32 pins as stirring unit and a deflector wheel at the outlet side of the mill to hold back the grinding beads inside the grinding chamber (see During the mill operation, the power draw of the mill was measured. Consequently, the specific energy input According to Eq. Furthermore, the temperature was measured at the mill outlet. Since it was nearly constant for all experiment (approx. 25–30 °C), temperature effects are neglected within the following discussion. The reason for the constant temperature is the double shell cooling of the mill in combination with air streams and continuous material throughput, which help to maintain comparatively low internal mill temperatures. In the case of selected parameter combinations, the mill was also crash-stopped afterwards and emptied for determining the material hold-up inside the milling chamber. After crash-stopping, the entire mill filling was removed from the mill and sieved to separate the hold-up material from the grinding media. Afterwards, a sample was taken from the entity of the limestone hold-up in order to analyze both the particle size distribution and the powder flowability. The impact of the product powder flow behavior on the continuous dry grinding in stirred mills was investigated in dependence of the stressing conditions inside the mill. Therefore, the stressing energy of the grinding beads was specifically changed by varying the stirrer tip speed and bead size according to Within this study, limestone Durcal 130 by the company Omya, Switzerland, was used as raw material for the grinding experiments. The raw limestone contains particles in the size range of a few micrometers up to approx. 600 µm, leading to a median particle size of x The flow behavior of the powder was specifically adjusted by adding two liquid grinding aids in different grinding aid concentrations. As it was shown in a former study ( The grinding aid was pre-mixed with the raw limestone for 60 min using a free fall mixer. The aim of the mixing step was not to distribute the grinding aid molecules evenly over the entire limestone surface but to distribute it in the raw bulk material homogeneously. Thus, the chemical composition of the raw material is nearly constant. The particle size distributions of the product and hold-up samples were measured using Helos laser diffraction particle size analysis (Sympatec, Germany). The analysis was performed in wet state by dispersing the powder samples in 96% ethanol. Furthermore, the dispersed samples were treated with ultrasonic prior to the analysis in order to disperse agglomerates. The powder samples were taken from the total amount of material and measured three times each. A ring shear tester RST-XS (Dietmar Schulze Schüttguttechnik, Germany) was used to investigate the powder flowability of selected hold-up samples. The detailed procedure of this measurement is explained elsewhere ( In a first step, the influence of the powder flowability on the grinding result was investigated under constant mill parameters, as shown in Both graphs in Unfortunately, grinding without any grinding aid was not possible under these process settings. In all of these cases, the agglomeration of the product particles led to strong product adhesions on grinding beads, on the stirrer as well as the inner chamber wall. As a consequence of these product adhesions, the material transport through this (small) mill was complicated, leading to overgrinding of the material, and thus, to even stronger agglomeration phenomena. Due to the steady build-up of adhesions, continuous grinding under steady-state-conditions was not possible without additive. In the first instance, these results contradict findings from a previous work ( In the case of HepAc, the powder flowability steadily rises with increasing concentration due a more complete coverage of the product particle surface. As HepAc molecules adsorb on the particle surface mainly with only one terminal functional group, comparatively large amounts of additive are needed for reaching a high surface coverage. In comparison to HepAc, DEG molecules adsorb on the surface with several functional groups simultaneously. Therefore, a complete coverage of the particles is already obtained at significantly lower additive concentrations. A further increase of the DEG amount solely leads to a sticking effect among the product particles, which affects an increase of the adhesion forces, and thus, a decrease of the powder flowability at excessively high additive amounts. It can be stated that the total number of stress events per product mass is not only influenced by the micro-processes at each stress event, like the particle capturing and stressing between approaching grinding beads, but also by the residence time of the product within in the mill. Furthermore, significantly different specific energy inputs can be identified between the both additives, even though similar product throughput settings were used. The smaller specific energy inputs in the case of HepAc emphasize that the power draw of the mill is constantly lower. This may again be explained by its flow enhancing character, which leads to a less cohesive character of the total mill load. Similar impacts were already observed and discussed for batch-wise stirred milling ( In order to describe the transport phenomena inside the mill, the amount of hold-up material inside the milling chamber was determined for selected process settings. Preliminary tests with heptanoic acid showed that the product hold-up inside the mill slightly increases with rising product throughput. Above a critical product throughput, this leads most likely to an “overloading” of the mill, which makes the comminution inside the mill less efficient. However, this was not observed within the throughput range examined within this study. In the following, the product hold-up was only investigated for selected process settings, especially since the determination of the mill hold-up is highly time-consuming. In order to compare the impacts of the two grinding aids on the product accumulation inside the mill, the product hold-up was determined exemplarily for the medium product throughput setting of 7–9 kg/h. It can be observed that the two grinding aids cause significantly different hold-up amounts, whereby HepAc constantly leads to higher values. While the hold-up decreases from 2.3 kg to 1.8 kg with increasing concentration of HepAc, it slightly increases from 1.1 to approx. 1.3 kg for DEG. In general, this result was not to be expected since a high powder flowability is normally assumed to cause an increased axial product transport velocity, leading to both, low residence times and lower material hold-ups inside the mill. However, the high hold-ups with HepAc clearly show that further aspects need to be considered when characterising material transport and residence time within this kind of horizontal stirred mill. The most probable overlapping impact is caused by the deflector wheel which is positioned directly in front of the mill outlet to hold back the grinding media. Obviously, this device also has certain classifying effects on the product particles, more specifically on the coarse fraction within the product. This explanation along with the assumption of flowability-dependent axial material transport discussed above, leads to further conclusions: As high powder flowabilities lead to a higher axial transport velocity, particles pass through the mill faster. Therefore, easy-flowing particles, which reach the deflector wheel at the outlet side, have been exposed to a significantly lower number of stressing events on their way through the mill. Consequently, higher amounts of those coarse particles, which are coarse enough for being rejected and hold back by the deflector wheel similar to the grinding beads, may reach the wheel and accumulate directly in front of it. Thus, the material hold-up increases especially in this sector of the mill even though the actual axial transport velocity is high (see scheme in Furthermore, the particle accumulation in front of the deflector wheel may exceed a critical hold-up amount at a certain point of time. As a consequence, the deflector wheel is overloaded, and thus, even parts of the coarse particles are pushed through the wheel and discharged from the mill. This assumption is supported by the particle sizes of the fine product (see Having a closer look to these experimental results, the question arises why the hold-up amounts of the different grinding aid concentrations change conversely to the trend of the corresponding powder flowabilities. First, the hold-up amount decreases for higher concentrations of HepAc despite the simultaneous increase of the powder flowability. Possibly, steadily increasing flowabilities may not only support the axial material transport through the mill, but also the transport of the product particles within the accumulation zone towards and through the wheel. The improved stabilization of the particles against agglomeration at high additive concentrations may further enhance this process. Thus, material accumulations in front of the classifier are reduced to some extent, when the particles exhibit both a low tendency to agglomerate as well as a high powder flowability. This explanation is supported by the particle sizes of the final product shown in Generally, the amount of hold-up leads to a further overlapping effect on the grinding result, as it determines the powder-to-bead ratio, and therefore, the efficiency of the grinding process. The afore-mentioned study ( In a next step, the effect of the stressing conditions inside the mill under consideration of the flow behavior of the product powder was investigated by varying the size ( The results show that grinding becomes more efficient by using both, smaller grinding beads and grinding beads with a lower solid density like alumina. As known from wet operated stirred mills ( Normally, the media material may also have influences on the extent of product adhesions on the grinding beads, and thus, on the grinding performance. In this case, strong product adhesions on the beads could be avoided for both media materials, since comparatively high grinding aid concentrations of 0.2 wt% were applied. Of course, growing amounts of adhesions were observed at high product finenesses, especially at x   Once again, the overlapping retention mechanism of the deflector wheel in the end of the mill needs to be considered to explain the results for HepAc. In general, similarities to common dynamic air classifiers can be assumed: As the wheel rotates with the stirrer shaft, the rotational speed of the stirrer determines the tip speed of the deflector wheel, and thus, the cut size above which particles are mostly rejected and held back inside the mill. Therefore, the retention behaviour of the deflector wheel can be assumed to be proportional to the stirrer tip speed. Especially the accumulation of coarse particles in front of the wheel, as it was shown for HepAc, leads to a higher discharge of coarse particles at lower tip speeds, and thus, to a low product fineness. As illustrated in Interestingly, the material hold-up inside the mill rises with lower stirrer tip speeds (see As seen from As discussed before, high material hold-ups in front of the internal classifier may lead to an overloading of the deflector wheel, and thus, to an increased discharge also of the coarse particles from the mill. In general, a critical hold-up mass, above which the classifying efficiency is decreased due an overloading of the deflector wheel, needs to be defined. A comparison of These findings emphasize once again that the grinding performance within this kind of mill is not only affected by the stressing conditions provided by the mill, but also by the transport behavior of the material as well as the retention mechanism of the deflector wheel. As the stirrer tip speed significantly influences the stressing conditions as well as the retentions mechanism, it is identified as a more challenging parameter compared to other process settings like the bead size or the bead material. This study revealed that dry fine grinding in continuously operated horizontal stirred media mills is strongly determined by both, machine-related values like the choice of process parameters as well as product-related characteristics like the powder flowability. It was further shown that the flow behavior of the product influences the grinding process on different levels simultaneously. Also, an overlapping retention mechanism of the grinding media deflector wheel was identified, which may lead to further crucial impacts especially at high powder flowabilities. In a first instance, this study confirmed the existence of optimum stressing conditions at comparatively low stressing energies, as it was already shown using a batch-wise operated stirred mill in a previous study ( In contrast to batch-wise grinding, high powder flowabilities constantly lead to lower grinding efficiencies in the present study. This result is attributed to a complex interaction between high axial transport velocities and the retention behavior of the deflector wheel. At high powder flowabilities, this interaction causes an enhanced accumulation of coarse particles in front of the internal classifier, which influences both, the grinding efficiency of the mill as well as the undesired discharge of coarse product particles through the deflector wheel. However, also very low powder flowabilities are identified to decrease the grinding efficiency, as it causes unfavorable stressing conditions and an inefficient grinding media motion. Furthermore, the stirrer tip speed was identified to be a more critical process parameter than other values like bead size and bead material. Since the deflector wheel is coupled with the stirrer shaft, the stirrer tip speed does not only influence the stressing energy of the beads, but also the retention behavior of the wheel classifier. Also, the axial transport velocity is directly affected by the mixing intensity provided by the stirring unit. Thus, the optimization of the grinding process via this variable, as it is often done in the case of wet operated stirred mills, is complicated by these overlapping mechanisms. Future studies will focus on the interaction of process parameters and product behavior with a special regard to the retention behavior of the deflector wheel. Especially, retention time distributions of the product material need to be determined in order to understand both, the impact of powder flowability on transport behavior as well as the retention mechanism of the integrated deflector wheel. Thereby, also other product parameters like the fluidization characteristics of the powder need to be considered next to the flow behavior in order to understand the complex processes inside the mill. We acknowledge the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi), ThyssenKrupp Industrial Solutions and BASF Construction Solutions for funding this research project (03ET1253A). We’d also like to thank Mr. Maximilian Dietz for his experimental support as well as Industrie Bitossi for providing the grinding media.