Purpose
                  Multifragmentary fractures of the distal radius with articular and metaphyseal comminution (AO 23-C3) represent challenging injuries to manage. Distal fracture lines, articular comminution, and limited distal bone stock may preclude stable fixation with a volar locking plate. The use of a dorsal spanning plate (DSP) offers an alternative treatment option in this setting. We examined the radiographic outcomes of a consecutive series of patients with comminuted intra-articular distal radius fractures not amenable to volar locked plating, who were treated with a DSP.
               
                  Methods
                  We reviewed all distal radius fractures treated with a dorsal spanning plate at our institution between October, 2014 and March, 2018. Patients with AO 23-C3 fractures treated with dorsal spanning plate fixation were included in this study. Demographic data, time from plate placement to removal, and postoperative radiographic outcomes were examined.
               
                  Results
                  We identified 24 patients, mean age 41 years (range, 19–62 years). Mean follow-up was 19.5 weeks (range, 12–35 weeks) from the time of plate placement. Plates were removed at a mean of 87 days (range, 40–215 days) after surgery. All patients achieved radiographic union. Mean radial height at the time of union was 11.1 mm (SD, ±3.7 mm; range, 6–18 mm), radial inclination was 19.7° (SD, ±5.4°; range, 9° to 30°), ulnar variance was 1.0 mm (SD, ±2.4 mm; range, –3 to 6 mm), and volar tilt was 1.4° (SD, ±5.2°; range, –10° to 14°). Mean articular displacement was 1.7 mm (SD, ±1.7 mm; range, 0–6 mm). Malalignment of at least one of these radiographic parameters was identified in 16 of 24 patients at the time of union.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Dorsal spanning plate fixation offers an alternative treatment option for comminuted intra-articular distal radius fractures (AO 23-C3). Although this technique presents a straightforward means for fixation of complex distal radius fractures, radiographic outcomes may be inferior relative to less complex fractures treated with standard volar plating techniques.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IV.Treatment of intra-articular distal radius fractures centers on restoring length and alignment and obtaining congruency of the articular surface. A variety of techniques are available, from closed reduction to percutaneous, external, and internal fixation. Although comparative studies have not unequivocally demonstrated superiority of one of these techniques, volar locked plating has become a preferred means of internal fixation of intra-articular distal radius fractures. Despite the popularity of this technique, certain fractures may not be well-suited to volar locked plating alone, including dorsal shearing fractures Traditionally, external fixation has been considered for highly comminuted fractures to restore overall length and stability. We obtained institutional review board approval for this study. All patients whom the senior author treated operatively for distal radius fractures were identified using our institution’s surgical database between October, 2014 and March, 2018. All cases were further reviewed to identify patients who were treated with DSP fixation. Two independent observers examined and classified injury radiographs using the AO classification system. Patients with multifragmentary articular and metaphyseal fracture patterns, AO type 23-C3, were identified. We included all such patients who underwent both placement and removal of the DSP at our institution. Patients who underwent supplementary volar or dorsal plating were excluded from analysis. Indications for DSP fixation in this cohort included (1) articular comminution that was thought to be too severe to be adequately secured with a volar plate and (2) fracture lines distal to the footprint of a standard volar plate. After the induction of anesthesia, manual reduction of the distal radius was performed. We have found intraoperative traction fluoroscopic views to be a helpful adjunct to preoperative imaging in selecting fixation. For fractures with insufficient distal bone stock owing to articular comminution or distal fracture lines, but which were reducible by closed or percutaneous means, we proceeded with DSP fixation. A longitudinal incision was made on the dorsal aspect of the hand overlying the second metacarpal. The extensor tendons were retracted and the dorsal surface of the metacarpal was exposed. A second incision was made in the dorsoradial forearm overlying the radius, proximal to the fracture site. The deep fascia was incised longitudinally, typically just proximal to the abductor pollicis longus muscle, and the radial wrist extensors were retracted to expose the radius. A 2.4-mm DSP (DePuy-Synthes, West Chester, PA) was then introduced into the distal wound and slid in retrograde fashion through the second dorsal compartment into the proximal wound. The plate was then secured distally to the second metacarpal. A distraction force was applied to the wrist to restore radial length with the forearm in neutral rotation and the plate was provisionally clamped to the radius. Fluoroscopic images were obtained to assess reduction and confirm the absence of overdistraction at the radiocarpal and midcarpal joints (defined as joint space in excess of 5 mm). The digits were assessed to confirm full passive flexion. Once satisfactory reduction was confirmed, the remaining proximal and distal screws were placed. When deemed necessary by the operative surgeon, supplemental K-wires were placed to facilitate articular reduction and augment fixation of key articular fragments, in particular the radial styloid. After surgery, digital motion exercises were initiated immediately. Patients were allowed functional use of the affected extremity after surgery with a weight-bearing restriction of 5 lb or less until plate removal. Patients were evaluated in the clinic at 2 weeks, and then at monthly intervals. When used, K-wires were left in place for 4 to 6 weeks. Plate removal was planned between 8 and 10 weeks after placement, depending on clinical and radiographic healing and patient adherence to scheduled follow-up appointments. Patient demographics, injury characteristics, the interval between the injury and surgery, and the interval between surgery and plate removal were recorded. Radiographic outcomes were measured by an independent observer not involved in the care of the patients immediately after surgery and on final follow-up radiographs. In 3 patients, this was at the time of plate removal. We also compared final radiographic alignment with that obtained at the time of surgery, to examine whether reduction achieved operatively was maintained through fracture healing. Radiographic parameters including radial height, radial inclination, ulnar variance, articular stepoff, and volar tilt at final x-ray before DSP removal were obtained for all patients. Several studies examined acceptable radiographic parameters after open or closed treatment of distal radius fractures. We identified 30 patients treated with DSP fixation for fractures of the distal radius during the study period. We excluded 2 patients who had combined fixation with a volar plate and DSP, and another 3 who underwent DSP for treatment of AO 23-C2 distal radius fractures. One patient underwent plate removal at a different institution and was subsequently lost to follow-up. The 24 patients who underwent both plate placement and removal at our institution for treatment of AO 23-C3 fractures were included in our study.  There were 3 complications in the case series. One patient developed tenosynovitis of the first dorsal compartment after DSP removal, which required first dorsal compartment release at 6 months after surgery with resolution of symptoms. One patient developed carpal tunnel syndrome after placement of DSP and underwent carpal tunnel release concurrently with DSP removal. One patient who was lost to follow-up after DSP placement returned with a fractured plate at 9 months after surgery. The fracture had healed with satisfactory alignment and the broken plate was removed without complication. There were no cases of radial sensory nerve injury or neuritis. Severely comminuted intra-articular distal radius fractures pose major challenges. Distal fracture lines, limited bone stock, and articular comminution challenge precise articular reconstruction and may preclude stable internal fixation with standard volar or dorsal locking plates. At times, indirect reduction using ligamentotaxis may be preferable to maintain skeletal length and improve fracture alignment. Although external fixation may achieve these goals, limitations include high complications rates and poor functional outcomes associated with pin-site infections, fracture subsidence, digital stiffness, patient dissatisfaction, and potential delays in mobilization and functional use. In this study, we found that DSP fixation maintained fracture alignment through bony union with a low complication rate. Radiographic outcomes demonstrated mean values across the cohort that fell within acceptable parameters for radial length, inclination, volar tilt, ulnar variance, and articular displacement. However, most patients demonstrated mal-reduction in at least one radiographic parameter at the time of fracture fixation that persisted through fracture healing. Burke and Singer Jain and Mavani We further examined radiographic outcomes to determine the proportion of fractures that did not achieve satisfactory restoration of distal radius anatomy. In this way, we identified outliers in which radiographic malunion in one or more radiographic parameters were evident despite acceptable mean values across the cohort. We found that 6 patients healed with a radial height of 8 mm or less, 7 had radial inclination of 15° of less, 4 had volar tilt of –5° or less (dorsal tilt of 5° or greater), 7 had ulnar variance of 3 mm or greater, and 9 had articular displacement of greater than 2 mm. Only 8 of 24 patients had acceptable alignment in all parameters ( One of the primary limitations of DSP fixation from a technical perspective is that all reduction is indirect. Although manipulative reduction may improve alignment before the plate in inserted, ultimately the plate itself allows distraction only across the wrist and fracture site. As was evident in our series, this technique is limited in the quality of reduction achievable in these complex fractures. Supplemental K-wire fixation may aid reduction of radial styloid fragments that do not reduce with plate application. However, we were not able to capture the volar lunate facet reliably with K-wires and residual displacement or rotation of this fragment accounted for most of the articular displacement observed in the 8 patients in our series. Whether it is better to accept some degree of malalignment and avoid opening the fracture or to pursue anatomic reduction aggressively with additional open volar and/or dorsal exposures and supplemental plating remains unclear. For the current study, we excluded patients who had supplemental fixation aside from K-wires because we thought this better defined the capabilities and limitations of the DSP technique. The long-term effects of malunion and the relative influence of specific radiographic parameters on pain, function, and development of symptomatic arthritis after distal radius fracture remain the subject of debate. In a long-term follow-up study, Ali et al Optimal treatment options for comminuted articular fractures of the distal radius remain unclear. Although our results demonstrate that radiographic outcomes may be suboptimal in complex fracture patterns stabilized with a DSP, available literature suggests similar limitations with alternate plating techniques. Volar plate fixation remains a preferred fixation option for most displaced intra-articular fractures. However, complications with this technique have become increasingly recognized. In a review of radiographic outcomes after volar plate fixation of 185 distal radius fractures, Mignemi et al How volar plating compares with DSP fixation for AO C3 fractures in terms of restoration of radiographic alignment remains unclear. For complex articular fractures with sufficient distal bone stock and articular fragments large enough to accept fixation, our current preferred surgical option remains volar plate fixation, acknowledging that a combined approach with supplemental dorsal fragment–specific plating may also be required. However, although not the first-line option for fractures that are otherwise amenable to standard plating techniques, we think that DSP remains a useful technique for select complex distal radius fractures. In particular, for fractures with a highly comminuted articular surface that cannot be directly reconstructed or with fracture lines that are more distal than a volar plate may capture, distraction plating offers a technically simple alternative to restore gross alignment with a low incidence of reduction loss and implant-related complications. Further comparative studies are needed to elucidate the optimal method of fixation. There are several limitations to this study. Our study had problems associated with retrospective studies, including loss to follow-up and inconsistent evaluation of surgical results in patient follow-up appointments. Some patients did not return for the post-DSP placement scheduled follow-up appointments and were scheduled for DSP plate removal later than they otherwise would have had. Because this study focused only on short-term radiographic outcomes, we are unable to draw conclusions regarding long-term clinical outcomes or the extent to which the malalignment identified in the cohort influenced long term radiographic or functional outcomes. Dorsal spanning plate fixation offers a straightforward technique to stabilize multifragmentary articular fractures of the distal radius. All fractures in this series achieved bony union. However, restoration of anatomic alignment was less reliable; only 8 of the 24 patients met all 5 radiographic criteria at the time of union. Further study is necessary to determine long-term functional outcomes with this technique and to evaluate the optimal method of fixation for these challenging injuries.