Property rights, landownership, and landowners play a vital role in the provision of housing. This article attempts at exploring how housing development takes place in a nexus of interests between stakeholders. It explores what landownership means and who can be regarded as a landowner. Notions of ownership are social constructs that reflect the norms, values, beliefs, and shared experiences of a society and provide legitimacy for access to land and rights over it. The physical reality is that housing is attached to land and societies need rules to regulate who can access the land, who must be compensated for granting access, what rights and obligations attach to access, and what the granting of access permits. As different societies have reached different solutions to these questions, what ‘landownership’ means also varies. For housing development to take place, the developer must expect to enjoy sufficient security to recoup the costs of what is a significant outlay. This does not necessarily require exclusive rights over the land – there may be other interests in existence at the same time.Housing is a major investment for its owners. While the dwelling itself is a form of capital, it stands on land. Therefore, access to land is essential for housing development to take place. A fundamental feature of landownership is the ability to deny access to it by others. The huge investment that housing involves can only take place if those making it believe they have the security to enjoy the benefits. Secure access to the land on which the housing stands is a necessary precondition. Although land is a physical entity, landownership is a social construct. Around the physical reality of housing, buildings, and infrastructure being attached to land, societies have constructed a variety of conceptual systems to deal with access to land and rights over it. These provide social legitimacy for access to land by individuals. Rules about land and property rights define the relationships between people, society, and the land. The rules reflect social structures as well as norms, values, belief systems, and shared experiences. They vary greatly between societies. These rules define what it means to be a landowner and who can own land. The rules vary enormously between societies. They can permit individual ownership of these rights, including the ability to buy, sell, or hypothecate them. By contrast, the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets in 1917 issued a decree which made all lands in the Soviet Union the property of the State bringing lands under collective ownership. The State allocated rights to use lands, which were not tradable and could be reallocated without compensation for loss. After Zambia was granted independence by Britain in 1964, as commonly happened in postcolonial Africa, the land was nationalised. Freehold was abolished and replaced by leasehold. Land vested in the President is held for and on behalf of the citizens. Officially there are only two types of tenure, 99-year leasehold on state lands (6%) and customary tenure (94%), although in reality informal tenures are widespread in urban areas. The President allocates state lands through the Commissioner of Lands in conjunction with local councils. In principle, the President allocates customary lands in conjunction with local chiefs. However, there have been accusations that the President has allocated land without the knowledge of chiefs and of chiefs cutting deals with private developers. The contrast between the USSR and Zambia shows that even in societies in which there is state ownership of land, the result can be very different in terms of who has effective management of the land and can control access to it. The proposition that property is a set of material rights comparable to other material values is not universally accepted. Many indigenes have a spiritual and physical relationship with the land that defines their identity. The land and people in some cases are believed to have been brought into existence by the same event, or the people to have been created out of the land. The current generation is the land’s custodian on behalf of their people as a whole, including ancestors and those still to be born. Custodianship may be vested in individuals like chiefs, or be exercisable by community or tribal councils. The link between the identity of the group and the land, and the consequential need to consult with those who are not currently alive, means that the land cannot be sold. The rights of the current holders therefore do not include that of permanently alienating the land. By implication, land cannot be used as collateral since the lender cannot foreclose in the event of default. The role of traditional chiefs has changed in some areas. Driven by the penetration of capitalist-oriented land management styles, chiefs may seek to appropriate communal assets for personal gain by charging fees for access to land. In Zambia and Ghana, chiefs have been accused of acting as business tycoons and as de facto owners of the land. The variety of social solutions to the question of landownership means that there is no universal answer to the question of what landownership is and who is a landowner. Landowners can own a variety of different rights over land. Owners may therefore exercise different degrees of control over who has access to the land, in many cases falling significantly short of absolute control. A defining feature of land is its durability, which means that landownership is four-dimensional: time, length, breadth, and height. Durability means that ownership rights can be divided over time as the land can be transferred to another for a period of time and recovered at a future date. The durability of the land means that owners can permit its use by others for a period knowing that they can recover it when the permission expires. Owners can protect the value of their future interests by imposing conditions on current users that prevent them from carrying out destructive acts. The implication is that there can be more than one ‘landowner’ at any one time. Those owners who exercise current control over the land might not have absolute dominion over it or have the ability to alienate it permanently, but may be constrained in their actions so that they do not diminish the value of the land for those with future ownership rights. Even where this is not explicitly stated in contracts or legal settlements, the current owners may feel themselves under an obligation to maintain the land for future (past) generations. They may view themselves as the current custodians rather than being able to dispose of the land as they see fit. Housing is also durable but not as durable as the land itself. Investment in housing is only worthwhile if the developer can enjoy access to the land for a sufficient period of time to recoup the investment. Where access cannot be guaranteed, housing tends to be constructed from portable material which can be moved to another site should eviction take place. Security of tenure, rather than whether there is ownership of the land, is likely to determine whether investment in housing takes place. What is significant is the secure ownership of sufficient rights over land that can enable housing to be constructed and the benefits from it to be enjoyed. The ‘landowner’ from the point of view of housing development is the person, group, or institution that possesses, or perceive themselves as possessing, these rights. They can fall a long way short of absolute ownership of the land, even if the society itself has such a concept. There may be other interests in the land in existence at the same time. In England, the term ‘proprietor’ described the person who exercised effective control over the land and was the primary beneficiary from it. Such a person could possess a long lease, have a life interest, or have pledged the land under a mortgage, whilst the legal owner could be the lessor or the trustee of a settlement. How substantial does an interest in the land or the rights over it have to be before one can regard the owner of an interest or rights as being the ‘landowner’? In other words, if landownership is regarded as being a bundle of rights capable of being sliced up into different packages and lengths of time, what is the minimum set of rights that can be said to give ‘ownership’ of the land? The answer is likely to be that which gives access to the land for a sufficient period of time to be able to exercise control over the housing for the economic life of the investment. Owners might therefore hold long leases, life, or other time-limited interests, and not necessarily possess interests of indefinite duration such as freeholds. They can be individuals, a state body or local authority, unincorporated or corporate bodies. Their objectives are likely to be similarly diverse. Landowners could possess formal legal rights, that may be registered or unregistered, or may have informal or customary rights. The rights may have been acquired by purchase, undisturbed peaceful enjoyment for a period of time, gift, inheritance, default by a borrower who had pledged the land, or by having been born into a community. In the public sector, the rights may have been obtained through compulsory purchase. One important approach that seeks to bring together different types of rights into a structure that allows the idea of landownership to be explored is UN-HABITAT’s Global Land Tool. As The closest to absolute security of tenure is a freehold registered in a Torrens Land Registration System, backed by a government guarantee of compensation in the event of error, in a country whose constitution or legislation guarantees that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property. A Torrens system has compulsory title registration of property rights, the boundaries to which they apply, and any charges over the property. Proof of title is by entry in the register. In a common law system with proof of title through a deeds system, ownership merely means that the current owner has a better claim to possession than anyone else. Dispossession by a superior claimant at any time is possible since claim is through a chain of conveyances recorded in the deeds and a defect in transfer at any point in the past can invalidate later claims. Leases and licences provide security of tenure under contract for time-limited periods providing the conditions/covenants are adhered to. Under group tenures, an individual may not possess security of tenure but is a member of a group who does. Membership of such a group can be by birth or marriage or may be of unrelated persons. Claims for adverse possession arise where society recognises that the peaceful occupancy of land for a period of time is deemed to convey ownership. A weaker position is where a claim through occupancy cannot be opposed because there are anti-eviction laws or policies. Individuals and groups in some countries use a variety of means to try to establish that they have de facto (if not de jure) security of tenure, for example, the payment of utility bills. Access to land is needed for the economic life of the housing rather than absolute ownership of the land for an indefinite period. For example, much of the housing built in Britain between the eighteenth and early twentieth centuries was developed on land leased to developers for 99 or 120 years. On long leases of this nature, the lessee rather than the ground landlord was conventionally regarded as being the owner of the housing and the land on which it stood since the lessee was able to exercise management control and enjoyed the profit rent. The ground landlord was regarded as having a reversionary interest exercisable at a future date. In the event, leasehold enfranchisement legislation after 1967 denied ground landlords this reversionary interest for houses by providing lessees with the opportunity to serve notice on them for mandatory enfranchisement at the market price. This method of development had advantages for both the ground landlord and the lessee. By leasing the land to a developer, the ground landlord could benefit from a guaranteed ground rent without exposure to the risks of development. Control over the nature of the development could be exercised through covenants in the lease. While the developer bore the risks of the development, he also stood to benefit from the profits since any upside in revenues or capital growth belonged to him rather than to the ground landlord. The system reduced the capital the developer needed to raise. Initially, he had only to find a peppercorn rent during the period of the building lease. Therefore, his capital could be employed in construction work rather than in buying the land. At the end of the construction process, the ground landlord could require a premium for the lease as well as receiving a ground rent during the life of the lease. However, the developer at this stage had a completed house, so the lease could be sold on to an investor as an alternative to retaining it for his own portfolio. The developer could enjoy a profit of the difference between the premium paid to the ground landlord and that received from the investor. This system is still found in commercial developments in the United Kingdom, often with the local authority being the ground landlord, but declined for residential development in the 1920s and 1930s with growing popularity of owner occupation amongst households. The idea that the ‘landowner’ does not have absolute rights over the land is not unique to the United Kingdom but is found elsewhere. Mozambique provides an interesting example of the division between those who exercise management control over the land and benefit from its development and an underlying owner of the land. Between 1977 and 1987, the FRELIMO government in Mozambique pursued a policy of central planning and collectivisation in which land was treated as being the property of the state. Those with customary rights to the land were regarded as tenants of state lands with temporary use rights. Under the 1990 constitution and the peace accord of 1992, natural resources were defined as being the property of the state. The state grants title for the use and enjoyment of the land and recognises and protects rights acquired through occupation and inheritance. Customary land rights have been given full status as State Land Use and Benefit Rights so that members of a community have co-title. Rights based on oral evidence are accepted and those who have occupied the land in good faith for at least 10 years are regarded as having legal rights. If land is not claimed by a community, the state is free to allocate it. If a local community states that the land is occupied and is not prepared to hand it over, the applicant seeking land for development must find an alternative land. If the community is prepared to hand it over, then it can negotiate the terms and conditions, including the benefits for the community, for doing so. In effect, there is a distinction between the legal ownership of the land, which lies with the state, and the beneficial ownership and managerial control which lies with the community. Durability also means that the physical entity of the land can be divided since it can be reunited at a future date. Surface, subsurface, mineral extraction, and air rights can be in different ownerships, as well as rights of way, grazing, and hunting rights. When housing was privatised in Moscow, residents with a Landowners exercise an important influence over housing development with the result that development does not always take place in the ways predicted by economic location theory. Development is typically erratic, proceeding in some areas, while neighbouring areas with similar location advantages and physical characteristics may remain undeveloped. Ownership can explain the survival of isolated undeveloped blocks and what has been described as leapfrogging development in which high-rise structures spring up in peri-urban areas leaving voids in between. The motives of landowners in bringing forward land for development are often complex with economic advantage or the desire to capitalise on rising asset values being one of only a number of factors. Willingness to help neighbours, the wish to pass on land to families, and to preserve a way of life can also play a significant part in the decision whether to release land for development. The result is likely to be complex urban growth patterns. Where landowners are unwilling to bring forward land for development, governments and local authorities can acquire land through compulsory purchase – resumption in the case of leasehold land. In countries with strong town planning controls and active public participation, the influence of landowners can be moderated by community pressure and the lobbying of activists. The acronym Not In My Back Yard (NIMBY) encapsulates the potential influence that such groups can exercise over development. The development of housing can be a by-product of other objectives by landowners. For example, industrialists can be obliged to undertake the development of housing in order to house their workers. For example, before 1996 employers in Zambia were obliged by law to provide housing for their employees with the formerly state-owned Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines not only providing housing but also assuming certain quasi-municipal functions before the mines were privatised and the houses sold to sitting tenants. During the industrialisation of the USSR, housing development for the workforce also tended to be the responsibility of the enterprises rather than municipalities. Studies of urban development in a number of countries show that landowners are able to influence housing development. Large landowners can open up an area for development and create a master plan that individual developers follow. There is evidence that the motives of landowners are complex and not just concerned with maximising economic gain. They may be building housing in order to promote a primary objective, such as industrial development, or may forgo profitable opportunities in order to preserve a lifestyle or to pass on land to future generations. The result is that housing development often does not follow the classic spatial pattern that would be expected from location economics. Rather there may remain areas of undeveloped land in locations that are attractive for housing development. There is no universal definition of what landownership is and, therefore, who should be regarded as being a landowner. Indeed, not all societies regard land as something that can be owned. Landowners can be individuals, juridical persons, governmental bodies, or groups such as tribes or cooperatives. The powers that landowners possess also vary widely and owners may be faced with limitations on what they can do with the land. Housing is a major investment. Housing is only likely to be developed if the developer perceives that he has sufficient security of tenure to enable him to recoup the costs of the investment. Since housing is attached to land, this implies that the developer has access to the land for this period and sufficient control over its use. This does not require absolute ownership of the land or exclusive rights over it. Housing development can take place under long leases or life interests.   Rights over land that have not been subjected to formal statutory definition but have been enjoyed for an indefinite historical period. Land tenure that grants the holder access to land for an indefinite period and the right to alienate the land to whom the holder wishes and in a manner the holder chooses. The individual, group, or organisation with rights that grant access to land and the ability to manage it for a sufficient period of time to recoup the costs of the investment in housing. Land tenure that grants the holder access to the land for a defined period of time measured in years or lives. The ability to peacefully enjoy access to the land for a defined or indeterminate period with effective protection by the state against forced eviction.