The estimation of rock and concrete strength by non-destructive test methods is of great interest both to civil and mining engineers involved in various design projects. The Schmidt hammer rebound hardness is one of the most frequently used methods for non-destructive testing of concrete and rock since 1950s, due to its cost-effectiveness and easy handling. Schmidt hammer tests can be performed in either the field or the laboratory to provide preliminary information on the relative quality of the material being investigated. Although originally developed to test the surface rebound hardness of concrete, it has since also been adapted for the indirect strength estimation of rock. The operation mechanism of the instrument is rather simple. A spring-loaded mass is released against a plunger when the hammer is pressed on to the surface of a test material. The plunger impacts the surface and the mass recoils. The rebound distance is proportional to the total energy absorbed by the impact surface. The rebound distance of the plunger is read directly from a numerical scale on the instrument and is called the On account of its precision, cost-effectiveness and easy handling, wide application of this instrument has been made in rock engineering. Some common extensions of the use of the Schmidt hammer include: the estimation of uniaxial compressive strength and Young's modulus of rock Despite its consistency and reproducibility The rebound number values obtained by Schmidt hardness method reflect an interrelated combination of rock properties such as elasticity, strength and hardness. It is known from theoretical physics that the The Schmidt hammer models are designed in different levels of impact energy, but the types L and N are more commonly adopted for the testing of rock and concrete. The provided impact energy levels of the L- and N-type hammers are 0.735 and 2.207 Considering the brief discussion made above, it is possible to arrive to the conclusion that there is still much uncertainty regarding the selection of an appropriate hammer type for a particular application. Therefore, the present research has been conducted with a view to improve the understanding of the influence of Schmidt hammer type on strength estimation of rocks. To achieve this goal, the Schmidt hammer rebound tests of a total of 27 different rocks were carried out in the laboratory, using both the L- and N-type of hammers. The obtained rebound values, using five different Schmidt hammer recording techniques, were then correlated with the UCS values of the tested rocks. Finally, statistical performance analyzes were performed in order to be able to check and compare the prediction capabilities of both hammer types. Twenty-seven different rocks including granites, marbles, limestones and travertines collected from various stone processing plants in Turkey were sampled and tested for the execution of the study. The mineralogical compositions of the tested rocks are given in For both the L- and N-type Schmidt hammers, the rebound tests were carried out on prismatic rock blocks having approximately 110 For the execution of this study, considering the wide procedural variations reported in the literature In order to be able to determine the best empirical correlations between Schmidt hammer rebound values ( As can be followed from The interpretations of the above performance indexes are as follows The results of the statistical analysis shown in The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock is regarded as the most widely used design parameter in the general field of rock engineering. As a non-destructive, portable and cost-effective device for hardness testing, the Schmidt hammer is often used to obtain an indirect estimation of UCS. Different Schmidt hammer models are commercially available providing different levels of impact energy, but the types L and N are commonly adopted for rock property determinations. However, a literature survey has shown that some confusion still exists concerning the selection of an appropriate hammer type for UCS prediction purposes. Although the procedure for Schmidt hardness testing has been standardized by both the ISRM After analyzing all the obtained experimental data by using various statistical performance indices, the following main conclusions were drawn: Valid for the rock types tested, compared to the L-type hammer, the N-type hammer appears to be a more effective tool in strength estimation of rocks for the approximate UCS range of 20–290 Valid for both type of hammers, Schmidt hammer test procedures that are based on continuous impacts at a point provide a more reliable and accurate estimation of UCS than those that are based on single impacts at a point. This finding may be related to the higher consistency and repeatability of continuous impacts recording technique, as claimed by some other authors in the literature. Although a great number of various petrologic rock types were tested in the present study, for further work it is suggested that the general validity of the findings mentioned above should also be checked for other rock types such as the sedimentary and volcanic group. If the relative effectiveness of N-type hammer is confirmed by other experimental studies in the future, it is thought that the suggestion made by the ISRM The authors would like to thank Prof. Y. Kibici (Afyon Kocatepe University) and Prof. M.R. Bozkurt (Eskisehir Osmangazi University) for their help in the study of thin sections and petrographic descriptions of the rock samples.