We report a case of intra-articular loose body in the mid-carpal joint following the fracture of the distal radius. The patient fell from a height of 5 ft. The radiographs and computed tomography scan showed a bony fragment in the midcarpal joint. It was associated with dorsal scapholunate ligament tear. The intra-articular bony fragment originated from the fracture distal radius. The possible relationship of the intrusion of the bony fragment and SL ligament injury is discussed.We report a rare case of mid-carpal joint loose body following the fracture of the radial radius. There was also concomitant scapholunate (SL) ligament tear. The coincidence of distal intra-articular radius fracture and SL ligament tear is well documented in the literature, with the incidence rate ranging from 32% to 59%. A heavily built 50-year-old gentleman was admitted to our department in 2008 for left wrist injury. According to him, he fell from a 5-ft height with his left hand landing on the ground in an outstretched position. Immediately, he noticed severe pain with swelling in his left wrist. There was no other injury. Clinical examination showed that his left wrist was swollen and deformed. The sensation of all five digits was intact, and the radial pulse was strong. The radiographs ( In view of the severity of comminution and the presence of a midcarpal loose bony fragment, a computed tomography scan was performed. The computed tomography scan ( Operation with open reduction and internal fixation was performed under general anesthesia. Since the comminuted fractures and the intra-articular fragment originated from the dorsal cortex of radius, a dorsal approach was employed for the exposure. Intraoperative findings confirmed that a fragment of the dorsal cortex of the distal radius had jammed into the midcarpal joint. There was partial rupture of the extrinsic ligament and intrinsic ligament of the wrist dorsally. The extrinsic dorsal radiolunotriquetral ligament arising from the dorsal ridge of distal radius and running transversely to the dorsal cortex of triquetrum was partially ruptured. The dorsal part of the SL ligament, which is an intrinsic ligament, was also ruptured. The fracture of distal radius was openly reduced. A 2.4-mm titanium right angle L-locking plate was employed to fix the intermediate column, whereas another 2.4-mm titanium radial locking plate was used to secure the radial column. The bony fragment was removed from the mid-carpal joint. It was 1.8 The K-wires and the cast were taken off 8 weeks after the operation. Active mobilization exercise was started. Clinically, there was no tenderness over the SL ligament. The Watson shift test was negative. The radiographs taken at 5 months after the operation showed solid bony union with palmar tilting maintained. However, there was residual increased SL angle. After 5 months of vigorous stretching and muscle strengthening exercise, the active range of wrist motion returned to 50째 of flexion and 50째 of extension, 70째 supination and 75째 pronation. The grip power of his left hand was 20 Carpal bones injuries are easily missed. Intra-articular fracture of distal radius with SL ligament injury was not uncommon. However, the intrusion of a bony fragment of the dorsal cortex of distal radius into the midcarpal joint was extremely rare. We could not find similar cases reported in the English literature. According to Mayfield, The finding of fracture fragment in the midcarpal joint in our case led us to think about the relationship of this sharp bone with the dorsal extrinsic and SL ligament injury. When the patient fell on the ground, he had his left hand in an outstretched position. The axial loading force from the ground resulted in the distal radius fracture with dorsal comminution. With the wrist in hyperextension, there was a possibility of the sharp bony fragment from the dorsal side of radius gaining entry into the midcarpal joint by penetrating through the extrinsic ligament (dorsal radiolunotriquetral) and the intrinsic ligaments. Lastly, when the wrist returned to neutral position, the bony fragment might be trapped inside the midcarpal joint by the soft tissue around. The shape of the bony fragment might also contribute to the entrapment. It may be more likely to happen in patients with healthy and strong bones because osteoporotic bone fragments tend to collapse into the metaphysis of the distal radius during injury and are not strong enough to lacerate the dorsal ligaments. In summary, this case illustrates a rare condition of SL ligament injury associated with a bone fragment from the fractured distal radius.