This pioneering study characterized the chemical, physical and mineralogical aspects of the Urucum Standard manganese ore typology, and evaluated some of its metallurgical characteristics, such as the main mineral heat decompositions, and the particle disintegration at room temperature and under continuous heating. A one-ton sample of ore was received, homogenized and quartered. Representative samples were collected and characterized with the aid of techniques, such as ICP-AES, XRD, SEM-EDS, BET and OM. Representative samples with particle sizes between 9.5mm and 15.9mm were separated to perform tumbling tests at room temperature, and thermogravimetry tests for both air and nitrogen constant flow at different temperatures. After each heating cycle, the mechanical strength of the ore was evaluated by means of screening and tumbling procedures. The Urucum Standard typology was classified as an oxidized anhydrous ore, with a high manganese content (~47%). This typology is mainly composed of cryptomelane and pyrolusite; however there is a significant amount of hematite. The Urucum Standard particles presented low susceptibility to disintegration at room temperature, but as temperature increased, susceptibility increased. No significant differences were observed between the tests done with the air or nitrogen injections.In the reducing process, the manganese lump ores have been widely applied as the main raw material for manganese ferroalloy production in electric furnaces ( Pre-reduction is the critical zone of the electric furnaces, where the solid raw-materials are heated while descending into the furnace. The charge temperature is between 500 In this context, unexplored important metallurgical properties such as the cold and heat disintegrations of the manganese lump ores are presented herein. International standards for iron lump ores set the parameters used to characterize this property. However, for manganese lump ores disintegration, there are no existing characterization standards. Only three articles were found about the theme in scientific literature (    Nowadays, the nomenclature and indexes which differentiate the steps of this disintegration are being discussed and there is still no consensus. As such, the aim herein is to help understand the decrepitation phenomena in manganese ores by characterizing the chemistry, the physics and the mineralogy of the Urucum Standard typology. To do this particle size disintegration at room temperature or under heat in an oxidizing or inert atmosphere was evaluated. One ton of Urucum Standard ore was homogenized and quartered to produce a 50 The characterization procedures consisted of determining the Mn, Fe The apparent and structural densities were respectively determined by a water picnometer and by a Quantachrome helium multipicnometer. The specific surface area and the porosity were also determined by a Quantachrome BET device. Aiming to evaluate ore particle disintegration, this work proposes to create a new terminology to describe and quantify the mechanical behavior of manganese lump ores. Two indexes are proposed: the CDI ( The CDI index allows evaluating the mechanical behavior of ores at room temperature, measuring their resistances to impact and abrasion. CDI was proposed mainly as a reference number for comparisons with the measurements at high temperature (HDI). The latter index allows evaluating the ore fine generation under continuous heating in the electric furnace pre-reduction zone. The ore particles from 9.5 Aiming to determine the CDI indexes, three samples of 500g were tumbled, at room temperature, during 10, 20 and 30 Aiming to determine the HDI indexes, the samples of 500 The samples were cooled naturally at room temperature. After sample cooling, the particles were submitted to a particle size classification in a sieve of 6.3  The chemical characteristics are explained by the ore mineralogy. The structural and apparent densities were determined respectively by helium and water picnometry.  Porosimetry data is an important parameter for ferroalloy production. The cold ore disintegration indexes (CDI) and their standard deviations are presented in  There were no significant differences between the samples heated in the air and inert atmosphere. The small variations could be associated to the small mineralogical variability from one sample to the other. During the sample heating until 500 The oxides with Mn valences +   The worst behavior was found for the heat decomposed samples at 1000   According to its mineralogical constituents and chemical composition, the Urucum Standard typology was classified as oxidized anhydrous. Due to its high manganese and low silica content, it is a good alternative for the ore mixtures confection in manganese ferroalloy plants. However Urucum Standard is not good enough to be the only Mn and Fe supplier in the production process due its high Mn/Fe (3.9) rate and P (0.26%) content. The Urucum Standard typology presents low susceptibility to particle disintegration at room temperature. The CDI obtained, after 30 There were no significant differences between the samples heated in the air and those in the inert atmosphere. The small variations could be associated with the small mineralogical variability of the samples. During the sample heating until 500 There were no significant differences between HDI measured in an inert atmosphere (100% of N The main causes for the heating particle disintegration of Urucum Standard ore were structural water elimination and crystal volume changes due to the heat decomposition of oxides. For the studied manganese ore, it is possible to suggest that the decrepitation term should only be used to describe the fine generation during its fast heating rate up to temperatures of around 700 The authors thank CAPES and VALE Manganese for their financial support and sample supply.