Introduction
                  Intramedullary (IM) nailing is the gold standard treatment for tibial shaft fractures, but can be associated with various mechanical complications, including delayed union.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  We believe that complications do not occur randomly, but in certain conditions that contribute to their development. Risk factors likely to predict delayed union can be identified to support prevention.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A cohort of 171 fractures treated by IM nailing between 2005 and 2015 was reviewed retrospectively. Independent variables included intrinsic, patient-related factors and extrinsic factors such as those related to the fracture or surgery. A multiple logistic regression model was used to determine which factors can predict each type of complication.
               
                  Results
                  Delayed union occurred in 22.8% of patients. Smoking and high-energy trauma were risk factors. Hardware breakage was significantly reduced (p
                     <0.05) when the nail diameter was greater than 10mm. A nail diameter/reamer diameter ratio outside the recommended limits (0.80–0.99) was more likely to be associated with screw failure. Diabetes is a risk factor for hardware migration, which itself is associated with other complications.
               
                  Discussion
                  Nonunion is the most common complication after IM nailing of tibial shaft fractures. Smoking cessation after a fracture is necessary in our opinion, even if the literature is ambivalent on this aspect and stopping to smoke once the fracture occurs may not be sufficient to prevent a poor outcome. Use of a nail diameter/reamer diameter between 0.80 and 0.99 favors union and prevents hardware breakage. Hardware migration in a diabetic patient may be a warning sign of other types of complications.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Retrospective cohort study. Level IV.Tibial shaft fractures are the most common type of long bone fractures and make up 37% of all lower limb fractures Despite this technical progress, mechanical complications, such as nonunion or delayed union, migration or breakage of the fixation hardware, can occur. This can cause residual pain, long-term functional disability Currently, the postoperative risks are hard to predict, and the disastrous consequences occur independently of the surgeon and his/her experience This retrospective study captures all the patients treated for a mid-shaft tibial fracture by IM nailing at the Saint-Luc University Hospitals between 2005 and 2015. The study protocol was approved by our university's research ethics board (B403201523492). The candidate patients were identified from our medical records database: 295 patients had been treated for a mid-shaft tibial fracture in this time period. Each patient's treatment followed good clinical practices guidelines. Patient selection and exclusion criteria are listed in The risk factors explored were patient-related intrinsic factors and extrinsic factors such as those related to the fracture event or surgery ( The patients were followed until signs of union were apparent and the fracture had healed completely. The latter was defined clinically as the absence of pain and stable walking, and radiologically as the presence of three solid bone bridges connecting the fracture fragments on anteroposterior and lateral views Any complications and their time frame were recorded. Delayed union was defined as a fracture lacking signs of a fracture callus on two consecutive radiographs at least 2 Malunion was defined as union in a non-physiological position: varus/valgus The data were subject to a descriptive and univariate analysis (Chi The mean age of the study population was 45.6 The incidence of each complication is shown in The significant results in the multiple logistic regression analysis for each type of complication and the relative risk are shown in Delayed union is the most common complication found in our study, like in the literature which reports a 4% to 48% rate in tibial shaft fractures Smoking is associated with a 3–18 times higher risk of delayed union in younger patients who smoke Delayed union often occurs in the context of high-energy trauma such as motor vehicle accidents Hardware breakage most often occurs in cases of nonunion because of the lack of progressive load transfer from the nail to the bone during healing To our knowledge, no other study has evaluated the risk factors for hardware migration. However, this regularly occurs with delayed union and residual pain A recent study has linked fractures treated by IM nailing and plate in overweight patients and the rate of infection, delayed union, secondary implant removal Our study has certain limitations. The complications can overlap each other, i.e. one could impact the appearance of another. For example, delayed union can occur following an infection and the predictors of infection can thus affect or distort those of delayed union. Some variables had to be excluded from the multivariate analysis, but it is impossible to say they had no effect. Also, we are conscious that all variables taken into account are not an exhaustive list of all the factors that can impact complications. Some of the subgroups had small sample sizes and it would be interesting to conduct a prospective analysis in a larger population. While our study could not demonstrate that smoking cessation at the time of the fracture is likely to prevent the progression toward delayed union, we must recommend that it be stopped to reduce the risk of nonunion. Our study also shows the benefit of using the correct nail diameter/reamer diameter ratio; otherwise the risk of hardware breakage is increased, and the risk of healing is reduced. Lastly, if screw migration is observed on follow-up radiographs in a diabetic patient, surgeons should systematically look for other associated complications, to rule out reversible causes that negatively affect healing. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. Clinical study: Julie Manon, Olivier Cornu, Dan Putineanu, Karim Tribak, Simon van den Veyver. Statistical study: Christine Detrembleur, Julie Manon, Olivier Cornu. Writing: Julie Manon, Olivier Cornu, Christine Detrembleur, Dan Putineanu.