The removal of ammonium ion from wastewater is an important part of tertiary wastewater treatment and is increasingly necessary to meet drinking water and discharge standards being applied in much of the developed world. The use of nitrification filters is an established technology which involves the biological oxidation of ammonium ion to the more benign nitrate ion. An alternative technique for ammonia removal is the use of ion-exchange however the capital costs can be significant and the economics of chemical regeneration may be prohibitive for large volume applications. In this paper we examine the combination of nitrification and ion-exchange in a packed bed system using the natural zeolitic ion-exchangers, clinoptilolite, and mordenite on which colonies of nitrifying bacteria are cultivated. The combined system intensifies ammonia removal and offers the possibility in principle of a more robust technique less sensitive to rapid perturbations in ammonia concentration and less costly than in a single ion-exchange process. One limitation of this approach is the rapid consumption of oxygen in the biologically active column. The paper demonstrates a novel technique for enhancing the oxygen concentration in a combined ion-exchange and nitrification packed column. The performance of fixed beds of clinoptilolite and mordenite in the presence of nitrifying bacteria is compared to that in columns in which only ion-exchange is occurring. Two modes of aeration are compared: (1) external aeration in which the feedwater is aerated conventionally by gas bubbling; (2) in situ aeration in which a membrane-aeration unit is incorporated into the packed bed. The ammonia removal in the presence of the nitrifiers is significantly intensified. Both methods of aeration provided a comparable further enhancement. In the case of the membrane system the air consumption was reduced by a factor of 60.Ammonia is the most commonly occurring nitrogenous pollutant in wastewater The guide levels for ammonia released into the receiving water vary in different parts of the world. The Environmental Protection Agency The classical solution to the problem of ammonia removal is nitrification, which is a component of biological wastewater treatment. Typically ammoniacal nitrogen can be reduced by up to 90% during secondary treatment processes which promotes nitrification by using fixed film biological filters, which include trickling filters, rotating biological contactors, and reciprocating biofilters. In each case the maintenance of high dissolved oxygen concentrations is crucial to sustaining effective ammonia removal With respect to shock loading, Kruner and Rosenthal An alternative to biological treatment is ion-exchange which provides a technique which is responsive to shock loading and can operate at lower (and higher) temperatures. A significant drawback of ion-exchange is the need for regeneration which can incur associated reagent costs. Another possible drawback is that desorption may occur due to shift in the exchange equilibria when the ammonia concentration in the influent drops. This may result in the discharge of ammonia into the eluent stream. A biological process in combination with ion-exchange might offer some improvements, exploiting the advantages of both techniques. Such a system has the potential to be responsive to shock loading and to yield significantly longer cycle times between regenerations, and offer a reduction in effluent arising because of the conversion of ammonia to nitrate. PH is a critical parameter since ion-exchange efficiency for ammonia removal depends on pH, since the ionized NH Biological regeneration of an ion-exchanger which is loaded with ammonia is also a possible option and is based on bacterial ammonia oxidation. Demonstration of this approach using ammonia loaded clinoptilolite Sand, plastic media, activated carbon and some ion-exchange materials support bacterial growth. Many natural surfaces, including those of nitrifying bacteria, are negatively charged The study of biologically active ion-exchange has mostly concerned treatment of wastewater from a secondary effluent or some other wastewater with an already established population of nitrifying bacteria. An ion-exchanger might be added into the suspended growth reactor where nitrification already occurred Beler-Baykal et al. Oxygen limitation is a phenomenon associated with fixed bed nitrifying filters and is also an issue in the case of biologically activated ion-exchange. McVeigh Another possibility for overcoming oxygen limitation in packed bed nitrification systems is membrane aeration A further potential limitation of promoting active biological cultures in ion-exchange columns is the obvious problem of fouling. Semmens and Porter From the review of literature it is clear that oxygen depletion in fixed bed nitrification columns is an important factor and this is also the case for ion-exchange columns which host active nitrifying bacteria. Therefore one of the prime goals of the study described here was to determine options for reducing oxygen limitation in biologically active ion-exchange columns, comparing external aeration of feedwater with in situ aeration using a tubular membrane. The performance of New Zealand clinoptilolite was compared directly with that of New Zealand mordenite for biologically active ion-exchange removal of ammonia from wastewater. Fixed bed columns of these materials were used for assessing the effectiveness of aeration in enhancing biological activity in each case, and the consequential effects upon ammonia removal from wastewater determined. Two column designs were evaluated. The first was a simple packed bed of ion-exchanger particles, The second was a new design, Prior to loading into the columns, batches of clinoptilolite and mordenite were crushed in a jaw crusher “Retsch BB 50” and classified to a size range of 0.5–0.71, 0.71–1 and 1–1.4 In order to prevent air bubbles within the column, water was circulated through each column prior to the addition of wet exchanger. The feed solution was pumped into each column in up-flow mode from a 5 Three types of feedwater were used: deionized water, water from a salmon fish farm and water from a local creek. Each batch was analysed and the chemical compositions are shown in In the experiments involving nitrification with external aeration, the feed water aeration was conducted in a separate aeration tank. Air was introduced into the tank using an aquarium air pump type JUN, ACO-5502 and diffuser with a maximum air flow of 3 The aeration rate, the internal diameter of the column, the flow rate of the water treated, the particle size of the material used, the temperature and the inlet ammonia concentration were the main variables. Biological activity was established on the columns of ion-exchanger by passing 48 bed volumes (BV) of bacteria rich and low ammonia concentration solution at a rate of 0.5 Ammonium analyses, as total ammoniacal nitrogen (NH Dissolved oxygen concentration was measured using an oxygen probe (YCI model 5739) with a temperature probe built in, attached to a meter YCI model 57. Metal cation (K Measurement of pH was conducted using a Hanna meter model pH211 with the glass-body combination pH probe, HI 1131B incorporating a temperature probe and compensation. Nitrite and nitrate were accurately determined using a Hach DR/2000 spectrophotometer after a rapid pre-determination using Merckoquant nitrite and nitrate test strips. They provided us with the information as to whether nitrites and nitrates were present at all and how much to dilute samples so that the results fit into the range of the applied method. The first experiments were designed to check whether aeration within the column would have any impact on the ammonia removal. The performance of the ion-exchange columns in all cases is expressed in terms of the column breakthrough. This is the point at which the exit concentration from the column starts to rise rapidly, indicating that the column is close to full loading with ammonium ion.  Other work  Although no detailed results are presented here, one unusual observation was the apparent retention of some biological activity after chemical regeneration. Regenerated columns were used for a new set of experiments with bacteria being introduced only in one, presuming that the other column would not exhibit bacteria activity any more. However, biological activity was present in both of the columns, leading to the conclusion that some of the bacteria can survive a regeneration procedure. Retention of some biological activity after alkaline regeneration may actually improve overall performance of the column, since established colonies of nitrifying bacteria proved to perform better compared to newly established ones. Since all the experiments involving bacteria and real wastewater did not allow creation of identical experimental conditions, the only way to compare the performance of biologically active clinoptilolite and mordenite was to study the columns simultaneously. Inlet ammonia concentrations of 40 The results in The change in the inlet ammonia concentration showed a significant influence upon nitrification rate, see Higher levels of bacterial activity and greater ion-exchange capacity would explain why mordenite responded to sharp increases in ammonia levels significantly better than clinoptilolite. In the final part of the experiment at 450 The results obtained for equalization of the inlet ammonia peaks on biologically active mordenite are very good when compared to the results available from the literature. Beler-Baykal et al. The results in Reduction of the air rate from 2.88 to 0.84 Overall, comparing the performance of clinoptilolite with that of mordenite over the various conditions indicated in  The nitrate and oxygen concentrations in the exit solutions from these columns are shown in There is clear evidence from this preliminary experiment that intra-bed membrane aeration showed significant enhancement relative to the control. This is not so obvious from the breakthrough data shown in The ion-exchange breakthrough behaviour of the natural zeolites, clinoptilolite and mordenite, in the presence of nitrifying bacteria was compared. The mordenite was shown to exhibit higher breakthrough capacity in all cases. Aeration of the feed solution to the columns of clinoptilolite had no effect upon breakthrough in the absence of nitrifying bacteria. In the presence of nitrifying bacteria the breakthrough capacities of columns of both mordenite and of clinoptilolite were enhanced in both cases. In the case of the clinoptilolite, the fractional enhancement of breakthrough capacity in the presence of nitrifying bacteria was greater than in the case of the mordenite, 50% in the case of the clinoptilolite compared to 36% in the case of the mordenite. This is a reflection of the better ion-exchange performance of the mordenite. The rates of nitrification in columns of the mordenite showed a significant sensitivity to the aeration rate. The clinoptilolite used in the study appeared to exhibit less effective oxygen distribution compared to the mordenite. This was attributed to lower bed voidage in the case of the clinoptilolite and shorter mean residence time. The intra-column membrane-based aeration system within each column appeared to provide higher degrees of aeration and oxygen availability compared with that observed when aeration of the feed water was conducted externally. The financial support of the New Zealand Foundation for Research, Science and Technology for a Bright Futures Top Doctoral Scholarship for Dr. Miladinovic is gratefully acknowledged.