The density of the dense medium separation used to be controlled according to the desired density given by the operators, which depended on the ash data assayed in each hour. Recently, it is indicated through research and practice that the density of the dense medium separation could be controlled intelligently. The control process is implemented through the procedure as follows. The property of the feed coal would be calculated firstly based on the scanned ash of raw coal on line, thus the process parameters, including the density of the dense medium separation, would be forecasted and optimized. The optimized desired density of circulatory medium would be transmitted to the control system. Similarly, the liquid level of the buckets and silo, the amount of the bypass flow, and the added medium would be calculated and controlled intelligently. The research result could reduce the effect of man's activity on the dense medium separation process, shorten the delay time of the process control, and enhance the efficiency of the dense medium separation. The key technology of the intelligent control of the dense medium process is the forecasting process parameters in the dense medium separation process.Controlling precision of density of a dense medium separation in a coal preparation plant could reach to 0.05 The defects mentioned above would be more serious when the raw coal into the coal preparation plant comes from different mines or coal seams, which make the quality of the feed undulated so that the control of the density of the circulatory medium becomes difficult and the quality of the product is unstable. The references indicate that the recent studies about the dense medium separation almost center on the flow characteristics in the separators ( Research on the intelligent control of the dense medium separation process is traduced in this paper, attempting to solve the problems, such as the manual density control, control delay, and absence of consideration of raw coal property. The focal point to research is the prediction of the raw coal properties and operating parameters on line, thus the system of the intelligent control of the dense medium separation is developed. The main contents of the intelligent control system of the dense medium separation process in coal preparation plant include: to predict the raw coal properties real time, such as density consist (i.e., the yield of coal in each density level; the washability data or float-sink data includes density consist and their corresponding ash) and ash; to forecast products' quantity and quality, such as yield and ash; to optimize the operating parameters such as desired or goal density, and medium system parameters; to decide the real-time control strategy of the dense medium system; to evaluate the efficiency of the separation and the prediction; to actualize the control hardware and software system. The work all of above would be realized on line and aimed at determining the desired density intelligently based on the real-time raw coal properties, so as to reduce artificial factor and lag control and to actualize intelligent control of dense medium separation. The intelligent control system of the dense medium separation consists of modules and devices of the on line data collector, the base data input and the client management, the real-time analysis and forecast of the techniques index, property of raw coal and product, inquiring data of the analysis and forecast, control system, database, and host computer. The data to be transmitted among the modules are stored in a database. The relationship between the modules is shown in The intelligent control system is developed in a coal preparation plant which is operating and has been equipped with an ordinary control system. The ordinary control system uses the AB series PLC which were divided into 3 substations, communicating one another with control net. The new system should be compatible with ordinary one, so the AB series PLC still is used as the host control machine and communicates with the ordinary one by an Ethernet. All the control signal and real-time monitor data are collected from the ordinary system and be transmitted to the new system, the real-time predicting and analysis are realized in the new system. The results of predicting and optimizing are sent into the ordinary control system. The scan and monitor instruments included in the control system are listed in The main parameters are checked on line, such as the quantity and ash of raw coal and products, the density of the qualified dense medium, the feed pressure of the cyclone, and the magnetite content. The data checked on line still are stored in the database of the ordinary control system. The new system reads the data from the ordinary system through custom-made port and put them in an OPC server which supports the intelligent control system. The core of the intelligent control system of a dense medium process is to predict the technical parameters on line in which there are several parts: predicting the raw coal density-consist, forecasting and optimizing of the products yield and ash, and optimizing the medium density and desired density. The other key work should be the determination of real-time control strategy of the dense medium system. Among the above contents, predicting of the density consist of raw coal is the key step. The other jobs are all based on raw coal density consist. A representative former raw coal density consist is needed as a basis to predict the raw coal density consist real time. The recent float–sink analysis could be used as the former or basic density consist. Then the change regular pattern of float–sink consist could be sought by period statistics data. The property of raw coal that comes from different coal seam is not alike. So if the mixed feed comes from different coal seams, their data have to be synthesized and become a new float–sink analysis data according to some proportion. The process of synthesizing data is shown in The change of raw coal ash indicates that density consist of the raw coal has changed. So the real-time ash from ash scanner could be used as the predicting benchmark. But precision of the ash scanner is not satisfactory. So the data from ash scanner have to be processed. The relationship between the real-time ash and the manual assayed ash is shown in The models that transform the raw coal ash to the density consist were developed based on the former raw coal density consist and benchmark ash. There are two available models developed. The work still is in progress to explore new models, to test the dependability and precision of the models, to compare the calculating data with the industrial production parameters, and to optimize the models. There are two steps to transform the raw coal ash to the density consist: predicting the yield of each density fraction and calculating their ash. predicting the yield of each density fraction It is discovered that the cumulating yield of each density fraction of raw coal is closely related to the raw coal ash except the fraction of − predicting the ash of each density fraction The relation of raw coal ash with floating accumulative ash is deduced real-time like this: The washability and the partition curve are needed so as to predict the technical parameters. Here the models for curve fitting are selected. The precision of a curve fitting affects the prediction efficiency directly. There are a lot of models, but the fitting effect would be different. So the optimum model should be selected. Some models have been used to fit the washability and the partition curve, such as arc tangent, hyperbolic tangent, and composite hyperbolic which were used over three decades and exhibited better fitting effect in most cases. But it is shown that in practice those models could not meet the needs of the minimum fitting error while coal property is special or situation is complex. So the new models need to be looked for. It is indicated through analysis that the shape of the partition curve and the Table Curve 2D, a fitting tool for two-dimensional data, is used to fitting 10 groups' data of the raw coal density consist and the partition coefficient. Some S shape curves were selected as follows, which could meet the needs of fitting the washability curve and the partition curve. Gaussian Cumulative: Logistic Dose Response: Lorentzian Cumulative: Extreme Value Cumulative: Asymmetric Sigmoid: The washability and partition curves are different for raw coals. The diversity of the curves is expressed through the characteristic index of the models, such as a, b, c, and d in Eqs. The system could select the model to get optimum fitting result. Until now, the parameters could be predicted on line with the real-time raw coal data and the partition curve gotten above. The predicted parameters include the washability, separation density δp, product yields, and product ashes, etc. For example, the clean coal yield is calculated real-time like this. The theory yield of clear coal is gotten from the real-time washability curve based on desired ash The different practical separation density could be obtained through moving the partition curve with the separation density as beginning, keeping the probable error E no change. Then the yield of the clear coal at desired ash Let The total clear coal yield is: The control strategy based on the optimized operating parameters was developed, thus the intelligent control could be realized. At first, the optimized operating parameters were transmitted to the control system. Then the operating parameters were transformed as the control strategy and steps. Thus the feed-forward and feedback control could be realized. The predicting and control result could be tested and verified on line. The structure of the intelligent control system on the feed-forward and feedback is shown in The system actualizes the functions through following programs. The basis density consists and the predicting benchmark ash of the raw coal are confirmed based on the real time detected data on the raw coal belt. The density consist of feed raw coal is calculated on line. Then the separating density, the ash and yield of the products, and the recovery efficiency could be predicted. The separating density is converted to the desired density which would be transmitted to the control outfit. The control outfit adjusts the suspension density to match the desired density by adding magnetite or water, or by split flow. The process is known as the feed-forward control. The quality and quantity of the clean coal are checked on line by the ash scanner and the weigh meter and fed back to the prediction system to compare it with the desired quality of the clean coal, then the given control density would be adjusted. The process is known as the feedback control. All of the data checked and calculated, such as the scanned and manual assayed ashes, the predicted and the detected weights, the basis and predicted density consists of raw coal, the desired density and detected suspension density, the predicted and the calculated recovery efficiency etc. are compared correspondingly and analyzed. Then the operating parameters are calculated and predicted afresh based on the real time changed data. The adding of magnetite or water, the qualified medium split flow, and the bucket level also are the control objects. The rule-based control strategy is developed and actualized, which assimilated the experience of the operators fully. So, the intelligent control of the dense medium process could be actualized in the suspension density control, bucket level control, split flow, adding magnetite, or adding water, which abates the anthropogenic effect and enhances the separation efficiency. The research and practice above show that the intelligent control of the dense medium process could be actualized based on the real time change of raw coal ash through predicting property of raw coal, separation technical parameters, and operating indexes. The crux of the intelligent control of the dense medium process is the predicting technical parameter real time. The hardware expenses do not need to increase a lot. The intelligent control of the dense medium process might improve the situation of control delaying, eliminate anthropogenic factor effect and enhance the separation efficiency. The paper is supported by the Project of