Statement of problem
                  Improvement in the masticatory function after replacing missing teeth is one of the main expected outcomes that need to be comprehensively measured with both clinical and patient-centered assessments. An evaluation of the responsiveness of these methods is lacking.
               
                  Purpose
                  The purpose of this clinical study was to assess the responsiveness of both objective and subjective methods for measuring the impact of different conventional prostheses on masticatory function at prosthesis delivery and 2 months later.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Participants (N=118) requiring prosthetic rehabilitation were selected from patients attending the Faculty of Dentistry of the University of Salamanca. Masticatory function was assessed by means of subjective methods (self-rated ordinal scales, visual analog scale, and food intake ability questionnaire) at baseline and 2 months after treatment. The ability to mix 2-colored chewing gum after 5, 10, and 15 cycles was also evaluated objectively. The responsiveness of each method was categorized by the effect size (ES) as low (<0.5), moderate (0.5 to 0.8), or large (>0.8).
               
                  Results
                  The study revealed that in all subgroups, the masticatory function improved 2 months after the treatment. The most responsive method was the visual analog scale (ES: 1.2) and the number of pattern foods perceived to be easily masticated by participants (ES: 0.7 to 1.3). By contrast, the masticatory performance assessed by using the mixing ability test showed a smaller magnitude of change (ES: 0.3 to 0.7). Both the objective and subjective masticatory functions were coherently correlated with age and clinical variables (number of occlusal units or the Eichner index) in all subgroups. However, masticatory performance and masticatory ability were not significantly correlated (r=0.22; P=.12).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Conventional prosthetic treatments significantly improve masticatory function 2 months after delivery, and the subjective methods were the most responsive in assessing changes in participants. Clinicians and researchers should be aware that both clinical and patient-centered assessments are able to detect significant changes in mastication after conventional prosthetic treatment, although self-rated masticatory satisfaction is the most responsive method. Moreover, age and occlusal status are the major predictors of functional outcomes. According to the Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms, mastication is the “process of chewing food for swallowing and digestion.” A universally accepted method for assessing mastication is lacking. The laboratory-based measures used are comminution tests (particle size), Both patients and clinicians expect prosthetic treatment to have a positive effect on masticatory function. However, a standard assessment is not routinely performed before and after prosthetic treatment to determine the magnitude of change in either the masticatory performance or the masticatory ability. Studies have addressed the impact of prosthetic treatments in terms of masticatory function The purpose of this clinical study was to evaluate the responsiveness of different methods for assessing the impact of conventional prostheses (CDs, RPDs, and FPDs) on masticatory function. The null hypothesis was that no changes would be detected by either objective or subjective methods 2 months after conventional prosthetic treatment. This clinical trial was carried out on patients rehabilitated following standard practice, based on the number, location, and status of remaining teeth and the patient's preferences for either CD, RPD, or FPD. The study was performed at the School of Dentistry of the University of Salamanca between 2012 and 2016. The Bioethics Committee of the University of Salamanca approved the study design (EXPTE: PI081020), and all participants were informed about the objectives and procedures and signed the specific consent form. The sample size for detecting large standardized differences (effect size ≥0.8) in masticatory satisfaction scores was estimated using paired After collecting basic sociodemographic and dental behavioral data, the participants' dental status was assessed from an examination. Data regarding the prosthetic status, the number of standing teeth, the Eichner index (A, B, C groups), The masticatory function was assessed at baseline and then reevaluated 2 months after delivery of the prostheses using 2 different methods. First, the participants were asked to report how often they had experienced the following 3 mastication-related difficulties because of tooth, mouth, or denture problems (pain or discomfort, interrupted meals, and adapted food preparation). The responses were set according to a 5-point Likert scale (0=never, 1=hardly ever, 2=occasionally, 3=fairly often, 4=very often), and the 3 questions allowed masticatory function to be self-rated on an ordinal scale. Moreover, the masticatory satisfaction of each participant was quantified by using a visual analog scale of 0 to 10 numeric endpoints (0=no satisfaction and 10=full satisfaction), which allowed the participants to rate their perceived masticatory satisfaction by marking a point along the visual scale. Also, the perceived difficulty of masticating 5 different types of food (salad, fresh carrots, meat, legumes/vegetables, and an uncut apple) was evaluated by means of the Leake index. The objective masticatory performance was determined by using 2-colored chewing gum and optical scanning to study mixing ability (Smint Kiss 3: white and blue). The participants were asked to masticate a piece of gum for 5, 10, and 15 cycles. The masticated gum was taken by the same operator (Y.G.) and squeezed between 2 glass slides, creating a 2-mm specimen that was subsequently scanned on both sides. Using a digital imaging program (ImageJ 1.42q), the bolus area and later the unmixed areas (blue and white regions) were identified to estimate the mixed area and to calculate overall masticatory efficiency as a percentage. The wider the mixed area, the greater the masticatory performance. The effect size (ES) was estimated to quantify the magnitude of change (responsiveness) of the method described previously. This value was a distribution-based measure of change calculated by dividing the mean difference between the baseline and follow-up scores by the standard deviation of the pretreatment scores. Fifteen percent of the specimens (n=18) were reevaluated at baseline to determine the exploratory reliability by using the interclass correlation coefficient (ICC) for absolute agreement in a 2-way mixed model. Within-subject comparisons were carried out using paired Student The initial study population (N=118) comprised 49 women and 69 men between the ages of 30 and 86 years (mean 56.0 ±12.5 years) presenting no uncontrolled systemic disease. This population consisted of 4 subgroups: participants arriving without prostheses (n=50) and participants with CDs (n=23), RPDs (n=30), and FPDs (n=15) ( Masticatory function compared among prosthetic cohorts at onset of study, with masticatory function recorded 2 months after treatment with CDs, RPDs, or FPDs (  Regarding masticatory efficiency in the group of participants who had received CDs, their mixing ability significantly increased after treatment, regardless of the number of masticating cycles analyzed. The ES of this test ranged from 0.3 at 5 cycles (low ES) to 0.7 (moderate ES) at 10 cycles.  The functional outcomes of the treatment with FPDs are shown in In Finally, in the group of participants treated with FPDs, age was not correlated with masticatory function, but the occlusal variables were correlated ( The findings of this clinical study support rejection of the null hypothesis because both objective and subjective methods were responsive enough to detect changes in mastication 2 months after prosthetic treatment. This work focused on evaluating the responsiveness of different methods for assessing the therapeutic result of conventional prosthetic treatment on masticatory function soon after delivery (at 2 months). All the methods used to evaluate the treatment outcomes are valid and have been used in other studies. As expected, the within-subject comparisons revealed that the masticatory function (objective and subjective) significantly improved in all subgroups. Similarly, the masticatory performance significantly increased with the number of masticating cycles. In addition, according to the present results, the masticatory function (objective and subjective) was coherently correlated with age and several clinical variables (number of teeth present, missing teeth, fixed teeth, and the Eichner index) among all subgroups ( The masticatory outcomes presented in the present study are consistent with those of other studies. For example, in CD wearers, masticatory satisfaction increased significantly (from 3.3 to 6.4) 1 month after treatment Limitations of this study include that the population was chosen based on convenience (those participants who visited the university dental clinic) and that the initial sample size (N=118) decreased by 15% to 25% at the time of the 2-month follow-up (N=94). This loss of participants may have biased the estimation of the treatment outcomes. An analysis determined that the participants who did not receive follow-up examinations did not differ with respect to sociodemographic, clinical, or subjective variables at baseline. If all treated participants had been reevaluated, the improvement in masticatory function might have been even greater than that reported in this study because patients experiencing problems are usually those with a higher probability of attending the scheduled visits. Based on the findings of this clinical study, the following conclusions were drawn: Conventional prosthetic treatment significantly improved the masticatory function 2 months after delivery. This improvement was better detected by using a subjective evaluation of masticatory ability, either by visual analog scale or by recording the number of pattern foods easily masticated, than by using objective assessments such as the mixing ability test. 