Stumps of conifer trees are a prospective source of bioenergy and stump harvesting is a novel practice in forestry management in the Baltic and Nordic countries. However, as stump harvesting may cause possible environmental risks there has emerged a clear need for research focusing on sustainable forest management.
                  Three Norway spruce (Picea abies) clear-cut areas on different soils in Estonia were selected for the present study. We analysed the effect of stump harvesting on net nitrogen mineralization (NNM) and on nutrient leaching. On dry and sandy Endogleyic Arenosol (Oxalis site type), stump harvesting reduced the annul NNM flux significantly; 134 and 202kgNhayr−1 at the harvested and at the control site, respectively. In clear-cut area where Endogleyic Cambisol was dominating (Hepatica site type), stump harvesting had no effect on NNM (92 vs 88kgNhayr−1). However, in a clear-cut area where the soil type was Endogleyic Albic Podzol (Myrtillus site type), stump harvesting increased the total annual NNM flux: 102 vs 70kgNhayr−1 at the harvested and at the control site, respectively. Stump harvesting affected also the proportion of nitrification and ammonification processes in NNM. At the Myrtillys site type stump harvesting increased the annual nitrogen (N) leaching flux. One year after stump harvesting, leaching at the harvested site was 11.7 vs 4.5kgNha−1
                     yr−1 at the control site. In the second year N leaching decreased and the difference levelled off. Increased N leaching was induced by a larger amount of water; average N concentration of the harvested and control sites did not differ. Although at the Oxalis site N leaching was larger at the harvested than at the control site, the total annual leached N flux was small (∼2kgNha−1). At the fertile Hepatica site type treatment had no impact on N leaching, which was only ca 1kgNha−1
                     yr−1. Phosphorus (P) leaching was very small in all study areas, being below 0.1kgPha−1
                     yr−1.
                  The effect of stump harvesting on annual NNM as well as on N leaching was soil specific and highly variable. Stump harvesting affected also the proportion of the nitrification and ammonification processes in total NNM. Considering the first short-term results obtained from different site types, we can conclude that harvesting of spruce stumps does not induce serious environmental hazards in relation of N cycling.During the last decade stump harvesting has become more actual in forest management practice in the Nordic and Baltic countries ( According to earlier studies, stump harvesting may lead to several positive effects. As stump harvesting acts as site preparation, ( Considering the environmental effects of stump harvesting, special attention should be paid to nitrogen (N) cycling, since availability of N is one of the crucial factors limiting tree growth and photosynthetic activity in boreal forests ( In relation to stump harvesting, it has been found that stump removal increases both NNM and nitrification already after one year of treatment ( The main aim of the present study was to estimate the short-term effects of Norway spruce stump harvesting on annual NNM and on the nitrogen and phosphorus leaching fluxes in different soils. The working hypotheses of the present study were: (1) NNM will increase after stump harvesting in Norway spruce clear-cut as a result of soil disturbances; (2) stump harvesting may initiate larger nitrogen and phosphorus losses from the ecosystem due to increased leaching. Three Norway spruce clear-cut areas (named as Elva, Rõuge and Orguse) of different soil types were selected for the study ( In all study areas 14 soil pits were dug to a depth of 1.0 The method with buried polyethylene bags was used to estimate The samples were incubated every month until winter before the soil became frozen. A sampling interval of one month is an optimal period during which changes are assumed to take place in the concentrations of mineral nitrogen ( The monthly and annual NNM fluxes were calculated as the difference between the contents of inorganic nitrogen forms (nitrate and ammonium nitrogen), and their sum in the initial and the incubated samples. Nitrite (NO Soil temperature was measured, using a soil temperature sensor (model 1425, Technologies, Inc., USA) and soil moisture was measured by using soil sensor (Watermark 6450WD, Technologies, Inc, USA), every hour at a depth of 5 The leaching of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and C was estimated with stainless steel plate lysimeters ( The Tecator ASN 3313 was employed for testing the soil samples for nitrogen after Kjeldahl. The concentration of NO Water samples were analysed for NH Normality of variables was checked using Lilliefors and Shapiro-Wilk’s tests. To analyse the effect of the treatment factors (stump harvesting) on the response variables, ANOVA was applied. The ANOVA assumptions - normality, homogeneity of group variances and nonsignificant relationship between the group means and the standard deviations - were checked. For multiple comparisons of the means, in case the assumptions were satisfied, the The Elva study area was located on a relatively fertile but droughty sandy soil ( Average soil pH Annual net mineralization in the Elva study area was more intensive at the control site than at the harvested site (Wilcoxon Matched Pairs test, p The total annual NNM flux in the 0–20 The annual N leaching flux in the Elva study area was considered small in both treatments. However, in the two study years (2012; 2013) total annual N leaching was higher at the harvested site; also the amount of percolated water was larger at the harvested site ( The Orguse study area lies on The soil N stock in the 0–20 In the Orguse area average pH in the mineral soil showed higher values for the harvested site for five months ( The intensity of N mineralization peaked in May in both treatments ( The total annual NNM flux in the 0–20 During the first year after stump harvesting, total N leaching was equal at the harvested and control sites (1.1 The Rõuge study area is located on sandy The total soil N stock of the Rõuge study area was the largest among our study areas, reaching up to 4.6 At the harvested site, N mineralization peaked in September, amounting to 700 The total annual NNM flux in the 0–20 The N leaching in the Rõuge study area was the highest among all three areas; also the amount of percolated water was relatively large ( There was revealed a clear difference in the annual dynamics of mineral N concentration in the soil between the study areas ( In the present study a short-term effect of uprooting on mineral N concentrations in the soil was found, which levelled out in autumn. In the Rõuge area the content of soil inorganic N was significantly higher at the control site in the first summer after stump harvesting ( In the Elva area, soil disturbance as a result of stump harvesting, had a negative effect on soil NNM intensity. Stump harvesting affected also the proportion of the ammonification and nitrification processes in total NNM. In the Elva study area, stump harvesting increased nitrification; nitrification rate was 86% at the harvested site The Orguse study area lies on Irrespective of the treatment, the highest peak of NNM occurred in Orguse in May, but NNM was also high in June and July, which is in accordance with earlier results ( The dynamics of soil pH in the Orguse study area was different for the harvested site and the control site, being higher at the former site during five months ( For the Rõuge area, the effect of stump harvesting on annual NNM was opposite to the results obtained for the Elva area. Both areas are located on sandy soils but their soil water tables were different. Sandy soil of the Elva area is the driest and the soil of the Rõuge area is the moistest ( The NNM in Rõuge area for the different months was clearly different at the harvested site and at the control site, demonstrating the effect of stump harvesting. From June to mid-September, NNM was evidently suppressed at the harvested site ( The significant increase of NNM at the harvested site from mid-September to mid-October may be related to microbial immobilization in the previous month ( The annual dynamics of NNM in the Rõuge area demonstrated also a different pattern compared with the other study sites; peaking in mid-summer for the control site and being quite low in spring and autumn, which is different also from earlier literature results ( The nitrification rate was quite low in Rõuge area (40–57% of total annual NNM) compared with the other two studied areas. The lower nitrification rate in this area could be attributed by the high soil C:N ratio ( In all study areas most of NNM was mineralized in the upper 0–10 Soil temperature is one of the crucial factors influencing the N mineralization process in the soil ( Thus the results of the present study do not clearly support our hypothesis about the effect of stump harvesting on NNM and we can only conclude that stump harvesting may intensify N mineralization under certain soil conditions, but it may also reduce annual NNM in other soils. Thus, the effect of stump harvesting on the annual NNM flux is highly site (soil) specific. The quantity and quality of soil organic matter have a significant effect on NNM intensity, the C:N ratio being one of the key factors ( According to some studies, stump harvesting may increase nutrient, especially phosphorus (P), leaching ( The highest N leaching occurred in the Rõuge study area in the following summer of stump harvesting. However, already in the second year after stump harvesting the soil stabilized and N leaching fell to the level of the control site. Although the nitrification rate was quite low for this study area (40% of NNM), leached N was mostly in the nitrate form ( The annual flux of nutrient leaching depended on two factors: nutrient concentration in percolated water and water quantity. Since the soil of the Elva area was dry, water from precipitation was fast assimilated by the vegetation and only a very small amount reached the deeper soil. In the Elva area increased N leaching at the control site in 2013 was caused by a larger amount of percolated water since the N concentrations did not differ between treatments ( Regarding the effect of stump harvesting on the annual NNM flux, the forest site type, i.e. the soil, seems to be a more significant factor than soil disturbance caused by stump harvesting. The annual fluxes of NNM estimated for the undisturbed soil (control sites) of the studied areas were 202, 88 and 70 Considerably increased N leaching in the harvested treatment was only found at one site, but it stabilized during a short period of time. Larger N leaching in the This study was supported by the project of the