The fracturing fluid is commonly used in the CBM reservoir. Long-term field applications show that the fracturing fluids can have adverse impacts on gas transport and flow capacity for CBM reservoirs. In this study, we investigate the effect of guar-based fracturing fluid on gas sorption capacity and diffusion under different fracturing fluid treatment conditions. The Illinois coal samples were initially treated by guar-based fracturing fluid followed by isotherm sorption and diffusion experiments. We also conducted microscopic observation and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance to characterize the guar-coating effect and geochemical evolution of coal microstructures. Our experimental results show that the residue of the guar-based fracturing fluid can result in damages of gas sorption and diffusion because of the guar-coating. The degree of damages does not correlate with concentration of hydroxypropyl guar (HPG). The Langmuir pressure of the guar gel treated coal samples were significantly reduced which hinders gas desorption during the well depletion. The gas diffusivity in the macropore of the coal matrix was damaged significantly after the guar gel treatment. It was also observed that the water washing can effectively recover the gas sorption capacity and diffusivity which implies that the flowback can remove the residual guar during the flow back period after the stimulation. Based on the microscopic observation and NMR results, it was found that the HPG can coat on the coal particles and hinder the gas sorption and diffusion, but no obvious functional group change on the coal surface with the treatment. The findings of this work can provide valuable data for the guar-gel fracturing stimulation optimization for CBM reservoirs.With the rapid increase of energy demand resulting from the economic development, all countries around the world are actively exploring new energy sources. Coalbed methane (CBM) development has long been successful in US and it not only can greatly reduce the methane related mine geohazards Safe to handle, environmentally friendly, non-damaging to the fracture conductivity and the reservoir permeability are the key prerequisites of the fracturing fluid selection during the stimulation operation The well flowback is an essential step of the fracturing treatment. The CBM well flowback can partially wash and remove the fracturing fluid residue attached to the coal fracture surface, thereby reducing the retention of the fluid residue within the formation. By removing the fluid residue, the permeability of the induced fracture can be recovered. However, both field observation and the laboratory investigates show that although the breaker agent can promote the fracturing fluid to flow back to some extent The evaluation of the influence of fracturing fluid on the reservoir damage provides useful information for reservoir stimulation and gas production optimizations. In the conventional oil and gas fields, this evaluation is usually carried by combining the production data analysis (PDA) and the SEM observation of the formation specimens from the reservoir In recent years, limited efforts have been devoted to investigating the influence of fracturing fluid on the gas adsorption and diffusion characteristics of the coal. A study by Kang et al The guar-based fracturing fluid is one of the most common fracturing fluids in the CBM gas field The guar powder, as a good thickener, has promoted the fracturing fluid system. The guar-based crosslinked gel has good fracturing fluid viscoelasticity and sand carrying capacity due to the improved crosslinking system Hydroxypropyl guar (HPG) is a product modified with propylene oxide on guar. Since plant fibers of the polymer are removed during the reprocessing and the washing process, the HPG generally contains less insoluble residue. Due to the replacement of hydroxyl groups on the macromolecule chain of guar by the hydroxypropyloxy, it has good temperature stability and strong biodegradability resistance  The guar-based fracturing fluid contains four chemical additives including thickener, crosslinker, anti-swelling agent and breaker. The guar powder is used as thickener of the guar-based fracturing fluid, and the crosslinker can promote the crosslinked structure to further enhance the viscoelasticity of the guar gel. Anti-swelling agent is used to relieve pore blocking or fracture blocking caused by clay mineral swelling induced by fracturing fluid invasion and uptake. The breaker can break the crosslinked structure by oxidation to reduce the viscosity of the fracturing fluid, thereby promoting the flow back process. The cross-linking and breaking principle of the guar gel has been discussed in the caption of  To quantitatively evaluate the influence of the flow back on the gas sorption and diffusion recovery, we conducted additional tests to compare before and after the water washing to mimic the The bulky fresh coal block collected from the Illinois Basin was pulverized into 60–80 mesh (0.25–0.18 mm) and then equally separated into 8 portions with each portion approximately 50 g. The prepared pulverized samples were immersed into 500 g of the prepared guar-based fracturing fluids and one portion of raw coal was immersed in the water. All the coal samples were immersed for 5 days, then the ammonium persulfate as the breaker was added, and then continue to immerse for 3 days. For the non-washed coal samples, we took the coal samples out from the fracturing fluids and directly dried them out using a low temperature oven. For the washed coal samples, we added the water into the container to dilute the gel and take the fluid out for a few consecutive times until the solution in the beaker is clear and no gel residue can be seen. Then the washed coal samples were taken out from the containers and dried out. The drying oven was used to dry all the samples at 60 °C. The drying process took about 1–2 days until no moisture presents in each dried sample. As shown in The Langmuir isothermal adsorption model is the most widely used model for describing isothermal sorption data For each sorption equilibrium pressure step, the methane diffusion coefficient was estimated to analyze the change of the diffusivity of the tested coal with or without fracturing fluid treatments. Based on the Fick’s law, the unipore model is commonly used to describe the diffusion process of gas in coal. This model assumes that the coal particles are isotropic homogeneous spherical particles with the following expression The shortcoming of the unipore model is that it assumes a single type of pore in the coal matrix In this study, both the above two models were adopted to investigate the diffusion characteristic of coal samples. The unipore model was selected to analyze the overall changes of coal sample during the gel treatment and water washing stages. Meanwhile, the bidisperse model was used to analyze the unique influence of the guar gel on the diffusion of macropores and the micropores. After the sorption and diffusion experiments, each coal sample was taken out from the sample cell, and the coal particles were optically investigated by microscopy to directly observe the coating of the residue guar gel on coal particle surface. To investigate whether guar gel based fracturing fluids can chemically react with coal surface functional groups to alter the geo-chemical properties of coal, the coal samples treated by fracturing fluids with 0.2% and 0.4% mass fraction HPG (Groups 6 & 7 shown in From   For estimated Langmuir pressures, we plotted all the data in To quantitatively analyze the effect of the HPG on the degree of coal adsorption capacity damage, the decreasing ratio of sorption capacity was analyzed as follows: The Notably, the coal samples treated by the fracturing fluids with 0.8% and 1.2% HPG mass fraction (Group 4 and Group 5) demonstrate notable desorption hysteresis as illustrated in The AHI index of the seven groups of coal sample was calculated and plotted in During the CBM depletion, the methane molecules initially desorb from the coal internal pore surface, then diffuse through the coal matrix towards cleats, and finally transport to wellbore by Darcian flow To comprehensively investigate the diffusion features of the entire desorption process, the diffusion coefficients were estimated by the unipore model (Eq. To further investigate the gas diffusivity damage due to the gel treatment, we also use the bidisperse model to check which portion of the pores are more influenced by the treatment. The diffusivity parameters based on the unipore model and bidisperse model were summarized in It was expected that the HPG can coat on the coal particles to prevent gas sorption and diffusion, we use microscope to observe the coating effects HPG on coal particles. Even after the water washing, the coal sorption and diffusion have slightly damage which may be attributed to the chemical structure changes of the coal sample with guar gel treatment and other additives, such as ammonium persulfate which can potentially oxidize the coal functional group. Thus, we employed the NMR to test the potential changes of the coal functional groups. After water washing, the adsorption capacity and diffusivity of the coal sample can almost recover back to its virgin value. This can be inferred into two points. First, the guar-based fracturing fluid is kind of gel using natural guar powder as the raw material, its viscosity greatly reduced after gel breaking ( After adding the breaker, the guar macromolecules will degrade, but some studies have shown that the guar gel macromolecular chain in the fracturing fluid does not undergo thorough hydrolysis completely, some polymer molecules with larger molecular weights still exist Without water washing, the guar-based fracturing fluid causes serious damage to the sorption capacity and diffusivity of methane in the coal. However, the degree of damage has little to do with the concentration of HPG. From both sorption and diffusion data, the HPG concentration does not correlate with the sorption damage for the range of 0.2% to 1.2% as shown in As mentioned in the introduction section, fracturing fluids may have two fundamental mechanisms to change the methane flow characteristics of coal. One is physical damage due to the residual gel coating on the coal surface and fractures. The other is the chemical damage, that is the gel residue dissolves and removes minerals or organic matter in the pores by geochemical reactions which potentially enhance the gas flowability by pore volume dilation. Based on the NMR test results, no apparent mineral dissolution and organic matter damages were found due to the additive of the guar fracturing fluids. This result is somewhat expected because additives within the guar-based fracturing fluid, including guar, anti-swelling agent, and breaker do not have strong acid, alkaline or oxidizing properties. These components do not reach with coal. Additionally, the mass fraction of HPG and other additives are negligible. It can be seen from the photos of the microscopic observation ( Based on the experimental results, the potential damage mechanisms of gas sorption and diffusion can be summarized as following aspects. As shown in The gel residue adheres to the surface of the outer surface of the coal or the surface of the pores and fractures but does not cause the pores and cracks to be blocked. This gel residue effectively occupies the surface area of the coal, resulting in a decrease in the number of adsorption sites as show in The gel residues adhere to the pore throats or inside the pores, completely blocking the pores or microfractures, completely blocking the flow channels of methane molecules as shown in Although the high concentration of guar fracturing fluid has high viscosity, the viscosity decreases after gel breaking, and some of the degraded small molecular compounds will enter into some macropores and stay in the pore throat. However, due to the small amount of gel entering the pores, the pores have not been completely blocked, and there is still a certain flowability for methane molecules ( All these three cases will directly or indirectly reduce the number of coal adsorption sites for methane, causing damage to the adsorption capacity and diffusivity. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct further research to quantify each of these mechanisms so that the influence mechanism can be clarified. When the methane molecules flow into the pores and adsorb on the pore walls, sorption swelling will occur, causing the pore walls at the pore throat to expand toward the centre of the pores The guar gel based fracturing fluid is commonly used in the CBM reservoirs and it can potentially damage the reservoir through various mechanisms. In this study, we quantitatively investigate the effects of HPG along with its associated additives on the gas sorption and diffusion of treated coals. The raw coal was treated by different concentrations of HPG fluids and the high pressure gas sorption and diffusion was used to quantify the fluid-induced damage for the coal. Our experimental results show that the residue of the guar-based fracturing fluid can result in damages of gas sorption and diffusion because of the guar-coating. The degree of damages does not correlate with concentration of hydroxypropyl guar (HPG). Both Langmuir pressures and volumes of the guar gel treated coal samples were significantly reduced which hinders gas desorption during the pressure depletion. The gas diffusivity in the macropore of the coal matrix was damaged significantly after guar gel treatment. It was also observed that the water washing can effectively recover the gas sorption capacity and diffusivity which implies that the flowback can remove the residual guar during the flow back period after the stimulation. Based on the microscopic observation and NMR results, it was found that the HPG can coat on the coal particles and hinder the gas sorption and diffusivity, but no obvious functional group change on the coal surface with the treatment. The findings of this work can provide valuable data for the guar-gel fracturing stimulation optimization for CBM reservoirs.