This work presents the results of the Fe(III) and Ti(IV) separation using D2EHPA (1.5molL−1 in n-dodecane), after ilmenite leaching with H2SO4. It was possible to recover over 99wt% Ti in a two-stage process. The co-extracted Fe was stripped (>99.5wt%) with 4.5molL−1 H2SO4. Fe can be extracted from this solution by D2EHPA (1.5molL−1 in n-dodecane) in ⩽1.2molL−1 H2SO4. Both metals can be stripped from the organic phase by aqueous F− (pH 4.5). The stripping and the residual acid solutions can be recycled. The LLE process is a feasible alternative for producing high purity TiO2.Ilmenite is a Fe(II) titanate (FeTiO The development of technological applications for Ti and its corresponding alloys/oxide justifies large-scale production of such compounds. The known reserves of Ti oxides (rutile/anatase) are decreasing, so other Ti minerals must be used, ilmenite being the immediate choice due to its abundance ( Ilmenite processing requires drastic leaching conditions, basically with hot concentrated mineral acids ( The separation of Ti from Fe is critical in obtaining high purity grade TiO The present work aims at developing a separation and purification process for Fe(III) and Ti(IV) from H Ilmenite samples from the processing of monazite sands by INB were used in this study. According to X-ray fluorescence data, ilmenite comprises over 98 The experiments were performed at 120  The raffinate (after Ti extraction) was evaporated in order to crystallize Fe After washing the Ti-bearing organic phase, the acid solution was too dilute to crystallize Fe sulphate. The solution was diluted with deionised water (1:1–1:5 Ti(IV) was stripped with NH  Fe(III) in the organic phase was stripped with NH  The pH was adjusted to 4.5 with H The final effluents were the washings of the Ti and Fe precipitates. F The free acidity (expressed as H X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was accomplished using Cu K Ilmenite leaching efficiency using 7 The cooled leachate was diluted with H Ti was recovered in two steps with an efficiency of 99.4 96.6 The maximum H 92.9 The stripping efficiency for Ti and Fe after three recycles (86–95 The concentration of F LLE with D2EHPA is efficient in extracting Ti from Ti-bearing H We are indebted to Prof. Luiz Sobral and Jari Cardoso for revision of the english text.