The objective of any analytical measurement is to obtain consistent, reliable, and accurate data. Validated analytical methods play a major role in achieving this goal. Although there have been many studies reporting about the isotopic compositions of honeys, little has been documented regarding the validation of these methods. In this study, an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometry (IR-MS) method for the determination of honey adulteration was validated in-house in terms of selectivity, stability, linearity, accuracy, repeatability, sensitivity, and recovery. This study was the first attempt to describe some important method validation parameters, such as the limit of detection (LOD), limit of quantification (LOQ), and recovery for the IR-MS studies. The LOD of the method was 0.11%, and the LOQ was 0.38% based on the percent adulteration ratio. The recovery value for spiked blank honey sample with the in-house standard was 98.57%. To evaluate the usefulness of the method, 13 different brands of honey samples were collected from markets in Turkey and analyzed. The ranges of δ13C values of analyzed honey samples and their protein fractions were from −12.87 ± 0.01 to −25.56 ± 0.08‰ and from −23.77 ± 0.09 to −25.98 ± 0.06‰, respectively. Adulteration was found in one honey sample.Honey is a naturally sweet product produced by honeybees when they collect the nectars from the flowers of plants, convert their compositions, and place them into the cells of combs to mature ( Adulteration by sweeteners is the most important authenticity issue. The following sweeteners have been detected in adulterated honeys: sugar syrups from corn, sugar cane, and sugar beets, and syrups of natural origin. Many analytical methods for the detection of these compounds in honey samples have been reported based on high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) ( Sugar cane and corn sugar syrups have unique isotopic The value for δ% Method validation is an essential component of the measures that a laboratory should implement to allow it to produce reliable analytical data ( Therefore, the aims of this study were 1) to improve an in-house validation of IR-MS method for selectivity, stability, linearity, accuracy, repeatability, sensitivity (LOD, LOQ), and recovery to precisely determine the adulteration of honey samples and 2) to identify the δ The following carbon isotopic reference materials were used as reference materials in this study: Sucrose (IAEA CH6) δ Thirteen different brands of honey samples were collected from the local markets in Antalya/Turkey between February 2013 and April 2013 in Turkey. The botanical origin of the samples was floral. A 0.149 mm sieve was used to separate the impurities from the samples at the beginning of the analysis. Total δ About 150 ± 50 μg of materials (reference standards, honey samples, and protein extracts) were weighed in small tin capsules using an MX-2 ultra microbalance and placed into the auto-sampler unit of the elemental analyser (EA). All analyses of the samples were replicated three times and the average and standard deviations were calculated. The proteins in the honey sample were extracted according to the Official Methods of Analysis 998.12 with minor modifications ( The solutions, which visually contained precipitation, were centrifuged for 5 min at 804–1575 × The oxidation and reduction reactors of the IR-MS equipment were heated to 1020 °C and 650 °C, respectively. The oven temperature was set to 50 °C. The carrier gas (He) flow was 110 ml/min. The flow rate of O In the isotope ratio studies, an in-house QA standards must be developed to ensure that QC based calibration and corrections lead to accurate results for samples ( The validation of the analytical method was performed using the following parameters: selectivity, stability, linearity, accuracy, repeatability, sensitivity, and recovery. The results were statistically analysed using analysis of variance (ANOVA, The sample preparation step of IR-MS analysis is a critical stage for obtaining reproducible, accurate, and precise results. The amount of samples used for the EA-based IR-MS system was very small (generally 100–200 μg). Therefore, the weight of the introduced sample and its homogeneity are important factors. Reports in the literature have recommended that the sample weight introduced to the IR-MS system should be approximately 150–200 μg ( The second problem is the homogeneity of the sample. Although the honey samples were filtered to achieve homogeneity before sample introduction to the IR-MS system, the homogeneity of the extracted protein is a common problem. Obtaining a pure protein extract via an effective clean-up procedure is a significant step to determine the exact adulteration ratio of honey samples. At the clean-up stage, the precipitated protein fraction, which is the sediment in the bottom of the tube after the addition of sodium tungstate and H To evaluate the efficiency of the clean-up step, the control in-house standard (δ This study was carried out using floral honey obtained from Turkey. The δ Selectivity was checked by introducing a reference gas pulse, two types of blank tin capsules, a sucrose standard, and a control in-house standard. Stability of an analytical method means that aliquots of the same sample provide equivalent quantitation both during and after storage. The stability of IR-MS quantification over time arises from its lack of biochemical specificity, since no chemical or physical degradation affects the isotope concentration in a stored aliquot. Stability testing of the method was carried out by determining long-term stock stability. A control in-house standard was kept at room temperature for four months in order to check its stability. According to the results, there was no statistically significant difference among the δ The linearity of an analytical method is a measure of the proportionality of the analysed result to the amount of the analyte in the sample. Two techniques were used for the determination of linearity. The first was carried out using standard samples of sucrose and cellulose. Accuracy can be described as the closeness of agreement between the value that is adopted, either as a conventional, true, or accepted reference value, and the value found. Generally, this value is assessed from multiple measurements of reference materials with well-known standard concentrations. The mean δ The repeatability of the isotope ratio measurement is found by measuring a set of prepared and mounted samples on different occasions, preferably separated by several days under normal operating conditions ( LOD is the lowest analyte concentration that can be detected and identified with a given degree of certainty. Data are confidently accepted for their intended purpose if they fall above the LOD and if they are quantified above the LOQ ( δ Recovery can be assessed by analysing a sample with known concentrations (e.g., a control sample or certified reference material) and comparing the measured value with the true value as supplied with the material. If certified reference materials or control samples are not available, a blank sample matrix of interest can be spiked with a known concentration by weight or volume. According to the Eurachem Guide, recovery can be calculated with the following formula ( C Therefore, a recovery study was carried out using in-house standard and an adulterated honey sample. We accepted the control in-house standard as a blank (unfortified sample matrix) because it did not contain any adulterant. Similarly, adulterated honey sample was accepted as a fortified sample. The calculated adulteration ratios for the in-house standard and the adulterated sample were <LOQ and 77.56%, respectively. These standards were mixed by weight in order to obtain a final adulteration ratio of 7%, which is accepted as the maximum adulteration ratio by the European Union (EU). The mixed honey sample and its protein fraction were analysed, and the adulteration ratio was calculated as described in Eq. To evaluate the applicability of this method for the determination of δ Since one of the aims of this study was to determine the stable isotope ratio and check the quality of honey available in the Turkish market, 13 different honey brands were purchased from local markets in the Antalya province. The measurements of δ This study reported on the in-house validation of the IR-MS method for the determination of δ The authors wish to thank the Scientific Projects Coordination Unit of Akdeniz University (Antalya, Turkey) for financial support. They are also grateful to Food Security and Agricultural Research Centre of Akdeniz University for their helps in IR-MS analysis.