Many modern cars can run on gasoline with low concentrations of ethanol, and flex-fuel cars are able to utilize fuels with any concentration of ethanol. However, the fact that most ethanol sources for fuel production are also food sources makes their adoption untenable. Lignocellulosic biomass, however, is the most abundant plant material on Earth, with much higher yields per area of land, and is therefore available at a lower cost compared with starch- or sucrose-based materials. The major drawback in the commercial use of lignocellulose for the production of fuels and chemicals is the lack of cost-effective solutions in the processing of lignocellulose. This chapter discusses the dissolution of cellulose using ionic liquids (ILs) in detail, as well as enzymatic catalysis using ILs.Boiler combustion Stove combustion Easy processing Proven technology Low thermal efficiency Anaerobic digestion Alcoholic fermentation High product yields Low energy consumption Modest reaction conditions Slow rates of conversion Secondary treatment of waste required Difficult mass production of enzymes Gasification Pyrolysis Supercritical fluid extraction Direct liquefaction Fewer processing steps Shorter processing time High oxygen content Poor thermal stability Complex components Low energy efficiency Reduction in greenhouse gases Reduction in particulate emissions High degradability Energy supply security High raw material cost  Historically, research on the use conversion of biomass into liquid transportation fuels seems to have originated during the first energy crisis of October 1973 in the United States Sources of biomass for fuels production include: Palm and vegetable oils Sucrose, derived from sugar cane and sugar beets Starch-containing crops, such as corn Lignocellulosic biomass, including woody biomass, such as trees, shrubs, and grasses (e.g., Micanthus and switchgrass) Use of these biomass sources is dictated by their availability, cost, and sustainability of production. Palm and vegetable oils can be converted to biodiesel, which can be used on its own as a transportation fuel or blended with other diesels. Sugars are converted to ethanol by microbial fermentation and blended with gasoline. Most modern cars can run on gasoline with low concentrations of ethanol (5–15%), and flex-fuel cars are able to utilize fuels with any concentration of ethanol. Brazilian sugar cane ethanol can save 80% of greenhouse gas emissions compared with gasoline with current technology Lignocellulosic biomass, however, is the most abundant plant material on Earth, with much higher yields per area of land, and is therefore available at lower cost than starch- or sucrose-based materials The major drawback in the use of lignocellulose commercially for the production of fuels and chemicals is the lack of cost-effective solutions in the processing of lignocellulose. The The objective of biomass pretreatment is to improve the enzymatic digestibility of lignocellulosic biomass. Many substrate factors, such as substrate accessibility, lignin content, and particle size, affect the difficulty of the pretreatment process. Lignocellulosic biomass is a composite that consists mostly cellulose (35–50 Cellulose is composed of linked linear glucose chains by numerous inter- and intramolecular hydrogen bonds, or it could be seen as a linear polymer of cellobiose that consists of two glucose sugar units that are linked by glucosidic linkages (C-O-C) It is very difficult for cellulose to be dissolved in water and most of the common organic solvents with numerous inter- and intramolecular H-bonds, and the dissolution processes suffer from environmental, energy, and other problems. When Rogers et al. In the studies by Rogers In general, there are two viewpoints regarding the interaction between ILs and cellulose in the process of cellulose dissolution, and the main difference between these viewpoints is the role of the cation and the anion in the dissolution. The first one is that the interaction between the anion and cellulose determines the whole dissolution process, and there is no clear action of the cation At present, most of the experimental results have shown that the interaction between the anions of ILs and cellulose plays a leading role in the process of dissolution of cellulose. It was pointed out The ability of the anion to dissolve cellulose is influenced by many factors, and it is mainly dependent on the ability to form H-bonds. These factors include H-bond type and structure of the receptor, the nature of electronic absorption chemical group in ILs, the interaction between the anion and the cation, and so on. It was found that ILs with anions that are strong H-bond acceptors were the most effective solvents Xu et al. These results suggest that the H-bond-accepting ability of the anions strongly dominates the capacity of ILs for the dissolution of cellulose, and the solubility of cellulose will increase along with the increasing H-bond-accepting ability of anions in ILs, as disruption of the intermolecular H-bond will be helpful for the dissolution process. Zhang’s group The role of the cation in the process of dissolution of cellulose is complex, and it is difficult to give an accurate description by using experimental measurements. It was thought that the role of the cation in the dissolution process is minor and related to size and hydrophobicity Rogers For imidazole cation ILs, the ability for dissolution of cellulose is effectively increased by introducing functional groups into the side chain. Ren et al. Lu et al. On the basis of all of the above experimental results, it can be deduced that the dissolution of cellulose is determined by both anions and cations in ILs. The H-bond interaction between the anion and cellulose plays a leading role. Although the cation plays a minor role in the dissolution process, it cannot be ignored. It is possible to control the ability of ILs for dissolving cellulose by designing and changing the structure of the cation. Most of the above reports indicated that hydrogen bonding is the major reason for dissolution cellulose in ILs The proposed mechanism of dissolution of cellulose in ILs In addition to the separation of the cellulose chains, there are other possibilities of structural changes occurring in the process of cellulose dissolution. Some experimental studies identified the side reaction of cellulose chains. When Heinze et al. Ohno et al. Theoretical study is a reliable and powerful tool to understand the interaction of cellulose with ILs and the dissolution mechanism. Research using theoretical methods to study interaction and mechanism of cellulose in ILs has been reported increasingly. Most of these works are based on molecular dynamics simulation studies, and some of them are carried out using quantum chemical theoretical methods ( Youngs et al. Liu et al. Cho et al. Gross et al. Zhao et al. With the method of molecular dynamics simulation and quantitative calculation from the molecular level, it was found that the basis for the mechanism of cellulose dissolution in ILs is O-H…anion H-bond formation between the anion and cellulose, whereas cations interact with cellulose by formation of weaker H-bonds and van der Waals forces. Quantum chemistry theory and approaches are also good tools to investigate the interactions between ILs and cellulose, with the advantage of mechanism study and high accuracy. Novoselov et al. Guo et al. According to the research work of Payal Xu et al. Focusing on the interaction of ILs and cellulose, it was realized that it is important to develop a structure relationship and a molecular design method to achieve effective dissolution and separation of cellulose with ILs as solvent and catalyst. The study on the mild catalytic conversion process of biogasoline preparation will provide scientific basis for energy-oriented use of biomass and establish a research platform to investigate ILs, from fundamentals to applications. In general, it is thought that ILs can effectively destroy the H-bond of cellulose molecules. It is necessary to design and synthesize stable and effective functional ILs to achieve dissolution, separation, and catalytic conversion of biomass. At present, deep theoretical research has not been performed on the dissolution and catalytic conversion of cellulose in ILs, and there is no clear and systematic explanation for the mechanism of cellulose dissolution. It is therefore difficult to provide a theoretical basis for effective separation of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin in biomass. The interaction of ILs with various components of biomass, the liquid-phase catalytic conversion mechanism in an IL medium, and a new separation–catalysis–conversion technology based on ILs need to be further researched and developed. Research on ILs as nonaqueous media for enzymatic reactions has been growing dramatically since the last decade Ketone reduction using whole cells of Baker’s yeast Transesterification using Synthesis of Z-aspartame using thrmolysin, alcoholysis, ammoniolysis, and perhydrolysis using lipase Mu et al.