Although ozone is widely used as a pre-oxidant before coagulation in water treatment, the effect of pre-ozonation on optimized coagulation for removal of particle and natural organic matter (NOM) is still not fully understood. In this paper, pilot-scale investigation was conducted to examine the impact of pre-ozonation on coagulation for particle and NOM removal. Changes in the particle and NOM distributions were characterized by various methods, including laser light granularity system, particle counter, ultrafiltration, and resin absorbent fractionation. A novel composite flocculant–HPAC was compared with the traditional ferric chloride coagulant in terms of coagulation efficiency under the influence of pre-ozonation. Typical micro-polluted North China surface water was used for pilot coagulation tests. The results show that the effect of pre-ozonation on coagulation is associated with the dosage of ozone, coagulant type, and water contamination characteristics. For FeCl3, pre-ozonation acts as a coagulation aid at low dosage (1.0 mg L−1 O3) for turbidity and UV254 removal; while at higher dosage (2.0 mg L−1 O3), pre-ozonation is detrimental to UV254 removal although it is still beneficial for turbidity removal. In the case of composite flocculant–HPAC, pre-ozonation demonstrates negligible influence on both turbidity and UV254 removal. Ozone can simultaneously aggregate fine particles and break down large ones, making them more mineralized and easier to remove. NOM with intermediate molecular weight and hydrophobic neutral property increases at lower ozone dosage, favoring removal by coagulation. At higher ozone dosages, NOM becomes more hydrophilic and its molecular weight becomes smaller, decreasing NOM removal.Ozone is initially used in drinking water treatment for the removal of various source water contaminants and to improve water quality. With the increasing concern regarding chlorination by-products, such as trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids, ozone is becoming widely adopted as a pre-oxidant before coagulation instead of chlorine. Pre-ozonation can eliminate taste, odor, color, and certain mineral compounds. It can also be utilized for natural organic matter (NOM) degradation and microorganism inactivation. Pre-ozonation has a profound influence on the subsequent treatment processes, particularly the coagulation operation, which is an adjunct to pre-ozonation. There are many contradictory reports about the effects of pre-ozonation on the removal of NOM and particles via coagulation ( Ozonation is anticipated to bring about only a slight reduction (< 10%) in dissolved organic carbon (DOC) at doses used in conventional water treatment practice (< 1 mg DOC mg Since the structure of aquatic organic matter is extremely complicated, containing a large number of diverse functional groups, there is no single analytical method that can reveal the actual concentration of each macromolecular organic solute in natural water samples ( In order to improve our understanding of the effect of pre-ozonation on coagulation, this paper investigates the effects of pre-ozonation on turbidity and NOM removal by two different typical coagulants. Changes in particle stability and NOM characteristics after pre-ozonation are elucidated by a combination of techniques. The influence of pre-ozonation on coagulation is also discussed for two coagulants. Typical micro-polluted North China surface water and synthetic water were selected as case studies for pilot-scale and bench-scale tests respectively. Two kinds of water samples were used in this study. Raw surface water was collected from a pilot-scale facility in the Tianjin water treatment plant (Tianjin, China), whose source water came from the Yellow River. Synthetic water was prepared by adding a certain amount of kaolin and a commercial humic acid (extracted from Yellow River sediment) to tap water. The coagulant FeCl The pilot-scale systems included two parallel water treatment streams, composed of pre-ozonation, coagulation-flocculation, flotation, sand filtration, mid-ozonation, granular activated carbon filtration and disinfection stages. In this paper, only the first three unit operations are considered. The flow rates of both streams were 5 m The bench-scale pre-ozonation was performed in an airtight contactor. Ozone was generated by an ozonizer OS-IN (Mitsubishi Electric, Japan). Ozone dosage was determined through ozone-demand tests. Ten min after ozone was introduced, samples were purged by high pressure, pure nitrogen to eliminate residual O The particle count (PC) was measured by two on-line particle monitor systems (IBR, UK), which were selected to measure particle sizes larger than 2 μm and report the numbers in eight size ranges: 2–3, 3–5, 5–7, 7–10, 10–15, 15–20, 20–25, and >25 μm. Total suspended solids (TSS), volatile suspended solids (VSS), and fixed suspended solids (FSS) were measured by standard methods ( Hollow-fiber modules and UF membranes (A/G Technology) with nominal molecular weight cut-offs of 30, 10, 3 and 1 kDa were used to fractionate dissolved organic matter (DOM) sequentially. The membranes were made of cellulose derivatives with total surface area of 24 cm Amberlite XAD-8, XAD-4 and anionic exchange resin IRA-958 were used to fractionate DOM following the procedures of TOC was analyzed using a Phoenix 8000 system (Tekmar-Dohrman Co., USA), and DOC was analyzed after filtration through a 0.45 μm membrane. UV The effect of pre-ozonation on coagulation-flotation with coagulant HPAC and FeCl To interpret the above phenomena, the particles in raw water, pre-ozonated water and flotation effluent were characterized by means of turbidity measurement, LLG, IBR and glass-fiber filtration. The results in Many researchers have found that O Ozone reacts with double bonds, active aromatic constituents, and polar organic functional groups, such as chained carboxylic acids ( Pre-ozonation exhibits different effects on UV In order to investigate the variation of NOM characteristics with treatment process, the DOM in raw water, after pre-ozonation, and flotation effluents were characterized using UF and RA methods. The results are shown in It shows that the Yellow River water is micro-polluted. The percentage of hydrophobic DOM is only about 45%, which is lower than that of well-protected source water, which is more than 70% ( Although the DOC decreases slightly from 3.46 to 3.22 mg L It is well known that ozonation significantly reduces the molecular weight of most NOM. After pre-ozonation, the DOM with molecular weight >30 kDa is largely decomposed, DOM with < 1 kDa increases, DOM in the range 10-30 kDa increases slightly, and DOM in the range 3–10 kDa decreases. Using the gel permeation chromatography technique, As shown in To verify the DOM changes after ozonation, bench-scale tests were conducted using synthetic water containing prescribed amounts of kaolin and humic acid. The DOM distributions were characterized by RA and UF before and after ozonation. The results are shown in The percentage of HoN increases after ozonation. However, more HoN is produced at a dosage of 1.1 mg L The dosage of ozone greatly influences the characteristics of DOM. At low dosage, ozone produces some hydrophobic neutral and intermediate molecular weight DOM, which is beneficial for the following coagulation process. At higher ozone dosages, the DOM is oxidized further into more hydrophilic and lower molecular weight DOM, which is not amenable to coagulation. NOM is a category of extremely complicated organic matter. HoN is a mixture of hydrocarbons, >C5 aliphatic alcohols, amides, esters, ketones, aldehydes, long chain (>C9) aliphatic carboxylic acids and amines, >3-ring aromatic carboxylic acids and amines ( Compared to the adsorption of similar non-ozonated organic matter, NOM with additional carboxylic groups produced by ozonation can be adsorbed to aluminum hydroxide surface to a much larger extent. However, via potentiometric titrations, The authors are very grateful for the kind help from the people of the Tianjin water treatment plant. This research was funded by China National 863 Projects 2006AA06Z312, CNSF 20475012 and the CNSF Program for Innovative Research Group (No. 50621804). Dr. Alistair Borthwick is also acknowledged for kind assistance in language revision. The kind comments from the anonymous reviewers are gratefully acknowledged also.