Five polysaccharides namely amylopectin, amylose, glycogen, guar gum and starch have been cationized by grafting with N-(3-chloro-2-hydroxypropyl) trimethyl ammonium chloride and studied for their flocculation behaviors. Of them, cationic glycogen (Cat Gly) is found to be the best for flocculation of coal suspended sample amongst cationic polysaccharides. Cat Gly was compared with some of the commercial flocculants.The world’s current crisis of potable water necessitates the treatment of municipal wastewater and industrial effluents. The treatment, involves the flocculation of contaminants by organic and inorganic chemicals for liquid/solid separation. In recent years, considerable attention has been focused upon the treatment and disposal of wastewater sludge ( During the past several years, a variety of flocculants have been developed on the basis of grafting cationic ( Washing coking coals with water before their utilization in thermal power plant and cement industry is a general practice and is gaining popularity. The process generates effluent containing suspended coal fines, causing environmental problems to natural water bodies like rivers and tanks. Metal ion coagulants are being used to coagulate and thereby retain the fine particles in the washery thickener. Synthetic polymers have already taken the place of metal ion coagulants as they are much more effective and are required in very small dosage. Polysaccharide based cationic polymers flocculate silica ( Amylopectin, amylose and glycogen were purchased from Sigma Chemicals Ltd., USA. Unmodified maize starch was supplied by E. Merck (India) Limited, Mumbai, India. Guar gum was a gift sample from Hindustan Gum & Chemicals Ltd., India. The non-coking coal sample tested in the present work was collected from R-7 seam of Jhanjra colliery, Eastern Coalfields Limited, India. Details of the coal sample collection and their proximate analysis results are given in Two commercial flocculants, namely Magnafloc LT 22 (Mag LT 22), Magnafloc 351 (Mag 351), were examined for comparison. Sources and chemical nature of commercial flocculants have been given in All the five polysaccharides namely amylopectin, amylose, glycogen, guar gum and starch have been cationized by inserting a cationic moiety onto the backbone of the polysaccharides. The synthesis procedure is briefly outlined below: The required amount of a polysaccharide was dissolved in distilled water. A mixture of The density of the non-coking coal sample was measured using a specific gravity bottle by the standard method. Average particle size of the prepared coal sample was measured by Malvern 3601 Particle Size Analyzer, manufactured in Malvern Inst., England, UK. The particle analyzer operates on the principle of laser diffraction. The results are shown in Zeta potential of the coal sample was measured at neutral pH 7.0 by Particle Micro Electrophoresis (Apparatus mark II) manufactured by Malvern Inst., England, UK. The measurement of zeta potential was done. The result is shown in Elemental analyses of all the polysaccharides, cationic polysaccharides and CHPTAC were performed by using the Carlo Erba 1108 elemental analyzer. The estimation of only three elements, that is carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen, was undertaken. The results are shown in A Thermo Nicolet FTIR Spectrophotometer (Model – Nexus 870 FTIR) and the potassium bromide (KBr) pellet method were used for FTIR study. The FTIR spectra of glycogen, cationic glycogen and Viscosity measurements of the polymer solutions were carried out by using an Ubbelohde viscometer (CS/S: 0.003899) at 25 The weight average molecular weights ( Flocculation tests of coal suspensions were carried out by using jar test and settling test. The standard flocculation jar apparatus was supplied by M.B. Instruments, Mumbai, India. The turbidity measurement was carried out by the Digital Nephelo Turbidity Meter 132, procured from Systronics (Ahmedabad, India). A suspension of coal (0.25%; prepared by mixing 1 The settling test employs a 100 From zeta potential measurement (  Development of cationic polysaccharide from polysaccharide is a substitution reaction, which has been shown in From intrinsic viscosity measurement, it has been found that the viscosity of the cationic polysaccharide is higher than that of the base polysaccharide; this is because of the presence of CHPTAC chains on the polysaccharide backbone. The results of elemental analysis of polysaccharides, cationic polysaccharides and Degree of modification has been calculated based on Kjeldahl analysis ( The FTIR spectra of glycogen (Gly), cationic glycogen (Cat Gly) and CHPTAC are shown in The weight average molecular weight and the radius of gyration of all the polymers, cationic polymers and the commercial flocculants were determined by SLS analysis using Zimm plot. The results are summarized in Radius of gyration is a parameter, which characterizes the size of a particle of any shape. The higher the radius of gyration, molecular dimension of the polymer will be more and that will affect the flocculation characteristics synergistically. From the radius of gyration results ( The flocculation performance of all the cationic polysaccharides and the commercial flocculants was compared in 0.25 wt% coal suspensions. The result is shown in An attempt has been made to compare the flocculation characteristics of the best performing cationic polysaccharide (Cat Gly) with some of the commercially available flocculants in coal suspensions. From The settling tests were carried out in 5 wt% coal suspension. In this case, the settling time was plotted against the height of interface. The flocculation performance of a particular polymer could be correlated with the settling velocity. The greater the settling velocity of the floc containing contaminants, the greater will be its flocculation performance. From the settling curve ( Amongst cationic polysaccharides, glycogen has a high molecular weight and highly branched structure. With increase in branching and molecular weight and subsequent cationic loading on them, the approachability of the contaminants towards branched polysaccharides enhanced and thereby enhancing the flocculation efficacy, which reflects the result. In addition, when compared with the commercial flocculants only Mag 351 has a higher molecular weight as well as higher radius of gyration compared to Cat Gly, this is why Cat Gly is the second one. From the above experimental studies, it can be concluded that by incorporating a cationic moiety on the backbone of polysaccharides, an effective flocculating agent can be developed. It is well known that glycogen has highly branched structure ( The financial support from Indian Institute of Technology-Kharagpur, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, New Delhi and CIF, Birla Institute of Technology-Mesra, for the above investigation is earnestly acknowledged.