The majority of this chapter on nanocomposites and flame retardancy is related to layered silicates or phyllosilicates, usually called clays. The clay family is very varied, but the scientific literature on polymer nanocomposites concerns mainly 2:1 silicates, particularly the family of smectites, and predominantly organomodified montmorillonites. From the pioneering work of NIST and Cornell University in the 1990s, many studies have been performed on these materials, as with other kinds of nanoparticles, to highlight their potential as flame retardants. A lot of work has been performed on the development of surface and interfacial modifications of clays to disperse them in polymers to achieve nanostructures. This led to investigations into the processing of clay nanocomposites to improve their reaction to fire. Research work has also been carried out on the understanding of the mechanisms of the fire-retardant action of organomodified layered silicates regarding surface modifications and interactions with other possible components used to improve the fire retardancy of polymers. Moreover, in relation to investigations concerning mechanisms, the research into synergistic effects in multicomponent systems represents a significant part of the literature devoted to clays and flame retardancy. This last topic is particularly important for companies since they have tried to replace halogenated compounds in many applications, such as in cables or in the transportation area. In fact, since the incorporation of clays, even organomodified does not meet fire standards such as vertical UL 94V at the level V0 for thin specimens, therefore a large panel of combinations was investigated, leading in some cases to very complex compositions.The majority of this chapter on nanocomposites and flame retardancy is related to layered silicates or phyllosilicates, usually called clays. The clay family is very varied, but the scientific literature on polymer nanocomposites concerns mainly 2:1 silicates, particularly the family of smectites, and predominantly organomodified montmorillonites. From the pioneering work of the NIST and Cornell University in the 1990s In this chapter, As shown in As we will stress the need to achieve a nanostructure for the composite to improve fire retardancy significantly, the main challenge is to disperse the clays in the polymer to have only stacks of sheets having nanometric dimensions. A microstructure at the nanometric scale in various polymers can be obtained for some clays presenting at least one nanometric dimension at the natural state, for example, halloysite and sepiolite, which exhibit respectively tubular and acicular morphologies and particle diameters less than 100 Nevertheless, the majority of layered silicates used as nanoparticles in polymers results from ionic exchange of intercalated inorganic ions ensuring electric neutrality by mainly alkylammonium ions, particularly in the case of phyllosilicates of the family of montmorillonites or bentonites Hence the main contributions of clays to the fire retardancy of polymers concern this last category of oMLS or organomodified montmorillonites (oMMT) In all cases, the possibility of achieving significant improvement in fire retardancy is related to the existence of a huge interfacial area between the silicate sheets and the polymer. These sheets or rather nanoparticles corresponding to sheet stacks or structures can be dispersed at the nanometric scale in the polymer, or polymer chains can penetrate inside the sheet stacks. For oMLS/polymer nanocomposites, the first case corresponds to exfoliated nanostructures, while in the second case intercalated nanostructures are obtained. It can be noticed that both kinds of nanostructures can coexist in the same nanocomposite. Nevertheless, despite exfoliated structures being more advantageous regarding flame retardancy, it was not possible to show significant differences between the fire behavior of polymers exhibiting both microstructures In many articles, the important role of the nature of the organomodifier has been emphasized, with regard to the achievement of a nanostructure on the For the majority of organomodified or nonmodified layered silicates leading to nanostructures (nanoclays), a significant improvement of thermal stability of polymer nanocomposites has been noticed by many authors This increase in thermal stability generally entails the improvement of the main fire reaction properties of the polymers such as reduction of the maximum value of the heat release rate (pHRR), measured as a function of time when the materials are exposed to a radiant heat flux, as well as the ability to autoextinguish Conversely, resistance to ignition of the sample is often damaged. Moreover, a significant decrease of the total energy released is not generally achieved through the use of nanoclays alone in the polymers. Therefore they have to be combined with other components in what is called a flame-retardant system. This connection between the increase of thermal stability and the improvement of important fire reaction properties was especially noticed for polyolefins, and, for example, in the case of poly(ethylene vinyl acetate), a copolymer often used in the cable industry, which requires a high level of fire retardancy for this use. Nevertheless, it has to be noticed that hydroxyl groups (silanols or aluminols) linked to the silicate sheets or present in the organomodifiers can entail hydrolysis processes for various polymers. It is particularly the case for thermoplastic biobased polyesters, resulting in a lowering of thermal stability, even in the case of well-dispersed nanoparticles. Halloysite is a natural clay, existing at the nanometric scale, extracted from natural deposits chemically similar to kaolinite, with the following chemical composition: Al Kennouche et al. It was noticed that thermal stability was reduced because of hydrolytic degradation caused by the hydroxyl groups of halloysite. This effect increases with the percentage of halloysite incorporated ( Fire reaction properties are currently determined through standardized tests A cone calorimeter (ISO 5660-1) assesses most of the parameters related to the heat release through the use of the Huggett principle Various research work published at the end of the 1990s or thereafter has shown outstanding decreases of the peak of HRR ( It was also noticed that for the oMMT nanocomposites, the mass loss rate during the cone calorimeter test was significantly reduced in comparison Pyrolysis combustion flow calorimeter (PCFC) or microscale combustion calorimeter (MCC), a new technique developed by Lyon et al. The mechanisms of action of clays in polymers in fire retardancy are now rather well established because of the extensive work of many researchers. Barrier mechanisms have been proposed as the main fire-retardant effect conferred by clays. Nevertheless, various authors have shown that chemical effects were also involved in addition to the physical ones (barrier effect), corresponding mainly to the limitation of heat and mass transfers because of the aspect ratio and huge interfacial area of the layered silicates at the nanometric scale. It has been shown by Lewin et al. It is obvious for all kinds of polymeric materials that the thermal ablation at the surface of a clay–polymer nanocomposite resulting from thermal irradiation caused by a radiant panel or a cone of a calorimeter is able to entail an increase in the surface concentration of layered sheets, which creates a barrier effect. Moreover, a high surface concentration of inorganic species in thermoplastics is also caused by a migration of silicate sheets because of viscosity and surface tension gradients through the sample. Finally, as also shown by Zanetti et al. The reduction noticed in pHRR is not constant for polymers, but it is strictly related to their macromolecular structure and composition. In some cases, it has been shown that the degradation pathway of the polymer has been changed because of the presence of oMMT. Jang et al. A complementary mechanism involving radicals has also been proposed and appeals to a paramagnetic trapping of the radicals produced by the composite during its degradation As mentioned earlier, the migration of clays through the material exposed to a radiant heat flow is governed by viscosity gradients caused by temperature gradients. Hence viscosity of the polymer at the molten state will influence its fire behavior, and it has to be noticed that the incorporation of nanoparticles and particularly particles showing high aspect ratio such as clays tends to increase the viscosity significantly. Various authors have intended to correlate the influence of nanoparticles on viscosity with fire performance. High viscosity values should decrease the growth of the bubbles formed by the decomposition of polymers as well as their diffusion rate in the melt to the surface. These bubbles will burst at the surface and supply the flame with fuel. Kashiwagi et al. Clerc et al. Battistella et al. Two distinct tendencies were observed ( In the same article, various micro- and nanofillers in EVA such as high aspect ratio talcs and boehmite were compared. This confirms that the addition of lamellar nanoparticles to reduce the pHRR is only effective as long as the elasticity of the material is below a threshold value. Even if higher loading content should lead to a more insulating layer at the surface of the sample, pHRR remains constant. Consequently, the barrier effect is not generally a heat shielding process. On the whole, the incorporation of nanoparticles and in particular layered silicates is restricted to percentages much lower than 10 Moreover, new strategies for surface modifications of layered silicates with organic compounds able to promote fire retardancy were developed As can be supposed, the majority of combinations of nanoclays with proposed flame retardants concerns mainly oMMTs. Nevertheless, some research work as well as industrial applications is also related to synthetic anionic clays corresponding to mixed metallic hydroxides, generally named layered double hydroxides Intumescent flame retardant systems are usually composed of at least a polyacid, able to dehydrate the second main component, which is a carbon source The intumescent behavior corresponds to a swelling and expansion of the polymer matrix beyond a critical temperature, with the formation of a stable charred structure that is generally foamed. It provides a barrier to heat transfer, volatile gases, and decomposition products and protects the remaining material from oxygen and the heat source. The main acid sources are ammonium polyphosphate (APP), melamine phosphate (MPP), or pyrophosphate (PyMP). Various studies report the use of oMMT combined with APP, which appears to be the most disseminated combination. It has been shown by Bourbigot et al. Intumescent flame-retardant systems based on oMMT, pentaerythritol, and APP in PP were also studied by Tang et al. Tang et al. Zhang et al. They also used PP grafted using diethyl- It was shown that APP caused the best improvement of LOI measured as ΔLOI and expressed as: Nevertheless, for some combinations, the poor thermal stability of organomodifiers led to negative values of ΔLOI. Other kinds of clays such as oMMT have been used in combination with APP in polymer blends in which one polymeric component acts as a carbon source. Sepiolite, which is a 2:1 clay presenting missing sheets and zeolitic channels, seems very promising in such combinations for different polymers or polymer blends. Vahabi et al. Synergistic effects were found on HRR values for compositions containing 3 APP/sepiolite combinations were also investigated by Vahabi in poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) Incorporation of oMMT and APP in thermosetting polymers has been particularly reported for unsaturated polyesters Nazaré et al. Intumescent oMMT/PU structures were investigated by Song et al. Since phosphorous fire retardants correspond to a wide range of chemical structures and not only inorganic phosphates incorporated as additives in polymers, combinations of nanoclays and organic phosphates, phosphinates, phosphonates, and red phosphorus were reported Various research work, mainly carried out in Asia, mentioning the combination of oMMT and red phosphorus The combinations of oMMT with aromatic phosphates such as triphenyl phosphate (TPP) and resorcinol bis(diphenylphosphate) (RDP) were investigated by Wilkie et al.  Strategies based on reactive fire retardants associated with clays were proposed by various authors. Organophosphorus epoxy resins were synthesized by Hussain et al. Toldy et al. Other routes can consist of intercalating phosphorous compounds between the silicate sheets. This allows the interaction between nanoclay and the phosphorous compound to be enhanced and will also limit the volatility of the phosphorous compound. Kim et al. Phosphonium-modified layered silicate epoxy resin nanocomposites were prepared by Schartel et al. A phosphorus-functionalized nanokaolin [with triphenyl phosphite (TPPi)] and a phosphonium-modified montmorillonite through the surface hydroxyl groups of nanoclays were incorporated in poly(ethylene terephthalate)/polycarbonate (PET/PC) blends by Swoboda et al. Phosphorus-containing monomers are also of interest to improve flame retardancy in combination with oMMT. Ge et al. The use of layered silicates in combination with metallic hydroxides is aimed at assessing synergistic effects on fire retardancy, but also at reducing drawbacks caused by this family of fire retardants. Various authors have reported combinations of nanoclays with mainly ATH and MH, which are the most frequently used metallic hydroxides as flame retardants. Their mode of action, based on endothermal release of water, needs high loadings (up to 65 From cone calorimeter tests, for example, in EVA Different mechanisms have been evoked, such as the promotion of charring and bubble nucleation related to decomposition products of polymers, connected to increased viscosity such as in EVA. Expanded residues have been observed in the case of EVA at cone calorimeter testing (for example, EVA with 55 To enhance the cohesion of the charred protective structures associated with metallic oxides resulting from the dehydration of metallic hydroxides, other components have been associated with nanoclays and ATH or MH, such as sepiolite As noticed in combination with phosphorous flame retardants, the combination of metallic hydroxides and oMMT allows the nanostructures to be maintained despite high loadings. Nevertheless, in the case of PP, the use of compatibilizing agents is also required. Ristolainen MH and ATH were not the only metallic hydroxides associated with nanoclays. Hydromagnesite (HM) (5MgO·4CO Finally, the use of more and more complex flame-retardant systems in which nanoclays, organomodified or not, are associated with the usual flame retardants and possibly with other kinds of nanoparticles, able to act through other fire-retardant mechanisms, tends to represent an interesting alternative to conventional fire retardants or fire-retardant systems based on well-known synergies (e.g., halogenated compounds with antimony trioxide). Beyond the use of new fire-retardant systems devoted to contributing to the phase-out of halogenated fire retardants, these fire-retardant compositions, including nanoclays, propose new challenges in materials science and industrial applications, such as the control of complex morphologies and processing steps. The use of nanoclays in fire-retardant systems as well as other kinds of nanoparticles has led to new experimental equipment or couplings as well as new approaches to characterize their performance, and also to provide a better understanding of their mechanism of action. Moreover, the increased use of nanoparticles in fire-retardant systems has required these One of the first attempts to highlight and elucidate the outstanding behavior conferred by very low amounts of oMMT in polymers was performed by researchers of the NIST through the development of a gasification setup based on a cone calorimeter structure Mass loss rate was determined as well as the quantity of char formed. The results have shown that the formation of char was particularly noticeable for nanocomposites corresponding to polymers, which normally produce little or no char when burned alone, such as PS, PP- The mode of action of nanoparticles used alone in polymers has led in some cases to contradictory results or conclusions regarding the different fire-retardant properties. It has been noticed that pHRR at the cone calorimeter was significantly decreased, but in some cases the resistance to ignition was decreased. For some LOI experiments, the values were not very satisfactory in comparison to pristine polymers because of wick effects on flame propagation along the surface of specimens. The conditions of ignition were particularly studied by Fina et al. In the presence of clays, differences in time to ignition were noted ( It has been shown that one of the main mechanisms of action of nanoclays is the limitation of mass transfers in the condensed phase (heterogeneous catalytic effects, tortuosity effects, action on bubbling processes, increase of viscosity). All these processes entail what is called the barrier effect, even if all processes are not pure physical effects. The development of the PCFC, also called MCC, allowed the investigation of the fire behavior of a very low amount of material, and thereby isolation of the contribution Various authors have shown that there is no general correlation between PCFC and cone calorimeter. Hence PCFC should not be used as a screening tool Sonnier et al. It is considered that R1 is always higher than (or at least equal to) R2. So, a component exhibiting a flame-retardant effect leads to a stronger pHRR The interest in PCFC experiments lies also in the possibility of coupling this device with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) to analyze continuously the nature of degradation products released as a function of temperature An average value of EHC can also be defined as follows: THR The comparison between EHCm and EHCi( Some investigations regarding fire retardancy of polymer blends containing oMMT using PCFC were carried out on polylactic acid (PLA)/PHBV blends filled with 5 Potential toxicity is becoming a major issue regarding the increasing use of nanoparticles in many applications of polymer nanocomposites. The majority of nanoparticles used in tonnage are nanoclays. Mechanical reinforcement, barrier properties (e.g., for packaging), and fire retardancy are among the main properties conferred on materials for which the end of life will be incineration. Hence studies have been carried out to investigate the nature of particles present in the aerosols of combustion that could be released in the atmosphere, despite the use of filtration setups in incineration plants. Beyond the assessment of potential toxicity, some research groups took the opportunity to use specific setups devoted to the characterization of aerosols for a better understanding of the fire reaction mechanisms involved in the combustion of nanocomposites or polymers containing complex fire-retardant systems including nanoparticles Ounoughene et al. A specific tubular furnace was used (850°C with combustion and postcombustion chamber, excess oxygen, and turbulent conditions). Time-tracking and offline analyses were carried out for particle matter. An electric low-pressure impactor was used downstream of a fine particle sampler dilutor. Particles from the aerosol were also collected on a transmission electron microscope (TEM) grid. Imagery on particles collected on polytetrafluoroethylene impactor substrates revealed the presence of soot Similar observations on aerosol and residue compositions were made on the same samples using a cone calorimeter at an irradiance of 75 Finally, the combination of all these characterizations and techniques of analysis of ultrafine particles and aerosols is now able to provide very useful information to identify the potential risks arising from nanoparticles and to help to understand more accurately the mechanisms of thermal degradation leading to the release of nanoparticles. The different types of layered silicates are among the main components of polymer nanocomposites. Because of their huge interfacial area with the polymers as naturally occurring or organomodified, nanoclays can confer in many cases enhanced thermal stability and better fire reaction to the host polymers. Nevertheless, outstanding improvements of properties can only be achieved in the case of a dispersion of silicate sheets at the New strategies have been also developed because of modifications of clays using phosphorous species allowing the efficiency of such combinations to be reinforced. Hence flame-retardant systems in polymers become more and more complex because of the number of associated components, which can often interfere through interplaying physical and chemical effects. In relation to the use of nanoclays in fire-retardant systems, the research into the barrier effects to mass and heat transfer during combustion has become one of the main objectives of designing effective fire-retardant systems. It entails the development of new experimental approaches and setups, including fire reaction assessment at the microscale, by the use of PCFC and various coupled techniques, as well as investigations regarding the composition and particle size distribution of the particles released from the combustion. Beyond a better understanding of fire reaction mechanisms, these new approaches are facing new challenges, particularly the environmental assessment of the end of life of polymers containing nanoparticles and the issues related to the release of ultrafine and composite particles when polymeric materials burn accidentally or are incinerated in industrial plants.