Model graphite composites, similar to those used in nuclear applications as encasement material in fuel pebbles, were prepared by uniaxial cold compression moulding. They contained natural flake graphite, synthetic graphite and 20wt.% phenolic novolac resin binder. The materials were carbonised at 900°C in a nitrogen atmosphere and then annealed at 1800°C in helium atmosphere. The X-ray diffraction studies showed that the graphite in these composites had hexagonal crystal structure after annealing. Raman spectroscopy revealed the presence of the structurally disordered phase derived from the carbonised resin. Optical microscopy revealed a flake-like microstructure for composites containing mainly natural graphite and needle-coke like particles for composites containing mainly synthetic graphite. The composites featured anisotropic property behaviour as the particles were partially aligned in a direction perpendicular to the compression direction. Thermogravimetric analysis studies showed that the annealed graphite composites were stable in air to 650°C. The linear thermal expansion coefficients measured by thermomechanical analysis (20–600°C) in the direction of pressing were in the range 5–9×10−6
                     K−1 and in the range 1.2–2×10−6
                     K−1 in the direction normal to pressing. The thermal conductivity of the composites were measured using Xenon flash method from 100 to 1000°C and the values ranged from 19 to 30Wm−1
                     K−1.The Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (PBMR) is a high temperature graphite-moderated nuclear reactor that uses helium as a coolant. The triple coated (TRISO) particles contain the enriched uranium oxide fuel. The coatings comprise layers of various forms of pyrolytic carbon and silicon carbide Similar compositions have been used in other high temperature reactors Graphite composites containing a fixed amount of phenolic resin binder (20 The natural flake graphite and the synthetic graphite powder were mixed in a Z-blade mixer (Jones Mixers, South Africa) for one hour. A methanol solution of the phenolic novolac resin was then added. Just sufficient methanol was used to ensure a flowable paste. This resinated paste was dried at 70 The diffraction patterns of the annealed graphite composite powders were recorded using a BRUKER’s D8 ADVANCE powder diffractometer. Measurements were done using Cu Kα radiation (0.15418 The Raman spectra were recorded with the T64000 series II triple spectrometer system from HORIBA Scientific, Jobin Yvon Technology using the 514.3 The microstructure of the raw graphite samples and heat-treated moulded graphite composites was studied by optical microscopy (OM) under reflected and polarised light. A Leica DM 2500 M microscope was used. The samples were mounted in an epoxy resin. They were polished with a Buehler Alpha 2 speed grinder-polisher with a continuous flow of water for 1 The SEM images were obtained using an ultrahigh resolution field emission SEM (HR FEGSEM Zeiss Ultra Plus 55) with an InLens detector at an acceleration voltage of 2 The bulk density of the pre-weighed moulded annealed graphite composites was measured using a Geopyc 1360 pycnometer. The helium density was measured with Accupyc II 1340 V1.03 Helium pycnometer. The volume of the sample cup was calibrated prior to analysis by filling it with helium gas until it reached a pressure of 134.45 The air oxidation behaviour of the powdered raw graphite samples, the phenolic resin and the annealed graphite composites was determined by TGA analysis using a Mettler Toledo A851 TGA/SDTA machine. About 20 The linear coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) of the annealed solid graphite composites were determined in expansion mode with a TA Instruments TMA Q400 V22.1 analyser. The runs were made on a quartz stage from 20 to 1000 The thermal conductivity of the annealed graphite composites samples were measured using the Xenon flash method. The thermal diffusivity were measured at each temperature using the Clark and Taylor analysis of a back face thermogram generated from a Xenon flash on the front face Rectangular annealed graphite composite samples were cut to the specifications of ASTM Standard C651-91 (Reapproved 2000). The length of the samples were 40.00 The moulded graphite composites discs of diameter 100 The X-ray diffraction patterns of the as-received graphite powders and the solid annealed graphite composites are shown in  The Raman spectra, shown in The disorder in the raw natural graphite could be due to the presence of impurities or the rhombohedral crystal forms. The Raman spectra of the annealed graphite composites are also shown in The reflected light, polarised light and scanning electron micrographs of the raw natural graphite are shown in The polarised light micrographs of annealed graphite composites containing various compositions are shown in However, the microstructure of the composite containing equal amounts of the graphite powders, see The open porosity of the annealed graphite composites was quantified by pycnometry. This crucial parameter affects properties such as thermal expansion and oxidative stability. The bulk and helium densities of the annealed graphite composites are presented in The oxidative stability of the raw materials (graphite powders and resin) in air, as well as that of the annealed graphite composites, was studied by thermogravimetric analysis. The TGA profiles of the phenolic resin, natural graphite and synthetic graphite are shown in The TG profiles of the annealed graphite composites are shown in The linear expansion behaviour of the annealed graphite composites was studied using thermomechanical analysis. The annealed composites expanded linearly and uniformly in the temperature range 100–600 The temperature dependence of thermal conductivity of the annealed graphite composites measured in the direction of pressing is shown in It had a higher open porosity than other composites (i.e. 41%); this is also evident from the polarised micrograph in Since these composites are polycrystalline and it has been shown that a composite containing 0 The composites containing mainly natural graphite flakes were easily compactable compared to those containing synthetic graphite needle-like particles as evidenced by their high bulk densities. They also had larger aspect ratios, i.e. length: thickness ratio and therefore this is the reason why they conducted heat so well. This study found that the flakes orient themselves in the direction normal to pressing consistent with literature The four point bending flexural strength and modulus values for the annealed graphite composites measured in the pressing direction are listed in Model graphite-carbon composites were prepared by uniaxial cold compression moulding. They were prepared from mixtures of natural and synthetic graphite powders with a fixed amount (20 This work is based upon research supported by the South African Research Chairs Initiative of the Department of Science and Technology and the National Research Foundation. Any opinion, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and therefore the NRF and DST do not accept any liability with regard thereto. The PBMR and NECSA are thanked for financial support to P.P. Magampa and the provision of samples.