This paper presents an experimental research on effects of micro-nano bubble water and mineral admixtures (zeolite and Chekneh pozzolans) on the mechanical and durability properties of concrete. In this study, 18 types of mixtures including 3 categories of conventional concrete were prepared. The first category was a mixture containing just one type of mineral admixture (zeolite or Chekneh) at different percentages; the second category contained a binary combination of zeolite and Chekneh; and the third category including a combination of zeolite, Chekneh, and micro-nano water bubble. The results emphasized that zeolite and Chekneh pozzolan notably improve the durability properties of concrete, such as water absorption, electrical resistance, and chloride permeability, leading to the increased pozzolanic replacement. In addition, using micro-nano bubble water improved mechanical properties of concrete such as compressive and tensile strength at different ages and reduced the rate of water absorption and chloride permeability. In this regard, the greatest improvement in the compressive, tensile strength, and electrical resistance tests were for the mixture including a combination of 10% zeolite, 10% Chekneh pozzolan, and 100% micro-nano bubble.Concrete is among the main materials used in numerous manmade infrastructures. From the natural resources point of view, it is virtually infeasible to imagine replacing concrete by any other material As their main role, Pozzolans are added to Portland cement because they usually enhance the durability and mechanical properties of concrete structures. The most important effects of pozzolans in the microstructure of cementitious paste are changing the interfacial transition zone (ITZ) and pore structure produced by the reduction in the particle size caused by the pozzolanic reactions. Thus, today applying newly developed pozzolans has become a necessity for building concrete structures, especially in aggressive environmental conditions Recently, using zeolite as a natural pozzolan material has been increasing. Pozzolan contains a high content of reactive SiO Today, the application of nanotechnology in construction structures offers many opportunities and challenges and determines a way to enhance the concrete properties The present study was conducted to determine the micro-nano bubble, local pozzolan (called Chekneh), and zeolite effects on the concrete properties separately. Then, for the first time, the simultaneous effects (binary) of the using local natural pozzolan and zeolite and micro-nano bubble water on the mechanical properties and durability of concrete are evaluated. To investigate the mechanical properties, tests including compressive and tensile strength and for the durability properties, tests including volumetric water adsorption, electrical resistance, rapid chloride permeability test chloride (RCPT), and ultrasonic pulse velocity measurements were done. Also for the microstructure evaluation, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images was used. In this research, an ordinary Portland cement type-I was used in accordance with ASTM To evaluate the mechanical properties and durability of concrete, mixture proportions were made in three phases. The first phase has 7 mixtures including mixing ratios of 10 and 20% Chekneh, and zeolite instead of cement and 30, 60, and 100% of the micro-nano bubble water instead of the concrete water. The second phase consists of 7 mixture ratios in the form of binary combinations of 10% Chekneh with 10% zeolite, as well as 10% Chekneh with proportions of 30, 60, and 100% of the water of micro-nano bubble water and 10% of zeolite with proportions of 30, 60 and 100% of micro-nano Bubbles. Finally, the third phase consists of three mixing ratios of 10% Chekneh and 10% of zeolite with ratios of 30, 60, and 100% of the micro-nano bubble water. Mixtures compositions are listed in The workability tests including slump test for conventional concrete and fresh mixture density were tested according to the ASTM A new and novel method of packing density measuring, called the wet packing method presented by Wong and Kwan After preparation of a mixture, a suitable cylindrical container of size 180 mm × 160 mm was filled with the mixture. The properties of container including weight and volume are denoted by M and V, respectively. If the mixtures included several various materials, the volume of total solid materials The compressive strength of the mixtures was measured according to the ASTM The indirect tensile strength of mixtures was tested according to the ASTM The water adsorption of mixtures in standard conditions at the age of 28 and 90 days was tested in accordance with the BS1881 In this study, cubic samples with the dimension of 100 mm were prepared for the ultrasonic test at the ages 28 and 90 days in accordance with ASTM C 597 The specimens used in the RCPT test were prepared according to ASTM The electrical resistance test was performed according to the method proposed by University of Florida for concrete resistivity, FM 5-578 The SEM of concrete samples was evaluated by the VEGAII TESCAN device under an electron microscope with an accelerating voltage of 30 kV and three precisions of 100, 20, and 5 μm. The results of concrete mixtures workability tests are shown in   At a curing age of 90 days, the compressive strength improvement of mixtures containing a zeolite and Chekneh pozzolans had a stronger decreasing trend compared to that at the age of 28 days; which is closer to that of the control one. The improvement rates for a mixture containing zeolite of 10 and 20% were 4 and 1.5% respectively while for samples containing Chekneh pozzolan of 10 and 20% they were 2 and 0.3%, respectively. The studies conducted by Ahmadi et al. A reduction in the compressive strength of mixture containing micro-nano bubble was observed at the age of 90 days, which can be attributed to the fact that most of the hydration process of mixtures occurred up to the curing age of 28 days. The increased rates of N30, N60, and N100 mixtures are 4, 5, and 11%, respectively.   The test results of mixtures water adsorption are shown in  The electrical resistance depends directly on the permeability of the concrete and its environmental conditions such as the number of ion intrusions and relative humidity. As the permeability of concrete increases, the ions can penetrate into the concrete more easily and quickly. Also, as the electrical resistance of the concrete decreases, ions migration inside the concrete increases and they pass through the pores in the concrete more quickly. In contrast, a concrete with a higher electrical resistance shows a higher resistance against destructive ions such as chloride and corrosion. The SEM test was conducted to investigate the microscopic properties at 28 days of age on three monophasic concrete samples containing 10% zeolite, 10% Chekneh pozzolan, and 100% micro-nano bubble and on a binary concrete mixture containing 10% zeolite and 100% micro-nano bubble and samples containing 10% Chekneh pozzolan and 100% micro-nano bubble s, and on a ternary system containing 10% zeolite, 10% Chekneh pozzolan, and 100% micro-nano bubbles. The results (  This study investigated the effect of using zeolite, Chekneh pozzolan, and micro-nano bubble water and their combination of the mechanical properties and durability of concrete. The main results of this work can be outlined as follows: Using natural zeolite and Chekneh pozzolan with a 10% replacement ratio at the age of 28 days increased the compressive strength as compared with the control mixture, while this increase was declined with an increase in the amount of zeolite, Chekneh pozzolan, and the concrete age. Zeolite and Chekneh pozzolan notably improved the durability properties of concrete such as water absorption, electrical resistance, and chloride permeability; this improvement increased with an increase in the pozzolan replacement. Using micro-nano bubble water improved the mechanical properties of concrete such as compressive and tensile strength at different ages. The improvement rate increased as the replacement ratio increases. Micro-nano bubble had the highest impact on electrical resistance; it also reduced the rate of water absorption and chloride permeability. The combined effect of 10% zeolite and 100% micro-nano bubble water increased the compressive, tensile strength, and electrical resistance of concrete while it reduced water absorption and chloride permeability. Also the combination of Chekneh pozzolan and micro-nano bubble water with the ratios of 10–100 increase d the compressive, tensile strength, and electrical resistance of the concrete while reducing water absorption and chloride permeability. The highest improvement in the compressive and tensile strengths and electrical resistance tests was for the composite sample containing 10% zeolite, 10% Chekneh pozzolan, and 100% micro-nano bubble; which were 18, 46, and 271%, respectively. Moreover, this composition reduced the water absorption and chloride permeability by 26 and 77%. Regarding these results, it can be said that natural pozzolan of Chekneh has very similar properties to zeolite. Thus, it can be used instead of cement as a cheap and suitable pozzolan to improve the properties of concrete. In this study, micro-nano bubble as a nanomaterial was identified with desirable properties by improving the mechanical properties and durability of concrete. The mixture of zeolite, Chekneh pozzolan, and micro-nano bubble water improved the properties related to the strength and durability of the modified concrete. Therefore, they can be used as alternatives to cement and mix water for concrete to reduce environmental pollution, increase concrete performance, and manage concrete production costs.