The consumption of fossil fuels has been increasing continuously around the globe and is the primary cause of increasing global warming and environmental pollution. However, in contrast to fossil fuels, biofuels appear to be a promising source of renewable energy for the production of fuels and energy-enriched chemicals generated by directly converting from biomass. To effectively produce fuels and chemicals from biomass resources, it is important to understand the composition of the feedstock materials and to have in-depth knowledge of their chemical constituents, which can be very useful in selecting the best feedstock for a particular conversion pathway, i.e., cellulose structure, degree of polymerization, hemicellulose composition, and the chemical nature and structure of lignin. Due to the complex and heterogeneous nature of biomass, the composition of different feedstocks can vary greatly and the variation not only limits different biomass types but there is also a lot of variation within a single feedstock. Therefore this chapter provides an insight into the importance of compositional analysis to improve biofuel production.Authors N.S. and P.K.M. acknowledge the Department of Chemical Engineering and Technology, IIT (BHU), Varanasi, India for providing research facilities. N.S. also acknowledges IIT (BHU), Varanasi for providing Institute PDF fellowship. MS acknowledges DST for awarding the DST-INSPIRE Faculty [IFA-13 MS-02] award. The progressive depletion of fossil fuel and world energy resources based on nonrenewable fuel is a primary concern these days. Moreover, long-term economic and environmental concerns associated with the large-scale utilization of fossil fuel due to availability, geographic distribution, and global warming are also rising day by day ( From a biofuel production perspective, the cell walls of plant biomass are mainly composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, ash, extractives/volatiles, and pectin, minerals that are collectively referred as lignocellulose. Lignocellulosic biomass is rich in cellulose, a polymer of glucose, and is a potential source of sugar production for biofuel production. Cellulosic raw material includes rice straw, wheat straw, sugarcane bagasse, corncob, and rice husk. Cellulose is mainly composed of hydrogen-bonded chains of β-1,4-linked glucose coated with hemicellulose. Hemicellulose is a polymer of β-1,4-linked xylose, which may have branches containing other sugars such as glucuronic acid or arabinose, depending on the plant species. Saccharification of cellulose and hemicellulose releases glucose and xylose that in turn can be fermented to bioethanol. Lignin is a complex polymer of methoxylated and hydroxylated phenylpropanoids and cross-link plant secondary cell walls to provide mechanical strength and hydrophobicity, which contribute to defense against pathogens. From cellulose to biofuel production, the compact structure of these biomasses covered by lignin is the main barrier that hinders the total productivity of the process. The total percentage of lignin content in the cell wall varies between plants and is a crucial parameter affecting the decomposition efficiency of the polysaccharides. An analytical review of the accurate compositional characteristics for selecting the best feedstock for a particular conversion pathway enables evaluation of conversion yield and process economics, because the feedstock may have a great amount of innate variability between different biomass types and individual biomass species. Therefore the objective of this chapter is to explore the compositional impact of cellulosic biomass to enhance biofuel production. Details of production and composition of cellulosic biomass are discussed in this chapter along with the application of these biomasses in biofuel production. Additionally, the pretreatment process to remove lignin for smooth assessment of enzymes during the bioconversion process is also provided with existing drawbacks and sustainable approaches. Due to the tremendous contribution of fossil fuels, issues such as environmental pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, and global warming contribute to the loss of biodiversity. Therefore production of biofuels from biomass will provide an eco-friendly solution to overcome these issues in an environmentally friendly manner. Additionally, biofuel production using these cellulosic biomasses is a potential process since these biomasses are rich in cellulose content. These cellulosic feedstocks can be classified into three groups, which are starchy crops, sugar (sugar crops and by-products of sugar refineries), and lignocellulosic biomass (LCB). All these groups differ considerably from one another with respect to the presence of sugar content ( Sources of lignocellulosic biomass are promising and abundantly available throughout the world ( The cellulosic cell walls of plants are the most abundant renewable resource on earth with 150–170 The second most abundant compound is hemicellulose containing about 20%–35% of lignocellulosic biomass. Hemicellulose is not chemically homogeneous like cellulose but has branches with short lateral chains consisting of different types of sugars, which include pentoses (xylose, rhamnose, and arabinose), hexoses (glucose, mannose, and galactose), and uronic acids (4- The third most abundant compound is lignin containing about 10%–25% of a lignocellulosic biomass ( Extractives/volatiles and ash are the other important compounds of LCBs and they have a major influence on what ends up being the optimal conversion process. Extractives/volatiles may be ethanol soluble (chlorophyll and waxes) and water soluble (nonstructural sugars and proteins). Ash from sulfur, nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, iron, potassium, magnesium, copper, zinc, sodium, manganese, chlorine, etc. is an indispensable material. When biomass is dried at temperatures of 105–250°C and further processed at 550–750°C in a high-temperature muffle furnace, elements such as carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, sulfur, etc. disappear in the form of gaseous compounds and the residue is ash, which contains many types of mineral elements in the form of oxides. Thus different components present in LCBs have different roles and their analysis plays a significant part in evaluating and improving biofuel production processes ( Compositional variability may depend on many factors, including component analysis methods, feedstock types, environmental factors, harvesting practices, storage conditions, and preprocessing techniques. Some of these can be controlled through standardization practices, while other factors can be difficult to control. Significant compositional variation occurs in different biomass types but there is also a lot of variation in a single feedstock as well. From the table it is evident that a significant amount of variability exists in the overall compositions of different feedstocks. The differences are so large that the conversion reactors have to be operated under different conditions based on the type of material supplied. Apart from high variability across broad categories such as woody, agricultural, or municipal solid waste, there is also significant variability within individual feedstock categories such that it can be easily seen from the table that the lignocellulosic biomass contains a large fraction of cellulose in the whole tree in comparison to the bark, which contains a high amount of lignin. In corn stove the majority of extractives are in the leaves and internodes, whereas in woody biomass the extractives are evenly distributed. Therefore studying anatomical fractions could allow for greater control over product output; it can also increase the economic viability of a process by extracting only high-value components. All the values reported in the table were collected from the Idaho National Laboratory ( Raw lignocellulosic biomass has a chemical composition high in cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, volatiles, ash, and moisture content ( After pretreatment of cellulosic biomass, enzymatic hydrolysis is carried out as a second step in the biomass-to-biofuel conversion step. In this step, sugars are released by breaking down the cellulose chains before they are fermented to biofuel. This process can be done through (1) enzymatic hydrolysis or (2) acid hydrolysis. In acid hydrolysis, dilute as well as concentrated acids can be used for decrystallization of a cellulosic mixture of acid and sugars that reacts in the presence of water to release individual sugar molecules ( The third process involves the fermentation process in which the generated sugar such as glucose, xylose, arabinose, galactose, or mannose is readily fermented into biofuel by yeast or bacteria. When enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation are conducted in a single step, the processes are called simultaneous saccharification and fermentation and separated saccharification and fermentation ( Pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass is regarded as the most expensive step and is the main challenge in biofuel production ( Different pretreatment methods, namely physical (milling, grinding), chemical (ozone, alkali, acid, organic solvents), biological, electrical, or a combination of these, have been used to remove the recalcitrant cell wall material of plants, depending on the raw material extracted ( The main aim of physical pretreatment is to reduce cellulose crystallinity. In this process, lignocellulosic material is employed by a combination of chipping, grinding, milling, and sieving. Chemical pretreatment methods for conversion of lignocellulosic biomass were started a century ago. The most studied method among all existing pretreatment methods includes the use of different chemical agents such as ozone, acid, peroxide, alkali, and organic solvents. Ozone treatment is used to reduce the lignin content of the lignocellulosic wastes because they increase the in vitro digestibility of the treated materials and do not produce toxic residues. Ozonolysis mainly degrades lignin; hemicellulose is slightly affected but there is no effect on cellulose content in many lignocellulosic materials such as bagasse, peanut, pine ( In alkaline pretreatment, some bases can be used for the pretreatment of lignocellulosic materials and their effect depends on the lignin content of the feedstock used ( Most of the pretreatment technologies, particularly physical or thermochemical processes, require expensive instruments or require abundant energy for conversion. The biological process is an environmentally friendly and safe process that uses various types of rot fungi such as soft, white, and brown rot fungi and the process does not require high energy for lignin removal from lignocellulosic biomass, in spite of extensive lignin degradation ( For an effective hydrolysis process, a successful pretreatment operation is essential ( Lignocellulosic biomass is a potential feedstock for the production of sustainable biofuel. The recalcitrant nature of biomass and complexities is a major technical and economic obstacle in the biomass-to-biofuel production pathway ( Many pretreatment methods are well known for conversion of these complex biomasses into simpler forms, but selection of the appropriate pretreatment method is itself a challenge because it relies on environmental, technological, and economical factors, including recycling issues, substrate recovery, wastewater, and energy savings along with minimal chemical use and maximal solid loading yield ( This chapter showed the significance of compositions and compositional analysis in sustainable biofuel production. The process of biofuel production via lignocellulosic biomass is directly related to cellulose content present in biomass and the strategies to access cellulose cost effectively. To bring the overall biofuel production costs down, compositional analysis and pretreatment strategies as well as the enzymatic hydrolysis step play crucial roles. Zone-wise identification and selection of cellulose-rich biomass may contribute to bringing down the production cost of biofuels. Moreover, suitable and cheap pretreatment strategies will also aid to develop economic processes.