The failure of soft rocks is highly concerned in both research and practice due to the vulnerability of materials and its involvement in a wide range of foundation and mine collapses. Different methods have been suggested to study the fracture characteristics of soft rocks. In this study, a discrete-based modelling method is proposed, as an alternative to existing continuum methods, to analyse the fracturing behaviour of soft rocks. A new cohesive model coupling damage mechanics with plasticity theory is formulated to characterise the failure mechanisms of cement bridges between aggregates in the materials. In conjunction with the discrete element method (DEM), the proposed modelling method can produce realistic modelling of soft rock failure, demonstrated through good agreements between experimental and numerical results in both specimen responses and crack patterns. Based on this, further analyses of soft rock failure are carried out, focusing on the influence of specimen geometries on the material fracture toughness measured in a semi-circular bending test. The simulation results agree well with their experimental counterparts while being less scattered than the experimental data. This demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method in characterising fracture properties of soft rocks and opens more potentials for a better understanding of soft rock failure.Soft rocks refer to geomaterials that are classified into a transitional group between soils and hard rocks based on their mechanical properties ( Different from hard rocks, soft rocks feature a porous structure with finer grains and lower-strength matrix ( Alternatively, discrete-based computational methods such as Discrete Element Method (DEM) ( At the granular scale, the failure of soft rocks is associated with cracking of cement bridges followed by frictional interaction of cracked surfaces. Physically, the cracking process is the development of micro-cavities inside rock bridges and the frictional interaction occurs when the micro-cracked surfaces dislocate. In this context, the cracking of cement bridges can be reasonably characterised by damage mechanics, while plasticity theory is effective in describing the frictional interaction. Constitutive models that combine damage mechanics and plasticity theory have been employed as the interfaced models in hybrid continuum-discrete methods such as UDEC ( Several contact models have been developed for DEM to model the failure of soft rocks and similar cohesive-frictional materials. For better modelling the fracture behaviour of soft rocks by DEM, a new contact cohesive model that couples damage mechanics and plasticity theory in both tension and compression modes is proposed in this study. The proposed model employs a single damage evolution law taking into account the effects of both normal and shear loadings, thus can prevent sudden jumps or temporary halt of damage evolution in the transition between tension and compression modes that has been experienced in the previous damage model during dynamic loadings. In addition, the capability to handle dilation during contact failure under combined shear-compression provides further flexibility in controlling the dilation effect at the grain scale. We believe this is essential, given the use of spherical particles in most DEM formulations that totally ignores the shape of the grain and roughness of the contact. Although the dilation of soft rocks at the macro scale is also controlled by particle sliding and rearrangement in DEM simulation, the added dilation at grain/contact scale can facilitate the calibration of the proposed model to experimental data. The capability of this proposed modelling method to capture the fracture behaviour of soft rocks is validated by three numerical simulations of three-point bending test, confined compression test and semi-circular bending test (SCB). To further demonstrate its potentials for characterising soft rock fracture, the proposed modelling method is then employed to investigate the influences of notch length and notch angle on the fracture properties of a mudstone measured in the SCB tests. Comparisons are later made between experimental and numerical results to validate this proposed approach and also the practical quantified equations of soft rock fracture toughness, which were developed based on experimental analyses. Within the scope of DEM analysis, intact materials are expressed as an assembly of rigid particles moving and interacting with each other at their contacts, and giving rise to the emergence of contact forces and moments. The motion of particles includes two components, translational motion and rotational motion. Both comply with Newton's second law as follows: As the motion equations in DEM are dynamic-based, kinetic energy can be accumulated in numerical simulations. To setup a quasi-static condition in DEM when simulating static experiments, the kinetic energy has to be dissipated by damping particle motions. In this study, the global damping force and moment proposed by To model intact materials in DEM, bonding contacts are introduced between particles. In this section, a new cohesive model is formulated for DEM modelling of soft rocks, though it would also be applicable to similar cohesive-frictional materials. This cohesive model couples damage mechanics and plasticity theory to describe failure mechanisms of cement bridges in soft rocks. In continuum modelling, cohesive laws determine the relationship between tractions and relative displacements of two virtual surfaces in the fracture process zone ahead of crack tip ( The relative displacement The stress state in this contact includes normal and shear contributions, which are linked to relative displacements of two particles in contact by the following equations, respectively: The evolution of damage variable is proposed as an exponential function of normal and shear plastic displacements as in Eq. We note that in our previous work ( In bonding models, a yield criterion determines stress states under which the bonding contact is yielding and plastic displacements accumulate. In principal, classical yield criteria for geomaterials (e.g. Drucker-Prager or Mohr-Coulomb criterion) can be adopted for the model formulation. However, these criteria are not flexible for the modelling of contact failure under mixed-mode conditions owing to its linear shape, which leads to the contact cohesion depends on the tensile strength and friction angle. The modelling of mixed-mode fracture of the contact requires more flexibility in the yield criterion, which allows the tensile strength, cohesion and friction angle of the model to be chosen independently. This flexibility can facilitate better calibrations and enhance the model capability in capturing soft rock responses under different loading conditions. In addition, the concurrent development of damage variable and plastic displacements, as mentioned in Section The geometry of the yield surface is depicted by a continuous line in Corresponding to the reductions of contact tensile strength and cohesion against increasing damage variable, the yield surface is shrunk. The shrinking of yield surface against the evolution of damage variable is illustrated in Further, by substituting Eqs. Eqs. Finally, the plastic potential and flow rule of the contact model are defined. Due to the structural irregularity of rock-typed materials, the effect of shear stress can induce both surface slips and dilation under confining pressure. Continuum models take into account this dilation effect by enforcing the positiveness of volumetric plastic strain rate under compression-shear mode ( Compared to the yield function, parameter It can be seen from Eq. The proposed cohesive damage-plasticity model is incorporated into PFC ( For mode-I loading, the normal stress-displacement relationship, yield function and damage evolution function become: Based on Eqs. For mode II loading, there are two scenarios being considered. If shearing under zero normal displacement, normal stress will develop when the bonding contact is yielding due to boundary constraint and dilation effect. As a result, contact stress state is no longer under pure shear mode, but alternates to compression-shear mode. On the other hand, if shearing under zero normal stress, normal displacement will develop, and Eqs. The results of tension-shear tests are presented in  As the proposed model parameters represent the properties of cement bridges at granular scale, it may require more advanced experimental methods to measure the local properties of materials. The model parameters can alternatively be calibrated by matching numerical results with their experimental counterparts. This calibration method has been commonly used in current DEM modelling due to the lack of experimental methods to measure material properties at granular scale (e.g. In addition, as DEM simulations involve random packing of polydisperse particles, the deformability method ( In this section, three laboratory tests of soft rocks are simulated by DEM incorporating the proposed cohesive damage-plasticity model. Numerical results are then compared with the experimental results to validate the capacity of the proposed modelling method in capturing the mechanical behaviour of soft rocks. In this first validation, the three-point bending test of a synthetic soft rock carried out by The comparison between experiment and simulations for the applied load magnitude against crack mouth opening displacement (CMOD) curves is shown in The above simulation results demonstrated the predictive capability of the proposed constitutive model in capturing the failure behaviour of soft rocks in tension mode. To further illustrate its performance under unloading/reloading condition, simulation of a post-peak cyclic test based on the above three-point bending test setup is conducted. The model parameters and sample attributes are maintained the same as in the three-point bending test. The specimen is unloaded/reloaded several times during its softening stage. The load-CMOD result is plotted in The simulation of SCB test for a mudstone conducted by  In this third validation, the triaxial compression tests of a porous sandstone carried out by The axial stress-strain results obtained in the experiments and simulations of the triaxial compression test are compared in  To further demonstrate the capability of the proposed modelling method in capturing the sensitivity of material fracture properties, the proposed modelling method is now applied to analyse the influences of specimen notch length and notch angle on fracture properties of mudstone obtained from SCB tests. In all simulations, the same model parameters calibrated in Section The influence of notch length on the SCB test result is investigated by performing different simulations with notch lengths varied from 2 mm to 38 mm. The numerical setup, specimen dimensions and particle attributes in these simulations are maintained the same as those given in Section  To investigate the effect of notch angle on the fracture behaviour of mudstone in the SCB test, a series of numerical simulations are performed with notch angle varying from 0° to 60° with respect to the vertical axis. Specimen geometries and boundary conditions of these numerical tests are displayed in  A new cohesive model is proposed for DEM modelling of soft rocks that combines damage mechanics and plasticity theory to describe the progressive cracking and frictional sliding processes occurred in the failure of cement bridges in soft rocks. This model can handle both pure modes and mixed mode fracturing behaviour of the materials, while being capable of taking into account dilation effect for different material microstructures. Through various numerical experiments, the proposed modelling method is demonstrated to be able to capture the fracturing behaviour of soft rocks, which are evidenced by the excellent agreements of load-displacement and crack pattern results between the experiments and numerical simulations. It has also been demonstrated through this paper that the proposed modelling method can be useful for numerical sensitivity analysis of soft rock fracture properties. The numerical sensitivity analyses of notch length and notch angle effects on the peak load, crack patterns and fracture toughness of a mudstone show that the results of numerical analyses agree well with their experimental counterparts. Moreover, the full controllability of boundary conditions, specimen microstructures and material properties enable the proposed modelling method to obtain less scattered results compared with experimental methods. As a consequence of the less scattered results in simulations, the numerical analyses reveal several uncertainties in the quantified methods of fracture toughness derived from the experimental data in the SCB test. For example, the normalised equation of stress intensity factor given by Funding support from the Given the incremental relative displacement of intact particles at each time step, contact stresses are updated following the below procedure: Elastic predictor The normal and shear elastic stress predictors are first computed based on the constitutive relations in Eqs. Yield verification and flow rule The value of the yield function, Normal and shear plastic displacement are updated as: Damage variable is then updated using Eq. Finally, true normal and shear stresses are returned: The stress-return algorithm is processed on all yielding contacts until the damage variable of the contact equal to 0.9999. At this moment, the cohesive contact is deactivated and the particle interaction is subsequently replaced by the classical contact law for granular materials.