The galvanic effect between the distinct associated mineralogical phases in different mineral concentrates was evaluated using an alternative methodology. Voltammetric studies were carried out in order to analyze the electrochemical reactivity of pyrite-bearing samples naturally associated with sphalerite, sphalerite-galena and acanthite, respectively. When these phases were chemically removed from the concentrate, using selective leaching procedures, the voltammetric behavior indicated a modification of the pyrite reactivity. These modifications were directly associated with the loss of the galvanic interactions. In this study, it has been shown that even small quantities of the impurities provoke a significant effect on pyrite reactivity. The strategy proposed here may be employed to predict the reactivity of sulfide minerals in different hydrometallurgical systems.Galvanic effects, occurring between conducting and semiconducting minerals in aqueous systems, play an important role in the aqueous processing of ores and minerals, such as in flotation and leaching. In flotation pulps, the galvanic interactions between two or more minerals produce surface coatings, which affect the floatability of sulfide minerals ( For semiconductive minerals, such as sulfides, direct contact of different minerals with dissimilar rest potentials initiates the galvanic effect. This effect has been modeled with galvanic cells through the redox reactions, where the mineral with the higher rest potential acts as the cathode, which is galvanically protected, while the mineral with the lower rest potential acts as an anode and its dissolution is favored through electronic interactions. These interactions occur between sulfides, involving the flow of electrons from grains with a higher potential to grains with lower potentials, modifying the Fermi level of both minerals ( Most of the studies which concern the influence of various factors on the galvanic interaction between sulfide minerals have been carried out using galvanic cells with short-circuited or attached mineral electrodes, and by comparison of individual electrochemical behavior of the minerals ( In order to evaluate the effect of mineral associations on the pyrite reactivity in different concentrates, a different strategy was developed in the present work. Voltammetric studies were performed in order to analyze the oxidation potential and the oxidation rate of pyrite samples, naturally associated with sphalerite (ZnS), sphalerite-galena (PbS) and acanthite (Ag The choice of each concentrate was made on the basis of the electroactivity of its major impurity in a neutral medium. When the concentrates contained galena and sphalerite, these impurities presented equilibrium potential values less positive compared to pyrite ( In order to achieve high reproducibility in the electrochemical results and also to handle particles more easily with the size distribution of the concentrates and residues, carbon paste electrodes were employed as the working electrodes ( Four different concentrates were employed. Three samples contained impurities with lower rest potential than pyrite (sphalerite, ZnS and galena, PbS), which were obtained from different mines: Huckleberry and Brunswick from Canada and Tizapa from México. The sample containing acanthite as impurity (Ag Taking advantage of the galvanic interactions, the leaching procedure for the samples containing impurities with a lower rest potential than pyrite was a non-aggressive treatment with CO Acanthite was removed by cyanide leaching since this mineral phase was not removable from the sample by the CO The cyanide solution was placed in a standard 1-l Pyrex reactor and the flow of the oxidizing agent was initiated. After 30 min, the reaction was initiated by introducing the sulfide mineral concentrate. The kinetic experiments lasted for 8 h. The amount of concentrate employed was 10 g/l of solution which had a cyanide concentration of 0.3 M. The system temperature was maintained at 20 °C. At the end of each experiment, the residues were filtered, dried and analyzed for silver and iron to complete the metallurgical balance. The electrochemical analyses consisted of cyclic voltammetry, where an EG & G PARC 273 potentiostat coupled to a PC with the M270 software was used to impose the electrochemical signal and measure the voltammetric response. An electrochemical cell was fitted with three ports: one for the working electrode (carbon paste electrode, CPE–graphite-electroactive species), another for the counter electrode (graphite bar, Alfa Aesar, Johnson Matthey 99.9995%) and the last for the reference electrode (Hg/Hg The pyrite reactivity describes the capacity of this mineral to react under a given set of conditions. In ores and concentrates, pyrite reactivity depends, among other factors, on their mineralogical composition ( The results obtained from the electrochemical analysis show that pyrite samples from Huckleberry, Tizapa and Brunswick ( The electrochemical oxidation processes observed in The current–voltage response is usually described as a function of peak potentials. Since a maximum current (peak) was not obtained for the pyrite samples studied here (due to the high concentration of pyrite in the concentrates), alternative comparison parameters were established. These parameters were the potential required to reach 10 μA ( Comparing the values reported in The voltammetric analysis of the Huckleberry pyrite sample indicates that the reactivity of this sample decreases after leaching ( In From the data obtained, it was concluded that the presence of sphalerite in the Tizapa concentrate creates a galvanic protection of the pyrite, decreasing its reactivity. This phenomenon indicates that the equilibrium potential of sphalerite is more negative than that of pyrite. However, the electrochemical detection of sphalerite contained in Tizapa is not possible since it would require a large overpotential due to the low conductivity or large band gap of this mineral ( The voltammetric response of the Brunswick concentrate is shown in The influence of the impurities contained in the Brunswick (galena and sphalerite) and the Tizapa (sphalerite) concentrates shows that, despite their small quantities, pyrite reactivity is greatly affected. On the other hand, even though the equilibrium potentials of sphalerite and galena are both more negative than pyrite, only the galena is electrochemically detected in the concentrate. In the case of sphalerite, electrochemical detection is not possible; however the effect that this phase has on the pyrite is eliminated once it has been chemically removed. It is important to note that the combined effect of the galena and sphalerite provokes the lowest reactivity in the Brunswick pyrite ( This section illustrates the galvanic effect between the pyrite and acanthite mineralogical phases contained in the Real del Monte (RM) concentrate, which consists of a high percentage of iron sulfide with a small portion of acanthite (see In The presence of acanthite as an impurity in the RM concentrate ( From the above discussion, it was concluded that in both cases, the distinct impurities contained in each concentrate increased or diminished the reactivity of pyrite, depending on their values at the equilibrium potential, as well as the electroactivity of the mineralogical phases contained in each concentrate. Galvanic interactions depend on the mineralogical association between the phases present in the concentrate. In order to determine the galvanic interactions in a complex mineral association, an alternative strategy was proposed in this work to analyze these kinds of interactions: Initially, the associated minerals were characterized by cyclic voltammetry to understand the reactivity of pyrite (main component). Afterward, a selective leaching procedure was then used to extract the associated impurities and the residues were also characterized by cyclic voltammetry. The comparison of the electrochemical behavior before and after leaching procedure allowed the identification of the galvanic interactions and their effect on the pyrite reactivity. It has been shown that even small quantities of the impurities cause a significant modification of pyrite reactivity. Therefore, the strategy proposed here could be employed to predict the reactivity of sulfide minerals in different hydrometallurgical systems. R. Cruz and R. M. Luna-Sánchez wish to thank CONACyT for their postgraduate scholarships. Financial support for this work came from CONACyT (Grant 485100-5-25715B). For the first case, Noranda Inc. (Canada) and Servicios Industriales Peñoles (Mexico) supplied the mineral samples to develop this project.