Background
                  Adult isolated ulnar shaft fractures (IUSFs) are uncommon, and treatment remains controversial. The purpose of this study was to compare results of operative (reduction internal fixation (RIF)) and nonoperative treatment (NOT) in patients with IUSF.
               
                  Material and methods
                  A retrospective case–control analysis was undertaken on patients diagnosed with IUSF between 2002 and 2008 at a Level I teaching trauma center. Clinical outcomes consisted of complications and functional ability.
               
                  Results
                  Seventy patients had a mean age of 44.6 years (18–86) and a body mass index (BMI) of 27.9 (17–47). The mechanism of injury included high-energy injuries (60/70, 85.7%), low-energy falls (8/70, 11.4%), and sports (2/70, 2.9%). Treatment consisted of 33/70 (47.1%) NOT and 37/70 (52.9%) RIF. The AO/OTA fracture classification was 48 A1, 20 B2, and two C1. The level of activity (LOA) was 60 without restrictions, six with restrictions, and three who did not return to work. The function determined by range of motion was 55/70 (78.6%) full, 11 slightly limited, and one severely limited. A total of 14 nonunions (NUs) and 17 malunions (MUs) occurred. NOT was associated with NU (χ
                     2
                     =0.001) and MU (χ
                     2
                     =0.000), respectively. Fracture angulation ≥8° was related to the inability to return to previous LOA (ρ
                     =0.406, p
                     =0.001). Secondary displacement >2mm contributed to MU (R
                     2
                     =0.238, p
                     =0.000) and NU (R
                     2
                     =0.076, p
                     =0.021). NU was related to a minor functional result (ρ
                     =0.315, p
                     =0.009).
               
                  Conclusions
                  IUSF treatment remains challenging in the adult population. Nonoperative treatment of displaced fractures produces a high risk of complications, and the fracture characteristics determine patient outcome.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III.Isolated ulnar shaft fractures (IUSFs) are uncommon The purpose of this study was to compare results, function, and complications of nonoperatively and operatively treated IUSFs based on age, gender, body mass index (BMI), fracture characteristics, and associated injuries (AIs). This investigation was a retrospective case–control study of non-operatively and operatively treated IUSF at a single private practice associated with a Level I teaching trauma center. Treatment was on the discretion of 10 fellowship-trained orthopaedic surgeons. Consecutive patients were identified by CPT (Current Procedural Terminology) codes 25530, 25535, 25545, 25560, 25565, 25574, and 25575 for ulnar fractures who underwent initial treatment from March 2002 through December 2008. The inclusion criteria were radiographically diagnosed IUSF, skeletal maturity, and initial treatment at study institution. The exclusion criteria were unavailable radiographic images at injury and at final follow-up and follow-up of <90 days. Associated ipsilateral radial injuries, ulnar olecranon injuries, ulnar styloid fractures, and injuries to the proximal or distal radioulnar joint complex were excluded. Age, BMI, gender, injury mechanism, and AIs were recorded. The surgical site infection ( IUSFs were grouped according to initial treatment into nonoperative treatment (NOT) or closed/open reduction internal fixation (RIF). A long- or short-arm cast, splint, or brace (AirCast, Vista, CA, USA) was utilised for 4–6 weeks keeping the patients’ forearm immobilised and non-weight bearing. If an isolated injury was present, progressive lifting and weight bearing was initiated based on radiographic and clinical assessment indicating healing and maintenance of reduction. If associated with other upper-extremity injuries requiring non-weight bearing for longer periods of time, therapy was focused on passive ROM exercise. Strengthening and weight bearing were delayed until other injuries warranted therapy. Patients were instructed to begin ROM exercises at home and organised physical therapy for ROM, conditioning, and weight bearing. Radiographic and clinical evaluation was performed on a standardised schedule with follow-up at 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. Furthermore, follow-up was performed at 6, 9, and 12 months if indicated. If operative fixation was indicated, a dorsal incision was carried out centred over the ulnar shaft at the dorsal forearm. Under protection of the neurovascular bundle, the interval between the extensor carpi ulnaris and the flexor carpi ulnaris was entered to advance to the ulnar bone. Keeping as many soft tissue attachments to the fracture fragments as possible, the fracture edges were cleaned and refined, and the fracture was reduced. Techniques of fixation varied depending on the fracture pattern and surgeon preference, respectively. Postoperatively, a short-arm cast or splint was worn for 2–4 weeks until wound healing was completed with restrictions of non-weight bearing. Early active ROM was started for the upper-extremity joints. Radiographic and clinical examinations were performed as outlined above. Standard radiographic images (AP and Lat) of the injured forearm, obtained at the time of injury, at 1 month and final follow-up, were retrospectively reviewed in a blinded fashion by one author (MOC). Radiographs were used to assess the degree and direction of displacement, degree of comminution, alignment, presence of AIs, adequacy of reduction, presence of hardware loosening, time to healing, and presence of healing disturbances (malangulation and NUs In each plane angulation, the displacement and fracture angle were measured. The lengths of the proximal and distal fragment were measured and the fragment ratio was calculated. An angulation of ≥10° at final follow-up was defined as MU Classification was based on fracture pattern The adequacy of reduction was assessed on the immediate post-interventional radiographs modified from Leung et al. Local pain was recorded as present or absent. ROM was rated as full, slightly affected, severely affected, or totally stiff, as modified from Anderson et al. Data analysis was performed using the IBM Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS A total of 180 patients met the inclusion criteria. One hundred and eight were excluded because of inadequate follow-up (59/108) or age below 16 years (49/108). Two patients were excluded for incomplete radiographs. The group of excluded adults was not significantly different from the study group regarding injury-related data ( Most of the patients (40/70, 57.1%) were injured in a motor-vehicle accident. Furthermore, injury mechanisms included direct impact (11), low-energy falls (eight), high-energy falls (five), motor cycle accidents (two), sport injuries (two), and crush injuries (two). AIs included 24 lower-extremity injuries, 18 thoracic/abdominal injuries, 15 ipsilateral upper-extremity injuries, 15 traumatic brain injuries, nine spinal injuries, seven contralateral upper-extremity injuries, and six pelvic injuries. Thirteen (13/70, 19.6%) patients sustained multiple injuries. An associated lower-extremity ( The treatment consisted of 33/70 (47.1%) NOT and 37/70 (52.9%) RIF. One patient required closed reduction and internal fixation. The fracture patterns were 17 transverse, 31 oblique, 20 wedge, and two segmental. The AO/OTA 2007 classification included 31/70 (44.3%) 22-A1.1, 17/70 (24.3%) 22-A1.2, 7/70 (10.0%) 22-B1.1, 13/70 (18.6%) 22-B1.2, and two 22-C1.1. No difference between treatment groups was present ( The implants used included 2.0-mm (five), 2.7-mm (16), 3.5-mm (11), and locking (4) plates. In one case, a K-wire was used as an intramedullary implant. The plate types were related to fracture location ( The reduction quality in RIF was excellent in 27, good in eight, and bad in two patients. Closed reduction was necessary in one patient in NOT. Costs averaged $1223.00 and were not significantly different between treatment groups (  Clinical and functional outcome measures are outlined in Nineteen (19/70, 27.1%) patients had an uneventful convalescence. The frequencies of complications and secondary surgeries are presented in The purpose of this study was to compare the results, function, and complications of nonoperatively and operatively treated IUSFs. In a consecutive cohort on 70 IUSFs, we found that operative treatment showed equal clinical results and functional outcome compared to nonoperative treatment, although nonoperative treatment was prone to complications and was associated with MU and NU. Fracture angulation (≥8°) and secondary displacement (>2 Fracture stability continues to be a topic of dispute. Cadaver studies showed that fracture angulation is limited with an intact interosseous membrane The rationale on IUSF treatment in adults needs to be redefined as a lack of evidence prevents the determination of the superiority of the present treatment regimen Non-displaced or stable fractures are recommended for nonoperative treatment So far, injury displacement has stratified operative treatment. Intramedullary nailing and plate fixation are common operative treatment methods providing healing in due time in about 95% One major disadvantage of operative treatment is the need for implant removal. Thus, patients are at a higher risk of surgical complications, although complications linked to implant removal have not been recorded in the present series. In summary, nonoperative and operative treatment showed comparable healing time, but operative treatment needed a shorter immobilization period; thus, earlier conditioning, ROM exercise, and start of weight bearing were achieved. Plate removal is not recommended on a routine basis Sarmiento et al. A comparable proportion of AIs was found as described for IUSFs Evidence regarding treatment-dependent functional outcome is limited. Leung et al. Reports on pain in forearm fractures are contradictory. In some, pain is reported as a common finding contributing to long-term disability The majority of patients (87%) in this study returned to the previous LOA or work, which was not influenced by the choice of treatment. Functional outcome was influenced by pain. These findings are comparable to current publications showing complete recovery or some minor functional limitations. Bousouga et al. Complications resulting from IUSF treatment are NUs MU and NU were major contributors of morbidity here ( Furthermore, the injury mechanism might be a contributing factor Contrary to present findings, Brakebury et al. In this setting, MU and NU were not influenced by factors such as fracture type and pattern, but fracture location and angulation. Furthermore, age, gender, AIs, secondary displacement, but also patient compliance determined anatomic healing. The high loss of follow-up in the present study is a known problem when studying an indigent population at a regional facility IUSF treatment remains challenging in the adult population. Fracture characteristics influence reduction. The reduction quality influences the functional outcome. Operative treatment did not result in increased patient morbidity despite more severe fracture patterns. AIs influence treatment decision. Pain and inability to return to normal LOA are related to inferior results. Nonoperative treatment is prone to more complications. None declared.