In this paper, we present the results of time-lapse electrical resistivity tomography (ERT) monitoring of rainfall-triggered shallow landslides reproduced on a laboratory-scale physical model. The main objective of our experiments was to monitor rainwater infiltration through landslide body in order to improve our understanding of the precursors of failure. Time-domain reflectometry (TDR) data were also acquired to obtain the volumetric water content. Knowing the porosity, water saturation was calculated from the volumetric water content and we could calibrate Archie's equation to calculate water saturation maps from inverted resistivity values. Time-lapse ERT images proved to be effective in monitoring the hydrogeological conditions of the slope as well as in detecting the development of fracture zones before collapse. We performed eight laboratory tests and the results show that the landslide body becomes unstable at zones where the water saturation exceeds 45%. It was also observed that instability could occur at the boundaries between areas with different water saturations. Our study shows that time-lapse ERT technique can be employed to monitor the hydrogeological conditions of landslide bodies and the monitoring strategy could be extended to field-scale applications in areas prone to the development of shallow landslides.Landslides are one of the most challenging geohazards worldwide and especially in Europe. They can cause fatalities and serious injuries to people as well as damage to the property. Landslides can also damage transport infrastructures (roads and railways) located downstream of the sliding area. Aside from the costs required for repair/diversion of the damaged parts, long delays occur in transportation to and from the affected areas interrupting marketing activities, educational and health opportunities, employment and social activities ( Long-term landslide monitoring systems are helpful to minimize the adverse impacts of landslides. Examples of such real-time monitoring systems are: high-precision global positioning system (GPS) units capable of detecting small movements of the slope ( In the last decades, geophysical techniques have been increasingly used to investigate the subsurface characteristics of landslide bodies. Different geophysical techniques such as geoelectrical ( Rainfall is one of the most common landslide triggers ( Time-lapse ERT measurements have proven to be efficient in tracking water infiltration conditions and monitoring subsurface soil moisture in different structures such as earth embankments and landslide bodies ( The landslide simulator used in this research is a Plexiglass flume mounted on a steel frame with base dimensions of 2 In all experiments, two GoPro Hero4 Session cameras were installed on the top frame of the landslide simulator ( A time-domain reflectometry (TDR) probe ( To perform time-lapse ERT measurements at the laboratory scale, we prepared two 24-channel mini cables to be compatible with the IRIS Syscal Pro instrument. Cables were connected to 48 stainless steel 0.02m-long mini electrodes and were tested in a test site before landslide simulation experiments ( We performed eight laboratory experiments to simulate rainfall-triggered shallow landslides. Each experiment ended with the collapse of the slope and we never used again a previous model or the material remaining from a previous test. The slope material used in all experiments was uniform fine sand with d The Wenner array with unit electrode spacing a After preparing the slope and before activating the rain sprinklers, an initial measurement of the soil resistivity (hereafter named T All measured apparent resistivity pseudosections showed that apparent resistivity values of deeper layers were anomalously high. This is because the base of the landslide simulator is covered by Plexiglass, which is an electrically resistive material. In ERT measurements, the electrodes are generally located on the surface and the current flows in the lower half space. Since the electrodes are buried in our experiments, the effect of buried electrodes needs to be corrected because the current also flows in the soil layer above the electrodes. The effect of buried electrodes can be quantified by the analogy between the electrical situation and optics ( All the datasets were further filtered for negative resistance values, bad quality factors (standard deviation larger than 2%), and extremely low current. The datasets were then inverted using RES2DINVx64 with the robust option (    After the collapse of the lower section of the landslide body, which resulted in the detachment of the downslope electrodes in all the experiments (  After inversion of all resistivity data, TDR data were used to establish the petrophysical relationship between water saturation and resistivity for the material used in our experiments. Archie's law ( The volumetric water content, Using the volumetric water content values and inverted values of resistivity at the location of TDR measurements, we calculated the coefficients of equation As a first trial, we assumed a  Having developed the petrophysical relation between resistivity values and water saturation of the landslide body (Eq. Time-lapse water saturation images of all the experiments were compared with the times and locations of failures. In 80% of the experiments, the landslide body became unstable at the borders between zones with different water saturation or where the water saturation of the soil exceeds 45%. A careful study of the images showed that the delay from the time a fracture was recognized on the resistivity sections until the failure of the related area ranged from 1 Our ERT monitoring tests of rainfall-triggered shallow landslides showed that rainfall infiltration paths through the soil were variable resulting in inhomogeneous zones of water accumulation. By comparing volumetric water content values obtained from time-lapse TDR measurements with inverted resistivity values measured nearby the TDR sensor, we were able to calibrate the coefficients of Archie's law. We observed that time-lapse ERT measurements could effectively monitor time changes in water saturation within the landslide body. Fractures were found to develop at the borders between zones with different water saturation, or where the soil was highly saturated. In particular, saturations higher than 45% were found to generate slope instability. This is a threshold related to the specific material and the specific dip values selected for our experiments. Nevertheless, our results indicate that laboratory tests could be successfully used to simulate various scenarios and to estimate thresholds specifically related to a real landslide. Time-lapse ERT images could predict development of fractures where abrupt high resistivity discontinuities were recorded. The most frequent delay from fracture formation to failure detected on GoPro images was in the order of a couple of minutes. However, our example of high-speed ERT measurements showed that development of fractures can be detected in ERT sections even before the fractures are visible on GoPro images. One of the future perspectives is to estimate more accurately the time lag from ERT fracture detection to formation of visible fractures as well as between fracture appearance and collapse and convert it from the laboratory scale to the real scale, in order to use it for implementing an early warning procedure. Our results show that geoelectrical methods can be effectively employed as parts of early warning systems for unstable slopes. However, in order to define landslide triggering thresholds based on water saturation, more experiments should be performed to correlate different governing parameters. Further experiments with different soil materials, such as clay, may help to better characterize landslide mechanisms in a more complex context. One of the limitations of our ERT investigations was the low frequency of measurements due to the time required for each acquisition. Measurements should be rapid enough to follow the fast processes involved in the failure of rainfall-triggered landslides without any aliasing and to avoid misunderstanding of the processes and loss of valuable pieces of information. In order to make ERT technique as efficient as possible, development of high-speed ERT monitoring systems capable of operating and being programmed remotely is encouraged. None. We are grateful to Dr. Meng Heng Loke for his valuable comments on 2D and 3D forward modelling studies. The authors also thank the journal editor, Dr. Mark E. Everett, and two anonymous reviewers for their suggestions and thorough reviews that helped to improve the manuscript significantly. The following is/are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This research was partially funded by Datasets used in this research will be sent to interested researchers upon request.