Sodium metal is a very promising anode for energy storage and conversion in the post lithium ion battery era because of its high capacity (1166 mA h g−1), earth-abundance and low cost. However, the sodium metal anode suffers from unstable plating and stripping cycling and thus low Coulombic efficiency. One of the important reasons for the situation is the high overpotential for sodium nucleation and thus non-uniform deposition and even dendrites growth. Herein we report a facile method by introducing a “sodiophilic” layer of Au-Na alloy onto the Cu substrate that acts as the current collector to significantly reduce the nucleation overpotential. Thus, the sodium metal can be plated on and stripped from the modified current collector with good reversibility. The average Coulombic efficiency maintains 99.8% at the current of 2.0 mA cm−2 for 300 cycles. As a proof of concept, an anode-free full cell consisting of Cu@Au and presodiated FeS2 was assembled. Our work demonstrates the great importance of sodiophilic modification of substrate to the deposition process for sodium metal battery.Researches on next-generation high-energy batteries is urgently required to meet the rapid developments of portable electronics and electric vehicles It is worth noting that in the researches of lithium metal anodes, Cui et al. Based on the findings of Li anode outlined above, we anticipate that a similar type of “sodiophilic” materials that have larger binding energies with sodium can be beneficial to improving the cycling performance of the sodium metal anodes. In this communication, we introduce a sodiophilic Au-Na alloy layer on the Cu surface by sputtering an ultrathin layer of gold onto the Cu surface followed by alloying reaction with Na during the initial cycle of Na plating and stripping. As shown schematically in Sodium metal (>99.5%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. 1 M Sodium trifluoromethanesulfonate (NaSO For preparing the array of Au and Cu rectangles, 200 nm Cu was sputtered on a Si disk, then a thin layer of photoresist was spin-coated. The photoresist was photoetched with a mask plate consisting of rectangle arrays on the surface. Next, the mask plate was removed and 50 nm thick Au layer was sputtered on the surface. At last, the photoresist was washed away by acetone and an Au and Cu array was obtained. CR2016 coin cells were used in the electrochemical tests. Half coin cells consisted of two electrodes, in which Cu or Cu sputtered with gold on the surface (Cu@Au) were used as the working electrodes and sodium metal as the counter electrode. Celgard 2400 separators were used. The stripping cut off potential was 1.0 V vs. Na The Cells were dissembled in the glovebox filled with argon gas (H  As shown in The binding energies between Na and different substrates were calculated. They are − 1.379, − 1.947, − 2.431 and − 1.704 eV for Na with Cu, Au, Au Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article  The surface morphologies of the plated Na on the two substrates were further characterized by optical and SEM ( The morphological differences of the Cu and Cu@Au-Na substrates after Na plating confirm that smaller nucleation barrier on Cu@Au-Na induces more uniform plating of Na, which can be completely stripped in each cycle, which guarantees a high Coulombic efficiency. On contrary, the larger nucleation barrier on Cu induces an uneven deposition; some of Na deposits are loose in electrical contacts with the substrate, resulting in “dead Na” that cannot be stripped and thus reduced cycling Coulombic efficiency. The efficiency is further decreased once dendrites are formed, which is hard to be completely stripped either. The effect of Au thickness was compared by sputtering 10, 50, 200, 500 nm Au on Cu. As shown in It is known that Cu is screened as the anode current collector in lithium ion batteries as Cu is regarded not to form sever alloy with Li. However, this work clearly shows that Cu alone is not a good substrate for Na plating and stripping, while introducing an ultrathin layer to form a surface sodiophilic alloy phase can significantly improve the cycling behaviors of Na metal anode. Although Au is expensive and may not be practical for the application in power Na batteries, the resultant Au-Na alloy layer demonstrates that a sodiophilic layer enables stable cycling of Na on it. In addition, such a layer is convenient for fabrication and could be affordable in microbatteries, in which only rather small amounts of active materials is required for achieving reasonably high capacity density At last, as a proof of concept, anode-free full cells consisting of Cu@Au or Cu anode current collector and presodiated FeS In summary, we have demonstrated that introducing a sodiophilic ultrathin gold layer that has a large binding energy with Na can significantly improve the Coulombic efficiency of Na plating and stripping. This gold layer converts to a sodiophilic Au-Na layer after initial cycle, which makes Na much easier to nucleate. It enables smooth and uniform Na plating and stripping with a very high Coulombic efficiency. As a proof of concept, an anode-free Na metal battery consisting of Cu@Au anode current collector and presodiated FeS This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 