Conventional or single stage triaxial compression experiments for obtaining failure envelope of rocks require several specimens to be tested under different confining pressures. As a replacement, multistage triaxial tests using one specimen have been employed in experimental rock mechanics for situations where preparing several specimens is difficult or expensive. The results obtained by the multistage triaxial test may deviate from those obtained by the single stage. However it is believed that using multistage triaxial test can decrease the cost and time and the obtained results are still reliable due to less variability in the rock properties. Several methods have been proposed for conducting multistage triaxial test including ISRM suggested method and a modified version of the ISRM method proposed by Crawford and Wylie. The results of this study demonstrate that both multistage methods give reasonable results. However, the modified method provides closer results to the single stage, because the specimen is subjected to less damage. As the number of the loading stages rises, both ISRM and the modified version provide lower strength parameters comparing to the single stage.Laboratory triaxial tests help to gain an understanding of rock behavior under three-dimensional state of stress. They provide input parameters for analytical and numerical models, and are used to verify, and even endorse developed empirical rock failure criteria. For this aim, rock samples are usually cored from the ground and brought to the laboratory to perform triaxial laboratory experiments, which closely corresponds to the in-situ state of stress. Conventional or single stage triaxial test has been considered as the commonly used experiment in this regard. However, due to limited available core material at a specific core depth or inability to obtain multiple identical samples with similar mechanical properties Though researchers have used all mentioned techniques in their experimental investigations, it is not yet well understood which technique provides more reliable data. In this paper, multistage triaxial test suggested by ISRM Single stage triaxial requires a suite of 3–5 rock specimens in which each specimen is tested with a particular confining pressure. The procedure consists of increasing the confining pressure and axial stress simultaneously until the required confining pressure is reached. Then the axial stress is continuously increased until the specimen fails ( In multistage triaxial test in ISRM method Comparing In addition to stress path, the ability of the experimenter to recognize “imminent failure point”, and thereby to prevent early failure of the specimen is the other critical factor in conducting a successful multistage triaxial test. Previous investigators have proposed different criteria for imminent failure point. These criteria are based on changing in axial, lateral or volumetric strains. While a lot of researches have focused on the effect of “imminent point”, less research has been done on the effect of “loading path” on the multistage triaxial testing of rocks. In this study, the emphasis is on investigating the effect of “stress path” on the tested rock specimens to see which stress path provides better results. For the current research, the imminent point was observed using the method proposed by Taheri and Chanda For the present research, the specimens were obtained from drilled exploratory boreholes in a Travertine quarry. A total of 65 core specimens (53–54 mm diameter, (NX-sized)) were prepared for testing. The length-to-diameter ratio of the prepared specimens was considered 2–2.5. The ends of the specimens were cut and flattened in order to be precisely perpendicular to the specimen axis. The sides of the specimens were smoothed and polished (according to ISRM suggested methods), and also were inspected to be free of cracks and other flaws that would act as selective planes of weakness. The tests were carried out in the laboratory on dry specimens. A servo-controlled testing machine with a loading capacity of 1000 kN and a loading rate of 0.72 MPa/s was used for axial loading. A high-pressure Hoek cell and a hydraulic pressure system were used to apply confining pressure from 1 to 70 MPa. Physical properties and ultrasonic P- and S-wave velocities were measured for each specimen ( To obtain the mechanical parameters of the rock, 5 uniaxial tests and 15 Brazilian tests were performed according to ISRM standard. Mechanical parameters of rocks are given in In this study a total of 55 triaxial tests in dry condition were conducted: 33 single stage tests, 11 multistage tests (3 stages) following the ISRM suggested method, and 11 multistage tests (3 stages) following the modified multistage triaxial method proposed by Crawford and Wylie.  Strength parameters are measured from fitting Mohr-Coulomb and Hoek-Brown failure criteria on the experimental data. In the Mohr-Coulomb criterion, the shear stress ( Using principal stresses (σ The Hoek-Brown failure criterion is defined as: The Brazilian and Uniaxial data are also used to combine the failure envelope with the results of the triaxial tests in the diagram. When using the results of the Brazilian test, the major principal stress is 4.1 times and the minor is equal to the Brazilian tensile strength.  In Although modified multistage triaxial experiments seem to yield reasonable results, as a general observation from Due to non-uniform deformations of the specimen and local measurement of the strain by measuring devices, it is usually difficult to measure accurate lateral and axial strains of the specimen. Although the multistage triaxial testing has shown promising results, its feasibility for all rock types is still in question. The study of Kim and Ko In order to investigate the amount of damage caused by single stage and multistage triaxial methods, the failed specimens were imaged and after representing them in a 2d-dimensional plot, the cracking pattern of each method was investigated statistically ( Single stage triaxial experiment, multistage method suggested by ISRM, The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at