This work correlates the densification behaviors of high entropy alloy powders with the alloying order. Mechanically alloyed powders (CoFeNi, CoFeNiCr, CoFeNiCrMn and CoFeNiCrMnAl alloys) were non-isothermally sintered using dilatometer. It was demonstrated that when the alloying order or the number of alloying elements were increased from 3 elements to 6 elements, sintering kinetics were changed. Materials exhibit sluggish grain growth, reducing densification rates and increasing activation energies of sintering, with increasing configurational entropy. Increasing trend of micro-hardness also indicates the better mechanical properties of such alloys.High entropy alloys (HEA) are among the most studied topics, since last decade Powder sintering is one of the major fabrication routes Elemental powders (-325 mesh) of about 99.5% purity were mixed in an equimolar ratio for respective CoFeNi (3E), CoFeNiCr (4E), CoFeNiCrMn (5E) and AlCoFeNiCrMn (6E) alloys. Powder mixtures were milled on a planetary ball mill (Fritsch P-5) using WC balls and vials with toluene media, for about 15 h at a speed of about 300 rpm; where ball to powder weight ratio was about 15:1. Small cylindrical pellets (green density of about 60%) were prepared at a uniaxial pressure of about 70 MPa. Green compacts were heated non-isothermally (at a rate of 10 °C/min up to about 1150 °C under purified Ar), on a vertical dilatometer system (Theta Inc. USA). The densities were measured using Archimedes principle. Hardness was measured using Vickers hardness tester (Dura Scan, EMCO TEST). Samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction (Cu kα radiation), scanning electron microscope (FESEM, ZEISS) and transmission electron microscope (JEOL-2100 TEM). XRD patterns of as-milled powders and sintered samples (3E, 4E and 5E) show ( Shrinkage recorded as a function of homologous temperature (T/T Sintering is a complex process where several mechanisms may contribute simultaneously. Mechanically alloyed powders often contain, meta-stable phases and sigma phases etc. along with major phase, which may also provide additional driving forces during sintering. However, their contribution in densification is often limited and often some diffusional mechanism, i.e., grain boundary diffusion (GBD) or volume diffusion (VD), dominates the process over others. Axial shrinkage data were analyzed through the widely used non-isothermal sintering model In 3E alloy grains have grown significantly, over 10–15 µm ( Faster grain growth and accelerated sintering with relatively smaller Q; indicates, 3E alloy behaves like normal alloys. When the alloying elements increased to 4 or more, it leads to a more complex and tortuous diffusion paths. The increasing configurational entropy seems to affect the diffusional behavior of alloys adversely and hence the sintering behavior as well. It appears that the hypothesis projected by Adam and Gibbs The measured micro-hardness ( The results obtained in this investigation suggest, the sinterability of HEA powder reduces significantly with increasing number of alloying elements. For a given diffusional mechanism, observed increasing trends of activation energies of sintering, indicate, a configurational entropy of the system adversely affects the diffusional processes and hence densification behavior of these powders.