A novel instrumental technique for the direct, fast, accurate, and precise determination of uranium in concentrates and other U-rich materials (as well as to mineralized rocks) is presented. The proposed technique is an absolute methodology, based on the comparison of the fluorescence of the accurately known standard with a sample of similar but unknown concentration in the low operational range of the instrument (on same sample-dilution basis), by the use of H3PO4–NH4H2PO4 as a fluorescence-enhancing reagent. The relative standard deviation of the proposed technique was 0.5–0.9% (n=9) at 18.1, 36.2, 61.2, and 99.6% U3O8. The proposed technique is suitable for the determination of uranium in samples arising from exploration projects, ores from mining operations, mill process samples, uranium ore concentrates leading to fuel fabrication as well as samples from environmental monitoring containing up to 100% uranium. The results are in good agreement with those obtained by titrimetric, gravimetric, and TBP extraction–H2O2 spectrophotometric methods. The precision of the technique is within the acceptable ‘pure geochemistry’ type of analysis (R.S.D. ∼ 1.0%) and is comparable even those obtained with titrimetric and gravimetric assay. The proposed differential technique coupled with flow injection may open up new advancement in instrumentation leading to design and development of microchemielectronic devices for direct on-line determination, more compatible with the tools of computer age as also to help in handling of radioactive solutions in chemical laboratories in uranium processing industries.Various methods are used for analysis of uranium concentrates and geochemical samples. Selection of the most appropriate method depends on many parameters: on the purpose of analysis, nature of the analyte, the concentration of uranium, the presence and concentration of the other elements in the matrix, the methodology available, the accuracy required, etc. The determination of uranium in concentrates, like mineral beneficiation products such as, yellow cake, impure uranyl nitrate, high-purity uranium compounds, grab sample and other U-rich materials require a precision higher than that obtainable by fluorimetric, spectrophotometric or polarographic methods and in such cases titrimetric methods are almost invariably used In 1964, Davies and Gray Laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) is a very sensitive, selective, and versatile technique mainly for uranium ultratrace analysis in various fields of the nuclear fuel cycle In the present work, we report the application of ‘differential technique in laser fluorimetry’ for the direct and fast determination of uranium at a dynamic concentration range from ppm to 100% U The method developed at this laboratory was studied using the instrument, Scintrex UA-3 Uranium Analyzer (Scintrex Limited, Concord, Ontario, Canada) Fluorescence-enhancing reagent: An acidic buffer mixture of H Aqueous standard U IAEA low grade uranium ore, Torbernite (Australia)— Alternatively, 0.01 All other chemicals were of analytical-reagent grade. Distilled water was used throughout. With an Eppendorf micropipettor, take 100 Compute the results using the differential technique as described earlier compute a factor for each of the two comparison standards, calculate an average from the two factors, compute the concentration of U compute the percent U Solution of powdered rock samples (500 The sample solution of yellow cake or uranium oxide (500 The fluorescence of the reagent blank prepared as per the prescribed procedure was found to be negligible. High nitric acid concentration as reprocessing medium of samples although has the drawbacks, such as absorption, quenching, and complexation The phosphoric acid–ammonium dihydrogen phosphate buffer system is more selective for uranium in the presence of metal ions and found to be most suitable for rock samples of diverse matrices In the proposed method, the sample solution are suitably one or two step simply diluted with distilled water using Eppendorf single push-button microlitre pipettes The technique used in differential spectrophotometry Under the optimized conditions, the reproducibility of the proposed method was checked by performing nine replicate determinations of 18.1, 36.2, 61.2, and 99.6% U In order to check the validity of the proposed method, the method was applied to the analysis of different aliquots of standard uranyl nitrate solution, grab samples, yellow cake, and purity of uranyl nitrate analaR grade (BDH Chemicals Ltd., Poole, England). The samples have been analyzed as per the prescribed procedure. The results obtained are given in A comparative performance of the proposed differential technique with other analytical methods for the determination of uranium is presented in In the determination of uranium by DT-LIF method, there is only one-step sample-dilution for fluorescence measurement without any separation step from accompanying matrix elements. By keeping all the parameters such as, fluorescence-enhancing reagent system, sensitivity control, dilutions/sample weights as constant, the relationship between fluorescence ( We found that at a fixed sensitivity control of the instrument, the value of common factor as per the prescribed procedure followed remains constant up to three places of decimal. This is an interesting observation and can be exploited in practically designing pre-calibrated laser-induced fluorimeter. In this way, with the advancement in laser tube, digitization and computer controlled electronic signal processing, the instrument can be practically pre-calibrated to read directly uranium in percentage or mg The application of proposed DT-LIF coupled with unique features of flow-injection analysis (FIA) Such other microchemielectronic devices may prove valuable for the determination of other fluorescent actinides and lanthanides in solution in different complexing media by taking advantages of triple selectivity of time resolved laser-induced spectrofluorimetry. Among the actinides and lanthanides The simplicity, rapidity, free from matrix effects, no separation steps, minimum generation of radioactive analytical waste, maximum throughput, cost-effectiveness, accuracy, and high precision are the significant features of the proposed differential technique. Differential technique is unique and warrants its use for routine determination of uranium in samples of diverse matrices over a dynamic range of concentrations from ppm to 100% U The ‘flow-injection’ coupled with ‘differential technique in laser-induced fluorimetry will be most promising microchemielectronic device for uranium determination in future advancement and may also prove valuable for the determination of other fluorescent actinides and lanthanides in solution in different complexing media by taking advantages of triple selectivity of Time Resolved Laser-Induced Spectrofluorimetry. We thank Dr H.C. Arora, Associate Director, Shri D.B. Sen, Regional Director, Shri A.K. Bagchi, Additional Director, and Shri R.K. Gupta, Director, AMD, for their kind permission to publish this work. The authors wish to thank Shri P.K. Srivastava and Dr. D.S.R. Murthy for their constant inspirations and suggestions on the theme of this work. Thanks are also due to my all colleagues for their help, critical comments, and valuable discussions during the progress of this work.