Adhesion forces between alumina substrates and spherical alumina particles were measured using an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) colloidal probe technique. It was shown experimentally how nanoscale roughness of alumina substrates affects AFM adhesion force measurements. The adhesion force decrease was approximately five-fold between 1.5 and 12.0nm root mean square (rms) surface roughness. Determining the roughness, which describes the actual geometry of the investigated surfaces, as accurately as possible, is crucial for predicting interaction forces. It was proven, that using a realistic value of the nanoscale rms is one of the most important parameters for accurately predicting adhesion forces between substrates.Interaction forces between particles and surfaces affect a lot in technical materials. The major focus of this study is the determination of surface forces between alumina particles and alumina filter materials. Since the atomic force microscope was introduced by Binning et al. The principal part of the AFM is a small silicon cantilever with a specific spring constant. This cantilever is moved slowly towards a sample surface. The deflection of the cantilever, which is determined by the interaction between the cantilever tip and the surface of the sample, is detected by the reflection of a laser beam by the backside of the cantilever. Since the deflection is a function of the interaction force and the spring constant, the force between the tip and the sample surface can be calculated. Measurements in ambient air enable the determination of the van der Waals force as the adhesion force. The van der Waals force depends mainly on the material specific Hamaker Constant, the distance between the surfaces and the roughness of the interacting surfaces. Invention and development of colloidal probe techniques have had major effects on studies of adhesion and effects of nanoscale roughness Measurement of surface/particle adhesion with the colloid probe technique gives lower adhesion values than expected for simple sphere/plate geometries, and this difference is attributed mainly to surface roughness. This study focuses on measuring adhesive forces for surfaces with nanoscale roughness. Adhesion force measurements were performed between very pure spherical alumina particles and polished alumina filter materials. Adhesion forces measured by AFM are compared to the modified Rumpf model and the Rabinovich model, which takes surface asperities into account. The quantitative calculation of adhesion forces between a particle and a rough surface can be difficult for many reasons. The size, shape, homogeneity, mechanical properties, and distribution of asperities (deviations from an ideal planar surface) influence the actual contact area and, therefore, directly affect the adhesion force Samples were produced by deposition of the origin alumina filter material slurry on planar substrate. Substrates were polished in a stepwise procedure with a commercial Struers laboratory polishing machine to obtain several roughness values. Samples were cleaned, dried and mounted in the AFM. Adhesion forces were measured at points that were chosen to provide reliable adhesion results. Topographies of measurement points were scanned using the AFM in contact mode with special Contact Cantilevers TYPE 905 M-NSC36. Based on these scans, the root mean square (rms) surface roughness and surface asperities of substrates were determined. The surface points used for adhesive force measurements had rms roughness between 1.5 and 12.0 Alumina particles (Al2O3) with 99.9975% purity from IMPRATEX were used in this study (see Adhesive forces were measured experimentally with a Park Systems XE-100 atomic force microscope. To measure the adhesion force between a particle and a substrate, a colloidal probe cantilever was prepared. A particle was glued to the top of a Budget Sensors tipless All-in-One type B cantilever. In this study, alumina spheres with radii of 5, 10 and 15 Force–distance curves were determined by measuring the cantilever deflection while approaching, attaching to and detaching from a surface. The measurement signal is the location-sensitive laser beam intensity on the detector. The distance to the surface is detected by piezo actuators. Since the deflection of the cantilever is a function of the force and the spring constant, the force–distance curve can be calculated. There is a typical linear range in the force–distance curves for alumina materials, and the adhesion force can be calculated easily from Hooke's law (see Eq. The distance, z, to lift off a particle can be calculated from the difference between the “snap-in” and the “pull-off” events in an AFM force–distance curve. A simplified schematic description of the force–distance curve is presented in Based on a repeatability test consisting of 150 parallel measurements with colloidal probe cantilevers, the variation (i.e., two times the standard deviation) of the experimentally measured adhesion force was approximately 5%. No clear upward or downward trend was observed during adhesion measurements, indicating no significant permanent deformation of the surfaces.  In general, the adhesion force, F Under gaseous conditions, contributions from electrostatic forces are significant on insulators and at very low humidity, where charge dissipation is ineffective. Under aqueous conditions, most surfaces become charged due to surface group dissociations, and electrostatic forces are important, but their magnitude also depends on electrolyte concentration. The van der Waals force always contributes to adhesion, and it is attractive in most cases. Under ambient conditions, a water neck forms between the AFM tip and the substrate due to capillary condensation and adsorption of thin water films at surfaces. This attractive interaction depends on relative humidity and hydrophilicity of the tip and the sample. Depending on functional groups present on the tip and the substrate, chemical bonds or other specific chemical interactions (e.g., receptor–ligand interactions) may form during contact. When these interactions occur, they dominate the adhesion force In many AFM studies of the adhesion force, conditions are chosen where van der Waals forces dominate the adhesive force. In this case, F Surface roughness has a pronounced influence on the adhesive force that is difficult to quantify. It is too difficult to determine the precise contact geometry. Adsorption of contaminants on solid surfaces leads to chemically inhomogeneous surfaces. Many studies present that relative humidity levels during AFM measurements are very critical The pull-off force, which is applied to separate two elastically smooth surfaces in adhesive contact, can be analysed with general contact mechanics. Two basic theories; one from Johnson, Kendall, and Roberts (JKR-model, One way to estimate adhesion force is by means of Hamaker's approximation. This model assumes that only van der Waals forces act between interacting surfaces. A Hamaker-based approach for calculating the van der Waals force between surfaces with nanoscale roughness was described by Rumpf Rabinovich et al. The total surface roughness in Eq. The adhesion force can now be calculated by the following equation: Surface roughness reduces adhesion forces due to reduced contact areas The measured roughness of the used alumina substrates is between 1.5 and 12.0    Because no clear differences between different size colloidal probes were observed in this study, all data were combined and then compared to the Rabinovich model. According to references in the literature, Hamaker constants of alumina particles in ambient atmosphere are between 14.5 and 16.0 For the theoretical prediction of adhesion forces, van der Waals attractions are assumed to be primarily responsible for particle adhesion The technical surface topography of the particles was not hemispherical. The geometry in the actual contact zone is not sufficiently regular, which can be a real challenge. Nevertheless, in this study, the Rabinovich model gave moderately good estimates of adhesion forces for experimental surfaces with roughness in the range 1.5–12.0 The modified Rumpf model does not work well when the roughness of particles or substrates is over 2 Significant differences were not observed in measurements of adhesion forces with different size colloidal probes (probe radius: 5–15 Measurements during this study were performed under constant conditions, and differences between measured and estimated forces were constant for every measurement. Adhesion forces are very sensitive to small variations in surface roughness. Experimental adhesion forces were quite regular 50–60% higher than forces estimated with the Rabinovich model, which indicated the presence of systematic errors. The most likely reason for the differences between estimated and measured data was that the Rabinovich model takes into account only the roughness of the sample surface, and does not include colloidal probe roughness. The roughness values for alumina particles used in this research were determined to be approximately 8 During measurements, other factors can also influence adhesion forces. For example, electrostatic or capillary forces and deformation sometimes have sometimes significant effects. Even if water does not exist in a continuous phase and form a meniscus under these measurement conditions and capillary forces do not affect adhesion, water monolayers on the surfaces can influence adhesion. In practice, capillary forces might also affect observed adhesion forces. After all, the differences between measured and estimated forces can be explained primarily by nanoscale roughness variations (both substrate and particle), and irregular profile variations of contact surfaces. In this study, the adhesion forces between alumina surfaces of defined roughness (1.5–12.0 The Rabinovich roughness model estimated adhesion forces with the same magnitudes as AFM force measurements. The modified Rumpf model estimated adhesion force that were approximately 10 times lower than could be expected for the researched surface roughness (1.5–12.0 The authors would like to thank the