Introduction
                  The purpose of this study was to introduce a new surgical technique, that involves modified Candy-package wiring followed by IM nailing fixation and to determine the clinical and radiological results obtained in patients with unstable intertrochanteric fractures with a lesser trochanter fragment.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  This study included 22 patients who were undergone proximal IM nailing with lesser trochanter wiring between January 2014 to June 2015. All patients were treated with minimally invasive technique of candy-package wiring for lesser trochanter fragments. The mean age was 75.8 years (range, 53–88) and average follow-up period was 15.1 months (range, 12–24). Each patient was followed up for a minimum of 12 months and their clinical and radiological results were analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  The mean period required for fracture union was 16.6 weeks. (range, 8–25) and union was successfully completed in all cases. The WOMAC scores at the last F/U visit (average; 45.4, range; 21–75) were not significantly different to pre-trauma status (average; 36.5, range; 19–59) (p
                     
                     =
                     
                     0.087). In comparison of ambulatory capacity prior to trauma, ambulatory aggravation was noted in four cases (18.2%), and eighteen cases (81.8%) was sustained walking ability of prior of trauma. Wiring breakage was found in two cases and heterotrophic ossification in one case. There were no functional deficeit related to the radiologic finding in these patients. With regard to postoperative complications, were no cut-outs, breakage, or pullout of screws.
               
                  Conclusion
                  When surgically repairing unstable intertrochanteric fractures with lesser trochanter comminution using proximal IM nailing method, the modified Candy-packaging wiring technique increases the fixation force at the fracture site. Thus, through this technique, both firm fixation of the lesser trochanter and more stable bony union were obtained.Proximal intermedullary (IM) nails have overtaken the use of sliding hip screws as treatment for intertorchanteric fractures due to their advantages such as shorter opertation times and lack of soft tissue injuries surrounding the fracture site during the past decade Lee et al. The purpose of this study was to introduce a new surgical technique, that involves modified Candy-package wiring followed by IM nailing fixation and to determine the clinical and radiological results obtained in patients with unstable intertrochanteric fractures with a lesser trochanter fragment. A retrospective analysis was performed to identify the unstable intertrochanter fracture treated operatively from January 2014 to June 2015. Of these, the inclusion criteria for this study were the followings: patients (1) who had unstable intertrochanter fracture with lesser trochanter fracture, (2) who were treated with proximal intramedullary nail and wiring technique, and (3) of these, lesser trochanteric fractures were complete fractures with more than 5 Throughout the study, a total of 109 patients underwent operation for intertrochanteric fractures at our institution. Of these patients, 57 were unstable intertrochateric fractures involving the lesser trochanter. Among those patients, 35 patients showed good reduction with proximal intramedullary nailing technique without additional wiring around lesser trochanter. Ultimately 22 patients were within the inclusion criteria. All patients were treated with modified candy package wiring technique in regards to the lesser trochanter fragment along with IM nailing fixation. The patients included nine men and thirteen women with a mean age of 75.8 years (range, 53–88). A right hip injury was involved in 10 cases (46%) and a left hip in 12 cases (54%). Trauma was associated with slip down in 14 cases (63.6%), traffic accidents in 5 cases (22.7%) and falls in 3 cases (13.6%). Fifteen cases (68.2%) had 31-A2 fractures and seven cases (31.8%) had 31-A3 fractures according to the AO/OTA classification Postoperative outcomes were assessed using radiological and clinical evaluations. Radiological evaluations that included both hip anteroposterior (AP), translateral and teleradiogram views were performed in 4 weeks interval postoperatively until union was observed, and 3 months, 6 months postoperatively thereafter. Radiological assessment included three measurements: the distance of the tip of the lag screw to the femoral head apex (tip-apex distance, TAD) Clinical evaluations were assessed at the last F/U visit and compared with pre-trauma status using the Western Ontario McMaster Universities Index of Osteoarthritis (WOMAC) score A minimally invasive surgical technique of Candy-packaging wiring using a cerclage passer ( After positioning the patient in supine position on the fracture operation table, reduce the fracture site through traction and rotation. The state of reduction is checked under fluoroscopy on the AP and translateral views. After closed reduction of fracture, 5–6 Bony union was achieved in all cases with average time of 16.6 weeks. (range, 8–25). Femoral neck angle was assessed with postoperative radiographs. Average femoral neck was measured to be 129.2° (range; 124–137) and which were maintained throughout the F/U period. The average TAD was measured in AP as well as translateral radiographs, with 9.9 As for the functional outcomes, WOMAC scores at the last F/U visit (average; 45.4, range; 21–75) were not significantly different to pre-trauma status (average; 36.5, range; 19–59) ( With regard to postoperative complications, were no cut-outs, breakage, or pullout of screws. There were no reoperations in any of the patients throughout the study. Wiring breakage was found in two cases and heterotrophic ossification in one case. There were no functional deficeit related to the radiologic finding in these patients. Post-operative systemic complications were two cases of pneumonia (13%) and one case of urinary tract infection (6%). Increase in life expectancy has led to an increase in the average age for intertrochanteric fractures. Accordingly, many reduction techniques and surgical methods have been developed to address unstable and comminuted osteoporotic fractures. Evans Techniques using trochanter stablilizing plates have been reported in order to reduce these problems by preventing excessive impaction, rotational and angular distortion Lee et al. Although a recent prospective randomised study failed to show superiority in using a long IM nail over a sliding hip screw in unstable intertrochanteric fractures Despite good results, our study also has some limitations. One of limitation of our study is the small number of cases, due to the low incidence of these unstable fractures with lesser trochanter fragment. Another limitation is that the following study is retrospective study without a control group, that is, our results need further confirmation from large comparative series. When surgically repairing unstable intertrochanteric fractures with lesser trochanter comminution using proximal IM nailing method, the modified Candy-package wiring technique increases the fixation force at the fracture site. Thus, through this technique, both firm fixation of the lesser trochanter and more stable bony union were obtained. To recover a posteromedial stability of intertrochanter area and to provide fixation to the fracture site, this operative method is more than capable of being a therapeutic option for an unstable intertrochanter fracture. All four authors declare that they have no financial interest or personal relationship with organizations or institutes other than their mentioned affiliations.