Abstract
                  Wrist arthroscopy is a commonly used procedure that has undergone many modifications and improvements since it was first described. The advent of new portals (both dorsal and volar) means that the wrist joint can be viewed from virtually any perspective (“box concept”). Indications for wrist arthroscopy have continued to expand and include diagnostic and reparative procedures and, more recently, reconstructive, soft-tissue, and bony procedures. Arthroscopic grading of Kienböck’s disease better describes articular damage compared with plain radiographs and can help guide surgical treatment options. Triangular fibrocartilage complex injury diagnosis, classification, and treatment can be performed arthroscopically, including distal ulna resection (wafer procedure). Assessment of fracture reduction of the distal radius and scaphoid is superior to that obtained with fluoroscopy, with the advantage of being able to look for associated soft-tissue and chondral injuries. Arthroscopic assessment of intercarpal ligament injuries and instability is now considered the gold standard by many authors. Arthroscopy can also aid us in the management of post-traumatic capsular contraction, resection of ganglia, and the relatively rare isolated ulna styloid impaction. Complications of wrist arthroscopy are relatively uncommon. With the ever-expanding list of indications and procedures that can be performed with this technique, it exists as an essential diagnostic and therapeutic tool for the orthopaedic surgeon.Wrist pain of unknown origin Synovial biopsy Assessment of instability Staging of Kienböck’s disease Staging before limited wrist fusion Bacterial sampling, drainage, and joint lavage Dorsal and volar ganglia Intraosseous ligaments Synovectomy TFCC tears Articular cartilage lesions Distal pole of scaphoid Distal ulnar (wafer procedure) Hamate Lunate Os central carpi Pisiform Proximal pole of scaphoid Proximal-row carpectomy STT debridement Ulnar styloid Volar capsular release Dorsal capsular release Dorsal radiocarpal ligament Lunotriquetral instability Scapholunate instability TFCC suture Distal radius fractures Peri-lunate dislocation Scaphoid fractures Scapholunate instability Scapholunate ligament reconstruction Distal radioulnar joint stabilization Bone graft to scaphoid nonunion Limited wrist fusion Full wrist fusion 2-cm longitudinal incision overlying FCR on radial side of volar proximal wrist crease. FCR retracted ulnarly. Radiocarpal joint identified with needle, then port expanded with artery forceps. An inside-out technique can also be used here, between the RSC and LRL ligaments, staying to the radial side of the FCR tendon to avoid the median nerve. TFCC wear but no perforation Chondromalacia of lunate or ulnar head Central perforation of TFCC Chondromalacia of lunate or ulnar head Central perforation of TFCC Chondromalacia of lunate or ulnar head Perforation of LT ligament Central perforation of TFCC Perforation of LT ligament Ulnocarpal arthritis Note: To access the supplementary video illustrations accompanying this report, visit the March issue of Professor Kenji Takagi first reported large-joint arthroscopy in 1920. Arthroscopic examination of the wrist should include the radiocarpal and midcarpal joints. Multiple portals are now described ( General or regional anesthesia is preferred. The patient is supine on the operating table with the shoulder along the edge of the table ( Historically, the radiologic classification of Kienböck’s disease of Lichtman et al. Wrist arthroscopy has become a valuable assessment and primary treatment tool in the treatment of Kienböck’s disease. The use of arthroscopy enables the surgeon to specifically identify the nonfunctional joints and tailor the surgical reconstructions to the anatomic findings. By specifically directing the treatment options to the findings identified, patient outcomes can be optimized. We developed an arthroscopic classification system for the assessment of Kienböck’s disease ( This grading system assists in classifying the severity of the disease and better directs the surgeon toward the reconstructive surgical options. A patient with a grade 0 disorder could be treated with an extra-articular procedure, such as a joint-leveling procedure or revascularization of the lunate. Patients with grade 1 or 2a can be treated with a radio-scapho-lunate fusion. Patients with grade 1 or 2b can be treated with a proximal-row carpectomy, whereas those with grade 3 or 4 require salvage procedures (such as wrist arthrodesis or arthroplasty). Menth-Chiari et al. Injury to the TFCC is a common cause of ulnar-sided wrist pain. Wrist arthroscopy has become the gold standard in the diagnosis and treatment of these injuries. The TFCC attaches to the sigmoid notch of the distal radius and spans across the ulna head to attach to the base of the ulna styloid. Palmer’s classification of TFCC injuries can be used to help guide treatment ( Central tears (type 1A) are managed with arthroscopic debridement of the TFCC tear, performed with the arthroscope in the 6R portal and the instruments in the 3-4 portal. A peripheral tear in the TFCC (type 1B) can be difficult to detect. A normal TFCC has tension within its substance when a probe is applied across it, referred to as the “trampoline effect.” Loss of this normal trampoline effect would indicate that there is a peripheral tear of the triangular fibrocartilage. We prefer to use the inside-out technique popularized by Poehling et al. Type 1C lesions involve disruption of the TFCC from the ulnar extrinsic ligament complex. At arthroscopy, there will be laxity of the ulnar intrinsic ligaments, and the pisiform may be unusually easy to see because the adjacent ligaments are torn. These injuries are less common but more complex to manage. Type 1D radial-sided tears have a poor chance of healing. This is because of the relative avascularity of the radial side of the TFCC, as well as the fact that it attaches onto the articular cartilage of the sigmoid notch. Most of these tears are managed with arthroscopic debridement; however, a number of suture techniques have previously been described in the literature, with two thirds of patients having good to excellent results. Type 2 TFCC lesions are degenerative tears that are often asymptomatic. If there is ulnar positivity, shortening of the ulna with either diaphyseal ulnar shortening or an arthroscopic wafer procedure should be performed. The arthroscopic wafer procedure involves resection of the prominent distal ulna through the TFCC tear Ulna styloid carpal impaction is an uncommon condition that has traditionally been managed with open excision of the ulna styloid. Wrist arthroscopy is now a valuable adjunct in the management of intra-articular distal radius fractures, both in assessing associated intercarpal ligament injury and improving the quality of joint surface reduction. With the advent of fixed-angle plating for the management of distal radius fractures, there has been a change in the utilization of wrist arthroscopy. In the past some we treated distal radius fractures with comminution with arthroscopy, percutaneous K-wires, and external fixators. The association of soft-tissue injuries with displaced distal radius fractures has been reported by a number of authors. Percutaneous fixation techniques have become increasingly popular for the management of scaphoid fractures. It is our experience that arthroscopy is valuable in ensuring that there is correct rotation of the fracture. We have seen a number of scaphoid fractures that we considered to be simple and stable. However, when these were assessed arthroscopically, we have been surprised to find instability and associated chondral injuries. We find this to be one of the most technically demanding of the arthroscopic wrist procedures. The wrist is initially examined and imaged with fluoroscopy. The line of the scaphoid is marked on the skin in both the coronal and sagittal planes ( Jigs can be used to stabilize the fracture and provide compression across the fracture before fixation. Fractures of the proximal pole of the scaphoid can also be managed with dorsal percutaneous fixation. Wrist arthroscopy is also useful in a proportion of scaphoid nonunions. Slade et al. Arthroscopic excision of the proximal pole of the scaphoid in patients with Preiser’s disease has been reported. Arthroscopic debridement of chondral lesions in the wrist has been described in a number of anatomic sites. These include the STT joint, the radiocarpal joint in Kienböck’s disease, and the proximal pole of the scaphoid. Patients with a type 2 lunate (with a second distal articular facet to articulate with the hamate) are at increased risk of degenerative osteoarthritis developing at the proximal condyle of the hamate. Radiologic methods for assessing carpal instability include plain radiography, fluoroscopy, arthrography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging. Three-compartment arthrography will identify perforations of the intercarpal ligaments, but it does not provide accurate localization of the tears or the extent of instability. Arthroscopy is now considered the gold standard for diagnosing carpal instability. It has the advantage of direct visualization of the scapholunate and lunotriquetral ligaments When infiltration into the midcarpal joint is being performed, a leakage of saline solution through the radiocarpal portals indicates that there must be a tear of the lunotriquetral ligament or scapholunate ligament. This is the same concept as that seen with an arthrogram where the midcarpal joint is injected and a leakage of contrast is seen in the radiocarpal joint on follow-up radiographs. From the midcarpal joint, the degree of laxity between the scapholunate interval can be assessed. Geissler et al. The scapholunate instability test of Watson et al. Lunotriquetral instability can also be assessed by use of the same arthroscopic assessment techniques and specific provocation tests. Verhellen and Bain Luchetti et al. The volar capsular release is performed via the 3-4 and 6R portals. Release of the volar capsule must preserve at least part of the radio-scapho-capitate ligament to minimize the chance of ulnar translocation. Knowledge of the major neurovascular structures is essential ( The goal of arthroscopic ganglion resection is to reduce scarring and avoid any capsular wrist stiffness that may be associated with an open removal. We use the technique as reported by Osterman and Raphael. Complications of wrist arthroscopy are uncommon, with authors reporting rates of approximately 2%. Wrist arthroscopy is a relatively safe procedure that has undergone many advances since it was first described. It is now regarded as the gold standard in the diagnosis and treatment of a variety of conditions. Its clinical applications continue to expand, with more complex reparative, reconstructive, and salvage procedures now being performed. Further advances are likely to occur from adapting open reconstructive procedures into an arthroscopic model. 