The bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate, intensified by the adapted mesophilic culture in the continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTR) was investigated. The cumulative bioleaching efficiency of copper was found to be increased from 34.8% to 49.3% in CSTR-1, 40.3% to 71.2% in CSTR-2, and 44.3% to 73.8% in CSTR-3, while the temperature was elevated from 30 to 37 °C, respectively; whereas, the pulp density (10%, w/v), agitation speed (350 rpm), aeration (400 cc/min), and retention time (7 days across the three reactors) were also optimized to keep constant. Further, the activation energy calculated for copper dissolution under the continuous flow indicated that the surface-diffusion was the overall rate-limiting step for the bioleaching process. Instrumental analysis of solid samples could reveal the degradation pathways of chalcopyrite bioleaching as: CuFeS2 → Cu2S → Cu0.3333Fe0.6667S → H9Fe3O18S8. It follows a complex mechanism that includes the occurrence of polysulfide and cooperative mechanism along with the passivation onto mineral surfaces.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Several efforts have been taken towards the process improvement of heap bioleaching by studying the influential parameters like temperature, the inocula, and redox potential ( In order to use STR in industrial application for bioleaching of chalcopyrite, the continuous mode operation can be considered as an obvious advantageous than batch reactor operations; however, scantly studied. Therefore, in the present study, copper dissolution from chalcopyrite concentrate was investigated to optimize the indigenous designed CSTR bioleaching process. A detailed investigation of the parameters such as agitation speed, aeration, temperature, and contact time for their potential influences on bioleaching efficiency along with the monitoring of changes on microbial density, redox potential (ORP or Eh), and dissolved oxygen (DO) during the experimental course was undertaken in this study. To date, most of the bioleaching mechanism of chalcopyrite have been studied on shake-flasks that obviously cannot be a true representation of higher scale bioleaching under the continuous flow. Hence, the present study was also focused on underpinning the mechanism of chalcopyrite bioleaching using mesophilic microorganism in a CSTR in terms of bridging the gap between batch mode and continuous mode of STR operations. The chalcopyrite concentrate was obtained from Kanmantoo copper mine, Australia. In order to remove any carbonaceous matter and dust from the mineral surface, the samples were water-washed and overnight dried in a vacuum desiccator at room temperature (∼27 °C). Further, the mineral was ground and sieved to screen the samples of particle size –74 μm, which was used for bioleaching experiments. The wet chemical analysis using aqua regia digestion method showed the mineral composition to be copper, 23.98%; iron, 27.15%; sulfur, 33.5%; lead, 2.5%; and molybdenum, 0.3%. The physical characterization of mineral concentrates using the X-ray diffraction (XRD; by X’pert PRO PANalytical fitted with Cu kappa) analysis showed mainly the CuFeS The consortia of the active microbial culture, The cell multiplication was carried out using double jacket stirred-tank reactor of capacity 1 L under the conditions of temperature, 30 °C (maintained using a water bath, CW-05G, JEIO TECH); agitation speed, 300 rpm; and aeration, 300 cc/min (aerator LP-20P). 0 K medium ( A cascade of indigenous designed continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTR) were used in this study. The capacity of a feed tank and the first leaching tank (CSTR-1) were 6.0 L and 2.5 L (working volume 2.3 L), respectively; whereas, the following two stirred tanks (CSTR-2 and CSTR-3) was of 1 L capacity (working volume 700 mL) each. All the tanks were connected in series and equipped with jacketing, baffles, axial flow impeller installed on a rotating shaft, and condenser on the top. The feed was made up of chalcopyrite slurry at 10% pulp density in 0 K nutritive media inoculated with adapted consortia ( Samples of bioleach solutions were periodically collected for monitoring the Eh, pH, cell counts, dissolved oxygen, and metal ions concentrations. Metals concentration was analyzed by an inductive coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP-OES, iCAP 7400 Duo, Thermo Scientific). The solution pH and ORP were measured using a pH meter (ORION 4 STAR, Thermo Scientific) and an ORP meter (ORION STAR A211, Thermo Scientific). Dissolved oxygen concentration (in cubic centimeter per minute, cc/min) was analyzed with a HANNA Do meter (Hl9146). The cell concentration was measured using a microbial counting chamber (Buerker-Tuerk Chamber) under phase-contrast microscopy (ODEO-2003 Triple, IPONACOLOGY). The overall efficiency for copper bioleaching was determined by calculating the mass distribution of metal between the three bioleaching tanks and feed reactor, as follows ( For the characterization of leached residues, the slurry was filtered (using Hyundai micro filter paper of pore size 5 µm) and solid was properly washed with distilled water three times. The washed solid mass was dried in a vacuum desiccator at room temperature (∼27 °C) and used for XRD, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. Supra 40VP, FE-SEM, Cari Zeiss (Germany) was used for the surface morphological analysis. The continuous bioleaching system is a multi-stage configuration; hence, it was imperative to first fix the residence time of each stage. In the adapted consortia, to continue the microbial growth along with the promotion of bioleaching reactions, and preventing the microbial washout in the subsequent stages ( The resultant effect in terms of metals dissolution is shown in Proper mixing is a primary requirement to achieve a pronounced solid–liquid mass transfer of metal/s in a heterogeneous system. In order to investigate the influence of agitation speed on the bioleaching efficiency, the experiments were carried out in CSTR at different agitation speeds ranging from 300 rpm to 450 rpm. The other parameters like pulp density (10% w/v), temperature (30 °C), aeration (400 cc/min) and retention time (7 days across the three reactors) were maintained to be constant. The analysis of experimental results indicates that the improvement in copper dissolution was mainly caused by the change in mass transport through the enhanced frequency of contacts between the lixiviant, dispersed air, and chalcopyrite that improves the rate of reaction via penetrating the initial film diffusion layer appeared onto the reaction interface ( Oxygen is a key substrate for cultivating the microbial cells, hence, aeration becomes very important to provide oxygen in the free form of dissolved oxygen. Given that, the effect of aeration was investigated in the range from 300 cc/min to 500 cc/min, while keeping other parameters constant. Results presented in Furthermore, the improved DO into bulk solution with increased aeration also mobilize the sulfur oxidation with freely available oxygen ( Although the mesophilic microorganisms can tolerate higher pulp density than thermophilic microorganisms ( To underpin more on the bioleaching process mechanism, the activation energy ( Further, the XRD analysis of the samples (not shown here for the sake of brevity) could depict that the chalcopyrite phase (CuFeS The formation of different intermediate products clearly indicate that the bioleaching of chalcopyrite follows a complex mechanism ( Simultaneously, the microbial attachment to the mineral surface is usually mediated by the secretion of extracellular polymeric substance, by which the iron gets oxidized (Fe With the prolonged runs of bioleaching, the formation of passivation products occurs that could not be removed furthermore to hinder the progress of the leaching process. The passivation reactions can be given as below: In this manner, the degradation pathways for bioleaching of chalcopyrite under the studied conditions in CSTR can be written as: CuFeS The present study used the consortia of mesophilic microorganisms, and hence, the first advantage of the process can be ascribed to the requirement of lower temperature in comparison to using the thermophiles ( The continuous bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate could significantly be intensified using the adapted mesophilic culture. A detailed study on the parameters such as the agitation speed, aeration, and temperature showed their potential influences on the bioleaching efficiency of copper. Copper dissolution was significantly improved up to 74% by performing the three-stage continuous bioleaching for a total elapsed time of 7 days. The calculated activation energy for copper dissolution indicated that the bioleaching process was chemically-controlled with surface diffusion as the overall rate-limiting step. Finally, the degradation pathways following the complex mechanism have been revealed for the CSTR bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrates.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Preliminary results were presented in the 23rd edition of the International Biohydrometallurgy Symposium, Fukuoka, Japan, 2019. The work was supported by Brain Pool program funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT through the