The application of multivariate wavelet texture analysis (MWTA) is presented and discussed as it is applied to three different types of pharmaceutical materials: (a) tablet cores, (b) wet granules and (c) controlled release tablets. The application of MWTA is initially proposed as a quantitative replacement to the human visual judgment of the textural appearance of the different materials. In all cases, the metrics obtained with MWTA agree with visual assessment on the progression of textural features such as erosion and surface roughness. This work further demonstrates that MWTA also represents a useful tool to increase the understanding of the manufacturing process, as it provides diagnostics to relate process parameters with textural features of the material that are difficult or costly to measure otherwise (such as granule size for wet material or surface appearance for a controlled release product). MWTA is also presented as a potential tool for real-time release for those cases where the textural features can be proven to provide accurate enough predictions of the final product performance; as shown here with the obtained prediction of dissolution from the controlled release tablet using the texture of the product as an input.The pharmaceutical industry is undergoing a dramatic shift in the approach towards the design of pharmaceutical products and operation of its manufacturing processes. These changes are a response to the guidance documents released by the This need for quantitative metrics is clearly reflected in the massive amount of research in the area of process analytical chemistry ( This work presents the use of multivariate wavelet texture analysis (MWTA) to quantitatively characterize the visual textural appearance of intermediate and final pharmaceutical products. The technique relies on simple digital grayscale images analyzed via wavelet analysis and multivariate latent variable methods. The metrics obtained with this technique can also be related to upstream conditions of the process and materials, or to downstream performance of the product. In this research, the MWTA approach is illustrated with three case studies: (a) the analysis of tablet erosion during film coating, (b) the characterization of wet granulated material and the prediction of its compaction behavior and (c) the characterization of a controlled release tablet and the prediction of its dissolution performance. The tablet erosion example is presented first since it is the simplest application of MWTA. The following examples are increasing the complexity of the analysis performed and include more than one model in their assessment. The visual appearance of a given material can be decomposed by its color features and its textural features ( The need for a quantitative characterization of surface texture was addressed by Other reported applications of MWTA for monitoring includes that of polymer films ( MWTA is a two step process that involves a decomposition step and a feature analysis step. The decomposition step involves the use of wavelets to decouple the textural features of the image. In simple terms, wavelet analysis is similar to Fourier analysis where a signal is decomposed into multiple frequency-amplitude terms with two main differences (i) instead of using a sine function wavelet analysis uses a wavelet packet and (ii) most importantly, the basis function (the wavelet) is of finite duration, while the sine wave used in Fourier is not. These differences enable wavelet analysis to perform not only spectral, but also spatial decomposition of the signal. Wavelet analysis is referred to as 2D wavelet analysis when it is applied to a matrix of numbers, such as the matrix extracted from a grayscale image, where each pixel is represented by a number between 0 and 255. In this 2D case the analysis can be performed in vertical, horizontal or diagonal direction across the matrix; this work utilizes decomposition in the three directions. These concepts are illustrated in After wavelet decomposition of one image; each of the grayscale images corresponding to the extracted details is read as a numerical matrix (since each pixel has a value between 0 and 255). Among multiple options to summarize the total energy in this image, for this work we chose the Frobenius norm due to its simplicity. The collection of the norms for all the details for one image is then collected into a feature vector called the The resulting matrix from collecting the feature vectors for multiple images is then analyzed using a multivariate latent variable method (LVM) such as Principal Components Analysis (PCA) to study the unsupervised differences in the textural features of the images; or Projection to Latent Structures (PLS) to regress these textural image features to a response of interest. The use of LVM such as PCA and PLS is well established in the pharmaceutical sector, hence the details on these methods are not the scope of this work and can be found elsewhere in literature ( In the present work, MWTA is used as an unsupervised feature extraction tool in the assessment of tablet erosion, granule appearance and film-coat appearance; and as a soft-sensor when the features extracted with MWTA were used to predict the downstream manufacturability of the wet granulated material and the dissolution performance of a controlled release tablet. Although tablet surface and coating have been widely studied with other techniques such as confocal laser scanning microscopy ( The use of MWTA is illustrated with three separate case studies: Tablet erosion study Tablet cores were prepared using a placebo blend composed of 48.375% of microcrystalline cellulose (Avicel PH-102, FMC BioPolymer), 48.375% of Foremost The tablets were then subject to tumbling at 20 Characterization of wet granulated material The eight different types of wet granules studied in this work were obtained with a full factorial experimental design carried out in a Collette Ultima PRO high shear wet granulator (Niro Pharma Systems). The three manipulated factors were (i) the particle size of a major component of the dry blend (see composition in The wet material was then imaged for MWTA analysis and then dried at the same conditions in a GPCG-1 fluid bed dryer (Glatt Characterization and performance prediction for controlled release tablets An experimental design was carried out in a HCT-60 (Vector Corporation) film coater to explore the impact of processing conditions on a controlled release tablet. The details on the formulation of the tablets are kept confidential for intellectual property reasons and are irrelevant for the scope of the work presented. The values and factors considered in the experimental design are listed in All images were taken using a Single-Lens Reflex (SLR) Fujifilm S91000 digital camera with 1/320 The wavelet analysis portion of the method was performed using functions from the To minimize the effects of amount and difference in the background, the images of individual tablets were cropped to an inner-rectangular section of the image where only the surface of the tablet would appear. This operation was automated with MATLAB For the tablet erosion study, the images of the eroded tablet surfaces were decomposed using a Coiflets wavelet with 7 stages of detail. The set of 105 feature vectors (21 pull points and 5 images per pull point) was analyzed using PCA. The average score values (for the first principal component) of the 5 images taken per pull point made the erosion progression observable as verified by visual inspection. In the characterization of wet granulated material case; there were multiple images taken of the wet material for each experimental point. The images were processed using a Coiflets wavelet and 8 stages of detail. PCA was applied to the matrix of average textural features per point in order to classify the images. Textural features were also analyzed against the parameters in the experimental design using a PLS model. Finally, the matrix of textural features was assessed as a potential predictor of the density, particle size, flow of the final dry granule, and the hardness compression of the final tablets. This analysis used a PLS model with 3 latent variables since the experimental design has 3 factors. For the characterization and performance prediction of the controlled release tablets, the obtained images were decomposed using a Coiflets wavelet and 6 stages of detail. The obtained feature vectors were analyzed using PCA, where one principal component was sufficient to rank order the tablets according to their appearance, as verified by visual inspection. Two PLS models were also fitted: in the first one the textural features of the tablets were a response and the process parameters a regressor, this model was done to determine which factors in the process had an impact on the textural characteristics of the tablet (this is useful information for process development). In the second PLS model the textural features were the regressor and the dissolution measured at 9 The choices made about the type of wavelet to use and the number of decomposition stages were based on visual inspection of the wavelet features, the signal to be processed (a transversal cut of the surface to be analyzed) and the approximation image (the residual), recent studies propose a more systematic approach ( For this work it was considered that an approximation image was appropriate when it only exhibited illumination gradients and textural characteristics that were irrelevant for each case study. During the evaluation of the multiple choices of a wavelet it was observed that the final results did not change dramatically when an alternative wavelet of similar features is chosen (e.g. a Daubechies versus a Coiflet wavelet, see After wavelet decomposition, the wavelet textural features are fitted to a PCA model which captures 90.36% of the total variance with one principal component. Images of the eight different types of wet granulated materials obtained are shown in The textural characteristics were analyzed as a response using the experimental design parameters as a regressor for a two latent variable PLS model. This model explains close to 100% of the total variability in the water addition rate and type of lactose used (fine/coarse); but only 12.5% of the variability in impeller speed. This same model explains between 50% and 90% of the multiple textural characteristics (energy in details 1–9, D1–D9). As discussed previously wavelet analysis decomposes an image into the energy of an approximation and details which represents the textural features of the image. The energy of the first stages of decomposition corresponds to finer feature of the images; energy of latter stages corresponds to coarser details of the image. Hence in these models the energy in the finer details is represented numerically in the variables D1–D4, variables D5 and D6 correspond to the medium size characteristics while the coarser characteristics are represented in the variables D7–D9. With this in consideration, it can be seen that the loadings ( Finally, The first result from this case is similar to the one from the tablet erosion case, with the difference that the textural differences for this material are in the polymeric coating material rather than the tablet core.  Finally, the textural characteristics of the tablets were assessed as a potential predictor of the dissolution performance, which is of upmost importance since these are controlled release dosage forms. The results obtained for the tablet erosion study indicate that the erosion of the tablets progresses steadily when the tablets are tumbled and subject to the aqueous spray, and that this erosion is less dramatic when the spray is off and the tablets are dry tumbled. This is inferred by the fact that the average score values become stable (no change in the average textural features of the tablet images) roughly after sample number 9 or 10 ( For the three presented studies, it was observed that the score values ( Aside from the statistical verification of the predictive potential in the textural features of a material it is also shown that these textural features can be used to advance the process understanding of the system where the materials were produced. In the case of the wet granulation example, the loadings from the PLS model ( The results obtained in the analysis of the textural features for a controlled release tablet indicate that the overall visual appearance of the tablets is strongly dependant of the amount of solution sprayed (thicker layers will look different) and the pattern air ( The importance of the inlet/outlet temperature and the gun to bed distance can be interpreted as the effect of the drying mechanism of the droplet onto the visual appearance of the tablets; the inlet and outlet temperatures will determine the thermodynamic conditions of the coater and the gun to bed distance will dictate the total time a droplet will be exposed to such conditions. Both mechanisms will affect the drying phenomena of the droplet on the surface of the tablet. This model (which relates process parameters to visual appearance) could be potentially used in conjunction with the model that relates textural features to the dissolution of the tablet in order to determine the feasibility of having a set of process parameters for a tablet designed with certain desired esthetic appearance features while still reaching a target dissolution performance (i.e. using MWTA as a design tool rather that an analysis one). The successful use of MWTA for design purposes is documented for the polymer industry ( Multivariate wavelet texture analysis was applied to study three different types of pharmaceutical materials: tablet cores, wet granulated material and a controlled release tablet. From the analysis of the progression of erosion in tablets, it was seen that the erosion only progresses while the tablets were sprayed and tumbled. This result casts doubt on the use of the traditional friability test as a way to diagnose potential problems in the film-coating step since this test is done on dry tablets. The analysis of wet granulated material revealed relationships among textural features of the granule and the process conditions used that were in agreement with prior knowledge about the mechanics of high shear wet granulation. This study also showed the potential predictive power of MWTA with respect to downstream manufacturing indexes of the dry powder (such as flow and compression) such results indicate that the use of MWTA is a cost effective addition to the battery of tests done for wet granulated material. Finally the results of the analysis of a controlled release tablet indicate that the textural features of the tablet surface could be used for process understanding and potentially to predict the in vitro performance of the product. These results (especially considering the low cost and simplicity of performing MWTA) support the use of MWTA for real-time release of product or as a complementary tool in a continuous quality assurance strategy, given that enough GMP provisions are taken (as they are for the use of any spectroscopy based technique). A This work presents the use of multivariate wavelet texture analysis (MWTA) as a cost effective replacement to such a human judgment of visual appearance. MWTA has shown to provide quantitative metrics that are in agreement with the visual differences in the textural characteristics of multiple pharmaceutical materials and with the knowledge on the fundamental mechanics of the processes involved. Furthermore, the obtained metrics are shown to form a continuum where the gradual change of appearance can be measured and systematically verified, offering an attractive tool for product development and manufacture. The authors want to thank Mary am Ende, Bruno Hancock (Pfizer Inc.) and Professor J. Jay Liu (Pukyong National University) for their help in improving the quality of this manuscript.