A simple theoretical model has been developed for the solvent extraction of cations with different oxidation states varying from +1 to +4 using acidic extractants. The basic assumption behind this theoretical model is that the cationic species (Mn+) will exist in ionic form and not form any complexes in the aqueous phase. A direct relationship between the concentration of metal ions in the aqueous phase and that in the organic phase was developed for trivalent and tetravalent cationic species. Using this model, the distribution isotherms were plotted for a given set of conditions. The effect of pH and equilibrium constant on the distribution isotherms were represented in three-dimensional form for trivalent and tetravalent cationic species. Consistent with expectations, the results suggest that with increasing pH and an increasing equilibrium constant one finds an enhancement of the extraction of cationic species for a given set of conditions. The calculations were performed in the pH range of 1 through 3 because for higher pH values, the pH shift accompanying the extraction is significant and thereby affects the mass balance equations. A comparison of the distribution isotherms shows that the total metal ion concentration to extractant concentration ratio determines the distribution behavior of metal ions with different valency. At low total metal ion concentration to extractant concentration ratio, the distribution coefficient was higher for higher oxidation state cations under similar experimental conditions, and this trend started to reverse when the total metal ion concentration to extractant concentration ratio was increased.The general equilibrium equation for solvent extraction of cationic species using organophosphorus extractants can be expressed as follows ( The distribution coefficient (D) is the ratio at equilibrium of the concentration of metal in the organic phase (C Substituting Eq. The logarithmic form of Eq. The efficiency of the solvent extraction is expressed in terms of percent extraction (%E), which is the ratio of the concentration of metal loaded into the organic phase at equilibrium divided by the total, or initial, metal concentration in the aqueous phase, finally multiplied by 100. Eq. Another way to calculate the fraction of metal extracted is to use Eq. Although many researchers have tried to develop mathematical models using solvent extraction experimental data for various metal-extractant systems ( Professor Michael L. Free ( Distribution isotherms are constructed using C Based on Eqs. Substituting By combining Eqs.  For After substituting Eq. The explicit roots for Eq.  The simplest solvent extraction scenario using acidic extractants for tricharged cations can be written as follows: Rearranging Eq. After several variable substitutions (see Eq. With the help of Eq. Similarly, The simplest solvent extraction scenario with acidic extractants for tetracharged cations can be written as follows: Substituting Eq. Expanding the right side: This equation has four roots only one of which (Eq. Eq.  Similarly,  A theoretical model for solvent extraction of differently charged cationic species using acidic extractants at given set of conditions (constant pH, equilibrium constant and total organic concentration) was further developed using the mass balance equation introduced by Free ( This study was sponsored by Defining the following symbols: and substituting in Eq. Eq. where p First, we define a variable ‘f’: Substituting the variables p, q and r in Eq. Next, we define another variable ‘g’: After substituting the variables p, q, r and s into Eq. Then we define ‘h’: After substituting the variables f and g from Eqs. As concentration cannot be negative, h, which is related to concentration and equilibrium constant, is always positive. Hence, there is only one real root available for Eq. At this stage, variables R, S, T, and U are defined for convenience. It follows that After substituting variables p, q, S and U in Eq. Assuming: After substitution in Eq. Eq. To verify the given model with experiments, solvent extraction data for dysprosium with acidic extractant PC88A from hydrochloric acid solution is taken into consideration. Concentration of PC88A is varied from 1 Substituting equilibrium constant value