We describe the surface modification of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), the coverage of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNiPAM) microgel with the MNPs and the inductive heating of these carriers. PNiPAM surface itself was modified using the layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly of polyelectrolytes to facilitate the deposition of surface-modified MNPs. One advantage of this concept is it allows the tuning of the magnetic and thermoresponsive properties of individual components (nanoparticles and microgels) separately before assembling them. Characterisations of the hybrid core–shell are discussed. In particular, it is shown that (i) each layer is successfully deposited and, more importantly, (ii) the coated microgel retains its thermoresponsive and magnetic behaviour.Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have unique, size-dependent properties. Composite or hybrid materials, essentially in the form of core–shell systems Thermoresponsive microgels have (i) high surface-to-volume ratios The LbL assembly is a very simple, versatile and one of the most important techniques of thin-film deposition. The LbL involves the sequential adsorption of polyelectrolytes on a charged substrate. The thickness of each layer, consequently of the whole film, and the morphology, can be monitored and tuned down to Å precision by varying the ionic strength, type of salts, pH and temperature of the solutions from which these films are fabricated. These multilayered materials and structures may be developed with specifically tailored optical, magnetic, or electrical properties. The advantage of the LbL technique lies in the fact that there is no restriction in the shape or size of the substrates. Although most LbL assemblies have so far been performed on hard and rigid substrates, we recently reported the successful LbL assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayers on soft and porous thermoresponsive microgels In this work, we report the incorporation of a surface-modified MNPs shell onto a PNiPAM core whose surface was modified with a polyelectrolyte sheath to facilitate the deposition of the MNPs (see First, we set out to prepare negatively charged MNPs. The inclusion of the MNPs into a negatively charged polymeric shell (for example polyacrylic acid (PAA)) A crystallographic study of the iron-oxide powder was performed on a rotating anode STOE STADI-P X-ray diffractometer system using CoK Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) on PAA–MNPs was carried out on the dried samples with a heating rate of 10 Magnetic properties were measured at room temperature using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer. The magnetisation curve reveals zero coercivity, zero remanence and the magnetisation does not saturate at 20 We then proceeded to synthesise the PNiPAM core microgel via free radical emulsion polymerization The particle size of the thermoresponsive microgel was measured as a function of temperature by DLS. Light scattering experiments were carried out on highly diluted samples with an ALV goniometer (ALV 5000E correlator). Temperature was varied from 20 to 40 The surface modification of PNiPAM was carried out using the LbL technique to deposit one layer of a positively charged polyelectrolyte, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDADMAC). 3 To deposit the MNPs on the polyelectrolyte-coated microgel, a solution of PDADMAC-coated microgel was added slowly to a dilute solution of PAA–MNPs in a volume ratio of 1:5 and mixing was carried out for 24 DLS studies, To basically show that a remotely control carrier system can be realised by an external stimulus, we performed inductive heating using a generator—oscillator combination (TIG 5/300, Hüttinger, Freiburg, Germany) with a maximum power dissipation of 5 We have demonstrated that it is possible to deposit a magnetic nanoparticles shell around a poly( AKG would like to thank the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (DAAD) for a scholarship. D. Müller and D. Röhrens are thanked for TGA and XRD measurements, respectively, and Dr. M. Hodenius for the induction heating measurements. Support by the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie is gratefully acknowledged.