The discrete element method (DEM) was applied to the study of the machine–product interactions occurring in manure handling and land application equipment. Two types of conveying systems (scraper and 4-auger system) were modeled along with a hopper and a flow-control gate and the results of the simulations were compared to experimental data.
                  A numerical simulation of the scraper conveyor including clustered particles to simulate the clumps contained in the manure used during field experiments was carried out. The simulated results correlated the measured data for a conveyor velocity of 38mm/s and the bottom of the gate 560mm above the bottom of the hopper. The ratios of simulated to measured characteristic flow rate and unloading time were 0.9 and 1.2, respectively. The effect of the gate on the energy requirements was replicated by the simulations but to a lesser extent than the experimental results. The 4-auger conveying system was modeled and simulations were carried out with virtual manure including clusters. The predicted characteristic flow rate, unloading time and peak power values were in agreement with the experimental results for both the high velocity–low gate (840mm/s and 560mm) and low velocity–high gate (471mm/s and 1282mm) configurations. The ratios of simulated to measured characteristic flow rate, unloading time and peak power were 1.4, 0.9 and 1.0, respectively, for the high velocity–low gate configuration. The same ratios were 0.8, 1.1 and 1.9 for the low velocity–open gate setting. The 4-auger system model was able to predict the effect of the gate on the energy requirements but not on the discharge rate. It is expected that improvements in the manure model would enhance the accuracy of the interactions models. The detailed simulation of a transverse distribution system for banded manure application gave results that were in agreement with experimental results obtained with a prototype land applicator. The simulated and experimental transversal coefficients of variation were 4 and 6%, respectively.The utilization of numerical models and simulations has become an important design tool in numerous industries such as aerospace and automotive. The ever-increasing power of computers combined with the decreasing cost of computing resources and the enhanced sophistication of modeling codes has promoted the expansion of numerical modeling. The design of agricultural machinery can certainly benefit from numerical modeling. Most modeling efforts have targeted high revenue agricultural machines for which the cost of developing the models could be justified. Manure land application machines have been much less researched and developed than other agricultural machines due to their low production volume and market value. However, the application of numerical modeling to manure land applicators could still significantly impact their design and operation. Moreover, testing and developing manure land application equipment based on empirical approaches requires a considerable experimental setup and usually yields limited information on the machine–product interactions that take place in such machines during field operation with variable product properties. Attempts have been made at simulating the action of machinery components using the discrete element method (DEM).    Screw conveyors were modeled by  Based on numerical models developed for manure products, the machine–manure interactions taking place in land application equipment were modeled and validated against experimental results collected during field testing. Models of two conveying systems (scraper and 4-auger systems) were implemented in PFC The machine on which the models are based is the prototype land applicator developed at the University of Saskatchewan ( The scraper conveyor was modeled as a series of walls representing the slats of the conveying system. One of the challenges was to develop a code capable of describing the motion of the conveyor where a slat disappearing at the discharge end of the machine is replaced by a new slat at the front end of the hopper. Each slat consisted of a pair of walls so the slats would have two active sides (the active side of a wall is the side that recognizes particles contacts). The slat regeneration code monitored the position of the pair of walls (slat) closest to the discharge end of the hopper. When those walls reached the end of the hopper, they were deleted and the code updated the walls that were being monitored for position and generated a new slat at the tractor end of the hopper. The code efficiently mimicked the dynamics of the scraper conveyor. General walls were introduced in Version 3.0 of PFC The transverse distribution system was developed to allow the machine to perform banded land application ( As illustrated in The incremental values Δ Starting with the user-specified aperture angle ( A loop was included to construct the sections of cylinder with apertures (apertures 1, 2, 5, and 6 when starting from the left in   (   Δ Δ   end loop The middle section of the transverse tube is cut off in half to accommodate the transition hopper. This required the construction of half cylinders made of wall segments. Defining the starting point at a rotation angle of In PFC The constitutive model acting at a contact consists in a stiffness model, a slip model and a bonding model ( The linear contact model in PFC PFC The slip model offers no normal strength in tension and allows slip to take place if the shear force exceeds the maximum allowable shear force. The slip model is defined by the friction coefficient ( From the observation of the physical characteristics of both products, it was decided that contact bonds would be used to model the behaviour of manure while compost would remain unbonded. In PFC The field testing of the conveying systems was carried out using beef feedlot manure that had been stored in swaths for about 5 months and that had an average total solids (TS) concentration of 57.0 The preliminary simulations of the transverse distribution system (Section For the detailed simulation of the transverse distribution system (Section It was possible to extract the characteristic flow rate and the specific energy required for the unloading process from both the simulations and experimental results. The recommendations of European Standard EN 13080 ( This factor is used to assess the amount of material discharged by the spreader as a function of its operating parameters. The characteristic flow rate basically corresponds to the highest average flow rate occurring during 30% of the unloading time of the spreader. The other evaluation criterion makes use of the power data to calculate the specific energy required by the conveying systems during the unloading operation. The specific energy is calculated using Eq. The results section is divided in two sub-sections. The first sub-section presents the results obtained for the models of the scraper and 4-auger conveying systems. The simulation results for the transverse distribution system for banded application are presented next. Full-scale simulations of the conveying systems studied by The unloading time was not predicted well by the model of the scraper conveyor running at 19.4 With the inconsistencies observed for the unloading time, it is interesting to look at the peak power required by the conveying system. The effect of the change in operating parameters was reproduced by the models with ratios of peak power for the low velocity and open gate setting to peak power required at the high velocity and closed gate configuration of 3.8 and 2.3 for the experimental and simulated cases, respectively. The power requirements predicted by the models were however only 6.1 and 10.3% of the average measured value for the high velocity–closed gate and low velocity–open gate settings, respectively.   As can be observed from the results for the simulation of the scraper conveying system, the case of the gate in its lowest position combined with the high velocity setting of the conveying system was well replicated by the model. The characteristic flow rate, unloading time and peak power requirement were all well correlated by the model with simulated to measured ratios of 1.4, 0.9 and 1.0, respectively. The simulated characteristic flow rate in the open gate–low velocity configuration was underestimated, but still within a reasonable range of the actual value. The simulated unloading time of the second scenario was also in agreement with the measured value. The effect of the gate on both the specific energy and the peak power was replicated by the simulations, but with attenuation. It is now obvious that machine–manure interactions models such as the ones presented in Sections The transverse distribution system was first simulated by vertically extending the transition hopper instead of attaching it at the back of the land applicator. All the apertures were 152 A first series of simulation was run to investigate the effect of the rotational velocity of the transverse conveyor on the discharge flow of each aperture, the power consumption and the risk of packing at the end caps. The model of the transverse distribution system was attached to the back of the prototype applicator to replicate the experiments carried out in the laboratory with the objective of measuring the discharge flow at each aperture. The simulation results for the transverse distribution system illustrated well the potential of using the models as design tools. With the banded applicator, the discharge flow is a function of the velocity of the four main discharge augers, the vertical position of the flow-control gate, the velocity of the transverse conveyor, and the size and position of the six apertures. With several parameters influencing the system, one can see the benefits of having models to assist in the design of the implement. Numerical models were developed to simulate the operation of two conveying systems used for manure land application. The results indicate that the models are capable of predicting the discharge rate and the energy requirements with reasonable accuracy. From the results presented, it can be stated that: The models of both conveying systems performed better when the gate was in its lowest position. This was due to the attenuation effect of the gate on the gravity flow at the discharge end of the machine. Refinements of the manure model are required in order to improve the predictions of the machine–manure interactions models for the open-gate configurations. The effect of the gate on the energy requirements was well replicated by the models. The influence of the gate on the simulated characteristic flow rate was adversely affected by the accuracy of the manure model. It was not possible to correctly replicate the effect of the gate with the manure model utilized. The results of the simulations were affected by the clustered particles. The clusters were found to be a good means of mimicking the clumps present in real manure and their effect on the flow. The strength of the bonds linking the clustered particles had an influence on the predictions of the models. Unbreakable clusters, with high strength values, caused artificially high values of contact forces in the case of the 4-auger conveying system. The scraper conveyor was less affected by the strength of the clusters. The damping coefficient applied to the equations of motion influenced the simulations results. A value of 0.35 was found to give good results in most situations. It is however suggested that the influence of damping be studied in more depth. The experimental mass distribution across the transverse distribution system for banded application was replicated by the numerical model. The simulated coefficient of variation for the mass distribution across the transverse distribution system was 3.9% compared to an average measured coefficient of variation of 6.0%. The very challenging task of modeling the machine–product interactions taking place in manure handling and land application equipment has been successfully initiated. The accuracy of the models has the potential to be enhanced by validating them over a broader range of mechanical systems and manure products as well as refining the manure models. The support provided to the first author by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Fonds Québécois sur la Nature et les Technologies (FQRNT) and the University of Saskatchewan is gratefully acknowledged.