Treatment of a dye solution containing C.I. Basic Red 46 (BR46) by homogeneous photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) combined with heterogeneous photocatalytic process was studied. The investigated photocatalyst was TiO2 nanoparticles (Degussa P-25) immobilized on glass plates. Carbon nanotube-polytetrafluoroethylene (CNT-PTFE) electrode was used as cathode. Response surface methodology (RSM) was employed to assess individual and interactive effects of the four key factors (initial amount of Fe(III), initial concentration of the dye, reaction time and applied current) in PEF/UV/TiO2 process. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed a high coefficient of determination value (R
                     2
                     =0.935) and satisfactory prediction second-order regression. Graphical response surface and contour plots were used to locate the optimum point. The optimum initial amount of Fe(III), initial dye concentration, reaction time and applied current were found to be 0.1mM, 15mg/L, 35min and 300mA, respectively. The observed experimental response was 88.89 of decolorization efficiency in optimum conditions of variables. The total organic carbon (TOC) measurements showed 99.2% mineralization of 15mg/L dye at 6h using PEF/UV/TiO2 process. GC–MS analysis verified the identity of intermediates. The electrical energy consumption for the photo-electrochemical process was evaluated.Azo dyes are used extensively in textile dyeing and finishing operations and contribute to the pollution problems associated with disposal of a considerable amount of wastewater containing residual dyes So, there is a need to develop effective methods for the degradation of such organic pollutants, either to less harmful compounds or, more desirable, to their complete mineralization. Various technologies have been developed for environmental pollutants remediation In acidic aqueous medium the oxidation power will be enhanced by addition of Fe(II) or Fe(III) ions to the solution that allows the production of a very reactive one-electron oxidizing agent hydroxyl radical (OH Soluble Fe(III) can be reduced to Fe(II) through reaction The mineralization process can be accelerated using the PEF method, where the solution treated under EF conditions is exposed to an UV light. The photocatalytic action of this irradiation is complex and its main effects can be related to: (i) the photolysis of Fe(OH) On the other hand, heterogeneous photocatalysis through illumination of UV on semiconductor surface is an attractive advanced oxidation process. TiO The valence band (h The hydroxyl radical is a powerful oxidizing agent and attacks organic matters present at or near the surface of TiO BR46 is a dark red powder dye used in wool, silk, acrylic and polyester textile printing (sweaters, shirts, socks, etc.). Therefore, BR46 can be found in the effluents of the producing these matters. In this work, we have studied the removal of BR46 as a model dye from aqueous solutions using the process of PEF/UV/supported TiO C.I. Basic Red 46 (BR46) was purchased from Shimi Boyakhsaz Co., Iran ( The experiments were performed using a DC power supply (ADAK PS 808, Iran). The solution pH was measured with a Metrohm 654 pH-meter (Switzerland). The removal of color was followed by using UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Light wave S2000, England). Before analysis of samples extracted from solutions, they were filtered with 0.2 Total organic carbon (TOC) measurements were carried out by TOC analyzer of Shimadzu TOC–VCSH (North America). Nitrogen sorption analyses were obtained with a Micromeritics Tristar sorptometer using standard continuous procedures at 77.15 TiO The treatment of BR46 was conducted at room temperature in an undivided, cubic tank with a capacity of about 2500 In the present study, central composite design (CCD), which is a widely used form of RSM was employed for the optimization of combined photoelectro-Fenton with photocatalytic process. In order to evaluate the influence of operating parameters on the decolorization efficiency of BR46, four main factors were chosen: initial Fe(III) concentration ( The degradation of BR46 was carried out by using EF, PEF, UV/TiO The 4-factor CCD matrix and experimental results obtained in PEF/UV/TiO Based on these results, an empirical relationship between the response and independent variables was attained and expressed by the following second-order polynomial equation: The decolorization efficiencies (CR(%)) have been predicted by Eq.  The student's The Pareto analysis gives more significant information to interpret the results. In fact, this analysis calculates the percentage effect of each factor on the response, according to the following relation  In  On the other hand, increasing the initial concentration of Fe  The main objective of the optimization is to determine the optimum values of variables of PEF/UV/TiO To identify the aromatic intermediates, 2000 Electrical energy consumption is very important economical parameter in PEF/UV/TiO The electrical energy consumption in the electrochemical process was calculated using the commonly used Eq. In this work, the removal of BR46 has been studied as a model dye from aqueous solutions by photocatalytic process using immobilized TiO The authors thank the University of Tabriz, Iran for financial and other supports. We also sincerely thank the Water and Wastewater Company of East Azerbaijan for TOC analysis.