Classical open pit optimization (maximum closure problem) is made on block estimates, without directly considering the block grades uncertainty. We propose an alternative approach of stochastic optimization. The stochastic optimization is taken as the optimal pit computed on the block expected profits, rather than expected grades, computed from a series of conditional simulations. The stochastic optimization generates, by construction, larger ore and waste tonnages than the classical optimization. Contrary to the classical approach, the stochastic optimization is conditionally unbiased for the realized profit given the predicted profit. A series of simulated deposits with different variograms are used to compare the stochastic approach, the classical approach and the simulated approach that maximizes expected profit among simulated designs. Profits obtained with the stochastic optimization are generally larger than the classical or simulated pit. The main factor controlling the relative gain of stochastic optimization compared to classical approach and simulated pit is shown to be the information level as measured by the boreholes spacing/range ratio. The relative gains of the stochastic approach over the classical approach increase with the treatment costs but decrease with mining costs. The relative gains of the stochastic approach over the simulated pit approach increase both with the treatment and mining costs. At early stages of an open pit project, when uncertainty is large, the stochastic optimization approach appears preferable to the classical approach or the simulated pit approach for fair comparison of the values of alternative projects and for the initial design and planning of the open pit.The definition of optimal pit limits and profit is an essential part in pre-feasibility and feasibility studies on open pit mines. The pit limits define the ore and waste tonnages and the ore values. It is the basis for important initial decisions such as the production capacity, the choice of equipments, and the location and size of surface installations (crushing plan, stockpiles, waste dump, offices, etc.). Moreover, the project internal rate of return can be computed and compared with other investment opportunities. The pit limits of the optimal pit maximize the net present value (NPV). The classical problem of pit optimization is easily solvable using well known and efficient algorithms like the In practice, pit optimization is performed on blocks which true grades are unknown and can only be estimated or simulated using the available information. Also, future commodity prices are uncertain. Because of these uncertainties, it is theoretically possible to define, by stochastic optimization, more profitable open pit limits than with the simple deterministic approach based on estimates (usually obtained by ordinary kriging) ( The effect of grade uncertainty on value of open pit and design was studied by We use geostatistical simulations to (i) generate synthetic deposits with different spatial characteristics, (ii) obtain samples from the synthetic deposits in pseudo-boreholes, and (iii) produce conditional simulations to the borehole grades. The conditional simulations are used for stochastic optimization based on the expected NPV of each block. The effects of the grade spatial continuity characteristics and of the mining and treatment costs on the predicted and realized NPV for the different synthetic deposits are studied, both for the stochastic and deterministic approaches. Moreover, our proposed stochastic method is compared to the approach of In a mine, real block grades are never exactly known. The uncertainty is even larger at the time pit optimization is done for feasibility studies. The block grades must be estimated/simulated using available data. However, at the time of mining a given block, more information will be available (e.g. from blast holes analysis), and the block grade will be eventually well known. Therefore, the final destination of a block, based on this new knowledge, can be different from its initial assignment. To simplify the analysis, and without loss of generality, we assume: (i) that only two destinations for blocks within the pit are possible (either the block is treated at the mill or it is send to waste dump); (ii) the cost of mining a waste block is assumed equal to the cost of mining an ore block and (iii) the cost of mining is assumed independent of depth. Under these assumptions, all blocks with grade covering the treatment costs should be treated. The profit function associated to any block grade is then as depicted in When the true block grade is uncertain, it is tempting to apply directly the profit function to the (unbiased) estimated block grade. However, due to the convexity of the profit function (see Eq. A direct consequence of The open pit optimization maximizes the pit profit under slope constraints represented by precedence relations between blocks ( The linear programming model is then A series of 12 different spatial structures (spherical covariance with different ranges and with/without nugget effect) are simulated (see For each simulated deposit, block grade estimates are obtained by averaging the 30 conditional simulations. This represents a smooth grade estimate similar to kriging. The estimated block grades are converted into profits Open pit optimization is done on both Due to the size of the simulated field and the large number of pits to optimize, an efficient pit optimizer is indeed required. Optimization is done using max-flow push-relabel algorithm of As indicated previously, because of the convexity of the profit function, one has: In average, pits optimized on      The ideal pit is the pit obtained by optimization on the profits computed with the true block grade, i.e. assuming perfect knowledge. The ideal pit realizes, by definition, more profit than any other pit ( It has been proposed in  In fact, the same observations hold when comparing the profits obtained by   Finally, compared to the best simulated pits, the tonnage is only 9.7% larger with For a wide variety of deposits and costs structure, the open pits optimized on The The level of information, in relation to the grade spatial continuity, was found to be an important factor controlling the gain realized by using Our results indicate that it is better to select the pit optimized on The profit function was not discounted. This has no important effect on the results of our study providing the discount rate remains always positive. In effect, it is well known that the open pit problem can be parametrized ( In this study, metal price scenarios were considered fixed. However, mining costs and treatment costs were both varied independently over a wide range of values (by a factor of 1–4 for mining costs and a factor of 1–3 for treatment costs). As the main findings on The proposed approach of stochastic optimization is based on the expected profit of each block computed from a series of conditional simulations. The stochastic optimization was proven to always generate larger ore tonnages and generally larger profits than the optimization based on estimated grades, the classical approach. It was also shown to be almost invariably more profitable than the best simulated pit (the pit with largest expected realized profit). The main factor controlling the relative gain of stochastic optimization compared to classical optimization or best simulated pit was shown to be the information level as measured by the boreholes spacing/range ratio. The gains compared to classical approach increase with the treatment costs but decrease with mining costs. Compared to the best simulated pit, the gains increased both with the mining and treatment costs. Finally, it was shown that the stochastic approach is unbiased, contrary to the classical approach. We conclude that the stochastic optimization approach presented is a better tool than the classical approach or best simulated pit for fair comparison of the values of alternative projects and for the initial design and planning of the open pit. This research was made possible by financial support from NSERC of Canada, FQRNT of Québec and the contribution of Corporation minière Osisko in the form of an industrial scholarship. Helpful discussions with C. Audet and contribution of M. Gamache who brought to our attention efficient max-flow algorithm implementations are also acknowledged. Two anonymous reviewers provided constructive comments that were helpful to improve the paper.