Lithium, mainly used in electrical energy storage, has also been studied in thermal energy storage. It is recognized as a “critical material” and is produced from minerals and from brines. Chile is one of the biggest producers, here from brine and with lower costs than in other countries. With sensible heat storage, in solar power plants lithium is seen as a way to improve the properties of molten salts used today. The low melting point in these ternary salts with lithium, represent a considerable reduction in the maintenance and operational costs associated with current solar technology, demonstrating that the fluids showed, are potential candidates for thermal energy storage (TES) in concentrated solar plants (CSP) plants. Many materials have been studied and proposed to be used as phase change materials (PCM). Between the multiple materials studied to be used in PCM, lithium materials and mixtures are listed as potential PCM for building applications and for high temperature applications. In thermochemical energy storage, lithium compounds have been used mainly in chemical heat pumps, following their use in absorption cooling.Thermal energy storage (TES) is used to keep thermal energy to be used at a later time. A complete TES process involves at least three steps: charging, storing and discharging ( With the use of TES, systems achieve benefits by fulfilling one or more of the following purposes: increase the generation capacity, enable better operation of cogeneration plants, shift energy purchase to low cost periods, increase system reliability, or integrate other functions. Lithium is recognized as a “critical material”, that is, a material important to the clean energy economy and with risk of supply disruption Lithium is produced mainly in Canada, Brazil, Australia, some areas of Africa and Russia as mineral, and in China, USA, Argentina and Chile from brines. 61.8% of the total world lithium resources come from brines, around 26.9 Lithium is mainly used in electrical energy storage, as the development of the electric car industry is based in lithium-ion batteries performance On the other hand, there are estimations of the lithium demand in the world, which give data on lithium demand by compound ( With known resources of lithium in the world of over 43 million tons, there is an abundance of physical lithium available to meet the demands estimated and shown above. The price of one kg of lithium metal is reported to be from 46 to 74.8 € The objective of this paper is to review the role that has played lithium compounds up to now in the different technologies of thermal energy storage, to evaluate the opportunities of lithium in them. The most common method for TES is sensible heat storage ( For a proper performance, the materials used in a sensible heat storage system must meet some requirements. Physical requirements are having a large Typical materials used in sensible heat storage are rocks and buildings materials in building applications, water for domestic hot water, and ceramics and molten salts in high temperature applications such as solar power plants storage systems ( The main applications of sensible heat storage are hot water production  There are very few estimations of the cost of energy stored, nevertheless the U.S. Department of Energy  Latent heat storage presents an advantage to sensible heat storage when used in applications where stabilization of temperature is desired, such as buildings or transport boxes, or where heat or cold is stored with a small temperature change with high storage density, such as domestic water heating or storage in solar power plants with DSG systems. Materials requirements can be also grouped in physical, technical and economical requirements. Again, the physical requirements will define the characteristics of the appropriate materials to be selected, but technical and economical ones should always be considered. These last two groups of requirements are the same to those listed in sensible heat storage, having to add small volume change in the technical ones. The physical requirements to PCM are having a suitable phase change temperature for the applications, having a large Δ Many materials have been studied and proposed to be used as PCM. They are usually grouped by their nature: inorganic materials such as salt hydrates and salts, organic materials such as paraffin and fatty acids, and eutectics or other mixtures. Although organic materials are non-corrosive, have low or non-subcooling and good chemical and thermal stability, their disadvantages push researchers to find appropriate inorganic materials. These disadvantages are a lower phase change enthalpy, low thermal conductivity, but mainly flammability (which is a big disadvantage in building applications) and low phase change temperature (which avoids their use in CSP systems) ( Between the multiple materials studied to be used in PCM, lithium materials and mixtures are listed as potential PCM for building applications (  When lithium compositions are used as PCM for high temperatures, one can compare their thermophysical properties to those of the solar salt, that has been studied also to be used as PCM. Thermochemical energy storage happens when gas is absorbed in an absorbent, adsorbed in an adsorbent, or when there is a chemical reaction. Absorption happens with a gas being absorbed in a liquid absorbent; the heat involved is generally similar to the condensation heat of a gas, around 41 The main advantage of thermochemical materials (TCM) is that they present higher energy density than other storage methods ( Lithium compounds have been used mainly in chemical heat pumps. Chemical heat pumps are a representative of chemical thermal energy conversion and storage systems. A chemical heat pump is based on the reaction equilibrium relationship and has two operation modes. The operation cycle resembles the one of adsorption heat pumps used for cooling Lithium has been used historically in chemical heat pumps, being used in one of the common pairs used in solar cooling applications, so in thermal conversion. Therefore, there are many studies that have developed lithium compositions to be used in chemical heat pumps for not only thermal conversion (in applications such as absorption cooling), but also thermal storage ( Lithium is mainly used in electrical energy storage, as the development of the electric car industry is based in lithium-ion batteries performance, it is recognized as a “critical material” and, on the other hand, it is studied to be used in thermal energy storage in several applications. The main producer countries are Canada, Brazil, Australia, some areas of Africa and Russia as mineral, and China, USA, Argentina, and Chile from brines. But due to its specific characteristics, the production in Chile is cheaper than in other parts of the world. Through sensible heat storage, in solar power plants lithium is seen as a way to improve the properties of molten salts used today. The low melting point in these ternary salts with lithium, represent a considerable reduction in the maintenance and operational costs associated with current solar technology, demonstrating that the fluids showed, are potential candidates for TES in CSP plants. Many materials have been studied and proposed to be used as PCM: inorganic materials such as salt hydrates and salts, organic materials such as paraffin and fatty acids, and eutectics or other mixtures. Although organic materials are non-corrosive, have low or non-subcooling and good chemical and thermal stability, their disadvantages push researchers to find appropriate inorganic materials. These disadvantages are a lower phase change enthalpy, low thermal conductivity, but mainly flammability (which is a big disadvantage in building applications) and low phase change temperature. Between the multiple materials studied to be used in PCM, lithium materials and mixtures are listed as potential PCM for building applications and for high temperature applications. In thermochemical energy storage, lithium compounds have been used mainly in chemical heat pumps, following their use in absorption cooling. This work was partially funded by the