This paper has examined some recent findings concerning the processing of fully dense hetero-nanostructured materials (i.e. consisting of nano, ultrafine and micrometric grains) which can be produced by using the interplay between heavy deformation and recrystallization. By plastic deformation of bulk materials, an improved strength/ductility balance can be obtained directly by imparting high strain deformation (by equal channel angular extrusion) until the occurrence of recrystallization. Using a powder metallurgy route, the strong potential of electric field assisted sintering (ECAS) techniques for producing multi-scale microstructures when a conducting milled powder is used is demonstrated. In this case, in addition to modify the classic processing parameters (time/temperature of spark plasma sintering), altering the nature of the milled powder – by Y2O3 addition during the milling stage – is also a good way to delay the onset of recrystallization and, thereby, increase the fraction of ultrafine grains.Nanostructured bulk materials can be produced by a number of processing methods, which essentially fall into two categories: (i) severe plastic deformation of bulk microstructured materials and (ii) consolidation of nanoparticles or ultrafine-grained powders. In addition to these two broad categories, pulsed electro-deposition is also a well established technique to reduce grain size – down to about a few nanometer – that is however restricted to thick (20 Among the most advanced high strain deformation techniques are the high pressure torsion (HPT)  A number of consolidation processes have been applied to fabricate nanostructured materials from milled powders such as cold pressing and hot extrusion Hybrid microstructures (i.e. consisting of nano, ultrafine and micrometric grains) can be produced efficiently by using the interplay between heavy deformation and recrystallization processes. This can be done for example by imparting high strain deformation using ECAE/ECAP until the occurrence of recrystallization. The strong potential of ECAS/SPS technique when consolidating conducting milled powders is demonstrated. The two necessary conditions for the formation of such a multi-modal nano-grain structure are (i) the large temperature differences that are spontaneously generated during the ECAS/SPS process of conducting materials and (ii) the use of the milled powders within which the heavily deformed nanostructure is present. The authors would like to thank Mr. N. Lugo (Barcelona) for his help with some of the ECAE experiments.