To decrease the environmental load from current Pt recovery processes that use strong acids in combination with oxidizing agents, the dissolution of Pt in hydrochloric acid (HCl) by way of alkali metal platinates was examined. The alkali metal platinates, Li2PtO3, Na2PtO3, and a (Na,Li)2PtO3 solid solution, were prepared by calcining mixtures of Pt black and the alkali metal carbonates (Li,Na) at 600−800°C in air. The dissolution of the resulting alkali metal platinates in HCl solutions was monitored by inductively coupled plasma–optical emission spectrometry. The results showed that Pt solubility approached 100% after choosing the appropriate calcination conditions. It was also found that by adding calcium chloride, the rate of Pt dissolution in dilute HCl significantly increased. The dissolution behavior of the alkali metal platinates was discussed based on the dissolution rates of the alkali metals and Pt ions, together with the crystal structures of the platinates.Platinum group metals (PGMs) play important roles in various industrial applications, especially as environmental catalysts ( PGMs are typically recovered after dissolution in aqueous solutions and subsequent metallurgical separation processes ( To dissolve PGMs in a non-oxidative acid such as pure HCl, this study focused on dissolution via complex oxides. In our previous study, alkali metal platinates were successfully and simply synthesized by a procedure involving calcination of a mixture of Pt black and alkali metal salts. The obtained Li The details of the preparation of Li The dissolution properties of the calcined samples in HCl were characterized as follows: One-tenth (by weight) of the prepared material was added to 3 The crystalline phases of the calcined samples and residues obtained after dissolution were analyzed using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Rigaku RINT 2000) equipped with a Cu Kα radiation source (40 The concentrations of Pt, Na, and Li in the solution samples after the dissolution tests were determined using inductively coupled plasma–optical emission spectroscopy (ICP–OES, IRIS Advantage, Thermo Jarrell Ash Co.). The total metal contents of the calcined samples and residues were measured after complete dissolution using pressure decomposition as follows ( The optical absorption spectra of the Pt-containing solution samples were measured using an ultraviolet–visible absorption spectrophotometer (UV–vis, JASCO V-530). The solutions obtained after the dissolution tests were diluted 250-fold with ultrapure water to adjust the absorbance into a measurable range before analysis. The alkali metal platinates were synthesized by the calcination of Pt black and alkali metal salts. The XRD profiles of the obtained samples are displayed in In terms of reducing the cost for the Pt recovery process, the use of the inexpensive Na salt would be favored. However, the formation of the Na–Pt complex oxide requires severe preparation conditions, compared with those of Li To characterize the dissolution properties of the alkali metal platinates, the platinates were dissolved in HCl under various conditions. After dissolution of Li The alkali metal platinates were soluble in conc. HCl, and almost 100% solubility was confirmed for Li The dissolution data and Eq. To investigate the effect of chloride addition in detail, we monitored the time-dependence of Pt solubility. To clarify the dissolution behavior of the alkali metal platinates, the solubilities of alkali metals were also determined. The changes in the metal solubilities of Li The time dependence of the metals solubilities ( To confirm the formation of the complex ion [PtCl Initially during the dissolution of the alkali metal platinates ( The XRD profiles of the solid residues are displayed in The synthesis and dissolution of Pt-containing complex oxides in HCl were examined. The alkali metal platinates were prepared by calcining a mixture of Pt black and alkali metal salts in air. The alkali metal platinates obtained easily dissolved in HCl. The addition of CaCl This study was supported by a