Prediction of the evolution of particle size distribution (PSD) is of great importance for studying particle breakage. This paper presents a stochastic approach, namely a Markov chain model, for predicting the evolution of PSD of granular materials during one-dimensional compression tests. The model requires the survival probability of each size group particles in an assembly, named as the survival probability matrix. The Weibull distribution is used to capture the particle size and particle strength effects of single particles. The evolution of the coordination number is investigated via 3D discrete element simulations. The proposed analytical form of survival probability matrix with consideration of the coupling effect of particle-scale factors (i.e., particle size, particle strength) and evolution of the coordination number during one-dimensional compression shows that the largest particles in an assembly do not always have the maximum breakage probability (or the minimum survival probability). This also confirms the dominant role of the coordination number on the balance of evolution of PSD within granular soils. The proposed model is validated against experimental data from one-dimensional compression tests on different granular materials. The limitations as well as possible future developments of the model are discussed.particle size discrete time set state space probability of particle size moving to one-step transition probability matrix for one load increment one-step transition probability matrix for the survival probability and average survival probability of PSD vector before breakage PSD vector after 1st breakage and mass percentage of survival probability matrix and crushing state matrix coefficient of breakage probability particle size ratio and cumulative percentage of the total crushed mass scaling parameter and shape parameter characteristic size and characteristic stress Weibull modulus particle shape factor initial void ratio of sample coordination number of the vertical stress applied on the sample particle size index and particle size span normalized average coordination number related parameters average coordination number of the maximum-sized particles related parameters Degradation of particle size is important in many fields, such as in chemical engineering, minerals processing, foods, pharmaceuticals, and geotechnical engineering. Particle breakage is manifested by the change in particle size distribution (PSD), due to mechanical forces, like shearing, compression or impact. In some cases, the change of PSD is intentional. For example, the PSD of processed wheat can be controlled by varying the characteristics (e.g. feed rate) of a roller mill Different methods for capturing the degradation process of PSD of geomaterials have been proposed during last decades, from laboratory investigation Mathematical models can be of great benefit for describing the evolution of PSD because of the low computational cost and low requirements for test facilities The coordination number and the particle size are considered as two of the most important factors affecting particle breakage. The particle-scale effects (including particle size and particle strength) are usually considered by employing the well-known Weibull distribution and will be introduced in the next section. The coordination number of a single particle is defined as the number of contact points with neighbouring particles, reflecting the geometrical structure characteristic in a granular system. The influence of coordination number on breakage characteristic of particles has been investigated by both experimental and numerical studies. Gundepudi et al. In general, the survival probability of a single particle increases with increasing coordination number, but with decreasing particle size. These two factors (i.e., particle size and coordination number) play opposite roles in the evolution of PSD. They are competing through the whole breakage process, and finally, reach a dynamic balance when an ultimate PSD of a granular packing is observed This paper follows on from our previous work The process of particle breakage can be treated as a Markov chain if the breakage event is discretized into discrete state space and discrete time. The state space is formed by a set of discrete values of particle size since the evolution of particle size is the objective of this study. A granular soil sample contains particles between sieve size As shown in with It is assumed that the finest particles will not break under external loading, indicating that Define an initial probability vector The survival probability of a brittle material of a given size Eq. However, for the breakage of a single particle with multiple contacts as shown in Eq. Nakata et al. As assumed before, no further breakage occurs for the minimum-sized particles. Eq. It should be noted that the value of All the samples tested are 90 mm in diameter and 30 mm in height and with different uniform gradings. The initial void ratio for all samples is about 0.67. The particle size span  As obtained from  Substitution of Eqs. (15)–(18) into Eq. It should be noted that the proposed model only consider the first breakage process or one breakage event as mentioned before. Eq.   In order to verify the model, experimental data of different granular materials in the literature were adopted, i.e., silica sand A series of single-particle breakage tests and one-dimensional compression tests on silica sand were conducted by Nakata et al. Tong et al. Tong et al. Hagerty et al. The development and validation of the proposed theoretical model have been shown in the previous sections. The core of the model is to calculate the survival probabilities of particles with different sizes within a sample, which are expected to be dependent on many factors, i.e., particle-scale factors (mineralogy, strength, size, shape of a single particle), sample-scale factors (initial PSD, initial void ratio, spatial distribution of the coordination number, etc.), and external factors (load type, stress path, sample preparation method, water content, etc.). It should be noted that some factors are independent of others; while some are coupled. It is difficult or even impossible to tackle all these factors in the calculation of survival probability. In this paper, most particle-scale factors, sample-scale factors, and their coupling effects are considered as shown in Eq. The major limitation of the proposed model is the limited range of initial PSD and the sphere particles adopted in the discrete element simulations. This limitation will result in the uncertainty in the applicability of the model when the sample is well graded and the particles are irregular. Although the particle shape factor is considered in a simplified form as shown in Eq. Another limitation of the model comes from the assumption that the model considers only one breakage event, which in turn greatly simplifies the model. Actually, the proposed model has great potential to describe the multiple load increments. In that case, Eq. In this paper, a stochastic-based approach, namely a Markov chain model is proposed with the aim of modelling the evolution of PSD of granular materials during one-dimensional compression tests. The survival probability of particles with different sizes in a particle assembly is captured by employing the Weibull distribution with emphasis on the evolution of coordination number obtained by using discrete element simulations on uncrushable sphere particles. The discrete element simulations show that the normalised average coordination number displays a linear distribution in terms of the particle size index This research was supported by the