Kimberlite material is one of the primary sources of diamonds. Accelerated weathering that leads to a physical breakdown of the material over a short period of time has possible benefits in diamond processing such as reduction in the energy consumption when used as a pre-comminution stage. This study investigated accelerated weathering by utilising organic reagents; acetic acid, ethanol, formamide, n-hexane, oxalic acid, and urea, in comparison to the use of Cu2+ solution that was previously shown to be very effective in weathering kimberlite. Oxalic acid was the organic agent that showed promising weathering capabilities. However, the use of organic solutions was not as efficient as with Cu2+ solutions. Results showed that 67% of the particles passed 12mm screen size in Cu2+ weathering compared to 48% in oxalic acid. It was also found that time of exposure had a small effect on weathering. Increasing the organic chemical concentration twofold, from 0.025M to 0.5M, improved weathering by ∼20% points. Different weathering mechanisms were observed at different solution concentration between oxalic acid (1st to 2nd order) and Cu2+ (2nd to 3rd order).Kimberlite is one of the primary sources of diamonds. Kimberlite processing described by Kimberlites vary in mineralogical properties but are described as inequigranular textures consisting of crystal and mantle derived xenoliths and xenocrysts ( This study investigates kimberlite weathering with a focus on the accelerated physical breakdown of the material. Accelerated weathering weakens the rock, especially the groundmass or matrix minerals. This leads to a reduction in the comminution effort required to liberate diamonds, which may lead to reduced diamond damage. The energy savings may be by far the greater benefit. This may also lead to completely different processing flowsheet, moving away from multi-stage crushing to a less energy intensive process. Studies on kimberlite accelerated weathering have been performed utilising cationic salts, i.e. inorganic solutions ( This study targets the presence of clays in kimberlite and is the first evaluation of the effect of organic species on kimberlite weathering. Kimberlite ore samples were obtained from Finsch Mine, one of the De Beers Consolidated Mines in South Africa. The ore sample was received crushed to −19 Samples of 300 Utilising oxalic acid and Cu The XRD analysis results indicated that the ore contained ∼35%, 5%, 7%, 8%, 11%, 7%, and 8% smectite, serpentine, mica, calcite, dolomite, plagioclase, and pyroxene, respectively, and had a CEC value of 28.21 cmol/kg. According to Weathering tests were evaluated by a particle size distribution after weathering and compared to the initial particle size of 100% passing −16 All the organic media tested improved weathering compared to the water that produced the least weathered product of ∼25% passing 12 From The effect of time on weathering was tested utilising oxalic acid as this particular organic solution had shown positive results. Varying solution concentration indicated that no significant difference between a 0.025 Similar to the work by Regression results are shown in Oxalic acid is known to dissolve minerals by proton attack. This attack causes a release of cations from the ore’s crystal structure which then forms cation-organic complexes with the oxalic anion known as oxalates ( The effectiveness of kimberlite weathering utilising organic species was investigated on a 30% smectite containing Finsch kimberlite. The weathering was assessed by a particle size distribution analysis and results compared to the starting size of 100% passing −16 The writers wish to thank the University of Pretoria for providing research facilities and allowing the publication of this work. A special acknowledgement also goes to the De Beers Group, especially Mr. Pete Sergeant, for the financial support as well as facilitating the supply of the ore resource.