This work deals with the optimal control of a rougher flotation circuit. The optimization of this process plays an important role in the improvement of a concentrator plant efficiency, since even small increases in the valuable recovery mean an important economic impact. In order to exploit the serial structure of this process, the dynamic programming technique is used. The optimization problem is solved considering phenomenological models for each flotation bank of the circuit, validated using process data obtained from several sampling surveys carried out in a rougher flotation circuit of a Chilean mineral processing plant. The control objective is the minimization of the Cu tailing grade in each bank given a final Cu concentrate grade. Simulation results show a good correspondence between the proposed optimization strategy and the actual operating practices at the rougher flotation plant under study, considering different operational scenarios.solid mass (t) solid mass flow rate (t/h) volumetric flow rate (m metallurgical grade (%) flotation rate (h level (m) cross-section (m height (m) number of mineralogical classes empirical constant steady state conditions concentrate cumulative concentrate tailing pulp froth mineralogical class (copper, iron and gangue), {1,2,3} number of the flotation bank, {1, solid in the slurry solid in the concentrate solid in the tailing cumulative concentrate solid Rougher flotation is the first concentration stage in a flotation plant. Its principal objective is to achieve recovery, for which several flotation cells are connected in a serial structure, as shown in The optimization of the rougher flotation process is a very important task in the mining industry, due to the high economic profit arising from an increase in the valuable recovery, as a result of the high throughput of the circuit. In fact, even increases in recovery as small as 0.5% can be economically significant, Considering that the flotation process is subject to a wide variety of disturbances, several regulatory control strategies have been proposed, based on different approaches, such as, adaptive control using linear SISO models, An hierarchical optimal control strategy of a rougher–scavenger section was proposed by The serial structure of the rougher flotation poses an important drawback for optimizing this process, because usually only the grade in the feed, final tailing and final concentrate streams are measured on-line in flotation plants, leaving the states in the other banks unmeasured. That is the reason why some control strategies described above, use the same pulp level set points for different banks. As an attempt to tackle this problem some works using machine vision techniques have been proposed to characterize chromatic information, average bubble size, froth texture, froth stability and mobility of the froths ( This work deals with the optimization of a rougher flotation circuit. In order to take advantage of the serial structure of this circuit configuration, a discrete dynamic programming method is considered. The optimization procedure is carried out considering steady state models of each flotation bank in the circuit, which are validated using process data obtained from several sampling surveys carried out in a Chilean mining plant. The control objective is the minimization of the Cu tailing grade in each bank given a final Cu concentrate grade and the pulps levels of each bank are considered as manipulated variables. The proposed strategy can be implemented in a RTE (real time evolution) framework proposed by This paper is organized as follows: first, the optimization model is presented in Section The optimization objective is the minimization of the Cu tailing grade The flotation sub-models to be presented next, involved three mineralogical classes Considering the nonlinear dynamic models proposed by The froth depth The concentrate solid mass flow rate In order to take advantage of the serial structure of the rougher flotation circuit (see  Let us define The optimal profit from stage In our case of study The optimization of the last two stages requires a minimization with respect to In our case of study, the transformation equation is given by: The dynamic programming problem is solved considering 10 quantization levels for the first state (Cu tailing grade, The quantization levels given above were selected by testing, in order to obtain an accurate solution, measured as the deviation between the final cumulative Cu concentrate grade    The The This work studied the optimal control solution of a rougher flotation circuit based on the dynamic programming technique under different operational conditions. This control system can be seen as the highest level of a hierarchical control strategy and could be implemented with any regulatory control strategy in a straightforward manner. The optimal control policies obtained from solving the optimization problem, show a good agreement with the actual operational practices used in the Chilean mining plant considered, that is, a control strategy using the first three flotation bank for regulation and keeping large froth depths in the last two flotation banks. One important drawback of the proposed optimization strategy is the large number of states generated, resulting in a high computational load. The time scaling factor between simulation and real time is about 100 times, which is too much for real time applications. However, considering the optimal profiles obtained, a strategy for reducing the computational burden of the dynamic programming technique could be implemented, which considers the optimization of only the first three banks, maintaining large fixed froth depths in the last two banks. Unknown disturbances can be compensated by the operator by directly modifying the desired final Cu concentrate grade in the cost function or by including an automatic adjustment through the use of an internal model control (IMC) structure.