The Bayer process is the most frequently used method for the production of alumina from bauxite worldwide. The aim of the process is to grind and dissolve the alumina-rich minerals into hot caustic solution, than to separate the insoluble phases. These are followed by precipitation and calcination to produce alumina (Al2O3). After the crushing step the bauxite has to be ground usually in spent liquor at 60…100°C in a tumbling ball mill for dissolution.
                  Due to the above special circumstances the determination of the specific grinding energy or the Bond work index for designing new grinding facilities and the optimization of the existing operations (grinding ball charge, filling ratio, revolution number, operating of classifier, etc.…) was not reliable when the traditional laboratory mills (Hardgrove-, Bond-, Zeisel mill) and procedures were used. To meet the requirements based on the standard grindability tests suitable methods and apparatuses were developed at the Institute of Raw Material Preparation and Environmental Process Engineering, University of Miskolc, called Universal Hardgrove- and Bond mill.
                  This paper presents briefly these laboratory apparatuses and methods and shows the most important results of the systematic research work carried out recently concerning the grindability of lateritic and karst bauxites. Parallel experiments were performed using the Universal Hardgrove- and Bond mill and the measurement data were compared. The samples originated from three continents worldwide: Africa (Boké), Australia (Weipa) and Europe (Greece and Hungary). The results show good correlation between the developed methods. Temperature and caustic media are very important affecting parameters to the Bond work index, which can be demonstrated by the above mentioned developed laboratory mills and methods.Grindability factor (g Hardgrove grindability index Correction factor mass of ground material under 74 Bond work index (kWh Bond work index calculated from HGI using the traditional equation Bond work index calculated from HGI using the Csőke equation corrected Bond work index using k factor Bond work index determined under dry circumstances Bond work index calculated from Hardgrove index (kWh t 80% passing particle size of the product (μm) 80% passing particle size of the feed (μm) The known bauxite resources of the world amount to about 60 Bauxites are usually considered to be of two major types; (1) lateritic and (2) karst bauxites. Both are weathered products from underlying parent rock; lateritic bauxites are derived from primary aluminosilicate rocks whereas karst bauxites are from interbedded carbonate and aluminosilicate rocks. Karst bauxites have a different typical mineralogical composition, which stem from the presence of carbonates in the parent rock and in the different weathering conditions to those for lateritic bauxites. Silicate minerals are again dominated by kaolinite, but may include more difficult to process minerals such as chamosite. Aluminous minerals are more likely to be boehmite and diaspore, with the changes to the mineralogy compared to lateritic bauxites sometimes attributed to different oxidative conditions experienced during weathering ( Nowadays 90% of the world's alumina production is provided by the Bayer-process in the course of which the bauxite is digested in caustic soda (Eq. During this procedure the grinding step carried out in sodium hydroxide above room temperature has a determinant role. In the industrial practice the bauxite grinding in NaOH is performed at a relative high temperature, e.g. 60…100 Since the dissolution of alumina-oxide-hydrate takes place on the surface of the mineral, the velocity of solution strongly depends on the value of the specific surface area, namely the physical parameter, the particle size distribution of bauxite. An additional important point of view of bauxite processing is that the Al-bearing minerals can be blocked from the digesting liquor by other mineral components. For instance, the oolites or the pisolites are such typical formations in which the Al-bearing minerals are covered by a thin iron-oxide film which blocks the Al from the solvent ( The additive materials such as quick lime or slaked lime have decisive role in Bayer-process. The digestibility and grindability of hardly soluble (especially diasporic) bauxites improve significantly in the presence of a certain quantity of CaO (dosage: 2…5%). Accordingly, the CaO has activating effect on the grinding and digestion of the bauxite. It can be explained on the one hand that the lime takes part in the process as a chemical agent producing interstitial compound, for example in the form of calcium-hydro-aluminates which are modified into sodium-aluminates in presence of NaOH (  Among others in the overview of  Due to the afore-named special circumstances the grinding of bauxite in industrial scale is not a conventional comminution process. Since chemical reactions take place parallel with grinding, the grindability of the material improves — Bond work index decreases. Furthermore the temperature accelerates these reactions modifying the grindability. Finally, the velocity of the chemical reactions is modified by CaO or Ca(OH) These conditions led to the development of a reliable apparatus and method for the determination of grindability of bauxites (or other ores) which can be applied to predict the mill capacity (t/h) and specific grinding work (kWh/t). A research group was formed at the Institute of Raw Material Preparation and Environmental Process Engineering, University of Miskolc and they improved the traditional Hardgrove- and Bond methods and machines. Firstly, measurements in alkaline media were carried out ( Commonly the Bond work index of minerals is determined by the 80% passing particle size of the feed and the product. On the other hand, during a general grinding experiment Blaine fineness can be an additional characteristic parameter of the ground material which represents only the outer specific surface area of the particles. Depending on the powder particle surface texture the inner surface including deep fissures, folds, and open voids can be significant. In such a complex case when grinding and leaching take place parallel, beside outer surface the inner surface is one of the affecting factors. In this way it is proposed to use the overall surface (e.g. BET specific surface area) of the powder as an additional material property for the implied test. Since the Universal Hardgrove Mill method is a novel grindability determination way, the relation of BET and Bond work index is not yet demonstrated by other authors. Some of the relevant general achievements concerning Bond work index dependence are as follows: - - - However the above presented hypotheses are created for dry (and wet) grinding and not alkaline grinding. On the basis of the result of this research work, the aim of this paper is to characterize the bauxites' grindability as the function of temperature according to their origin and type. A further goal is to compare the characteristic curves and find correlation between the above mentioned developed methods. The samples used for laboratory measurements were chosen from a wide range of bauxite types in order to investigate the grindability of lateritic (2 samples) and karst (3 samples) bauxites. In particular, one boehmitic Hungarian (Halimba), two Greek (boehmitic and diasporic), one gibbsitic Australian (Weipa) and one boehmitic African (Boké, Guinea) samples were taken. The two latter ones are lateritic and the previous ones are karst type. The oxidic composition and the Modulus of the materials applied can be seen in At the left edge of the photo ( Physical properties such as BET specific surface area and particle density of the bauxite samples were determined by a Micromeritics Tristar The traditional Bond grindability test ( During the development work this type of batch mill was equipped with a suitable heating jacket and the procedure was improved for alkaline media. The electric heating of the Universal Bond mill ( The evaluation of the experimental result is completed following the “standard” of the Bond procedure, viz. the Bond work index is determined using by the following equation: In the case of the Universal Hardgrove mill the required constant temperature was reached due to the heatable jacket ( For measuring the temperature, 4 pieces of PT100 RTD were built in. The heating process is controlled by a PC program (written by József Faitli, The parts of the heated grinding chamber are as follows ( — The grinding chamber. — The coverage of heating wires. — The electrical and heat insulation. — The heating wires: 4 — 4 pieces of PT100 RTD. — The cover of chamber. — Closing plate. According to Bond the work index can be estimated from the Hardgrove Grindability Index using the following empirical formula: Our previous Hardgrove experimental results proved ( The detailed description of the developed Universal Bond- and Hardgrove test procedures and devices was written by During the measuring series the grindability of karst- and lateritic bauxite with different texture and type (boehmitic, diasporic, gibbsitic) was measured with the previously presented modified Bond- and Hardgrove-mill parallel at different temperature values in caustic liquor. Additionally, the question of grinding additive (quick lime) was examined. Evaluation was performed according to the standardized way given by To determine the grindability indices of bauxites experimentally, first dry grinding tests were carried out under the usual and “standard” Hardgrove and Bond test conditions at room temperature with all of the five samples. At the alkaline grinding tests, slurry made from the prescribed dry bauxite and caustic soda was fed into the mill. The mass concentration of the sludge was 37 The alkaline grinding experiments were performed in industrial liquor with a concentration of 190 In the case of the Universal Bond mill test closed-cycle grinding was carried out as follows: firstly, the average moisture content of the screen residue was determined after the first grinding cycle, and knowing this value, the dry mass of the wet screen residue was calculated using this number in the later grinding cycles. The Universal Hardgrove mill tests were performed as batch grinding. The basic characteristics of the bauxites being known, in the first measurement series all of the bauxite samples both karst and lateritic ones were investigated in the Universal Hardgrove Mill at various temperatures (20…100 In the second trial, the effect of quicklime grinding additive was studied by the Universal Hardgrove Mill with karst samples, since generally CaO is used for hard bauxites in order to facilitate the grinding and digestion process. Lime was added in the portion of 2% and 4% to the mass of dry boehmitic (Hungarian and Greek) and diasporic (Greek) bauxite respectively. In the case of the lateritic bauxites (Boké, Weipa) the investigation was carried out without additive according to the industrial practice. In the third experimental series the measurements were performed in the Universal Bond Mill using the hard diasporic and boehmitic Greek bauxites with CaO additive in the dosage of 4 and 2% respectively. The particle size distribution of the mill product was measured by wet sieving and laser particle size analyzer (Fritsch Analysette 22) in distilled water. Based on the obtained Bond work indices for bauxites of diverse mineral composition and texture in alkaline media at various temperatures it was established that the grindability of the examined materials has improved at higher temperature. The specific grinding energy decreased. Nevertheless, the degree of the improvement was not adequate for different bauxites. Relative grindability shows the ratio of the Bond work indices determined under dry (room temperature) and under alkaline condition. The results as the function of temperature can be seen in Significant improvement of the grindability occurred in the case of bauxite samples with autogenous texture type (oolitic, pisolitic Boké and Weipa, oolitic Halimba) in alkaline medium at a temperature of 20 The changing of grindability can be taken into account with the correction The phenomenon can be explained by the difference of the texture- and rock type. According to The highest relative grindability belongs to the lateritic Boké and Weipa bauxites with porous structure (oolitic and pisolitic) with numerous interstices; these numbers reached 2.08 and 2.09 at 80 Further experiments were completed in order to investigate the effect of grinding additive on the grindability of bauxites under extreme conditions. According to the industrial practice these kinds of experiments were carried out only in the case of the three karst bauxites. Investigating the effect of CaO on the bauxite's grindability it was stated that the Bond-work index of bauxite decreased using grinding additive (quick lime) but the degree of change was different depending on bauxite type. In the case of diasporic Greek bauxite after an intensive decrease of the grindability index the effect of CaO the W No significant effect of grinding additive on grindability of the non-cohesive relatively good quality Hungarian boehmitic bauxite can be observed. The Universal Bond mill tests were carried out with the hard Greek bauxite samples (boehmitic and diasporic). Firstly, it is important to investigate whether the developed apparatus and measuring methods are reliable and suitable. To this end the experimental results originated from Universal Hardgrove- and Bond mill are compared hereinafter. The measurement data can be seen in It is assumed that if the Bond work indices from the two methods correspond with each other, the new methods are reliable, like in the case of the dry method. This modified Bond Mill as well as the Universal Hardgrove Mill has been used for systematic experiments with bauxites of different origins; the same materials and circumstances were tested in both instruments. In this way the calculation of the Bond work index at any temperature from the Hardgrove index can be possible. The above introduced measurement results allow us to compare the “traditional” (Eq. Nearly identical results were found with the Universal Bond and Hardgrove mill methods developed for high temperature grinding experiments which prove their applicability. It means that the developed measuring procedures and devices are also suitable for determining the Bond work index under special circumstances. Relative difference between the results obtained by the two processes under discussion was in the range of −3.70%…+1.39%. The correlation of the results was excellent. The two methods are coherent because the conversion possibility is proved. Based on The Universal Bond test procedure (time consuming) can be replaced with the Universal Hardgrove process in certain cases especially for daily industrial control. Finally, the increase of grindability can be explained by several factors: -The first factor is the impact of the alkaline reaction and the Ca ions on the break-down of the textural structure of bauxite particles (this does not necessarily mean dissolution as well), which can partly take effect already at a low temperature (mechanochemistry). -The most important factor is, however the reaction of kaolinite and amorphous silica with caustic liquor (and lime) and the loosing of the textural structure at 80 -The reaction of kaolinite is confirmed by the fact that a significant increase of relative grindability was measured above 60 -On the other hand Greek samples have only small amount of kaolinite, in this way the effect of temperature was less significant in comparison with the other examined ores. -Between 30 and 60 -In general chemical reactions take place even during holding the bauxite slurry in pre-desilication at 60…70 -The dissolution of the aluminum-oxide-hydrate and the reaction of kaolinite and amorphous silica with caustic liquor (and lime) take place on the surface of the bauxite particle, so the rate and velocity of solubility of Al -It is supposed that the BET specific surface area (and the particle density) of the raw bauxite affect intensively the outcome in the experiments ( -Additionally, pores and capillars are shortened due to the mechanical activation by grinding, so the penetration of liquor will be easier and the reactions will be intensified. -It should be emphasized that, in addition to the significant decrease of grinding energy, other important advantages also appear during the digestion stage when the aluminum minerals dissolve faster as a result of high-temperature grinding. -Consequently, the duration of digestion (retention time at high temperature for alumina extraction) can be reduced, smaller equipment is needed, one can work at a lower digestion temperature and obtain higher aluminum-oxide super-saturation in the alkali at the end of the liberation (resulting on higher cycle efficiency). However, these latter questions can only be answered by carrying out detailed digestion (alumina extraction) tests following the systematic grinding experiments. Bauxite grinding in hot liquor in the Bayer process is a very complex task because during the comminution procedure chemical reactions take place which affect the grindability of the ore. Based on the experimental research results the following facts can be established: -Temperature and alkaline grinding media have significant effect on the grindability of bauxites for which the increase of temperature involves chemical reactions as well (chemical and mechano-chemical effects occur). -Possible reasons of the Bond work index decrease were revealed: (1) the reaction of kaolinite and amorphous silica with caustic liquor (and lime) and the loosing of the textural structure, (2) the dissolution of the aluminum-oxide-hydrate and (3) the physical characteristics, namely the density and the specific surface area of particle have significant impact on the grindability in case of hot alkaline grinding of bauxite. -In addition to the significant decrease of grinding energy, the advantages may appear in further processes (especially during alkalic extraction), which must be taken into account when testing the given material. -In case of grinding under extreme conditions it is suggested to apply the above presented methods instead of traditional dry grinding tests at ambient temperature to predict the specific grinding work more accurately. -It was proved that the Csőke conversion formula is appropriate for the calculation of the Bond work index from the Hardgrove Grindability Index determined using the developed “universal” testing method. -Additionally, it was demonstrated that the value of the correction factor of Bond work index strongly depends on the type and texture of the bauxite being tested. Based on the good correlation between methods ( -When the specific grinding energy of bauxite is measured the work input W as calculated by Bond equation should be divided by an empirical adjustment factor k In such cases too, the Universal Hardgrove mill provides advantageous application possibilities for testing the grindability and for estimating the Bond work index for mill dimensioning and the operating parameters (size distribution of grinding media, ball filling ratio, operation of classifier, etc.…) resulting in significant savings in both investment and operating costs. Of course, further experiments are necessary to carry out in industrial scale to ensure these last statements concerning industrial application. Regarding future work, the authors are planning to extend the investigation from the chemical and mineralogical point of view. Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy and X-Ray Diffraction analyses of solid residue and liquid phase are expected to monitor the chemical and crystal structural changing in the bauxite during the combined effect of mechanical and leaching stress. The described work was carried out as part of the TÁMOP‐4.2.1.B‐10/2/KONV‐2010‐0001 project in the framework of the New Hungarian Development Plan. The realization of this project is supported by the European Union, co-financed by the European Social Fund.