In this study, Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes were prepared using five different preparation techniques, namely, ultrasonic treatment (UST), equal channel angle pressing (ECAP), rolling treatment (RT), cold-rolling (CR), and ultrasonic + rolling treatment (UST + RT). Except for UST, these processes were followed by a subsequent annealing treatment. The microstructure, resistivity, microhardness, and electrochemical performances of the Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes prepared under different conditions were investigated and compared in detail. Preparation methods that can be used to obtain anode materials with better comprehensive properties are discussed. The results show that the conductivity, electrochemical properties, and mechanical properties of Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes are significantly improved upon treatment using the different processes. Among them, UST + RT is beneficial for obtaining a denser structure and achieving considerably better electrochemical performance compared with the casting, rolling, and ultrasonic processes. Compared with the as-cast Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag alloy, the resistivity was reduced by 45 % and the hardness by 2.2 times after UST + RT. In zinc electrowinning experiments, the cell voltage of the Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anode subjected to UST + RT was also significantly reduced, and the current efficiency was increased by 8.63 %. These results will lay the foundation for energy conservation in zinc electrowinning.Nonferrous metals are indispensable basic materials and important strategic materials for the development of science and technology, the daily lives of people, national economies, and the defense industry [ In the zinc electrowinning industry, Pb-Ag anodes have been used for a long time because of their low cost, good electrocatalytic activity, high corrosion resistance, and ease of processing [ In contrast, several research studies have indicated that the performance of Pb-Ag anodes depends not only on the elemental content of the alloy and the ion concentration in the electrolyte but also on the preparation and processing of the cast alloy [ The performance of the material is closely related to its microstructure and grain size. For Pb-Ag alloy, a grain with moderate fineness and uniform distribution can obtain good creep resistance and corrosion resistance, but very fine grains may affect the conductivity. Therefore, the problem of final grain size and distribution state of the Pb-Ag alloy material is one of the key issues affecting the comprehensive performance, and the final grain size is closely related to the size of the initial grain. In this paper, from the optimization of the Pb-Ag alloy microstructure, the preparation and processing methods of the traditional Pb-Ag alloy are changed, and the preparation processes of ultrasonic solidification fine grain and various large plastic deformation technologies are put forward to improve the grain size, structural uniformity and stability of Pb-Ag alloy and finally to obtain more excellent performance of Pb-Ag alloy. This work can provide some useful insight into the design and preparation of Pb-Ag anode materials. Industrial Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag alloy plates were purchased from Mengzi Mining and Metallurgy Co., Ltd, China. Other chemicals used in these experiments were analytical-grade and were used without further purification. All of the solutions used were prepared with deionized water. Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag alloy anodes were prepared via ultrasonic treatment (UST), equal-channel angle pressing (ECAP), rolling treatment (RT), cold-rolling (CR), and ultrasonic + rolling treatment (UST + RT). Subsequently, an annealing treatment was performed for all anodes, except for the sample prepared via UST. The parameters of the grain refinement technologies are shown in In this experiment, the surface morphology after corrosion was investigated, and the grain size of the cross-section was measured for different Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes using scanning electron microscopy (XL-30, Philips, Netherlands) and a metallographic microscope (DFC280, Lecia, Germany). The microhardness of the Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes were measured using a Vickers hardness tester (HV-1000, Jujing, China) with a load of 100 gf and a duration of 15 s. Before the hardness test, the oxide layer on the surface of the sample shall be removed to reduce the material hardening caused by processing, and the samples with flat surfaces shall be selected for seven hardness tests. The maximum and minimum values of the test results are removed, and the average of the remaining five values is taken to reduce the experimental error. The resistivity values of the Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes were tested via four-probe resistance measurements (FT-300A1, Rooko, China), in which the stable current forms a closed-loop between the S  As shown in  In addition, the rolling had a remarkable effect on the microstructure refinement, as shown in In The measured resistivity (ρ) and conductivity (σ) values are listed in Based on Matthiessen’s theory [ During the electrolysis process, Pb-Ag anodes are susceptible to creep and bending due to their softness, which can cause the electrodes to contact each other, resulting in a short circuit. Therefore, the hardness should also be considered for Pb-Ag anodes. Among the treatments, the CR treatment produced the Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag alloy with the highest microhardness; this was possibly because this material exhibited the highest internal stress and the smallest microstructure grains, leading to a strong resistance to deformation. The microhardness of the Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag alloy could be increased by a maximum of 3.2 times compared with the as-cast alloy through grain refinement. When the Pb-Ag alloy is used as anode material for electrolysis, a constant distance should preferably be maintained between the electrodes when the Pb alloy electrode is electrolyzed. This ensures that the electrode is not affected by the unevenness of the pole pitch caused by the deformation of the electrode, thereby causing the local current voltage to be excessively high and accelerating the dissolution of the electrode. Therefore, improving the microhardness of the Pb-Ag alloy not only reduces the dissolution rate of the Pb alloy but can also effectively prevent short circuits due to collisions between the anode and cathode plates, which is of great significance in actual production.  According to the electrochemical dynamics theory [ To compare the corrosion resistance of Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes prepared using different methods, Tafel curves were obtained as shown in Alternately, the corrosion behavior of the Pb-Ag alloy is closely related to its microstructure and grain size. When the grain size is larger, due to the uneven distribution of the components, the electrode surface can more easily form corrosive galvanic cells, which causes deep local corrosion along the grain boundary and rapid expansion. Then, the Pb-Ag matrix becomes loose and porous, and the electrolyte is easier to penetrate, so the corrosion resistance is poor. However, after the various grain refinement processes, the grain structure is finer and denser, and the uneven distribution of smaller particles cannot easily cause local deep and rapid corrosion. With the increase of corrosion time, the small particles are gradually corroded away, and the corrosive galvanic cells will also disappear. EIS is an effective tool for studying electrochemical reaction processes, as well as the kinetic parameters of the reaction processes occurring on the surface of an electrode [  In the actual production process of zinc electrodeposition, the oxygen evolution overpotential accounts for a large part of the anode cell voltage. A decrease in the oxygen evolution overpotential indicates that the electrode reaction is easier to carry out and that the electron transfer speed is faster, which has a positive effect on the catalytic activity of the anode and lowers the cell voltage. In this study, the engineering application of zinc electrowinning was studied. The current density of the electrowinning process was 450 A m Combined with the change in the resistivity, it can be seen that the variation in the cell voltage was consistent with the change in the material resistivity. In addition, the relationship between the cell voltage (E) and ohmic drop (R) can be defined by Eq. (3) [ It can be concluded from the above formula that the cell voltage is mainly composed of two parts, namely, a + blgD  The crystal grain size and crystal morphology of the sample obtained by the ordinary casting method did not show uniform size and regular shape, so corrosion would occur mainly at the grain boundaries, which can be classified as intergranular corrosion, as shown in In this work, the microstructure, resistivity, microhardness, and electrochemical performances of Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes prepared under different conditions were tested and analyzed. Based on experimental results and data analysis, the main conclusions are as follows: The microstructure of Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes can be improved to some extent by different treatments. Compared with the traditionally cast anode, the treated grain sizes were refined, and the corrosion condition of the anode surface was improved. The conductivity, electrochemical properties, and mechanical properties of Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anodes were significantly improved by different processes. The sample treated by the ultrasonic + rolling treatment exhibited the best comprehensive properties. Compared with the traditionally cast anode, the resistivity could be reduced by 45 % and the hardness by 2.2 times. Based on the combined analysis of Tafel curves and microstructure, the ultrasonic + rolling treatment process was most beneficial for obtaining low self-corrosion current and over potential, improving the corrosion resistance and electron transfer rate of the anode, and achieving excellent electrochemical performance. At the same time, the dense and fine structure changed the corrosion form of the anode surface from the original local corrosion mode to more uniform and comprehensive corrosion, laying the foundation for improving the service life of anode materials. The current efficiency of the Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag anode after the ultrasonic + rolling treatment process was increased by 8.63 % compared with that of the as-cast Pb-(0.5 wt.%)Ag alloy anode in zinc electrowinning, which reached 97.89 %. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the