Intramedullary (IM) nailing has been established as one of the most effective treatment modalities for the stabilisation of long-bone fractures. Recently, with the development of new nail designs and instrumentations, the indications of IM nailing have expanded to include stabilisation of metaphyseal fracture patterns. Despite the overall advances that have been made, there continues to be some controversies about the optimal timing of surgical intervention, especially in multiple injured patients, the superiority of antegrade versus retrograde nailing, as well as what should be the ideal entry point for antegrade nailing of femoral shaft fractures. The choice of entry point is of paramount importance since the selection of the wrong entry point may lead to intra-operative complications. Gerhard Kuntscher conducted a considerable number of cadaveric and animal studies before he inserted his first femoral nail in 1939. Bohler also proposed the tip of the greater trochanter as the optimum entry portal but in a more specific location, at the junction of the middle and posterior third of the greater trochanter. Opponents of using the greater trochanter as the ideal entry portal for antegrade femoral nailing suggested that because the tip of the trochanter is not aligned co-linear with the anatomic axis of the femoral medullary canal in the frontal plane, the insertion of straight nails could lead to varus malalignment of the proximal fragment of fracture, eccentric reaming of its medial cortex and comminution of the fracture site. Kempf et al. In subsequent years, piriformis fossa was widely indicated as the ideal starting point, mainly due to promising biomechanical results and the supporting results of prospective clinical studies. The piriformis fossa is widely considered as the standard starting point in antegrade nailing. Studies using the antegrade femoral nailing through the piriformis fossa as the standard technique of treatment of femoral shaft fractures have a high rate of union (99%) and a low rate of infection and malunion (<1%). The piriformis fossa is an extracapsular skeletal site; a small, shallow depression on the tip of the greater trochanter at the site of insertion of the piriformis tendon. A recent study aimed to review the opinion of orthopaedic surgeons as to what should be the correct entry point for antegrade femoral nailing by means of a questionnaire. The tip of the greater trochanter is not collinear with the central axis of the medullary canal, but it is located more laterally. This malalignment of the greater trochanter with the long axis of the femoral shaft was thought to be responsible for the complications observed with the placement of straight nails, including eccentric reaming of the medial femoral cortex of the proximal fragment, comminution of the fracture site and varus fracture malalignment, especially for proximal fractures. The potential advantages of using the trochanteric tip as the starting entry portal includes less operative time and less intra-operative fluoroscopy. Moreover, the nail insertion through the tip of the greater trochanter minimises the risks of intracapsular infections, avascular necrosis of the femoral head and iatrogenic femoral neck fractures. Ricci et al. have the credit of performing the first prospective study evaluating the results of nailing for femoral shaft fractures, with the insertion of a specific nail with a proximal bend through the tip of the greater trochanter. Other studies in children Lately, two prospective, randomised studies were performed comparing the trochanteric with the piriformis entry portal for stabilisation of femoral shaft fractures. In another study, Starr Another prospective, randomised study was presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgery, where the hip abductor function was assessed following IM nailing of femoral fractures using either the piriformis fossa or the tip of the greater trochanter as the entry portal. With regard to the argument of provoking soft-tissue injury, both of these portals are known to be associated with perforation and penetration of the hip abductors and external rotator tendons. These soft injuries may jeopardise the functional outcome of the treatment. However, the contribution of the entry portal to the magnitude of the damage to the musculotendinous structures and of their supplying nerves and vessels remains unclear. Dora et al. The authors observed that the piriformis fossa portal based on soft-tissue damage was by far the worst entry portal. It caused not only the most damage to external rotators but also injured branches of the medial femoral circumflex artery, compromising the vascular supply of the femoral head. They concluded that the piriformis fossa entry portal should be avoided, due to the most significant damage to muscle and tendons as well as to blood supply, whereas the nailing through the tip of the greater trochanter combines less soft-tissue injury and easier insertion. Similarly, Moein et al. attempted to assess the possible iatrogenic injury to the soft tissues of the proximal femoral area. In a cadaver study, a modified trochanteric portal was proposed for bypassing the soft-tissue injury in the gluteal area. The concept of ‘bald spot’ on the lateral facet of the greater trochanter should also be considered. In an anatomic study using a highly accurate computer navigation system, the anatomic insertions of the tendons on the proximal femur were evaluated. Ricci has also proposed a modified insertion technique. The mismatch between nail designs and femoral curvatures is an issue pointed out in several studies. It seems prudent that the most efficient entry portal is determined by the surgeon's familiarity with the nail being used. Based on the above-mentioned information, the following recommendations can be made: Each femoral fracture has its own ‘personality’, with unique characteristics and features which should be considered in the preoperative planning. The tip of the greater trochanter seems to be a more justified entry portal in the case of proximal femoral fractures with fracture lines extending to piriformis fossa. Obese and multiple injured patients represent a population group where the tip of greater trochanter seems to be a technically easier and better accessible entry portal. Anatomical variations of the proximal hip also should be assessed prior to antegrade femoral cases, since variants such as trochanter overhang make the access to femoral medullary canal through piriformis fossa quite laborious and difficult. The femoral neck–shaft angle should be assessed as the piriformis fossa seems the correct entry portal in valgus hips, whereas the tip of the greater trochanter and the area just medial to the greater trochanter seems to be the correct entry portal for varus and normal hips, respectively. Attention should be paid to the possible anterior cortical penetration in the intertrochanteric/subtrochanteric fractures, when the anterior bow of the femur is intact. The debate still exists about the impact and detrimental role of piriformis fossa nailing to the soft-tissue structures, and on the long-term functional outcome.