The influence of oxidation-reduction (redox) pretreatment on the pulverization of Panzhihua ilmenite during hydrochloric acid leaching to obtain synthetic rutile was investigated in detail. We observed the dissociation of incompact TiO2 products formed via the dissolution-hydrolysis of Ti ions, which was caused by the fast dissolution of FeTiO3 during the leaching process and was the fundamental reason for pulverization for the raw Panzhihua ilmenite. A stirring operation during the acid leaching aggravated the pulverization phenomenon. The formation and consumption of insoluble rutile grains during the redox pretreatment played a key role in preventing the pulverization of pre-treated ilmenites. The rutile network formed during the pre-oxidation was retained and served as a nucleus for the hydrolyzed product during the successive leaching process, providing the leaching products of the pre-oxidized ilmenite with less hydrolyzed TiO2, higher mechanical strength, and thus an excellent resistance to pulverization, even with stirred leaching. Because the following weak reduction process (reduction of ferric iron to ferrous state) at relatively low temperatures (e.g., 873K) did not destroy the rutile network that was formed by the pre-oxidation, it did not change the ability of the pre-oxidation to prevent the pulverization of ilmenite. However, the weak reduction process at high temperatures (e.g. 1023K) weakened the effect of pre-oxidation because most of the rutile grains that were formed by the pre-oxidation were consumed and formed FeTiO3.Hydrochloric acid leaching is an important process that upgrades ilmenite rock with high contents of CaO and MgO to obtain synthetic rutile (SR), which is the major feedstock for the chlorination process to produce titanium dioxide due to its excellent ability to remove various impurities. ( Oxidation roasting at low and moderate temperatures (T In the present study, the influences of oxidation at low and moderate temperatures and the strong oxidation-weak reduction pretreatments on the pulverization behavior of ilmenite during hydrochloric acid leaching were systematically investigated. We analyzed and compared the particle sizes, XRD patterns and morphologies of the leaching products that were obtained from the as-heat-treated and raw ilmenites. The experimental material was ilmenite concentrate from the Panzhihua area of China with particle sizes ranging from 100 to 120 mesh (the mean particle size was 137.5 Dry air, H The oxidation and reduction thermal pretreatments were conducted in a fluidized bed reactor to avoid agglomeration of ilmenite particles during the roasting process. The fluidized bed reactor has a perforated plate as the gas distributor and is made of quartz with a diameter of 15 Both stirred leaching (stirred using a magnetic stirrer at a speed of 600 The particle sizes of the leaching residues were examined using a Laser Particle Size Analyzer (LS-13–320, Beckman Coulter, United States). The samples for the particle size test were well dispersed in an ethanol solution using an ultrasonic disperser. The phases present in the leaching residues were determined using X-ray diffractometry (XRD, X’ Pert MPD Pro, PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation (λ First, we investigated the pulverization behavior during the acid leaching of ilmenite without any thermal pretreatment in both the stirred and non-stirred leaching modes. The leaching was conducted in the 20% HCl solution at 378 To clarify the mechanism of the leaching-induced pulverization, the morphology change of the particles during the leaching process was carefully observed. The morphologies of the particles after stirred leaching for 1 From the above morphology analysis, we determined that dissociation of the TiO Ilmenite samples that experienced pre-oxidation for 4 The oxidation effect on the pulverization prevention for leaching products should be related to the phase and the microstructure evolution during the oxidation process. During oxidation pretreatment from 873 In addition to the morphologies, the leaching product of the pre-oxidized ilmenite also exhibits a different crystalline phase from that of raw ilmenite. The XRD patterns of the products obtained from 8 Because the intensity of the mechanical effect is much lower, the pre-oxidized ilmenites have a much stronger resistance to pulverization during the non-stirred leaching, as expected. (Without stirring, the leaching rate only decreases slightly.) Even ilmenites that were pre-oxidized at 873 The pulverization resistance of ilmenite leached via pre-oxidation at T The solubility of pre-oxidized ilmenite can be effectively improved via the weak reduction process (reduction of ferric iron to the ferrous state). ( To determine the effect of the weak reduction on the pulverization, the ilmenite that was pre-oxidized at 1073 Additionally, the above effect should be related to the phase and the microstructure evolution during the reduction process, which was systematically illustrated in one of our previous publications. At high temperatures, e.g Because the main phase is also FeTiO For the pre-oxidized ilmenite subjected to reduction at a lower temperature, most of the Ti present in the insoluble rutile network (its leaching product), which has few hydrolyzed TiO The pulverization resistance of Panzhihua ilmenite during hydrochloric acid leaching via oxidization-reduction pretreatment has been studied for several decades in China. However, the appropriate process conditions, which can significantly improve both the performance of the pulverization resistance and the leaching rate, has not yet been established. The present investigation reveals that the formation and consumption of rutile grains during the oxidation-reduction thermal pretreatment plays a key role in preventing pulverization during the leaching process. A new pretreatment processing condition has been found: pre-oxidation at T We systematically investigated the influence of oxidation-reduction pretreatment on the pulverization of hydrochloric acid leaching products of Panzhihua ilmenite. The TiO The authors are grateful for financial support from the