Fracture of the nasal septum is a common injury. Fracture reduction using Ash forceps is the standard treatment for non-severely comminuted cases. In this study, septoplasty was compared to Ash forceps reduction of nasal septum fractures with regard to the quality of life outcome of patient breathing. Thirty consecutive patients with non-comminuted septal fractures were divided randomly into two groups. In group I, fractures were managed by closed reduction (using Ash forceps), while in group II, fractures were managed by septoplasty surgery. Each patient completed a validated quality of life scale for breathing (Nasal Obstruction Symptom Evaluation, NOSE) preoperatively and at 3 months postoperative. In group I, the mean difference between postoperative and preoperative NOSE scores was −28.33 (range −40 to −15), while in group II the mean difference was −44.33 (range −70 to −30). There was a significant improvement in nasal breathing quality of life in group II compared with group I (t-test, P
                     =0.001). The results of this study showed a significant improvement in quality of life outcome with the use of septoplasty compared to closed reduction for acute septal fractures. Septoplasty could be recommended for patients with acute nasoseptal fractures to ensure better nasal breathing outcomes.Nasal trauma is a common facial injury because of the central and prominent facial position of the nasal structures. Car accidents and sports injuries are common causes of nasal trauma. Fracture of the nasal septum is frequently associated with nasal trauma and may result in bilateral or unilateral nasal obstruction. The routine medical management of the fractured septum in the emergency operating room is by closed reduction. This is a simple, rapid, and economical manoeuvre. Septoplasty surgery is recommended for severely deviated septal fractures. The reported rate of revision septoplasty or septorhinoplasty for a residual deformity is as high as 50%. The hypothesis of this work is that a proper septoplasty should be done in the emergency management of a fractured nose with an associated fractured nasal septum. A proper septoplasty means that the septum is approached through a hemitransfixion incision, with the elevation of mucoperichondrial flaps, excision of septal spurs, and correction of the deviated parts. This can lead to improvements in patient quality of life outcomes regarding nasal breathing. Quality of life outcome measurement tools are increasingly used in otolaryngology. The American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery has approved the validated Nasal Obstruction Symptom Evaluation (NOSE) scale for the evaluation of nasal breathing. This scale has been used in many studies to evaluate different techniques in septoplasty. The aim of this study was to assess patient satisfaction in terms of postoperative breathing, comparing two methods commonly used to manage fractures of the nasal septum. Patient satisfaction with breathing was determined using the validated NOSE scale developed by Stewart et al. This randomized study was approved by the necessary ethics committee. The sample size was calculated considering a power of 80%, alpha of 0.05, and a minimum clinically relevant difference in NOSE score of 20. The planned sample size was 30 patients (two groups of 15 patients in each). Inclusion criteria for the enrolment of patients were age ≥18 years, the presence of a mild septal fracture without comminution, and patient agreement to participate in the study. Patients with open wound nasal fractures and those with severe comminuted septal fractures were excluded. A septal fracture was considered severe if it was grade IV or V in the classification of Ondik et al. Thirty consecutive patients requiring surgical management of a nasal septum fracture and meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled in the study between 1 July 2013 and 30 June 2015. In order to be enrolled in the study, every patient had to provide signed informed consent. The consent form stated that the patient would be allocated randomly to a surgical method for the correction of their nasal septum fracture. The patients were assigned randomly to one of two groups. Randomization was done by the research coordinator by choosing a closed envelope containing details of the method of management. Blinding was not applicable. The surgeries were performed in the otolaryngology department of a university hospital in Tanta, Egypt. All surgeries were done under general anaesthesia by the same surgeon (AY), who is a consultant in otolaryngology with particular experience in rhinoplasty. Fifteen patients were enrolled in group I and their septal fractures were managed by reduction using Ash forceps and a Boies elevator. This was done by reducing the fractured septum with a twisting movement using the Ash forceps, or repositioning the displaced segments with the Boies elevator, without raising mucoperichondrial flaps. Fifteen patients were enrolled in group II and their septal fractures were managed by septoplasty. The septoplasty technique was as follows: after submucoperichondrial infiltration of 1/200 The NOSE scale ( The NOSE scale comprises five questions related to nasal breathing function. The patient selects a score in response to each question, ranging from 0 (not a problem) to 4 (severe problem). The sum of the five scores is multiplied by 5 to obtain a final score ranging from 0 to 100. A negative difference between the postoperative and preoperative scores indicates an improvement in nasal breathing function, while a positive difference indicates worsening of nasal breathing. The data analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics version 21.0 software (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Paired Fifteen patients were enrolled in group I; 12 were male and three were female. They ranged in age from 18 to 55 years (mean age 27.8 years). The average operative time for these patients was 15 Preoperative NOSE scores in group I ranged from 50 to 85 ( The mean In group I, the mean difference between the postoperative and preoperative NOSE scores was −28.33 (range −40 to −15, standard deviation 7.48; Fracture of the septum associated with fracture of the nasal bone is a common injury. Ondik et al. classified nasal and septal fractures into five grades. Hung et al. found that 18% of patients needed further surgery after closed reduction in their study. The present study was a randomized trial evaluating the effect of septoplasty in non-severely comminuted septal fractures based on a validated quality of life outcome measurement tool (NOSE scale). Nasal breathing is dependent on the patient's subjective perception, thus validated outcome tools appear to be the best method for the evaluation of surgical interventions in this regard. The strengths of this study include the randomization of patients and the measurement tool used, which is a validated quality of life scale. The main weaknesses of this study are the absence of blinding and the relatively small sample size. In cases managed by closed reduction in which the patient does not achieve a satisfactory breathing outcome, a septoplasty should be considered. The results of this study showed a significant improvement in quality of life outcome with the use of septoplasty compared to closed reduction for acute septal fractures. Septoplasty is a basic surgery in all otolaryngology resident training programmes and thus should be easy to apply in patients with acute nasoseptal fractures, as well as in the severe cases for which it is already indicated. Septoplasty could be recommended for patients with acute nasoseptal fractures to ensure better nasal breathing outcomes. No funding. No competing interests. Ethical approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of Tanta Medical School. Not required.