A combination of transmission electron microscopy, electron backscatter diffraction and wavelength dispersive spectrum has been used to identify crystal structure, grain boundary characteristic and chemical composition of the constituent phases in Cr-Fe-C alloys with three different carbon concentrations. Depending on the three different carbon concentrations, the solidification structures are found to consist of primary α-phase and [α+(Cr,Fe)23
                     C6] eutectic in Cr-18.4Fe-2.3C alloy; primary (Cr,Fe)23
                     C6 and [α+(Cr,Fe)23
                     C6] eutectic in Cr-24.5Fe-3.8C alloy and primary (Cr,Fe)7
                     C3 and [α+(Cr,Fe)7
                     C3] eutectic in Cr-21.1Fe-5.9C alloy, respectively. The grain boundary analysis is useful to understand growth mechanism of the primary phase. The morphologies of primary (Cr,Fe)23
                     C6 and (Cr,Fe)7
                     C3 carbides are faceted structures with polygonal shapes, different from primary α-phase with dendritic shape. The primary (Cr,Fe)23
                     C6 and (Cr,Fe)7
                     C3 carbides with strong texture exist a single crystal structure and contain a slight low angle boundary, resulting in the polygonal growth mechanism. Nevertheless, the primary α-phase with relative random orientation exhibits a polycrystalline structure and comprises a massive high-angle boundary, caused by the dendritic growth mechanism.Cr-Fe-C alloy is well known for its excellent resistance to abrasion, oxidation and corrosion and has been extensively used in aggressive conditions, such as mining and mineral process, cement production and pulp and paper manufacture industries. Many previous investigations have focused on the microstructural characteristics, mechanical properties and abrasive wear behaviors of Cr-Fe-C alloys The morphologies of constituent phases can exhibit a wide variety of geometrical arrangements. Many recent investigations report solidification behaviors and morphological transitions of the constituent phases in Fe-based, Cu-based and other alloys Electron backscatter diffraction has been commonly used to characterize crystallographic orientation, texture and grain boundary misorientation of the multi-phase compounds in several different materials Cr-Fe-C alloys were prepared by gas tungsten arc welding technique to deposit various pure Cr and CrC (Cr:C Specimens for metallographic examination by optical microscopy and field-emission scanning electron microscopy were ground on silicon carbide papers to 1500 grit and then progressively polished with 1 and 0.3 Chemical compositions of the cladding layers and constituent phases were analyzed by wavelength dispersive spectrum. The phase transitions during solidification process in Cr-Fe-C alloys with three distinct carbon contents were determined by differential scanning calorimeter under an argon atmosphere. The flow rate of argon was 4          Electron backscatter diffraction technique has been applied successfully to analyze crystallographic orientation and grain boundary misorientation of the constituent phases in Cr-Fe-C alloys with three different carbon concentrations. The morphology of primary phase transits from dendritic shape with non-faceted structure to polygonal shape with faceted structure, as the carbon content varies from 2.3 to 5.9 The authors would like to thank the financial support of Ministry of Economic Affairs and National Science Council under projects numbered 99-EC-17-A-08-S1-117 and NSC99-2221-E-005-033-MY3.