This paper proposes a novel approach to sulfur removal by adding aluminum in the bayer process of high-sulfur bauxite. The effects of aluminum dosage on the concentrations of different valence sulfur in sodium aluminate solution were investigated at length to find that high-valence sulfur (S2O3
                     2−, SO3
                     2−, SO4
                     2−) concentration in sodium aluminate solution decreases, but the concentration of the S2− in the sodium aluminate solution increases as aluminum dosage increases. This suggests that aluminum reacts with high-valence sulfur to generate low-valence sulfur at digestion temperature, which is consistent with our thermodynamic calculation results. As aluminum dosage increases, sulfur digestion rate decreases notably, and the alumina digestion rate decreases slightly, while sulfur content in red mud markedly increases. This suggests that high-valence sulfur in sodium aluminate solution can be converted to S2− and then enter red mud by adding aluminum during the digestion process.Extensive and rapid developments in the alumina industry have made bauxite resources increasingly scarce. China possesses over 800 million tons of diasporic high-sulfur bauxite, mainly in Henan, Chongqing, and Guizhou provinces; this bauxite is highly valuable, provided that effective methods of removing its sulfur are made available. Bauxite with sulfur content greater than 0.7% is called high sulfur bauxite. The nature of high sulfur bauxite is as follows: i. The higher the content of sulfur is, the deeper the buried depth of high sulfur bauxite is. The content of sulfur is between 0.8% and 7%; ii. The ore grade is high, the A/S (mass ratio of alumina to silica) of 2/3 reserves is above 7; iii. High-sulfur bauxite belongs to diasporic bauxite, the most common sulfur-bearing minerals in high-sulfur bauxite are pyrite and its isomers (marcasite and melnikovite) as well as sulfates such as CaSO The most negative effects of sulfur’s presence in the Bayer process are as follows ( To date, relatively few researchers have investigated sulfur removal in the alumina production process because high-sulfur bauxite is seldom used in alumina production outside of China. Recent years have seen a few relevant studies in China ( Large swaths of China’s high-sulfur bauxite reserves are unable to be developed or utilized due to the lack of an appropriate bulk desulfurization method for alumina production. This paper proposes a new method of sulfur removal by adding aluminum in which aluminum is supplied to prevent S The high-sulfur bauxite used in this experiment was obtained from the Zunyi mining area in China. The chemical components of mineral samples are shown in X-ray diffraction of the prepared samples was conducted with a Bruker advanced-D8 powder diffractometer using Cu-K As shown in As shown in The alkali solution used in the experiment was taken from an evaporation spent liquor from the Zunyi alumina refinery. Its chemical components are listed in The lime used in the experiment was also provided by a certain Alumina Plant in China. The weight percent of total CaO in the lime is 92.65%. Digestion experiments on high-sulfur bauxite were conducted in a XYF-6 digester heated by molten salts. The digestion temperature can be controlled within the variation range of 273.1 K (0.1 °C). The mineral sample and evaporation-spent liquor according in predetermined proportions were placed in a 100 ml sealed stee1 bomb. The digester was brought to the specified temperature and held for 5 min, then the steel bomb was placed inside and the digestion process was run. The sodium aluminate solution was then filtered and the Al The digestion rate of alumina (η  (A/S) (A/S) The digestion rate of sulfur (η  S S F F The aluminum dosage was varied between 0% and 5% through a series of digestion experiments at a temperature of 533 K (260 °C), a digestion time of 60 min, α  The standard Gibbs free energy of the reactions of aluminum with high-valence sulfur (S As can be seen from Again, six different aluminum dosages (between 0% and 5%) were tested under the same conditions described above. The effects of aluminum dosage on the digestion rates of alumina and sulfur are shown in It can be seen from The content of sulfur in red mud described above are shown in It can be seen from The results shown in Iron exists as Fe(OH) Again, six different aluminum dosages (between 0% and 5%) were tested under the same conditions described above. The effects of aluminum dosage on liquor absorbance are shown in It can be seen from The higher the sulfur concentration in sodium aluminate solution, the deeper the colour of solution ( Based the above results and discussion, we propose the following mechanism of sulfur removal (shown in As a reductant, the aluminum reacts with high-valence sulfur (S The high-valence sulfur in sodium aluminate solution can be converted to S This work was supported by the