Geriatric acetabulum fractures commonly occur because of low-energy falls. The decision-making and treatment strategies can be difficult independent of the fracture pattern. Elementary fracture patterns in the elderly are more commonly treated with open reduction and internal fixation versus acute total hip arthroplasty. Osteopenia further challenges surgeons' ability to obtain and maintain the reduction of these fractures. We present techniques regarding open reduction and internal fixation of elementary type acetabulum fractures in the elderly/geriatric population.Acetabulum fractures in the geriatric population are projected to increase in incidence. Elementary fracture patterns consist of anterior and posterior wall fractures, anterior and posterior column fractures, and transverse fractures ( Signs that portend to a poorer outcome after open reduction and internal fixation include the “gull sign,” Unlike in younger patients in whom anatomic reduction is the surgical objective, surgical objectives for the elderly include one nonextensile surgical approach, stable fixation of the columns, relatively quick operative times (3-4 hours), avoiding osteotomies (specifically trochanteric osteotomies), limiting disruption of the abductors, and providing as close to an anatomic joint reduction as possible given the aforementioned restrictions. In the treatment of posterior fractures, a standard Kocher-Langenbeck approach is typically used. To limit intramuscular dissection, a Gibson approach is used occasionally. Once the approach is performed, fractures are reduced with standard instruments. However, osteopenic bone may fracture with forceful reduction attempts; this may be minimized by spreading the force over a larger area with “shoes” placed on reduction forceps and by the use of push plates. A helpful fixation option for small articular pieces is to add “rebar” with numerous small diameter screws, smooth and/or threaded K-wires, or “smart”/bioabsorbable pins. These act to reinforce already brittle bone in and about the acetabulum. This technique is especially useful to buttress a comminuted and impacted articular segment. Using bone cement (polymethyl methacrylate) is another well-established technique to further augment bony fixation. Synthetic bone void fillers, such as a calcium phosphate, are well documented for use in articular fractures in other areas of the skeleton Lag screws alone should not be used in osteoporotic bone but should be neutralized with reconstruction plates. Multiple spring plates for buttressing comminuted posterior wall fractures with an overlying reconstruction plate are particularly useful. Locking plate fixation is an attractive option for patients with osteoporotic bone. One would presume that the advantages would be similar to other bones in terms of fixation strength. However, there are no biomechanical studies of acetabulum surgery using locked plating. There are downsides to locked plating, such as when contouring locked reconstruction plates, locked holes can become deformed and not allow screws to appropriately lock into the plate. Another limitation with locked plates is their fixed angled; often, an angled trajectory is needed to place screws about the acetabulum, and this is limited by fixed-angle locking screws. Future technology using variable-angle locking plates may address this limitation. Percutaneous fixation is a very attractive option in treating elderly patients with acetabulum fractures, especially those with minimal displacement or those prone to displacement. Total hip arthroplasty ought to be considered if there is severe femoral head damage and/or fracture, concomitant femoral neck fracture, the acetabular articular surface is unreconstructable, there is a need for an extensile approach for ORIF, severe osteopenia does not allow reduction or secure fixation, there is preexisting coxarthrosis, or if there is a delay in surgery because of comorbidities. Preoperatively, elderly patients are treated the same as their younger counterparts with a complete trauma and/or medical evaluation and optimization for surgery, typical Judet radiographs and computed tomography scan, skeletal traction when necessary, deep vein thrombosis (DVT) chemoprophylaxis, and perioperative antibiotics. Intraoperativly, wide, standard prepping and draping is used, all hardware is verified to be extra-articular with fluoroscopy, and multilayered closure over drain(s) is used. Postoperatively, mobilization and range of motion are started immediately as tolerated, and toe-touch weight bearing is instituted for 12 weeks. For isolated posterior wall fractures, we routinely position the patient in the lateral decubitus position, axillary roll, using rolled blankets and tape for support (a beanbag can affect intraoperative imaging), and on a radiolucent table. We use a commercial bone foam (Excel Medical Solutions, Plymouth, MN) with a leg tunnel for the down leg and a flat top rather than blankets and pillows for support for the operative leg. The hip is kept extended, and the knee is flexed throughout the case to relax the sciatic nerve. The Kocher-Langenbeck or Gibson approach is used. External rotators are tenotomized and tagged for later repair; the sciatic nerve is identified. Self-retaining retractors and sciatic nerve retractor are used only when needed for visualization to avoid prolonged pressure on soft tissues. Damaged and nonviable muscle is excised (regularly this includes some or all the gluteus minimus and the gemelli). The joint is irrigated while the hip is held subluxed or dislocated, and the femoral head and intact acetabular articular surfaces are inspected. If the injury is the result of a femoral head dislocation, the non–weight-bearing portion of the femoral head is drilled with a 2.5-mm drill bit to assess for bleeding. All capsular attachments are maintained to the bone to preserve vascularity. Marginal impaction and/or articular injuries are reduced first using the femoral head as a template. Fixation strategies are used as described previously (ie, temporary fixation with K-wires and then “rebar” internal fixation supplemented with autograft bone or calcium phosphate bone filler to buttress the articular surface). The posterior wall is reduced and held with lag screws or multiple spring plates if needed. An appropriately contoured reconstruction plate along the brim of the posterior wall is placed to neutralize spring plates and/or buttress the posterior wall ( Isolated posterior column fractures are uncommon in the elderly. These are often associated with fractures of the posterior wall. These are approached similar to that described earlier for posterior wall fractures. Locking plates are more commonly used in this setting because the reconstruction plates typically do not have to be contoured as aggressively for the posterior column as the posterior wall. Isolated transverse fractures are uncommon in the elderly and are often associated with fractures of the posterior wall. A single nonextensile approach is usually used. Our decision on the approach is dictated by the column with the greatest amount of displacement and the “ease” of an indirect reduction of the opposite column. Most transverse fractures are approached posteriorly because this is usually the column that is more displaced. This is performed as described previously for the posterior wall with the exception of placing the patient in the prone position versus the lateral position. Prone positioning usually makes the reduction easier because the surgeon is not trying to counteract the weight of the femoral head displacing the transverse fracture. Likewise, the placement of a posterior to anterior, anterior column lag screw is more easily placed in the prone position. Once the approach is performed, the anterior column is typically reduced first followed by the posterior column. After reduction, the anterior column is internally fixed with an anterior column screw placed “percutaneously” using the obturator outlet and inlet views. Isolated anterior wall fractures are uncommon. The patient is positioned supine on a radiolucent table. The middle window of the ilioinguinal approach frequently offers the best visualization of this area. Reduction and fixation strategies are similar to those of the posterior wall. Often, spring plates and mini-fragment fixation are required, with reconstruction plate(s) for neutralization and/or buttressing the anterior wall. Isolated anterior column fractures are more common in the elderly than their younger counterparts. We equally use either an ilioinguinal approach or a Stoppa with lateral window approach for anterior column fractures. The patient is positioned supine on a radiolucent table. Typically, longitudinal traction of the affected limb and/or lateral traction on the affected hip are used. Pelvis reduction clamps and pushers are used to obtain and maintain the reduction of the anterior column. As in the posterior column, locking plates are not routinely used but may be an attractive option if there is severe osteopenia. These plates are typically longer than may be used in a younger person to place screws into areas of more dense bone, such as the pubic body, the supra-acetabular area, the pelvic brim, and the sciatic buttress/posterior ileum ( Complications in the elderly are similar to those seen in the younger population; however, a few warrant specific mention. The risk of neurologic injury can be increased in the elderly. Spinal stenosis and/or foraminal stenosis can contribute to the increased risk of injury to neurologic structures, specifically to the sciatic nerve (and its nerve roots) when retracted during a posterior exposure. This is avoided by always maintaining the hip extended and knee flexed. Vascular injury may be more of a concern because vessels may be atherosclerotic and they would be more inelastic. Vessels could rupture and/or tear during normal surgical approaches (compared with the younger patient with more elastic vessels that tolerate stretch). An elderly patient may also be more prone to thrombosis and/or embolus during surgery. Vascular complication is decreased by appropriate operative exposure, carefully retracting vessels, and keeping self-retaining retractor use to a minimum. Nutrition is always a concern in the elderly because this can affect infection risk and wound healing. Nutritional status should be evaluated if there is any question and subsequent dietary supplement implemented if appropriate. DVT is a concern in the elderly as well, and there is no change in prophylaxis compared with younger patients with the exception of adjusting for renal impairment if necessary. Osteopenia lends itself to increased risks of failed fixation and potential nonunion. This is best treated with secure fixation techniques as described here. If those are not achievable, then one could consider acute total hip arthroplasty. Excellent and good outcomes have been reported to be less common in the elderly compared with the young. Open reduction and internal fixation of acetabulum fractures in the elderly can be achieved with expected good results by using some of the principles and techniques described here.