Required deformation energy is one of the most important factors in metal forming process. So many attentions have been paid for finding the new ways to optimize the energy in various forming process. In this research extrusion of L-section with two different streamlined dies, one with Limason-shaped intermediate section and the other without intermediate section, has been analyzed. Experimental results show an interesting phenomena, extrusion with the second die which changes round initial section to L-exit section directly, without intermediate section, needs much more energy than that requires for the first die having intermediate section. These important results, considering practical point of view, are in good agreement with macro examination and theoretical analysis of metal flow pattern of L-section extrusion in flat face die which has done before.Extrusion is one of the most common forming process which is used for production of long and straight products such as bars and sections. Using upper bound approach and finite element method, many researchers had analyzed extrusion processes of different sections. Nagpal and Altan In this research two different streamlined dies, one with intermediate section and another without intermediate section, have been employed. Test results show that energy required for extrusion of L-section becomes minimum when the streamlined die with intermediate section is applied. Designing and manufacturing of two different streamlined dies are the first phase of this research. Based on the theoretical simulations of metal flow pattern For doing practical experiments, two different materials were used, commercially pure aluminum and commercially pure Lead. Extrusion of lead was carried out at room temperature while aluminum specimens were extruded at 450 Using two different streamlined dies, four specimens, two of them made from lead and other made from aluminum, were extruded. The load–stroke curves were obtained to analyze the deformation energy of the extrusion process. These curves are shown in The maximum force of extrusion was used for comparison between different processes. This comparison is shown in As can be realized from  The relative pressure can be calculated by dividing the extrusion pressure by materials flow stress. In Since in flat face die sever plastic shearing occurs between dead zone and deformation zone, sticking friction prevails and shear stress reaches to its maximum value, so friction factor will be maximum. Upper bound analysis for calculating relative pressure of extrusion in various frictional conditions other than in flat face die has been carried out. Results are shown in Also the ideal work of extrusion can easily be calculated using the following formula: In this formula As it is shown in A great practical achievement in designing L-section extrusion dies has been obtained in this research. In extrusion of L-section, if metal is passed through Limason-Shaped intermediate section, then passing from this optimum section will lead to in energy reduction. Experimental results show that extrusion pressure, relative pressure and actual work required for deformation became minimum in streamlined die with intermediate section compared to streamlined die without intermediate section, and thus the process efficiency is increased. All of these experimental results are in good agreement with the theoretical analysis of metal flow pattern.