Processing of graphite from its ore has been studied for more than a decade due to the elevated demand for graphite which has a wide range of applications but restricted to the short availability of resources. In the present study, microwave irradiation was used for the graphitization of carbon using different metal (Ni, Co, Fe, Cr) salts as catalysts. Microwave irradiation excels from the classical thermal treatment since in the former case the reaction time and the temperature used is low. The graphitization using nickel sulfate as a catalyst was most effective when compared to the other catalysts and the % degree of graphitization was about 98% for 5 min of reaction time. The mechanism underlying the formation of graphite by microwave irradiation is also discussed in brief. Hence this study provides a new approach for processing graphite by a simple, fast and effective microwave technique. In addition, the preparation of graphene oxide (GO) from the graphitized carbon was also attempted and compared with GO prepared from commercial graphite.Carbon-based materials have been the focus of research over the past years owing to their astonishing electronic and thermal conductivities, good mechanical stability, efficient adsorption capability and chemical stability. With the advantage of these properties, it can be used in various applications. One important candidate from carbon family is graphene, which has been in the spotlight of research. Graphene due to its extraordinary properties can be used in the fields, such as fuel cells, solar cells, lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors, catalyst, photocatalysis and also in targeted drug delivery since graphene is also biocompatible [ Graphite has a wide range of applications such as carbon steel forging, crucibles, refractory bricks, lubricants, dry cell batteries, fuel cells, solar cells, sensors, nuclear production and also in the preparation of most sought out material graphene [ Generally, graphite occurs in nature in one of the three forms such as amorphous (70–80%), crystalline flakes (90–98%) and crystalline lump or vein (90–99%) [ Various methods were reported for the graphitization such as template method, pyrolysis, foaming technique, chemical activation followed by catalytic graphitization, plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition and so on [ Teawon et al. [ Here, we report microwave irradiation for graphitization with the aid of catalyst for processing graphite mineral resource obtained from Indonesia [ Nickel sulfate hexahydrate (NiSO In our previous work graphite was separated from its ore by froth flotation process from other gangue minerals and the recovery of graphite was about 70% [ Graphitization of the carbon experimented with the aid of four different metal salt catalysts such as nickel sulfate, iron nitrate, cobalt nitrate, chromium nitrate using microwave method. 100 mL of 6 mmol concentration of metal salt solutions was prepared and mixed separately with 1 g of graphite and stirred for 4 h. The mixture is heated at 75 °C for 24 h and the mixture is cooled to room temperature, filtered and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 5 h. The dried powder of graphite is subjected to microwave irradiation for 5 min, 10 min and 20 min of reaction time respectively with the purging of inert argon gas at a flow rate of 1 L/min. The samples after the microwave treatment are collected separately and characterized by various techniques. The microwave graphitization of the material is experimented using Microwave Oven (IEC 60705) with 1000 W capacity, 220 V and a microwave frequency of 2450 MHz which was customized with inlet and outlet valve for passing Inert gas such as Argon. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (pan-analytical X'pert PRO series PVV 3040/XO with λ = 1.5418 Å) made in the Netherlands. X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) analysis was done using XRF Rigaku NEX CG to analyse the purity of the materials. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy dispersive X-ray (EDAX) analysis was performed using Su 3500-EDAX Hitachi, and EDAX Apollo X. Prior to the analysis, the materials were sputtered with 2.5 nm gold thickness. Raman spectra were recorded at room temperature using Raman spectrometer (XploRA One) from Horiba Scientific using argon ion laser source with an excitation wavelength of 523 nm. XRD patterns of crude graphite before and after leaching is shown in the Different metal salts such as nickel sulfate, iron nitrate, cobalt nitrate and chromium nitrate are selected as catalysts for microwave graphitization. It can be observed from the literature, that the most commonly used metal salt catalysts are used in this study. The reason for its use: high solubility of carbon-based materials with these metals even at high temperature and high carbon diffusion rate [  The XRD patterns for graphitization using various catalysts for 5 min of microwave irradiation is depicted in The morphology of the graphite before and after leaching and microwave graphitization with various catalysts were characterized by SEM analysis. The SEM micrographs of graphite before and after leaching are shown in the Since the % G using the nickel sulfate catalyst produced a better result, SEM analysis is shown only for this nickel sulfate catalyst after microwave irradiation. From the Raman spectroscopy is one of the most substantial tools to characterize carbon-based materials and is considered to be the fingerprint for these materials. Distinguishing carbon materials using Raman analysis makes it feasible to categorize these materials for specific applications. The fundamental bands in Raman spectroscopy for graphite material are the D-band and G-band, the former corresponding to the defects in sp Apart from these prominent peaks another peak D′ appears at 1600 cm The formation of the 2D band which is the overtone of D band is attributed to the development of graphene structure and used to predict the thickness of graphene layer thickness. The crystallite size La for graphite is calculated as per the formula is given by Cancado et al. [  The Raman spectra of different metal catalysed graphite prepared by microwave technique is given in Although iron nitrate catalysed microwave graphitized material shows D and G band in the Raman spectra as shown in For the generation of heat within the material using microwave irradiation, the microwave should penetrate into the material. In the microwave frequency, dipole polarization, i.e., Maxwell-Wagner Sillars, is considered as the prominent mechanism for coupling of energy at the molecular state when the carbon-based material is heated. In dipolar polarization, dipoles align themselves with an electric field, and the frequency of the microwave is adjusted to stimulate thermal effect. This phenomenon gives rise to molecular friction and collisions between the adjacent molecules or atoms leading to the formation of heat required for the process [ The schematic representation for graphitization with increased crystallinity using nickel sulfate catalyst is shown in The formation of Ni intercalated in the graphite network is reiterated by XRD analysis, as indicated by the presence of peaks around 2ϴ value of 42.8° and 53.6° corresponds to Ni [ The graphite prepared by microwave irradiation using nickel sulfate catalyst is used as the starting material to prepare graphene oxide (GO) by modified Hummer's method. GO is considered to be the most widely used material for the synthesis of graphene in large scale since the direct ways to obtain graphene is tedious and expensive [ GO synthesized from graphite prepared by microwave irradiation with nickel sulfate as catalyst shows three peaks at a 2ϴ value of 10.8°, 26.6° and 43.5° representing GO, graphitic moieties, and unoxidized graphitic moieties respectively as displayed in In summary, graphitization is done by microwave irradiation with different metal salt catalysts. Although leaching improves the crystalline nature of the carbon material, the graphitization was studied further using microwave irradiation. Microwave graphitization is more efficient than the other conventional graphitization techniques engaged so far. Nickel sulfate catalyst improves the % degree of graphitization considerably to about 98% when compared to the other catalysts as implicated from XRD analysis and the calculated % degree of graphitization. Raman spectroscopic analysis also discloses the successful formation of graphite with I The authors would like to acknowledge PUPT Research Scheme,