Carbonaceous matter in refractory gold ore is known to be one of the primary causes of gold recovery loss. Model experiments were conducted to simulate the bio-modification of carbonaceous matter using powdered activated carbon (PAC) as a surrogate and cell-free spent medium (CFSM) of Phanerochaete chrysosporium. The CFSM was used because of the lignin peroxidase and manganese peroxidase secreted by the microbe during its incubation. In the present work, an investigation was conducted to determine the physical and chemical alterations in PAC after enzymatic treatment and its effect on Au(CN)2
                     − uptake. Characterization of the solid residues of PAC by 13C NMR and N2 adsorption after bio-modification revealed that the treatment had decomposed poly-aromatic carbons into aliphatic carbons and also reduced the specific surface area from 1430m2/g to 697m2/g in 14days. As a result, Au(CN)2
                     − uptake decreased from 100% (0.048mmol/g) to 43% within 12h primarily due to the enzyme treatment and adsorption of CFSM components. It further decreased to 26% due to surface passivation by bio-chemicals derived from CFSM and/or decomposed aliphatic hydrocarbons from aromatic carbons between 7days and 14days. These findings may contribute to efforts to decrease preg-robbing in hydrometallurgical processing of refractory gold ores.Refractory gold ores (RGO) are widely distributed in the world. They can be found in several gold mining regions, including the Prestea, Tarkwa and the Ashanti goldfields of Ghana, the Sao Bento Mineracao in Brazil, the Carlin Gold Mine of Nevada in USA, the California mother lode in USA, the Kerr Addison Mines in Canada, the Bakyrchik mine in Kazakhstan and Natalkinsk mine in Russia, the Ratatotok district, North Sulawesi in Indonesia, and Shaanxi in China ( The difficulty with sulfide minerals arises from encapsulation of tiny gold grains, making them inaccessible to the cyanide lixiviant. On the other hand, the CM in RGO tends to adsorb gold cyanide (Au[CN] Characterization of the CM is central to defining its interactions with Fundamental understanding of the mechanisms associated with the interaction between RGO and CFSM derived from All reagents and powdered activated carbon (PAC) used were of special grade and supplied by Wako Chemicals, Japan. PAC was selected as a surrogate for natural carbonaceous matter due to its amorphous crystal structure (unpublished XRD data), which shares some resemblance with the elemental carbon in RGO ( A white rot fungus Liquid cultures of 25 Separately, 50 All experiments of bio-degradation with CFSM were conducted in duplicates. The filtrate and bio-modified PAC residue were collected periodically for characterization. The residual enzyme activity and total dissolved organic matter concentration of were also determined. The bio-modified solid was subjected to washing with ultrapure water assisted by ultra-sonication prior to solid analysis. Afterward, a portion of these bio-modified solids were supplied for various washing techniques using simple alcohols to remove the bio-chemicals on the surface of PAC after CFSM treatment. The optimal procedure was washing with 2-propanol at 50 The chemical alterations in CFSM-treated PAC following the enzyme treatment were examined using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and XRD patterns of the pristine and bio-treated PAC were collected on an Ultima IV diffractometer (RIGAKU, Akishima, Japan) using Cu Kα radiation (40 FTIR spectra were collected in DRIFT method by a FT/IR-670 Plus spectrometer (JASCO, Tokyo, Japan) in the transmission mode using 0.5 Solid The BET specific surface area and pore size distribution of PAC 5 A field emission scanning electron microscope was used to determine the change in surface morphology of PAC before and after CFSM treatment. The micrographs were collected at an accelerated voltage of 8 The zeta potential of PAC 5 The Imai Kinpaku gold foil was used to prepare a stock solution of Au(CN) For adsorption experiments of Au(CN) Over the incubation period,  FTIR spectra for bio-degraded PACs are shown in According to Physical characteristics of PAC after enzymatic treatment were investigated using N The pores in PAC were comprised of micropores and relatively smaller mesopores ( The SEM images of the pristine PAC sample seem to be quite smooth with this magnification ( The bio-degradation of PAC may have proceeded through the immobilisation of the enzymes on the solid surface during the treatment. The initial zeta potential of PAC was slightly positive (3.1 Considering the point of zero charge of LiP and MnP which is between pH CFSM treatment of PAC was able to decrease Au(CN) The contribution of enzyme activity and/or surface passivation in Au(CN) The combined effects of surface passivation of PAC by CFSM and washing with 2-propanol can be schematically illustrated as shown in In summary, the biodegradation of carbonaceous matter may contribute to reducing Au(CN) CFSM from The research funding was provided to KS by the Japan Society for Promotion of Science (