Legumes/pulses namely, lentil (Lens esculenta), cowpea (Vigna unguiculata), blackgram (Phaseolus mungo), greengram (Phaseolus aureus) and Bengalgram (Cicer arietinum) in their dhal (dehusked split pulse) form were studied for their grinding characteristics from initial coarse grinding to further fine grinding of coarse particles resulting in 860–75μm and 210–45μm respectively, using an impact mill. The ground samples were screened and analyzed using differential analysis technique. The results indicated lentil to be the most amenable to grinding resulting in highest increase in surface area and also number of particles, and Bengalgram, the least in this respect. Cowpea, blackgram and greengram showed almost similar behavior with respect to increase in surface area and number of particles on grinding from coarse to finer particles. Though an increase in energy consumption was noted from coarse to fine grinding, it did not entirely depend on their breaking strength either. Analysis of the particle distribution of the ground samples indicated that grinding characteristics depends largely on some inherent property of these legumes and not merely on the size or shape of the samples during grinding.total surface of coarse and finely ground samples, respectively (mm total surface area of particles (mm Geometric constant, depending on the shape (dimensionless) particle diameter/mesh opening of screen particle diameter of screen immediately above arithmetic average of current drawn during coarse and fine grinding, respectively (A) total number of particles in coarse and finely ground samples, respectively. total number of particles in the mixture number of screens Shape factor (1 for sphere) (dimensionless) density of the particles (g/cm mass fraction of the total sample that is retained by screen mass fraction of the total sample that is retained by screen The objective of crushing and grinding is to produce small particles from larger ones. The energy efficiency of the operation is measured by the new surface created by the reduction in size. For this, the geometric characteristics of the particles are important in evaluating the product from a grinder. No grinder yields a uniform product either in size or shape. Hence the ground material consists of mixture of particles ranging in size. The comminuted particles resemble polyhedrons, and with several nearly equal faces can be considered to be spherical and so the term “diameter” is used for the particle size ( Solids may be broken in one or more of the following ways for reducing their size, i.e., compression, impact, attrition or cutting. In general, impact gives coarse, medium or fine products. The fundamentals of product size and shape and of energy requirements are however common to most machines employing either of the above principles for comminution ( Studies on cryogenic grinding of cumin seeds and cloves at different conditions, was studied by Five legumes were studied to know their grinding characteristics in terms of the new surface created resulting in increase in number of particles in the mixture of the ground sample from coarse to fine grinding. Equations are suggested for finding the total surface area of the particles and the number of particles in the sample of uniform particle size. But to apply these equations, the mixture of particles having various sizes and densities has to be sorted into fractions of approximately constant size. The most common method of separating the mixtures is by screening using test sieves. Calculations of average particle size, specific surface area, or particle population of a mixture may be based on either differential or cumulative analysis. Though methods based on the cumulative analysis are more precise where the assumption that all particles in a single fraction are equal in size is not needed, calculations based on differential analysis are more commonly used since the accuracy required does not warrant the use of the cumulative analysis ( Among many machines that are available for reducing the sizes of particles, in an impact mill, the material is reduced in size by a series of impacts against a rigid housing. The sieve installed at the outlet also influences particle size and shape of the product. Impact mills are used to process soft, medium hard and some hard materials ( However, an attempt has been made here to find the grinding characteristics of some of the legumes, using an impact mill for grinding. Such a study would help in selecting a suitable and an economical grinder depending upon the particle size required and the available resources. The objective of the study is to give a comparative data with regard to the new surface generated on grinding, resulting in the increase in number of particles. Legumes namely, lentil, cowpea, blackgram, greengram and Bengalgram in their dhal (dehusked and split) form were procured from the local market, and after cleaning they were dried at 40 Moisture, fat, protein and ash content of the pulses used in this study were determined according to The initial size of the dhal of the various legumes were measured using vernier calipers, having a least count of 0.02 Hardness of the dhal was noted using an Universal Testing machine (Model #5R, Lloyd, UK) with a load cell of 50 The above five types of dhal were ground to two different sizes, one from initial size of dhal to coarse size and then from coarsely ground material to fine grinding, using hammer mill (GEO Adlam & Sons Engineers, Bristol, London) of 130 From each batch of ground material two samples were taken for screen analysis. The ground material was analyzed for particle size in the mixture, using a vibratory sieve shaker (Rotap, India) of the type described by The screen analysis of the ground material for each dhal was done by differential analysis technique. The average particle size, specific surface area and particle population of a mixture were determined and the results were tabulated.  Of the five legumes studied, lentil seems to be the most amenable to grinding to fineness, having 3.5 times increase in area and 31 times increase in number of particles from coarse to fine grinding of the material. But, though lentil dhal is smaller in size compared to cowpea and Bengalgram ( Comparing cowpea, blackgram and greengram, it is evident from  The results indicated that lentil was most amenable to grinding and Bengalgram, the least with respect to increase in surface area and number of particles on grinding. Cowpea, blackgram and greengram showed almost similar behavior in this regard. Lentil, though being smallest in size and the least hard compared to similarly shaped dhal samples of cowpea and Bengalgram, the increase in surface area during coarse grinding of lentil was much smaller than cowpea or Bengalgram dhal. Similarly, blackgram and greengram, having more or less similar shape and size, though, have shown similar characteristics during coarse grinding, resulted in a distinct difference during fine grinding of the coarse particles. Among cowpea, blackgram and greengram, though cowpea is the largest in size compared to the other two, it resulted in more of finer particles during coarse grinding. Similarly, cowpea and Bengalgram, though resemble closely in shape and size, behaved differently during grinding, indicating once again that the grinding characteristics of these legumes in their dhal form did not depend merely upon their initial shape and size. Energy consumed did not entirely depend on the hardness of the dhal samples. But for all the samples, an increase in energy consumption was noted from coarse to fine grinding. Also, noticed that hardness of the dhal samples depended largely on their thickness. Though lentil having the least thickness and also least hard, did not indicate a distinct increase in the particle population during screen analysis of coarse grinding. This leads us to say that grinding characteristics also depend on some inherent property of these legumes.