Acid pressure oxidation followed by cyanide leaching of the residue is a promising process for the treatment of complex sulphides and the recovery of precious metals along with the base metals will improve the economy of the process. However, silver is incorporated into the jarosite specie during the pressure oxidation and cyanide leaching of the residue yields very low silver extraction.
                  In this work, iodide was added to the pressure oxidation of zinc–lead–iron complex sulphides to prevent the deportment of silver ions into the jarosite phase. At low temperature range (110–130 °C), the silver ions were completely sequenced into the silver iodide phase because of the fast precipitation kinetics of silver iodide and its stability at low temperatures. The leaching of the residue in cyanide solution yielded high silver extraction (above 90%).
                  Silver extraction from the residue decreased when the pressure oxidation was conducted at high temperatures (140–150 °C). At this temperature range, the enhanced stability and the precipitation kinetics of the jarosite specie posed a challenge by competing (with iodide) for silver ions. This competition was minimised by using moderately high initial acid for the pressure oxidation.
                  High zinc extraction was achieved during the pressure oxidation. Also, there were appreciable iron precipitation and acid neutralisation of the slurry. The resulting pregnant solution is suitable for zinc recovery by electrowinning and the residue can be leached for silver and gold extraction.The zinc industry has witnessed a steady improvement in the hydrometallurgical extraction of zinc such that high extractions (more than 98% extraction) are routinely achieved. It is now obvious that, the recovery of precious metals (silver and gold) along with zinc has become a necessary evaluation parameter to judge process economics. Silver is of interest because of its association with complex sulphides of base metals (galena, sphalerite and chalcopyrite) and its good price. Gold occurs in some complex sulphides and may be recovered along with the silver. Although the primary sources of base-metals (zinc and copper) are sulphide concentrates from high grade ores, as supplies diminish, the treatment of complex sulphides must be considered. The complex sulphide can be broadly described as an association of inter-grown sphalerite, galena and chalcopyrite which are finely disseminated within a pyritic, pyrrhotitic or arsenopyritic matrix. Silicates and carbonates rock may be the major gangue constituents. The individual mineral flotation is very difficult because of the fine-grained nature of these ores and therefore, ultra-fine grinding (with the associated cost) is required for the adequate liberation of the phases prior to the production of the individual concentrate. Significant deposits of complex fine-grained base metals sulphide ores occur in many parts of the world, however, economic exploitability of many of these deposits has been hampered by the metallurgical difficulties encountered in producing readily saleable selective concentrates. Where the production of the individual concentrates is feasible, some metal values are lost in these concentrates (such as gold and silver in zinc concentrate) and payment for these metal values may be poor. However, metal recoveries from the ores can be very significantly improved by producing bulk concentrates rather than the individual concentrates. A hydrometallurgical process, which is capable of selectively extracting the base metals without the loss of precious metals (silver and gold), would be attractive for the treatment of the bulk concentrates. The acid pressure oxidation in a sulphate medium has comparative advantages over the roast-leach-electrowinning process such as the high metal extractions and the production of elemental sulphur rather than the sulphur dioxide and acid recovery, which may raise environmental concern. This process is used commercially for the processing of zinc concentrates ( Acid pressure oxidation followed by cyanide leaching of the residue is a promising process for the treatment of zinc–lead–iron complex sulphides. High extractions of zinc into solution can be achieved during the oxidation with adequate liberation of the precious metals. The process can be adapted to a variety of concentrates and ores (such as copper ores and concentrates) because it is relatively insensitive to concentrate grade. However, there have been few investigations on the pressure oxidation of bulk sulphide concentrates ( During the pressure oxidation, the major silver mineral, which is silver sulphide is oxidised and silver ions are released into solution. Under the optimal conditions such as high concentration of lead, ferric and low level of acid that are favourable to iron precipitation, the silver ions are incorporated into the hydronium–lead jarosite specie ( Other solutions that have been offered are the oxidation at a temperature beyond the stability of jarosite (180 °C), the use of high acidity to reject silver as silver–lead sulphate and the use of high levels of potassium sulphate to precipitate the iron as potassium jarosite ( The objective of this work was to deport silver (in the range of 110–150 °C) into a residue suitable for leaching by cyanide, and to extract zinc into solution suitable for recovery by direct electrowinning or by solvent extraction/electrowinning. The pressure oxidation of three different complex sulphides was carried out in the temperature range of 110–150 °C and the iodide was added to the initial solution used for the oxidation test. The iodide addition was based on the stoichiometric of silver in the feeds. Silver iodide has low solubility product and its formation during the pressure oxidation will prevent the sequencing of silver ions to the jarosite phase. The solubility of silver chloride limits its application in the way iodide is applied in this work, despite the low reagent cost and the recent focus on the effects of chloride on the refractory gold extraction. Investigations were carried out to identify the oxidation conditions which would improve the deportment of silver into the silver iodide phase, without compromising the zinc extraction during the pressure oxidation. The resulting residues from the pressure oxidation were leached in cyanide solutions for silver and gold extractions. The silver iodide and other halogen compounds of silver are the most soluble silver compounds in cyanide solution and no oxygen or oxidiser (such as lead nitrate) is required for their dissolution in cyanide ( Pressure oxidation experiments were conducted on a 1 l scale in a standard 2 l Parr titanium autoclave with the following procedures. The autoclave was equipped with a temperature controller and a variable speed stirrer system. The internal vertical cooling tubes were fixed to the autoclave head and these also acted as baffles during the reaction. Stirring was provided by two 5.7 cm diameter 45° pitched blade impellers on a titanium shaft, the first one was positioned 2.5 cm off-bottom and the second was located 6.0 cm from the first impeller. Oxygen input to the autoclave was measured by a mass flow-meter (Omega Instruments) and data acquisition system. Chemical reagents were dissolved in deionised water and made up to 1 l. Slurry of the concentrates and solution were charged into the bomb. Whenever the experiment was conducted above the melting point of sulphur, 2.63 kg/t of lignosol and 2.63 kg/t quebracho surfactants were added to the initial slurry to prevent occlusion of the sulphide particles and the stiffening of the reaction by molten sulphur. Preliminary investigation at this level of surfactant combination revealed that sulphide occlusion was prevented, but at lower levels of surfactants, occluded particles were observed (visually) in the residues after drying. At high levels of initial acid such as 75 g/l sulphuric acid, the 2.63 kg/t lignosol and 2.63 kg/t quebracho surfactants were not sufficient. However, 4.21 kg/t each of the surfactants were observed to be effective in preventing the occlusion of the particles. The autoclave bomb was sealed and inserted into the heating assembly. In order to minimise the time required to reach the operating temperature, the jacket assembly was preheated for 15 min before inserting the bomb. Air and vapour were periodically vented up to a solution temperature approaching 100 °C. Slow stirring speed (180 rpm) was used during the heating to minimise reaction. When the system was approaching the desired temperature, stirring was increased to 900 rpm and at the exact temperature; stirring was stopped for oxygen addition. Oxygen was admitted into the autoclave near the bottom through a dip tube, which was also connected to an autoclave sampler. Once the required oxygen pressure of 689 kPa (100 psi) was attained, the acquisition of the oxygen flow data was initiated. Then, the stirrer was switched on (at 900 rpm), which marked the commencement of the oxidation test. When the oxidised residues were required for cyanidation, “non-interruptive” oxidation tests were conducted, in which samplings were omitted during the oxidation reactions. When the extraction-time profiles were required, slurry samples were obtained during the oxidation reactions.A sampler, which could withdraw a 5–10 ml slurry sample during the experiment was developed and fitted to the reactor. The withdrawn sample was weighed and filtered. After drying the solid sample, it was weighed and its mass was deducted from the mass of the slurry sample in order to obtain the mass of the solution sample. The density of the solution was also determined by weighing the known volume. The volume of the solution sample was then calculated from its mass and density. This was used to adjust for the changing volume due to sampling. The solution was analysed for zinc, iron and free acid. At the end of each run, the test was terminated by cooling and de-pressurizing the autoclave. The autoclave contents were suction filtered and the residue was washed thoroughly with deionised water and the solids were dried overnight in an oven. The dried solids were used for cyanidation. All pressure oxidation tests were carried out in duplicate and a third test was conducted in case of large difference (more than 5%) in the results of the first two tests. When the calculations of sulphide oxidation to sulphur and sulphate were required, the dried residues were repulped, 4 times in 1 l solution of 10% ammonium acetate to remove metal sulphate ( Cyanidation tests were carried out in 500 ml glass reactors. The slurry for cyanidation was made of 40 g of solids in 200 ml deionised water and agitation was provided by an overhead stirrer at a rate of 400 rpm. The pH was controlled at about 10.75 by the addition of calcium oxide powder during the 24-h cyanidation. The feeds and the solids from the oxidation reactions were examined by Scanning electron microscope/X-ray Spectrometer (SEM/EDX) for elemental composition analysis and the individual phases in the solids were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The soluble Fe, Zn and Ag were analyzed by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). The Fe The total sulphur in the solid was determined gravimetrically as BaSO The reagents employed in this study were reagent grade chemicals of the following specifications: ferric sulphate (Fe Three solid feed materials were obtained from various mines and suppliers. A bulk sample of zinc–lead–iron sulphide material was obtained from scavenger flotation of a sample of final flotation tailings from the Cannington mine. Size analysis of the dried Cannington complex sulphide particles indicated the 25th, 35th, 50th, 70th and 80th percentiles to be 5.99, 9.99, 20.00, 45.00 and 70.00 μm, respectively. The major economic sulphides associated with this material are galena and sphalerite. The principal iron mineral is pyrite and the silver is in the form of silver sulphide (Ag A sample of ore from the Eskay Creek mine in British Columbia was included in the study. The sample was low in sulphide and base metals but rich in precious metals. The sample was obtained dry and wet ground in a rodmill. The size analysis of the reground particles indicated the 25th, 50th and 80th percentiles to be 4.97, 13.75 and 30.00 μm, respectively. The ore minerals are dominantly pyrite, minor arsenopyrite, silver sulphide and freibergite. The complex sulphide concentrates from Cannington and Eskay Creek mines contain low concentration of zinc, which are 4.80% and 0.09%, respectively. Therefore, in order to produce a feed that contains high concentration of zinc, the Cannington concentrate was mixed with a high-grade natural sphalerite in the ratio of 14–5, respectively. The natural sphalerite was obtained from Wards Natural Science Ltd., Ontario. The sphalerite particles from −73 The chemical composition of each sample is presented in The baseline cyanidation tests were carried out on the Cannington and Eskay Creek low grade sulphide without prior pressure oxidation and the results are presented in Pressure oxidation of the Cannington concentrate was carried out at different temperatures in the range of 110–150 °C and the resulting residues were subjected to cyanidation for silver extraction. Initial solution used for the tests contained ferric, ferrous and zinc with concentration of 5, 5 and 20 g/l, respectively, as sulphate. Other conditions used were: oxygen partial pressure 100 psi; autoclave residence time 60 min; pulp density 8%; initial acidity 50 g/l H Silver extractions by cyanidation of the oxidised Cannington residues are presented in The iron minerals (excluding pyrite) and base metal sulphides consume acids (by reaction The low acid level and high temperatures promoted the precipitation kinetics of jarosite specie ( At 140 or 150 °C, the iron precipitation was more than the iron dissolution, which resulted into the high net iron precipitation at the end of the oxidation reaction ( Although the stability of jarosite specie increases with increasing temperature, the stability of silver iodide decreases with increasing temperature ( The migration of the silver ions to the jarosite phase is limited by the solubility of the silver iodide, which increases with increasing temperature ( If the silver ions are incorporated into the core of the jarosite crystals, its extraction during the cyanide leaching will be low because only the silver ions in the outer crystal planes of the jarosite can react with the free cyanide ions ( After the pressure oxidation, sulphur was the predominant product at low temperatures (110–130 °C) as shown in The same pressure oxidation conditions were used for the treatment of the Eskay Creek ore, except that lower stoichiometric iodide addition was used (100% of silver). The silver extractions by cyanide leaching of the oxidised Eskay Creek residues are presented in In Although the stoichiometric iodide addition was 100% of silver, which was lower than the iodide concentration used during the pressure oxidation of Cannington complex sulphide, silver extractions from the oxidised residues of Eskay Creek ore were almost complete in all the cases unlike the oxidised residues of Cannington complex sulphide. The results of the pressure oxidation of Eskay Creek ore are summarised in The silver ions released during the pressure oxidation of the Eskay Creek ore were completely deported into the silver iodide phase and these were leached into solution by cyanide ( Many of the complex sulphides may require high temperature oxidation for high rate of reaction and adequate liberation of the phases, which contain precious metals. Also, from the investigations of the Cannington bulk sulphide concentrate, sulphur yield decreased with increasing temperature ( Pressure oxidation tests of Cannington complex sulphide concentrate were carried out at 150 °C and at different levels of initial acid. Solution used for the oxidation tests contained ferric, ferrous and zinc with concentration of 5, 5 and 20 g/l, respectively, as sulphate. Other conditions were: oxygen partial pressure 100 psi; autoclave residence time 60 min; pulp density 8%; agitation 900 rpm; initial solution 1000 ml; stoichiometric iodide addition 200% of silver. 4.21 kg/t each of lignosol and quebracho surfactants were added to the slurry at the beginning of each experiment. The oxidation was followed by cyanide leaching of the residue and the results are presented in Silver extraction from the oxidised residue increased with increasing initial acidity of the pressure oxidation ( The pressure oxidation tests were conducted without the addition of iodide, while other conditions remained the same. The filtrate and the wash solution obtained after the pressure oxidation tests were analysed for silver and there was no dissolved silver in the solutions. The resulting residues were leached in cyanide solutions and the results are included in The results of the pressure oxidation tests are summarised in There was no substantial increase in the sulphide oxidation with increasing initial acidity of the slurry ( The UBC mixed concentrate contained sphalerite, galena and pyrite, and three different responses were selected to follow the overall behaviour during the pressure oxidation. The responses were: zinc concentration in solution as a function of time, which were expressed as a percentage of the total zinc present in the concentrate; iron concentration in solution, which would be determined by iron dissolution and precipitation; free acid (H Pressure oxidation of UBC mixed concentrate was investigated at a temperatures range of 120–150 °C, which was above the melting point of sulphur and in the presence of iodide. Samples were withdrawn during the reaction for analysis. The response-time profiles at different temperatures are presented in Initial solution used contained ferric, ferrous and zinc with concentration of 5, 5 and 20 g/l, respectively, as sulphate. Other standard conditions were: oxygen partial pressure 100 psi; residence time 90 min; pulp density 8%; agitation 900 rpm; initial volume of solution 1000 ml; acidity 50 g/l H There was ferric oxidation of the sphalerite ( When the oxygen was admitted into the bomb, the zinc sulphide reacted according to the following reaction: The acid data in For very finely ground material such as that derived from fine-grained complex sulphide, some oxidation of pyrite could take place as follows: The iron dissolution reactions that occurred during the heating were responsible for the increase in the initial ferrous iron from 5 to 10 g/l and the ferric oxidation of sulphides was responsible for the decrease in ferric iron from 5 to 2.5 g/l. The total iron increased from the initial concentration of 10 to ∼12.5 g/l at time zero ( Also, when oxygen was admitted into the slurry, the ferrous oxidation caused a decline in the concentration of ferrous iron as shown in At the early stage of oxidation (first 30 min), the net ferric concentration increased because the ferric precipitation reaction “lagged” behind the ferrous oxidation until low acid level was reached. The ferric precipitation was delayed further at 120 °C because of the low rate of jarosite precipitation at low temperature. At 150 °C, a very low level of ferric remained in the final solution because of the increase in the stability and the precipitation kinetics of the jarosite at high temperature. Non-interruptive pressure oxidation tests, in which samples were not taken during the experiments, were carried out on the UBC mixed sulphide and the resulting residues were subjected to cyanidation. The conditions for the pressure oxidation were the same as that of The extents of sulphide oxidation of the UBC mixed sulphide were more than those of Cannington complex sulphide concentrate ( High zinc extraction can be obtained by the pressure oxidation of complex sulphides, when a stoichiometric amount of iodide is added to the slurry. The product of the oxidation can be separated into an impure zinc rich solution and a washed residue. The pregnant solution can be sent to zinc recovery stage and the residue can be leached in the cyanide for silver extraction. The effects of iodide on the zinc electrolyte purification and electrowinning have not been reported in the literature. Currently, low level of chloride is desired in the zinc plant because of the chlorine gas evolution at high levels of chloride concentration (∼300 ppm) and when the anodes are new ( Acid pressure oxidation followed by the cyanide leaching of the residue is a promising process for the treatment of complex sulphides. The process can be adapted to a variety of concentrates and ores (such as copper ores and concentrates). A simple conceptual flowsheet for the treatment of complex sulphides consists of the pressure oxidation of the bulk concentrate to liberate the silver for subsequent leaching ( The conceptual flowsheet shows “Ag and Au Recovery” after the cyanide leach of the autoclave solids and this may be done by the Merill-Crowe system, which releases zinc cyanide and iodide into the solution. The iodide is recycled by returning the spent solution to the autoclave and the cyanide may be oxidised. However, the kinetics of cyanide oxidation under the autoclave conditions is not known from the literature. Therefore, the addition of a cyanide stripping step may be considered and the recycling of the HCN for reuse will reduce the operational costs. High zinc extraction can be obtained by the pressure oxidation of complex sulphides in the temperature range of 110–150 °C. The zinc extraction rate increases with increasing temperature. The pregnant solution can be sent to the electrowinning circuit for the zinc recovery (either directly or by SX/EW of zinc) and the residue can be leached using cyanide for silver extraction. In the temperature range of 110–150 °C, elemental sulphur is the main product of the oxidation and the sulphur can be floated for sales or discarded. The stoichiometric iodide addition to the pressure oxidation of complex sulphide prevents the incorporation of silver into the jarosite phase. At low temperatures (110–130 °C), the deportment of silver into the cyanide soluble silver iodide was complete during the oxidation because of the high kinetics of silver iodide formation and its enhanced stability at low temperatures. Also, the competition for silver ion by jarosite specie was minimised because of the low stability of jarosite and its low precipitation kinetics at low temperatures. The leaching of the silver iodide-rich residue in a cyanide solution yielded high silver extraction (above 90%). High temperature oxidation of the complex sulphide concentrate minimised the sulphur yield and the low sulphur content of the resulting residue could translate to savings on the cyanide reagent during the leaching of the residue. However, the silver extraction from the residue decreased slightly when the pressure oxidation was conducted at 140 and 150 °C because of the enhanced stability of the jarosite specie and its high precipitation kinetics at high temperatures. The enhanced stability of jarosite specie and its high rate of precipitation poses a challenge by competing for silver ions during the oxidation, however, this can be minimised by using moderately high initial acid. It is possible to control the chemical behaviour of silver during the pressure oxidation of complex sulphide ores and concentrates at 110–150 °C. Addition of small amounts of soluble iodide combined with careful control of temperature and solution composition can ensure that most of the silver in the feed material forms silver iodide in the autoclave residue. Silver iodide in the residue can be leached completely in a cyanide solution or perhaps in alternate silver lixiviant.