In this study, an attempt was made to model rock cutting tests. For this purpose, a computer program named Particle Flow Code in 3 Dimensions (PFC3D) was used. In order to numerically predict tool forces from cutting tests in PFC3D, graded particle assemblies were created, and the micro-properties were calibrated by modeling the uniaxial compressive strength test. Following the model creation procedure, the conical (point attack) pick was positioned and advanced with a constant velocity. The tool forces acting on the pick were recorded during the simulations. Moreover, the peak cutting forces were calculated by utilizing the theoretical equations proposed by researchers and the results of experimental studies were given as well. Consequently, the mean peak cutting forces, which were obtained from numerical, experimental and theoretical models, were compared. The relationships between these models were investigated and supported with the regression analysis. It was pointed out that there is a strong correlation between the modeling, experimental and theoretical studies.The feasibility and applicability of an excavation machine is examined depending on a detailed site investigation including the geological, hydrological and geotechnical conditions. Cuttability of rocks also leads to determine the specific energy, which is defined as the work done by the cutting force to excavate per unit volume of yield, installed power and advance rate of machine. Tool–rock interaction, which involves rock brittleness, tool stiffness, tool bluntness, is also taken into account in the course of determination of the cuttability. However, the tool forces acting on a pick is the dominant parameter for rock cuttability. Tool forces are divided into three orthogonal forces: normal, cutting and sideway forces. Normal forces act on perpendicular to the direction of cutting while cutting forces are applied in line with the cutting direction. Sideway forces are also measured transverse to the direction of cutting. However, the cutting forces essentially govern to optimize the cuttability. They can be measured by full-scale cutting tests in the laboratory or estimated by using formulas developed analytically or empirically. To date, a number of researchers have made several attempts to predict the forces using mechanical properties of rock, geometrical simplifications and some basic assumptions. In the early 1960s, both coal and rock cutting theories were studied and the developments on the theories continued until the 1990s. The rock cutting tests carried out in the laboratory is also the most successful, reliable and efficient method to observe tool–rock interaction and estimate the tool forces. Although the cutting tests take a long time and expensive processes, the tool forces obtained from the tests can be confidently used as an input for the design and selection of the machine Although several methods are used to predict the tool forces, numerical modeling of rock cutting test emerges as a faster and cheaper performance prediction method. Particle Flow Code in 3 Dimensions (PFC The aim of this paper is to model the rock cutting test in PFC Over the years, prediction of tool forces acting on a pick, i.e. the cuttability of rock, has been investigated, and theoretical models involving in cutting have been developed by researchers. These models were based on the mechanical properties of rock. The theories were developed by means of geometrical shape of the pick and the position of the penetration into the rock. The theories are also supported with experimental observations on a laboratory scale and statistical analyses. Laboratory scale cutting tests are carried out in Linear Cutting Sets. The tests can be conducted at two different modes such as relieved and unrelieved mode. The basic difference between two modes is the interaction between the picks. In relieved mode, the interaction between the picks is put into account. Nevertheless, there is no interaction in unrelieved mode. The cutting test in unrelieved mode is usually performed to determine the optimum cutting depth by using only one cutter. However, the cutting test in relieved mode, where the line spacing between two cutters are determined, is conducted to optimize the pick pattern on a cutterhead by evaluating the interaction between the cutters. When the distance between the cutters is too low, a considerable overcutting or grinding takes place. If the distance between the cutters is too large, the cutters act independently from each other and hence no benefit is gained from the cutter interaction. Nevertheless, optimal interaction occurs provided that the cutters are positioned appropriately. In this case, the minimum specific energy is reached. Chisel, conical or disc type of cutters are fixed to the tool holder of the machine. A dynamometer on the tool holder measures the forces. Then, the forces are recorded to a text (txt) file and interpreted by Microsoft Excel program in order to obtain the mean and peak cutting forces. Also, the specific energy is calculated by collecting the volume of the chips after the test. Although laboratory cutting tests, which can be directly used on an industrial scale, provide reliable and accurate results, the numerical modeling of rock cutting in three dimensions is underway to become a universally accepted method The first cutting theory on the metal cutting process was propounded by Merchant More recently, Evans proposed the first cutting theory for point attack (conical) picks Later, Ranman dealt with the geometry of the pick and the chip in cutting process with conical picks In addition, a theoretical model employing the point attack pick was presented by Roxborough and Liu Afterwards, Goktan In addition to theoretical models, detailed laboratory cutting experiments have been always considered a necessity since, in some cases, theoretical estimations of cutter forces were not in good agreement with actual cutting forces due to the complex petrographic, mineralogical and anisotropic nature of rock formations In the last decade, prediction of tool forces from numerical simulations has been regarded as an easier and faster method in comparison to experimental methods. Since the mechanical behavior of rock involves crack growth which depends on the heterogeneous nature of the material, it is really difficult to monitor the same behavior from numerical codes. Either statistical or regression analysis can be used in order to get the approximate values. A considerable amount of literature has been published on numerical modeling of rock cutting so far. A comparison of the numerical techniques regarding simulation of rock cutting can be found in Although the number of particles and contacts increase in three dimension modeling, it has the advantage of analyzing and visualizing the model more comprehensively in engineering applications. For this purpose, the first trial of rock cutting test in three dimensions was simulated by Su and Akcin In order to numerically predict the cutting forces on a conical (point attack) pick, rock cutting tests were simulated at 3, 6 and 9 The variation of the normal and cutting forces acting on the conical pick was monitored in the course of simulations. In accordance with the results, the mean and peak cutting forces were calculated. Besides, the tool–rock interaction, the micro-cracks, damage on the rock and the chips formed around the conical pick were monitored. Modeling of particle or granular behavior using discontinuum mechanics is one of the most important scientific advancements in the mining industry. Particle Flow Code in 3 Dimensions (PFC In the DEM, the dynamic behavior of the stressed assembly is numerically represented by a timestepping algorithm and the calculation is carried out by force–displacement law. The positions of the particles and walls change continuously. A general view of ball–ball contact is shown in In these equations, it should be noticed that For a linear contact model, the stressed particle assembly is generated by utilizing the micro-properties. These are the contact Young’s modulus, the ratio of normal to shear stiffness ( On the other hand, since PFC Artificial specimens for 3, 6 and 9 The graded particle assembly consisted of four areas in the shape of half cylinders. The particles were placed randomly in each area with uniform distribution. The particle radius was increased uniformly from a specified minimum value to a specified maximum value and the ratio of maximum to minimum radius was selected as a constant value for each area. The maximum particle radius in the inner area is accepted as the minimum ball radius in the next outer area. The fractions of particle and cylinder radii in relation to cutting depth and specimen dimensions are listed in The micro-properties were calibrated by modeling uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) test in PFC At the beginning of the simulation, six strain gauges were fixed into the specimen in order to measure the displacements in the horizontal and vertical directions. The top and bottom platens were moved with a velocity of 0.2 On the other hand, the mechanical behavior of the particles except the inner cylinder of the specimens prepared for rock cutting was examined due to changes in the particle radii in the other areas. For this reason, simulations of UCS tests were repeated by using the particle radii in the areas of 2, 3 and 4 given in Following the specimen generation and calibration procedure, a conical pick, which is perfectly sharp, was positioned through the left side of the specimen depending on the cutting parameters illustrated in At the beginning of the simulations; top, bottom and the lateral walls of the specimen were deleted and the particles which are close to the bottom surface were fixed. The pick was advanced at a low velocity of 0.3 Rock cutting simulations were carried out on graded particle assemblies which were calibrated based on the same mechanical properties. In this context, the macro-properties such as uniaxial compressive strength, Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the samples were reproduced in PFC During the numerical cutting tests in PFC The experimental rock cutting tests were performed before and the results were previously published by Kel et al. On the other hand, in the light of the mechanical properties summarized in It is apparent in The validation of the relationships shown in The reasons for the difference between experimental and numerical modeling studies are the effect of tool bluntness and the cutting condition as well as the stress distribution in the particle assembly, which varies throughout the specimen as a function of specimen geometry. Point attack picks manufactured in the mining industry are not perfectly conical. They generally have rounded tips. However, the conical pick modeled during simulations have an exact cone tip and assumed to be sharpened. When the shape of the pick in the simulations is accepted as rounded or worn, the forces will inevitably be increased. Thus, closer results to experimental studies will be obtained from numerical simulations. It is also emphasized by Evans, Goktan and Gunes that rounding of the tip to a certain extent significantly affects the cutting forces. According to their investigations, the influence of rounding can be especially seen better at lower cutting depths In jointed and fractured rock masses, a highly variable stress distribution is expected. Gravitational, tectonic and some other forces affect the state of stress Another reason is that the stress distribution depends upon the geometry of the pick as pointed out by Nishimatsu For the point attack picks, the uniaxial compressive strength and tensile strength essentially lead to failure in Evans’ cutting mechanism. However, the friction angle between the pick and rock are also put into account in Goktan’s and Roxborough’s cutting theories. Among these rock cutting theories, since Evans did not consider the effect of the friction angle while other researchers were taken into account, it appears that the relationship between Evans’ theory and PFC In addition, Bilgin et al. Estimation of optimum specific energy and cutter spacing from the relieved cutting test will allow achieving the maximum mechanical efficiency of a cutting machine. A deficiency of the PFC In this paper, three dimensional numerical modeling of the rock cutting test was conducted in unrelieved mode and tool forces acting on the point attack pick were recorded. Depending on the mechanical properties of the specimens, the peak cutting forces were estimated by rock cutting mechanisms. The results of the experimental cutting tests were also presented. Accordingly, reasonable agreements and strong correlations were found between modeling and theoretical models. Goktan’s equation made it possible to obtain results closer to those from numerical tests since it is dependent on the friction angle as well as the mechanical rock properties. In addition, regression analyses of the mean peak cutting forces indicated that the relationships between the modeling and theoretical studies are quite reliable. Hence, the results of the rock cutting mechanisms were verified by numerical models. Additionally, it was seen that the numerical studies correspond well with the experimental studies in terms of peak cutting forces. However, using a sharpened pick in simulations, the cutting conditions and the stress distribution in the specimen caused significant difference between numerical and experimental studies. On the other hand, a high correlation coefficient of the relationship between both studies was achieved. It was also verified with the regression analyses. Owing to very strong and statistically significant relationships obtained, numerical prediction of tool forces as well as experimental studies can be suggested as an alternative method. By considering the established equations, the results of numerical simulations can be used for determining rock cuttability. Moreover, in the case of modeling of relieved rock cutting test, numerical prediction of cutting forces will precisely allow to obtain quantitative results in terms of specific energy and performance prediction of an excavation machine.