A novel method was developed to produce spherical Ti-6Al-4V powder for advanced near-net-shape manufacturing processes including additive manufacturing and powder injection molding. The new process synergistically integrates a few common low-cost processing techniques including granulation, sintering, and de-oxygenation to produce spherical Ti alloy powders without relying on costly melting and atomizing techniques. This new granulation-sintering-deoxygenation (GSD) process can use low-cost source powders such as scrap Ti as the raw material. The spherical Ti-6Al-4V powder produced using this process has controlled particle size distribution and low oxygen content (<0.15%), which meet the Aerospace Material Specification (AMS-4998) for spherical Ti-6Al-4V powder.Titanium is known as a wonder metal because of its properties including high strength to density ratio, excellent corrosion resistance, and biocompatibility. However, the use of Ti in the industry is extremely limited because it is prohibitively expensive for many consumer applications. Powder metallurgy (PM) has long been suggested as a low cost manufacturing alternative to traditional wrought methods In general, the oxygen content of Ti powder is inversely proportional to the particle sizes Conventional spherical Ti powder production methods include the plasma rotating electrode process (PREP), gas atomization (GA), and plasma atomization (PA) There have been some reported research efforts on making spherical Ti powder more affordable. Among those efforts, plasma-spheroidization has been used commercially In this paper, a new process is designed and demonstrated. The new process combines granulation and sintering to form solid spherical particles. The new process also minimizes the oxygen content in the powder by using a low temperature molten salt process to de-oxygenate the Ti alloy powder. This granulation-sintering-deoxygenation (GSD) process is also inherently low-cost. The current paper describes the process, as well as elaborating the fundamentals behind the process, especially the principles of controlling oxygen content. The raw material used in this study was − The spherical granules were thermally debinded in the temperature range of 200–400 The oxygen/nitrogen/hydrogen contents in the powder were determined by using a LECO TCH 600, and the carbon content was analyzed by using a LECO C/S 230. The concentrations of metallic elements in the powder were analyzed by using an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES). All measurements were taken three times, and the average is reported.   Oxygen content of as-milled powder depends directly on the particle sizes in the as-milled condition. As shown in Oxygen content also increased significantly during sintering in this study. This is a surprising result because the sintering was conducted in inert atmosphere. However, as mentioned earlier, CaO was used as a separator during sintering. CaO was thought to be inert with regard to Ti because calcium is a well-known reducing agent for Ti oxide Titanium has significant solubility for oxygen as a solid solution. The chemical potential of oxygen in titanium as a function of oxygen content is plotted in Taking Ti with 0.03 Oxygen content decreased during the de-oxygenation, as it is designed to do. The oxygen content of sintered Ti-6Al-4V particles must be below 0.18 In order to eliminate or minimize the bonding between particles during de-oxygenation, the de-oxygenation temperature has to be significantly lower than 900 It is apparent that the surface of particles formed by the GSD method is not as smooth as that of PREP, GA or PA powders, since Ti particles do not go through a molten state during the GSD process, and melting/solidification can produce very smooth surfaces. However, it should be noted that spherical titanium powder is usually recycled after printing, and the surface becomes rougher with repeated cycling A novel method that synergistically combines granule spheroidization, sintering, and de-oxygenation into one integrated process for producing low-cost spherical Ti-6Al-4V powder is demonstrated. The spherical powder produced using the GSD method has controlled particle size, size distributions and low oxygen content. The powder can be used for additive manufacturing, cold spraying, metal injection molding, hot isostatic pressing, press and sintering, as well as other Ti manufacturing processes. This method is also applicable for producing other spherical titanium alloy or other metal alloy powders such as nickel based super alloy powders and stainless steel powders. The authors acknowledge partial financial support by