A surface chemical approach of different pyrite size fraction is developed in this paper in the prospect of addressing the well-known coarse pyrite flotation challenge for environmental purposes. This work aims at exploring the effect of particle size on pyrite surface chemistry through the study of three pyrite size fractions up to 425μm. Pyrite surface evolution was investigated through dry crushing, air oxidation and aqueous conditioning using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and diffuse reflectance infrared spectroscopy (DRIFT) as complementary surface characterization tools. XPS, which characterized the outmost surface (about 40Å depth), indicated that pyrite size fraction did not impact its surface chemistry after crushing. However, DRIFT which characterizes the whole oxidation layer, led to the conclusion that ferric sulfate was more abundant in the finer fraction than in the two coarser fractions. Those two surface characterization tools allowed a thorough insight into the three-dimensional oxidation product structures of pyrite from different size fractions. The surface evolution of coarse fractions had the same surface evolution trend when submitted to aging and conditioning processes than the fine pyrite size fraction, studied in previous works, in terms of surface species speciation and their relative proportion. Those results led to a better understanding of particle size impacts on pyrite surface chemistry.Pyrite, as a quasi-ubiquitous and usually barren mineral, is often encountered within mine tailings generated by polymetallic ore processing plants. This metallic sulfide can be the source of contaminated (acid or neutral) mine drainage when it oxidizes under certain conditions ( Surface chemistry of pyrite prior to collector addition may vary depending on many factors. Among these factors, the grinding conditions and the pulp physico-chemistry are very important ( Pyrite surface chemistry, as a complex system, has been extensively studied using a wide variety of surface science tools, particularly spectroscopic techniques, such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transformed spectroscopy (DRIFTS). XPS is a powerful technique at atomic scale that identifies the oxidation products present at the outmost pyrite surface with a signal covering about 40 Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transformed spectroscopy (DRIFTS) is used to identify oxidation products present at the pyrite surface at molecular scale with a penetration depth of the IR radiation covering the first 25,000 Pyrite reactivity, composition and electrical properties have been widely reviewed in many studies ( The main purpose of this work is to investigate pyrite surface evolution as a function of particle size up to 425 High grade pure pyrite samples were obtained from the Huanzala mine site (Peru), a Zn–Pb ore of adularia-sericite type ( Specific gravity (G XPS analysis were performed using a KRATOS Axis Ultra X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos Analytical, Manchester, UK) equipped with a monochromated AlKα X-ray source (hν Infrared spectra were recorded with a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer Bruker IFS 55 equipped with a mercury–cadmium telluride (MCT) detector and connected to a diffuse reflectance attachment from Harrick. Optical line was adjusted to avoid contribution of specular reflection. Sample preparation involved a 15% dilution of sample in KBr ( XRD spectrum (not presented herein) confirmed that pyrite samples were pure. Trace minerals may be present but could not be clearly identified through XRD analysis. Calculation from elemental analysis of the samples showed that pyrite samples were pure at 94 XPS and DRIFT analyses, conducted on pyrite after crushing, and aging as well as after aqueous conditioning at different pHs, are presented respectively in XPS analysis presented in S(2 XPS narrow Fe(2 XPS narrow O(1 The XPS narrow C(1 The total O(1 Surface and lattice atomic percentage of sulfur and iron were calculated from the total element atomic percentage (broad scan) weight by the proportion of this element corresponding to lattice or surface products (narrow scan) ( Fe(II)/Fe(III) ratio was not calculated due to overlapping Fe(II) et Fe(III) multiplet peaks ( In summary, XPS analysis gave evidence of the oxidation state about 40 Although Fe(II)/Fe(III) ratio could not be calculated due to overlapping Fe(II) and Fe(III) peaks, the three pyrite size fractions have almost the same proportion of each component of the Fe(2p3/2) scan, indicating that whatever the Fe(II)/Fe(III) ratio is, the latter doesn't change significantly with pyrite particle size. The conditioned coarse pyrite, however, had less contribution of the high binding energy peaks assigned to ferric sulfate and ferrous sulfate/ferric oxides. As the solution pH is about 4.5, it is expected that dissolution affected mainly the ferric sulfates and ferric oxides ( The following DRIFTS analyses have been conducted to obtain the complementary characterization of the inner part of the oxidized layer developed at the pyrite surface as DRIFTS allows a deeper characterization of the oxidation layer than XPS. DRIFTS analysis was performed on the three size fractions of crushed and aged pyrite and on aqueous conditioned pyrite at different pHs. Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transformed (DRIFT) spectra peaks were assigned according to literature data ( It may be reminded that the characteristic IR absorption bands of pyrite are below 500 The peak group M Finally, no significant bands could be observed between 1900 The reference state corresponded to pyrite surface just after dry crushing. This reference state was characterized using DRIFTS for the three pyrite size fractions ( The fraction 32–63 the decrease of the intensity of the diffuse part (R the decrease of the amount of superficial sulfate species due to the reduction of the crushing energy needed to produce each fraction (even if crushing procedure intended to minimize those differences). Pyrite size fraction 32–63 The hydration of the 32–63 DRIFTS gave evidence of some of the different oxidation products of pyrite surface (oxides, sulfate, and carbonate) as a function of the pyrite size fractions. Thus, the difference between the 63–150 In order to spare numerous figures, the DRIFT spectra presented in this section and the following sections were reported in synthetic tables, displaying the peak distribution, intensity and integrated surface area; which may allow a global qualitative and comparative visualization of the IR spectra. The M The 150–425 Pyrite oxidation of the different size fraction gave evidence that different sulfate formation rates occurred. The latter seemed to depend partly on iron speciation. Once ferric sulfate prevailed, the sulfate amount increased rapidly along with hydration/hydroxylation as underlined through oxidation of the different pyrite fractions from 43 to 104   XPS and DRIFTS spectroscopies have already been used as a means to determine spatial distribution of sulfide oxidation layer ( This work provides results on the evolution of coarse pyrite surface compared to finer pyrite through dry crushing, air oxidation and conditioning. Pyrite surface characterization achieved in this study allowed reaching the following conclusions: DRIFT high resolution spectra were obtained with coarse pyrite size (fraction up to 425 Dry crushing created a thick and heterogeneous three-dimensional oxidation layer at the pyrite surface for all the fractions. After dry crushing, the outmost part of the pyrite oxidation layer had a similar speciation of its oxidation products for all size fractions even if the global oxidation layer had different sulfate speciation depending on the size fractions. Air oxidation of pyrite led to the formation of ferric sulfate and increased the amount of sulfate except for the coarser fraction. Ferric sulfate rich oxidation layers showed a higher oxidation level and a higher dissolution rate than the ferrous sulfate rich oxidation layers. The pyrite size fractions studied here had the same surface evolution trends through the conditioning processes than the pyrite size fraction studied in previous works: Conditioning lowered ferric sulfate amount at the pyrite surface pH controlled the iron sulfate speciation during the conditioning step. Acidic pHs led to ferrous sulfate predominance while basic pHs created a hydrated hydroxyl ferric sulfate rich oxidation layer. This work is the base that leads to further researches for a better comprehension of collector adsorption onto coarse pyrite and eventually of coarse pyrite flotation through its application on a specific case (desulfurization of hemo-ilmenite ore desulfurization exploited by Rio Tinto Fer et Titane at Sorel-Tracy, Canada). This work was financed thanks to the