Due to the fact that the presence of aluminum in the leaching solutions of the ionic rare-earth ore adversely affects the subsequent extraction and separation of the REES (rare-earth elements), the aluminum must be reduced as soon as possible. Previously, organic substances with functional groups of carboxyl, hydroxyl, and amino, which can form stable and insoluble water complexes with aluminum ions in aqueous solutions under certain conditions, have been studied. This study used 8-hydroxyquinoline as the selective complexing precipitant for the purpose of complexing and precipitating aluminum in a rare-earth leaching solution. The results revealed that, when the amount of 8-hydroxyquinoline was 1.25 times that of the theoretical reaction amount; the reaction time was ten minutes; reaction temperature was 60 °C; and final pH of the solution was 4.5, then the Al3+ removal reached 94.39%, and the RE3+ loss was only 8.21%. Additionally, the obtained 8-hydroxyquinoline aluminum was found to have the advantages of a rapid precipitation rate, large crystal particles, and small entrainment losses, and filtration had been easily completed. In addition, the characteristics of the obtained 8-hydroxyquinoline aluminum would allow it to be used as photoelectric material with a high market value.Ion-adsorbed rare-earth ore is a special type of rare-earth mineral, and were found in the southern Jiangxi Province area in China ( For impurity removal in the metallurgy industry, hydrometallurgy offers the advantages of low cost and low energy consumption ( It has been found that some organic substances containing carboxyl, hydroxyl, amino, and other groups can form stable complexes with Al, Fe, Cu, Ca, Ni, Cr, and other metal ions in aqueous solutions under certain conditions ( The separation of metal ions using organic precipitators has the advantages of good selectivity, complete precipitation, easy separation, and so on. The advantages observed when using organic precipitation agents have provided new ideas for the study of aluminum removal. In the current study, 8-hydroxyquinoline was selected as organic precipitator in order to separate Al from the leaching solution of rare-earth, and various reaction conditions and separation mechanisms were studied in detail. A leaching solution of rare-earth concentrate ore by hydrochloric acid was used as the experimental raw material in this study. The concentrations of RE An EDTA capacity method was used to determine the concentration of rare-earth ions, and a chrome azure S colorimetric method which adopted a UV-6300 ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer was used to determine the concentration of aluminum ions ( In the present study, based on the known coordination reactions between the 8-hydroxyquinoline and aluminum ions, the 8-hydroxyquinoline was dissolved in anhydrous ethanol and added into the rare-earth leaching solution. The complex reaction was maintained within a fixed temperature for a certain period of time, and then the pH of the mixed solution was slowly increased using ammonia until precipitation occurred. This study's experimental process is detailed in It has been found that 8-hydroxyquinoline can form stable complexes with aluminum, rare-earth, iron, and so on, and is a highly efficient metal chelating agent. However, its complex capabilities with different metal ions can be easily affected by pH levels, temperature, dosage amounts, and so on. In previous studies, it was found that under suitable conditions, 8-hydroxyquinoline can selectively form a stable chelate with aluminum ions in aqueous solutions. The reaction equation is detailed in Eq. In the equation, as a chelating agent, 8-hydroxyquinoline can react with aluminum with increases in pH, and It has previously been determined that 8-hydroxyquinoline molecules with large conjugated structures have a characteristic absorption peak in the range of the ultraviolet-visible spectrum. Therefore, ultraviolet spectrophotometry can be used to study the reactions between 8-hydroxyquinoline and aluminum ions. As shown in Eq. As can be seen in  Due to the fact that the pH values had major influences on the reactions in the current study, the coordination reactions between the 8-Hydroxyquinoline and the aluminum ions were examined using a UV spectrophotometry method. During the investigation, under room temperature conditions, a mixed solution of aluminum ions (0.0935 mmol/L) and 8-hydroxyquinoline (0.0935 mmol/L) were detected by UV spectrophotometry in the pH range of 2 to 12. An 8-hydroxyquinoline aqueous solution with the same concentration and pH was used as a reference. The ultraviolet absorption spectrum which was obtained is detailed in As can be seen in As can be seen in Orthogonal experiments were conducted in this study based on the method mentioned in Section 2.3 (Experimental setup). Such factors as the reaction temperature (A); reaction time (B); pH (C); and dosage of 8-hydroxyquinoline (D) were investigated using orthogonal experiments designed to include those four factors and three levels ( For each of the factors, a higher mean value (Kj) had indicated that the level had a larger effect on the removal of the aluminum ions. Therefore, the best level for each factor could be determined by calculating the mean values (Kj) of the experimental conditions. The optimum combination program for the removal of the Al was determined to be A It was observed in this study that the pH levels in the solution had major influences on the reactions between the 8-hydroxyquinoline and the Al For the purpose of examining the effects of the pH levels on the removal of the aluminum ions in the solution, a batch of leaching experiments were conducted under the following conditions: 1. The 8-hydroxyquinoline dosage was 1.25 times that of the theoretical dosage versus the aluminum; 2. The reaction temperature was set as 60 °C; and 3. The complexion time was set as 10 min. The results of the leaching experiments are shown in The amount of precipitation of the aluminum gradually increased with the increases in the pH, and the loss rate of the rare-earth also increased. It was observed that as a result of the increased pH, the equilibrium of It is known that temperature conditions exert major influences on chemical reactions. In the present study, for the purpose of investigating the effects of temperature on the removal of aluminum ions from the examined solution, a series of experiments were performed under the following conditions: 1. The final pH of the solution was 4.5; 2. The complexion time was set as 10 min; 3. The amount of 8-hydroxyquinoline was 1.25 times that of the theoretical reaction amount; and 4. The complexion temperature was in the range of 30 to 80 °C. The results are shown in As can be seen in In order to determine the effects of the reaction time on the removal of the aluminum ions from the solution, a batch of experiments were carried out under the following conditions: 1. The final solution pH was 4.5; 2. The amount of 8-hydroxyquinoline was 1.25 times that of the theoretical reaction amount; 3. The complexion temperature was set as 60 °C; and 4. The reaction times in each of the tests were set at 2, 10, 30, and 60 min, respectively. The results are shown in As demonstrated in In the present study, it was found that the dosage of 8-hydroxyquinoline should be at least 100% theoretical dosage versus aluminum in order to guarantee a complete reaction. Therefore, due to the fact that there were potential reactions for the 8-hydroxyquinoline, a series of experiments were performed under the following conditions: 1. The final pH of the solution was 4.5; 2. The complexion time was set as 10 min; 3. The complexion temperature was 60 °C; and 4. The amount of 8-hydroxyquinoline had ranged from 1 to 2 times the theoretical dosage. The results are detailed in As indicated by the diagram in In the present study, the precipitated products obtained through the removal of the aluminum ions from the rare-earth liquid solution using 8-hydroxyquinoline as a chelating agent were observed to all have a yellow-green coloration, large size, and good crystallization, and filtered easily. Infrared characterization was used in order to determine the main composition of the product, and the results are shown in As shown in The removed aluminum product was filtered and dried at 80 °C for the purpose of XRD characterization. The results are detailed in According to In the role of a complexing agent, 8-hydroxyquinoline had been successfully used to selectively precipitate Al We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. The project was sponsored by