The comminution of different pharmaceutical solids by high pressure homogenization in various dispersion media has been investigated. First, the influence of two important process parameters, namely the pressure drop and the number of passes across the homogenizer, has been investigated through the homogenization of aqueous suspensions. Applying pressure drops ranging from 250 to 1000bar and up to 200 passes across the homogenizer, it was found that smaller particles can be obtained either by working at an increased homogenization pressure or by further increasing the number of passes. The smallest particles, obtained for one of the two pharmaceutical compounds investigated by applying 50 passes at 1000bar homogenization pressure, exhibited a very narrow size distribution with a median x
                     50 of 1.14μm. Moreover, experimental results could be adequately described using an empirical relationship that allows estimating a priori the median x
                     50 of the product size distribution as a function of the aforementioned operating parameters. Furthermore, the performance of different homogenizers has been evaluated, thus showing that valve homogenizers have favorable properties as compared to static homogenizers regarding the comminution of solids. Finally, the present study demonstrates successfully the feasibility of this novel process option by applying two different pressurized dispersion fluids, namely liquid carbon dioxide or 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane (Solkane R134a), in the homogenization of phenytoin and of another proprietary pharmaceutical solid. These fluids are subject to residue-free evaporation upon pressure release, and at the end of the process the micronized product particles could be directly recovered in form of a dry powder.Crystalline particles have a number of favorable properties that make their use in pharmaceutical drug formulation very attractive. These are, for instance, their intrinsic purity due to the strict regularity of the crystal lattice, their chemical stability against degradation such as through oxidation, and their excellent processability into solid dosage forms such as tablets. Consequently, more than 90% of small molecule drugs are ultimately delivered in the form of a crystalline product Conventional crystallization processes lead typically to particles in the size range of tens and hundreds of μm. Direct precipitation of crystalline particles in the desired micron and submicron size range has been investigated particularly on the basis of a number of techniques using supercritical carbon dioxide either as solvent or as anti-solvent High pressure homogenization (HPH) of crystalline pharmaceuticals is a comparably novel milling technique with especially promising scale-up properties It is the aim of this present study to develop an empirical understanding concerning the role of the aforementioned parameters in the HPH process. Therefore, aqueous suspensions of two sparingly water-soluble pharmaceuticals, namely phenytoin and the proprietary pharmaceutical compound herewith called compound A, were processed in homogenization experiments where the pressure drop and the number of passes across the homogenizer have been varied systematically. Also, the experimental performance of the valve homogenizer and of different static homogenizers has been subject to a thorough comparison. Finally, it is the goal of this study to demonstrate the feasibility of homogenization using a pressurized operating fluid. To this end, a HPH setup suitable for high pressure operation has been used to comminute phenytoin and compound A in two different dispersion media, namely liquid carbon dioxide and the haloalkane refrigerant 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane. Deionized water, carbon dioxide (CO The setup used for high-pressure homogenization in aqueous suspensions is shown in Homogenization experiments in water were carried out as follows. In a first step, an aqueous suspension was prepared by dispersing the raw crystalline pharmaceutical in water. If not stated otherwise, the solid content of the suspension was 1 The homogenization experiment is initiated by adjusting the desired pressure drop and flow rate across the homogenizer. The flow rate is predominantly controlled by adjusting the aperture of the valve homogenizer, while the maximal pressure is adjusted by varying the feed air pressure, which is increased by factor of 250 in the air-driven piston pump. Using the two-vessel setup, the experiment is interrupted whenever the feed vessel is empty and the reflux vessel is full; the role of the vessels needs to be interchanged at this point, and samples may be taken prior to continuing the experiment. Operating the homogenization process continuously is possible by recycling the product stream directly into the feed vessel. The number of passes is in this case estimated as the ratio of the processing time and the residence time of the suspension in the vessel. This residence time is obtained by dividing the volume of suspension in the vessel through the flow rate delivered by the piston pump, which is determined directly from the frequency of pump strokes, assuming that each stroke corresponds to a volume flux equivalent to the pump head volume, i.e., 6 The setup used for high-pressure homogenization in suspensions based on liquid CO Homogenization experiments were carried out as follows. Initially, the pharmaceutical solid to be homogenized was placed inside the vessel in form of a powder. When using liquid CO To avoid the formation of gas bubbles inside the pump head, the suspension withdrawn from the bottom of the reactor was cooled using dry ice before being fed to the pump for pressurization. The pressurized suspension was subsequently depressurized over the homogenization valve. The product was recycled directly into the high-pressure vessel, thus allowing for continuous homogenization of the suspension enclosed therein. Experiments were terminated by flushing the homogenization cycle with pure operating fluid from the bottle. Then, the reactor was emptied by gradually opening the vent line located at the top of the reactor, thus evaporating the operating fluid at reduced pressure. After depressurization, the homogenized product could be recovered from the bottom of the reactor in the form of a dry powder. It is worth mentioning in this context that unlike water, both liquid R134a and particularly liquid CO The particle size distribution (PSD) of product particles was determined by static light scattering (Helos BR, Sympatec GmbH, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany). Product suspensions were diluted in water to a suitable optical density, and measurements were carried out using a stirred glass cuvette. Further, particle size and morphology have been characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using dry powder samples. The influence of the pressure drop and of the number of passes across the homogenizer has been studied using two different pharmaceutical solids, namely phenytoin and compound A. A summary of the corresponding experiments is provided in When subject to several passes across the homogenizer, the particle size distribution of the pharmaceutical solid typically evolves as shown in Within the double logarithmic representation adopted in Remarkably, trend lines for phenytoin and compound A exhibit very similar exponents For phenytoin, Besides the valve homogenizer also static homogenizers have been used in homogenization experiments. These are characterized by a static internal geometry with a certain aperture, and three different homogenizers with apertures of 100, 200 and 400 To address the question whether static homogenizers have advantages regarding the size distributions of product particles that may be obtained, a raw suspension of compound A was used in a homogenization experiment applying a large number of passes, using as described initially the 400 In high pressure homogenization, processing suspensions with a high solid density strongly increases the efficiency of the process. However, it can also cause problems, especially when using static homogenizers which are prone to blocking. In order to investigate the potential of the valve homogenizer in this context, another experiment was carried out in which a suspension of compound A with a solid density of 10 There are different reasons why the application of CO To demonstrate the viability of this process, high pressure homogenization of compound A and phenytoin has been studied in suspensions based on two different fluids, namely liquid CO Regarding the particle size distributions attained, it can be seen that products processed in suspensions based on either liquid CO For a number of established and novel pharmaceutical applications, control of particle size in the low μm range is very important. Thus, when investigating a milling technique such as high pressure homogenization, it is crucial to understand how the different operating parameters of the process may be exploited in order to control and fine-tune the particle size distribution of the product in this interesting range. Previous studies have addressed this issue empirically, mostly by varying the number of passes across the homogenizer Well-established applications of homogenization, falling predominantly in the fields of emulsification and cell disruption, rely on two different categories of commercially available homogenizers, namely valve homogenizers and static homogenizers. Regarding the comminution of solids, which is comparably novel and emerging in high pressure homogenization, possible advantages and disadvantages of the two homogenizer types in that area need to be investigated. This has been addressed in The use of dispersion media such as CO Summarizing, it has been shown that high pressure homogenization is a robust technique that seems to be viable for pharmaceutical manufacturing. For this process, the application of operating fluids such as CO The authors gratefully acknowledge Kurt Schafflützel and Ranjit Thakur, both Novartis Pharma AG, for their continuous support in this project.