The coagulation of blood plasma and the effect of fibrinogen concentration were studied with a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), where frequency and half-width at half-maximum (bandwidth) values measured from the conductance spectrum near resonant frequency were used. Bandwidth change is an indicator of energy dissipation, allowing for an understanding of qualitative changes occurring during fibrin clot formation. Both frequency shift (Δf) and bandwidth shift (ΔΓ) were dependent on the concentration of fibrinogen in plasma. We defined a sum of squares function α (=Δf
                     2/1000+ΔΓ
                     2/1000) that measures absolute changes in QCM resonant characteristics to semi-quantitatively include an overall contribution of adsorbed mass and elastic modulus components and a function β (=1−ΔΓ/Δf) that indicates qualitatively the nature of response based on its deviation from ideal Newtonian behaviour. Increasing concentration of fibrinogen resulted in an increase in the value of α, showing that a larger amount of fibrinogen results in larger amount of coupled viscoelastic mass. Changes in β indicated that the nature of changes occurring was very similar to Newtonian and that coupling of rigid-mass dominates the overall response in the early stage of coagulation and in the later stage growing elastic mass compensates some of the response.Fibrinogen has been identified as a major risk factor in cardiovascular disorders Significant changes in viscoelasticity occurring due to conversion of liquid plasma to a soft fibrin gel network have been shown to be an indicator of various pathologies. Changes in viscoelastic properties during the process of clot formation have been studied by a number of methods discussed in detail in a review by Evans et al. Water (ACS reagent), sodium chloride (NaCl) and toluene were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (Dublin, Ireland). TriniCHECK Fibrinogen Low Control and TriniCHECK Level1 Control plasma used in this study was obtained from Tcoag Ireland Limited. The lyophilized plasma was reconstituted in 1 The QCM sensor preparation and experimental arrangement has been described in detail in The conductance spectrum for QCM has a peak at the series resonant frequency. The bandwidth for 5 The change in conductance spectrum upon addition of undiluted plasma is shown in aPTT is a method of investigating the intrinsic and the common pathway of coagulation. Typically, the citrated plasma is activated by the addition of aPTT reagent followed by the addition of calcium chloride (CaCl In order to evaluate the effect of fibrinogen concentration ( Concentration dependent Δ The dynamic response of functions When a clot starts forming, fibrin fibres appearing can produce two simultaneous structural changes in plasma: an increase in elasticity from zero value and an increase in rigid-mass due to additional mass of fibrin-network coming in contact with the QCM surface. An increase of It was shown that monitoring frequency and bandwidth shifts of QCM can be used both qualitatively and semi-quantitatively to investigate viscoelastic property changes occurring in a clotting blood plasma sample at the QCM–plasma interface. Plasma viscosity can be evaluated immediately after the addition of the sample to the sensor, allowing for simple blood viscosity determination. We showed that increasing the concentration of fibrinogen in plasma had a significant contribution on clot properties and resulted in a concentration dependent decrease in frequency and increase in bandwidth. This method can be used to evaluate fibrinogen concentration in an unknown sample from the calibration curve for This material is based upon work supported by the