The effectiveness of two different carbon based catalysts, Lewatit® AF 5 (AF 5) a new microporous carbonaceous bead, and a granular coconut shell based activated carbon, in aiding atmospheric oxidation of a gold-bearing pyrite concentrate was tested. Oxidation in ferric sulphate media unassisted by a catalyst was incomplete after 96h and resulted in only 60% pyrite oxidation, with an elemental sulphur yield ranging between 16% and 28%. Under the same test conditions, oxidation tests assisted by AF 5 saw approximately 96% pyrite oxidation with elemental sulphur yields ranging between 65% and 74%, while activated carbon assisted oxidation reached 100% pyrite oxidation with elemental sulphur yields between 63% and 64%. Testwork indicated that not only were pyrite oxidation kinetics greatly enhanced by the addition of carbon based catalysts leading to almost if not complete oxidation, but drastic increases in elemental sulphur yields and thus reductions in sulphate yields were also experienced.
                  It is shown that the AF 5 catalyst adsorbs all of the elemental sulphur produced on its surface. The AF 5 beads are large enough (approximately 0.5mm) that after the leach process they can be screened out of the slurry, resulting in negligible elemental sulphur within the residue after solid/liquid separation. AF 5 also showed much stronger mechanical properties than the activated carbon, resulting in only approximately 0.40% AF 5 loss to fines compared to approximately 21.5% activated carbon loss to fines.It is well known that pyrite is an important sulphide mineral within the gold industry due to its affiliation with invisible gold and its ability to contain invisible gold concentrations as high as 132 Some current oxidative pre-treatment processes include high temperature and high pressure (HT/HP) leaching within autoclaves, biological atmospheric leaching and roasting. HT/HP leaching is a proven process reaching desirable recoveries with fast oxidation kinetics (approximately a 1–2 It is evident from Eq. Biological atmospheric leaching is another option for the oxidative pre-treatment of refractory sulphides. Biological leaching can take place as heap leaching or atmospheric tank bio-oxidation. Tank bio-oxidation is more applicable to the research involved in this study. The process incorporates the use of thermophilic and/or mesophilic iron and sulphur-oxidizing bacteria acting as a catalyst to drive the oxidation of sulphides. Current bacterial oxidation processes include the BIOX® process ( The type of concentrate being used in this test work has a gold grade to sulphur grade of about 0.07, far too low for this kind of pre-treatment to be economic. Pyrometallurgical roasting is another oxidative pre-treatment method that has been commercially proven to effectively oxidize pyrite and other sulphidic and/or carbonaceous ores. The overall reaction for pyrite oxidation via roasting is presented in Eq. The sulphur dioxide generated by roasting can be retrieved and converted into sulphuric acid, reducing gas emissions, however increased environmental legislations and high capital costs associated with roasters, do not make roasting an ideal pre-treatment option. Given the information regarding the three commonly used oxidative pre-treatment methods above, it is evident that while all are proven to work commercially, all have limitations and flaws. It is well-known that the majority of clean high grade gold reserves have been depleted and that the industry as a whole is moving towards more and more refractory sulphide materials like pyrite, and alongside this, gold grades can be expected to decrease. Knowing the economic limitations of bio-oxidation processes such as BIOX®, it is clear that these processes will not be applicable for future reserves to be mined. It is also understandable that due to environmental concerns and constraints it will be extremely difficult to construct new roasting facilities, eliminating roasting as a pre-treatment possibility. With the low grades to be expected, it is evident that the high capital and operating costs associated with autoclaves of the HT/HP processes are no longer economical. A new process with lower capital and operating costs than that of the autoclave processes, however with similar kinetics must be developed. That is where the survival of the gold industry lies. It is difficult to determine the exact mechanism of pyrite oxidation however, elemental sulphur and sulphate are the most stable products resulting from pyrite oxidation with ferric ions acting as the oxidizing agent ( Sulphate yield is represented by Regardless of sulphate yield, it is evident that ferric ions are consumed during the oxidation of pyrite, and that ferrous ions are generated. Singer and Stumm reported that the rate of pyrite oxidation is controlled by the oxidation of ferrous ions to ferric ions ( The use of activated carbon in the assistance of sulphide leaching and oxidation has been reported before. Dixon and Rivera-Vasquez investigated and submitted an U.S. patent application for the use of activated carbon with an acidic ferric sulphate leach solution in the presence of oxygen to assist the copper extraction in enargite. The addition of 100 Activated carbons have been studied and researched intensively to determine their capabilities of metal removal, ion oxidation, functional group interactions, and how different pre-treatments affect their properties, among a long list of other studies. Figueiredo et al. investigated the modification of surface chemistry of activated carbons, discovering that gas phase oxidation of carbon increases hydroxyl and carbonyl surface group concentrations, while liquid phase oxidation increases the carboxylic acid surface concentration ( Ahumada et al. studied the catalytic impact of activated carbons on the oxidation of ferrous ions in the presence of oxygen ( C The focus of this paper is testing the effects of carbon catalysts on an atmospheric leaching process with the intention of the introduction of a viable commercial pre-treatment option for the oxidation of pyrite. The process involves the atmospheric oxidation of pyrite in a sulphuric acid media. Carbon based catalysts are being applied to the atmospheric oxidation in order to increase the pyrite oxidation rates while promoting the production of elemental sulphur rather than sulphuric acid. It is shown that the addition of carbon based catalysts to the atmospheric oxidation of pyrite in acidic ferric sulphate media in the presence of oxygen increases oxidation kinetics and improves elemental sulphur yields. The addition of carbon catalysts promotes the formation of hydrogen peroxide, a strong oxidant, as well as alter the ORP of solutions to benefit elemental sulphur production. Testwork was performed on a pyrite concentrate. The testwork involved in this study, apart from some contracted analytics was performed in the mineral processing and hydrometallurgy laboratory at Queen's University, Kingston, ON. The concentrate was a leach feed concentrate with a P It is evident from The oxidative pre-treatment tests were conducted in 2-L round-bottomed glass-kettle batch reactors. Test solutions were prepared using 1 Tests were conducted for a total of 96 After 96 Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area and Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) pore size analysis was conducted on AF 5 and activated carbon using a TriStar 3000 Surface Area and Pore Size Analyzer. An initial de-gas was conducted for 2 After analysis of aqueous samples there was no discernible change when varying the flow rate of oxygen sparging. The three different flow rates (0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 Following filtering and washing of the oxidation residues, the filtrate and wash solutions were collected for MP-AES iron analysis. The results were collected and used to calculate the total iron dissolution after the 96  The solid sample analysis is displayed in  The tests assisted by AF 5 Solid analysis from the activated carbon assisted tests show that total pyrite oxidation reached 100%. Although It becomes clear that there are benefits associated with catalyst assisted oxidations, not only kinetically but in terms of sulphate generation. The sulphate yields viewed in tests assisted by either AF 5 or activated carbon were, at the highest, half of that of the corresponding unassisted oxidation test. This means that in the worst case scenario the catalyst assisted oxidation tests are producing half of the sulphuric acid of the unassisted tests. This also means that less neutralization reagents will be needed for downstream leaching. The glaring question is why do the carbon catalysts improve the reaction kinetics and why do the catalysts promote elemental sulphur formation rather than sulphate formation? The increase in reaction kinetics is likely due to functional oxygen groups on the surface of the carbon catalysts. It is probable that hydrogen peroxide (H While the increased kinetic rate of oxidation observed in the tests with carbon catalysts can be explained by the probable production of hydrogen peroxide from functional oxygen surface groups, this does not explain the increase in elemental sulphur formation. Rodriguez-Reinoso declared that non-polar molecule adsorption on the surfaces of activated carbon is more dependent on pore size distribution rather than surface chemistry (functional groups) ( Pyrite oxidation was improved similarly when assisted by both activated carbon and AF 5, however there were some differences experienced between the two catalysts. The first difference is the much faster oxidation kinetics viewed in the tests with activated carbon, the second being the improved elemental sulphur yield during AF 5 tests that also increased with oxygen flowrate versus the more stable and lower yield observed during activated carbon tests, and finally the ability of the AF 5 to retain elemental sulphur adhered to its surface, demonstrated in The faster kinetics viewed in the activated carbon assisted tests compared to the AF 5 assisted tests are likely due to surface chemistry. The activities of the two carbon catalysts may be different due to different surface chemistry, and it is probable that the activated carbon's surface chemistry is more favourable in promoting Eqs. Improved elemental sulphur yield viewed in the AF 5 tests over the activated carbon tests is likely due to surface area and pore size, while the ability of the AF 5 to retain elemental sulphur is likely due to pore size and mechanical properties. The surface area of the AF 5 determined by BET surface area analysis is 1154  As seen in One reason for the lack of elemental sulphur adhesion on the activated carbon surface is that the activated carbon is mechanically weaker than the AF 5. Upon filtering it was found that attrition during oxidation caused a large portion of the activated carbon to be lost as fines in a “slime”. Prior to oxidation the concentrate contained only 0.16% carbon, however after oxidation assisted by activated carbon, the residue contained between 35.4 and 38.0% carbon ( Another reason attributing to the difference in elemental sulphur retention between activated carbon and AF 5 is the pore size distribution. The distribution based on the volumes associated with various pore width sizes determined by BJH analysis for activated carbon and AF 5 are presented in Titration of the solution samples during testing coupled with MP-AES analysis allowed for the determination of the concentrations of total ferrous and ferric species. Given that the oxidation of pyrite in this system, represented in Eq. The trend in ferrous iron throughout testing without a catalyst ( The ferrous and ferric ion behaviour for the oxidation tests assisted by AF 5 are depicted in The faster kinetics of the activated carbon oxidation tests ( It is interesting to note that in With the data acquired from the ferric/ferrous analysis, iron speciation calculations can be conducted using PHREEQC Interactive (Version 3.3.7.11094), a software developed by the USGS ( The total moles of ferrous and ferric ions for the oxidation tests at 1  The activities calculated via the PHREEQC software for each test at each sparging rate are presented in Previous research indicates that oxidation reduction potential (ORP) during the oxidation of pyrite by ferric ions and dissolved oxygen has an impact on sulphate yield, with lower potentials decreasing sulphate yield and increasing elemental sulphur yield ( It is noticed in  The PHREEQC Interactive speciation calculation provided the free ferrous and free ferric ion activities (  Relating the ORP witnessed back to elemental sulphur yield and oxidation kinetics, it is evident that the ORP values experienced during the AF 5 tests were lower than those experienced during the activated carbon tests. Considering that it has been documented that lowering ORP will increase elemental sulphur yield ( The authors have tested a novel process for the atmospheric oxidation of pyrite in ferric sulphate media with the addition of AF 5 carbon catalyst. The results of the AF 5 tests were compared against tests under the same conditions without a catalyst and with the use of a granular coconut shell based activated carbon. After 96 The authors acknowledge the financial support of the