A segmented two-phase flow model is developed to describe immiscible two-phase flow in discrete fracture networks; i.e., there is an abrupt interface separating the two immiscible fluids. The capillary pressure on the fluid material interface and gravity are considered. For two-phase flow in fracture networks it is inevitable to form a mixed fluid in some fracture segments. The mixed fluid is described by a homogeneous model, and parameter γ is introduced as a critical value controlling new fluid formation in mixed fluid. The governing equations for two-phase flow are solved with a developed numerical manifold method (NMM) which is verified using the finite element and analytical methods with two examples. Two-phase flow through a single fracture intersection acting as one of the basic elements for complex fracture networks is then analysed. Different inlet and outlet configurations are considered including one-inlet/two-outlets, two-inlets/one-outlet and one-inlet/multi-outlets. For the second configuration, parametric studies of defined parameter γ and boundary conditions are carried out. In the third configuration, capillary pressure and gravity effects are discussed. The developed NMM is applied to the analysis of two-phase flow in a complicated fracture network showing that it is an efficient method for simulating segmented two-phase flow in fracture networks. Complex two-phase flow characteristics in the fracture networks that cannot be addressed in continuum models, e.g., the change in flow direction and transition from static to flow, are also revealed and analysed.Two-phase and multi-phase flows in fracture networks are common in energy and environmental engineering, including nuclear waste isolation ( Fractures are ubiquitous in natural rock mass ( Many studies have examined two-phase flow in fractured media using the DFM. The widely used governing equations of two-phase flow are saturation equations for each phase, which include mass conservation, Darcy's Law, relative permeability functions and capillary pressure functions. Ordinarily, the relative permeability and capillary pressure are expressed by saturation of wetting fluid, which can be determined through laboratory tests. Several experiments have indicated that the above governing equations are a satisfactory approximation for describing two-phase flow in porous media ( For two-phase flow in fracture networks, the transition zone between two immiscible fluids is narrow relative to the regional dimensions occupied by each fluid alone. Therefore, a segmented two-phase flow model can be adopted to describe this phenomenon, which is shown in experiments conducted by The present study, as an extension of our previous work ( In the current study, we assume that  The pressure on the abrupt interfaces can be expressed as follows: For a fracture segment The interface condition for fluid velocity in fracture segment Mixed fluids may be formed during the process of two-phase flow through a fracture intersection. As shown in This type of two-phase flow in a fracture is very complicated. The main issue is that there are many flow patterns, which are affected by many factors, such as the velocity of each phase, mixture flow rate, finite density difference, ratio of fluid viscosities, phase surface tension and fracture wall wettability, shear stress between phases, as well as the fracture aperture and fracture inclination based on two-phase flow in pipes ( The ratio of the flux of each phase to the total flux of the two-phase flow in a mixed fluid can be expressed by fractional flow of each phase at time During the process of two-phase flow, flow rates may vary with time. Thus, the ratio of the flux of each phase to the total flux of the two-phase flow is different, and different new mixed fluid may appear at each time step, increasing the computational burden. To solve this problem, a new parameter During the simulation of two-phase flow in a fracture network, for example, a mixed fluid begins to be formed at time If the value is smaller than the critical value For the mixed fluid, the governing equation is as follows:  Notably, when a material interface is only at an intersection point, the interface conditions need to be considered in the global discrete equation. It is warranted to add the following equations to the global discrete equation for a fracture network (e.g., The NMM discretization equations for manifold elements were obtained based on the Galerkin method, which is as follows: The NMM simulations of two-phase flow in a horizontal single fractures are verified with the analytical and finite element methods in our previous study ( The computational model is shown in The NMM and FEM results of hydraulic pressure distribution in the fracture network are shown in The computational model is shown in The computational results are shown in Two-phase flow through a single fracture intersection with different inlet and outlet configurations are analysed in this section, which are divided into two cases according to whether the capillary pressure is considered or not. The capillary pressure is not considered in the first case and considered in the second case. In this section, three tasks are conducted: The computational model with one-inlet and two-outlets and the model with two-inlets and one-outlet are shown in The processes of two-phase flow through the fracture intersection with different inlet and outlet configurations are illustrated in  The variations of intersection point pressures for the two models are shown in The pressure variation for the intersection point in the model shown in In During the process of two-phase flow through the fracture intersection, the fluid velocity variations in these fracture segments and the pressure at the intersection point for all selected The minimum value of Taking The model shown in During the process of two-phase flow through the single intersection, the pressure variations at the intersection point and fluid velocities in fracture segment 2 for the first situation are shown in From Comparing In this section, two-phase flow through a single fracture intersection with one-inlet and multi-outlets is conducted with consideration of capillary pressure and gravity. The study includes The computational model for the fracture intersection with one-inlet and multi-outlets is shown in The process of two-phase flow through the fracture intersection is illustrated in During the process, the fluid velocities vary in each fracture segment, which are presented in Based on In this section, we aim to investigate the capillary pressure effects on two-phase flow through the fracture intersection. Computational model, initial conditions, boundary conditions, and the hydraulic properties of fractures and fluids are the same as those in The fluid distribution in the single fracture intersection for all four situations in a stable state are shown in In this section, both gravity and capillary pressure are considered to investigate the two-phase flow through the fracture intersection. The computational model considering gravity force and the number for each fracture segments are shown in The processes for both situations are illustrated in In this section, the developed NMM was adopted to analyse two-phase flow in a fracture network. The original computational model is shown in The process of two-phase flow in the fracture network is shown in From Moreover, the variations of concentrations of fluid 2 (driving fluid) in the domain and at the outlet boundary caused by different boundary pressures are discussed. Different inlet pressures are set, From the figure one can see that except the fluid velocities, the variations of concentrations of fluid 2 in the domain and at the outlet boundary have the same features for the above model under different inlet pressures: The reason causing this phenomenon is the assumption of “Darcy's Law”, under which the relationship between fluid velocity and pressure is linear. Thus, the pressure distribution along the fracture segments occupied by fluid 1, fluid 2 or a mixed fluid is linear as shown in the governing equation of segmented two-phase flow In this study, a systematic segmented two-phase flow analysis in fracture networks based on the numerical manifold method has been presented with consideration of capillary pressure and gravity effects. The following main conclusions are drawn. For the model with one-inlet and two-outlets, when the driving fluid reaches the intersection point, it flows into the other two fracture segments. However, for the model with two-inlets and one-outlet, mixed fluids might be formed. The pressure variations at the intersection point for the two models are different. The smaller parameter For two-phase flow through a single fracture intersection, fluid velocity directions in a fracture segment might change, which is affected by pressure boundary conditions in the fracture segment as well as the mobilities of the driving fluid and driven fluid. When the mobility of the driving fluid is larger than that of the driven fluid, the pressures under which the direction of fluid flow changes are larger than those for the reverse situation. The capillary pressure between two fluids vanishes when the material interface moves to outside of a fracture, which causes a sudden change of fluid velocities in all fracture segments, such as a sudden increase, sudden decrease or a direction change. The pressures at the intersection points are variable during the process of two-phase flow in fracture networks. The pressures result in the fluids in some fracture segments have no-flow or almost no-flow at some time, and the fluid velocity directions may change in some fracture segments. For a horizontal fracture network, regardless of capillary pressure, the variations of concentrations of fluid 2 in the domain and at the outlet boundary have the same features and the concentration of each fluid in the domain is also approximately equal at the breakthrough time of driving fluid under different inlet pressures. The research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Nos. 11572282, 51778021, 51627812 and 51778029) and