A negative carbon isotope shift in sedimentary organic carbon deposited in stratified marine and lacustrine systems has often been inferred to be a consequence of the process of recycling of respired and, therefore, 13C-depleted, dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) formed from mineralization of descending organic matter. To study this process, we measured δ
                     13CDIC and δ
                     13C values of particulate organic carbon (POC) over an annual cycle in the permanently stratified Kyllaren fjord in Norway. A notable accumulation of respired DIC below the chemocline was evident from the substantially 13C-depleted DIC (ca. −19‰). Especially in autumn to early spring, respired DIC from the deep anoxic water is mixed into the oxygenated surface water and the calculated respired DIC contribution to the total DIC pool was up to ∼40% in early spring in the upper 2m of the water column. At 4m depth, just below the chemocline, the respired DIC contribution reaches ca. 90% of the total DIC pool. Assimilation of the respired DIC seems to exert only a small effect on δ
                     13CPOC, which has an average δ
                     13C value of −24‰. The measured photoautotrophic fractionation (ε
                     p) was low (<10‰) during the majority of the year. This is likely responsible for reducing the apparent impact of recycling of respired DIC on δ
                     13CPOC. However, in June 2002, photoautotrophic use of the 13C-depleted DIC is obvious from a 13C-depletion of POC (−33.7‰) derived from a bloom of the protist Euglena sp.The present day oceans are well mixed by thermohaline driven ocean currents, the so-called ocean conveyor belt. However, during past “oceanic anoxic events” (OAEs;  Evidence that this process of recycling of respired CO In contrast to lake systems, stratified marine systems have been less well studied with respect to recycling of respired DIC. Permanently stratified marine systems are confined to relatively small (semi) enclosed basins, generally with a narrow connection and/or a shallow sill to the open ocean, thereby restricting water circulation. In the Black Sea, the largest anoxic basin ( In order to determine the significance of recycling of respired DIC in the photic zone and its impact on Kyllaren is a small, 29 m deep fjord on the west coast of Norway (62°N, 5°E), connected to the Norwegian Sea by a narrow, 1–2 Water samples for DIC concentration ([DIC]), stable carbon isotope ratios of DIC ( Temperatures were measured with a thermometer inside the Niskin bottle or in situ with YSI 85 equipment. Salinity was measured using STD/CTD model SD204, manufacturer SAIV A/S Environmental Sensors & Systems (optional sensor unit 106) or YSI 85 equipment, whilst oxygen was measured with STD/CTD model SD204. The pH was measured in situ or in the laboratory directly after the fieldwork with a GK2401C Radiometer Electrode. Samples for hydrogen sulfide concentration ([HS Water samples for [DIC] were filtered over 0.2 For [POC] and DIC concentration, sulfide concentration and Standard deviations for The [CO In the surface layer to 4–5 The [DIC] increased with a sharp gradient from ∼1 [POC] generally fluctuated between 35 and 260 In the sediment core, three facies could be distinguished: OM-rich fluff (0–3 Due to density stratification throughout the year, two chemically distinct water layers are prevalent in the fjord. The low salinity (i.e., <16‰) surface water (0–3.5 The With D Another requirement for the Küspert model is that the respired CO The largest The stable carbon isotopic composition of POC at 0 and 2 The calculated One of the factors that could lead to a small At 4 m depth below the chemocline, an even smaller From the above it is clear that, due to changes in the plankton community, it is preferable not to use Even if the impact of recycling of respired CO The most negative DIC below the chemocline in Kyllaren fjord is almost entirely derived from OM and forms a potential Drs. R. Pancost and S. Bernasconi and an anonymous referee are thanked for their constructive comments which substantially improved the manuscript. This research was financed by a grant of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) to JSSD. Fieldwork was made possible by a grant from the Schure-Beijerinck-Popping fund of the KNAW (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences) and by assistance of the students of the Department of Geology at the HSF University College, Norway. We thank Karel Bakker (NIOZ) for analytical assistance in determining [DIC] and [H