Three aluminium metal matrix composites containing reinforcing particles of B4C, SiC and Al2O3 (0–20vol.%) were processed. The stir-casting manufacturing route followed by hot extrusion was utilized, being one of the cost-effective industrial methods. A clear interfacial reaction product/layer was found at Al–SiC interface for composites held for a relatively long processing time (>30min). No reaction product was observed at Al–B4C and Al–Al2O3 interfaces at the resolution limit of the SEM used. On the other hand, two secondary phases (alumina and another phase containing aluminium, boron and carbon) were found in the aluminum matrix away from the interface in Al–B4C composites. From the fracture surface analysis, B4C reinforced Al composite seemed to exhibit a better interfacial bonding compared to the other two composites.Aluminium metal matrix composites (Al MMCs) are being considered as a group of new advanced materials for its light weight, high strength, high specific modulus, low co-efficient of thermal expansion and good wear resistance properties. Combination of these properties are not available in a conventional material The primary function of the reinforcement in MMCs is to carry most of the applied load, where the matrix binds the reinforcements together, and transmits and distributes the external loads to the individual reinforcement Substantial information is available in literatures on wetting and interface of Al-alloy MMCs reinforced with SiC, Al The main aims of the present work were to see the feasibility to produce Al–B Three different ceramic particles SiC, Al To reduce the porosity of the cast composites and to improve the particle distribution within Al matrix, the cast composites were subjected to hot extrusion at 420 The microstructure was investigated by optical and scanning electron microscope (Philips XL 30 FEG) equipped with EDX spectroscopy. Fracture surface of some of the composites were analyzed by the SEM.   A interaction layer was found at the interface of Al–SiC composites, none was found at the interface of Al–Al To analyze the phases formed at the Al–SiC interface, a spot analysis was taken from the center of the interaction layer formed in Al–15SiC composite ( From the EDX analysis results and the peak ratio of Al–Si it is suggested that the phase formed at the interface of Al–SiC in the present system is a ternary compound Al In addition to this ternary compound forming the interaction layer, small white particles, identified as Al For the Al–Al For Al–B Three composites with the highest volume fractions of the reinforcing particles viz. Al–20SiC, Al–20Al Particles distribution was found to be better in Al–B The authors would like to thank ABOS, Belgium for support through a VlIR-ABOS (1998–2002).