The study was conducted to investigate the effects of nano-zirconia on the compressive and flexural strengths of concrete. For this purpose, the hydrothermal method was applied for the preparation of nano zirconia. Crystallinity, purity and structural properties of the prepared product were determined via X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis. Zirconia nanoparticles were applied as nano-filler with partial replacement of ordinary Portland cement (OPC) by 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0 wt%. The strength of OPC was determined via flexural and compressive strength tests on 3, 7 and 28 days. The results cleared that 1.5%wt have the highest improvement on the concrete. Overall, flexural and compressive strengths of OPC paste were increased first (0.5, 1 and 1.5%) then decreased (2, 3 and 4%) in 3, 7 and 28 curing days. Flexural strength was improved with 19.9% after 3 days, 17% after 7 days and 14.6% after 28 days. Compressive strength was improved with 14.9, 9.8 and 11.4% after 3, 7 and 28 days respectively.In the field of the civil fundament, cement-based concrete is highly and mostly applied In recent years few types of research on zirconia have proved that the structure and the mechanical properties of zirconia-cement nanocomposites are highly interrelated Since the properties of ZrO Ordinary Portland cement (OPC), Ethanol, Zirconyl chloride (Zirconium oxychloride) ZrOCl In a typical synthesis, in 30 ml of deionized water 0.1 M of ZrOCl The main goal of the test is to examine the effect of adding nano-zirconia on the flexural and compressive strengths of a concrete specimen. Different percentage of nano-zirconia (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0%) were added to determine the impact of ZrO The X-ray diffraction pattern of the as-received zirconia nanostructures is presented in Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) technique was used to examine the surface of the prepared zirconia. The FTIR spectra of the prepared ZrO The physical properties of zirconia can be strongly influenced via shape and particle size. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was applied to determine the shape and size of the particle. In Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used as a complementary of SEM analysis. TEM is an advantageous method in light of the fact that it directly measures nanoparticle size, grain size, size distribution, and morphology The N The effect of zirconia nanoparticles on the flexural and compressive strengths of concrete was investigated after curing for 3 days. In comparison to Z-0 (blank sample), the flexural strength of Z-0.5, Z-1, and Z-1.5 increased by 12.2, 14.9, and 19.9% respectively. After this, the flexural strength gradually decreased by introducing more content of nano-zirconia. For Z-2, Z-3 and Z-4, flexural strengths reached 13.3, 12.2, and 3.9% higher than Z-0 respectively ( The influence of nano-zirconia on the setting time of cement paste was investigated. For this, the optimum content of nano-zirconia was applied (Z-1.5). The setting time of blank (Z-0) was measured 250 min. While setting time of cement paste accelerated to 190 min in Z-1.5 sample ( In conclusion, zirconia nanoparticles were prepared via the hydrothermal method in the presence of CTAB as a surfactant. XRD and EDS analysis confirmed the formation of zirconia with any impurity. SEM and TEM images revealed the formation of nanoparticles with a diameter of 21.5 nm. This paper aims to show how prepared nano-zirconia were influenced the mechanical properties of concrete. For this, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3 and 4%w contents of synthesized zirconia nanoparticles were applied as a modifier for improved mechanical properties of concrete. Flexural and compressive strengths of concrete were measured after curing for 3, 7 and 28 days. Flexural and compressive strengths of OPC paste increase first (Z-0.5, Z-1, and Z-1.5) then decrease (Z-2, Z-3, and Z-4) in applied curing days. For Z-1.5, as an optimum dosage, flexural strength was improved with 19.9% for 3 days, 17% for 7 days and 14.6% for 28 days. Compressive strength that showed a similar trend was improved with 14.9% for 3 days, 9.8% for 7 days and 11.4% for 28 days. After 1.5%, the compressive and flexural strength of concrete slightly decreases with a further increase in zirconia nanoparticle dosage. Results showed that setting time of cement paste accelerated via the addition of nano-zirconia.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors are grateful to the council of