Photovoltaic power generation technology has developed rapidly in the past decade due to its clean and efficient characteristics. However, with the development of photovoltaic power generation technology, a large number of waste photovoltaic panels are generated, but there is no clean and effective method for resources recycling in waste photovoltaic panels. High-voltage pulsing tends to cause fractures at interfaces of materials with different dielectric constants, which has a satisfactory recovery effect on layered materials like photovoltaic panels In this paper, high voltage pulse crushing is used to dissociate and enrich waste photovoltaic panels, the experimental results show that there are differences in the selectivity of different components during high-voltage pulse crushing (selectivity: Ag > Si > glass). This makes high voltage pulse crushing have good enrichment effect on photovoltaic panels. Most of the high-value elements are enriched to lower grain size, the glass purity of 0.5∼4 mm grain size can be directly recycled while it reaches over 98%. High-voltage pulse crushing has the most obvious enrichment effect on silver, Selectivity increases with the decrease of field strength and pulse number. The enrichment rate of silver in the lower field strength and pulse can reach 3.08, and the recovery rate is 54.07%. As the field strength and pulse number increase, the enrichment rate of silver drops to 1.67 but the recovery rate increases to 89.41%. The silver recovery can be effectively improved by adjusting the electrode gap. High-voltage pulse crushing can effectively enrich and recover the silver in the waste photovoltaic panels, providing convenience for subsequent sorting.Photovoltaic power generation is a reliable and clean technology, which has become an active area of research in various countries as fossil fuel derived energy is increasingly exhausted. Globally, photovoltaic-based energy supply doubled in 2016 compared to 2015. With the development of photovoltaic energy, it is estimated that 9.6 million tons of waste photovoltaic panels will be generated by 2050 ( To date, many scholars have carried out relevant studies of the recycling of photovoltaic panels. Some scholars, for example, proposed the use of a mechanical crushing method to extract and recycle the useful components of photovoltaic panels ( However, each of these recycling methods has its own shortcomings. Such as poor dissociation, high treatment cost, reagent harm, high energy consumption and pollution. Therefore, it is necessary to explore other methods of photovoltaic panel recycling. In the field of mineral processing, mineral recovery is mainly based on gravity separation ( Then high-voltage pulse technology has also been applied to the recycling of circuit boards, with excellent results ( In previous studies, the advantages of high-voltage pulse technology over mechanical crushing technology in the recycling of photovoltaic panels were elaborated. However, the selective crushing effect of high-voltage pulses on photovoltaic panels and enrichment of each component of photovoltaic panels were not fully explored. This paper describes a study of the effect of various factors on degree of crushing and selective crushing rule of photovoltaic panels using high voltage pulses. In this paper, the effects of various factors on the selective crushing rule of photovoltaic panels and the recovery and enrichment effect of Ag under high voltage pulse were studied. The waste polycrystalline silicon photovoltaic panels used in this study were provided by local photovoltaic manufacturers. The general structure of the panels is shown in After the glass on the photovoltaic panel is manually stripped, the remaining material is heated in a muffle furnace (650 °C for 1 h) to constant weight. This procedure causes the EVA and backboard layers to be pyrolyzed, leaving behind less than 1% of the materials in these layers, which for the purposes of this study can be regarded as complete removal. The resulting material can be regarded as a pure cell layer. The compositions of the glass and cell layers are determined using X-ray fluorescence spectrometry, as shown in The photovoltaic panels used in this test are removed from their aluminum alloy frames in advance, and cut into 50 × 50 mm pieces of to meet the requirements of the crushing equipment. The main condition of high voltage pulse crushing solid insulation material is the material internal dielectric breakdown, and the condition of internal dielectric breakdown is that the electric field intensity inside the insulation material reaches the breakdown condition, and the electric field intensity of the external material should not reach the breakdown condition. When the voltage rises for a short time (<500 ns), the breakdown field of water is higher than that of rock, so when a high voltage pulse is applied to a solid in water, internal dielectric breakdown of the solid occurs, creating a discharge channel. Then, the discharge channel expands, resulting in a pressure wave that disintegrates the solid material ( The instrument used for crushing is the SELFRAG LAB high-voltage pulse crusher from SELFRAG, Switzerland. This uses the principle of high-voltage pulse crushing to disintegrate a mineral and its general structure is shown in In this study, the frequency of device was set to 1 Hz, and the test was carried out under different voltages, pulse number, and electrode gap. When the voltage or the pulse number is too small, the material cannot be broken effectively, and when the voltage or the pulse number is too large, the product is over crushing; when the electrode gap is too small, the electrode may contact the material to impact crushing, and internal dielectric breakdown will be difficult to occur when the electrode gap is too large. To ensure the recovery of the photovoltaic panel, the voltage is set to 90, 110, 130, 150, 170 kV the pulse number is set to 30, 50, 70, 90, 110, and the electrode gap is set to 17, 19, 21, 23, 25 mm. The sieve-free reaction tank was used, and the crushed product was analyzed by sieving and XRF for particle size distribution, selective crushing characteristics and energy consumption. D δ is used to indicate the degree of selective crushing of every components of photovoltaic panels, and δ is the sum of the rate differences of different particle size. When there is no selective crushing, θ β is used to indicate the degree of enrichment of silver. β is used to indicate the degree of enrichment of silver. β is the ratio of silver recovery rate to the yield of broken product in the <0.5 mm particle size range. A larger β indicates a better enrichment effect. As shown in First, the influence of voltage on the fracturing of the photovoltaic panel was investigated, by setting the voltage to 90, 110, 130, 150, or 170 kV. In these experiments, the number of pulses was fixed at 50, and the electrode gap was 21 mm. The results of this test are shown in Next, the influence of the number of pulses was investigated, by using either 30, 50, 70, 90, or 110 pulses. Voltage and electrode gap were fixed at 150 kV and 21 mm, respectively. The results of this test are shown in The influence of the electrode gap on crushing was investigated by setting the gap to 17, 19, 21, 23, or 25 mm, with the voltage fixed at 150 kV and the number of pulses fixed at 50. The results from this test are shown in In order to investigate the recovery effect of the crushing product, XRF analysis was carried out to measure the amounts of glass, elemental silicon, and silver in the crushed product. Since more than 98% of the particles in the crushed product larger than 0.5 mm are composed of glass, with negligible elemental silicon and silver present, this test is mainly applicable for the analysis of particles smaller than 0.5 mm. First, the pulse number was fixed at 50, electrode gap fixed at 21 mm, and the voltage set to 90, 110, 130, 150, 170 kV. As can be seen from Next, a fixed voltage of 150 kV and an electrode gap of 21 mm were used with a varying number of pulses from 30 to 110. As can be seen from When increasing the electrode gap from 17 to 25 mm, with the voltage fixed at 150 kV and number of pulses fixed to 50, the separation result is shown in In order to further understand the selectivity of high-voltage pulsing to separate specific materials by removing them in small particle form, the selective crushing index δ described in Section The following is proposed to explain these results. Since high-voltage pulsing tends to cause fractures at interfaces of materials with different dielectric constants, the larger the difference between dielectric constants, the more easily an interface is broken. The difference in dielectric constant between silver and the other components in the panels is larger than between the other components, so at lower field strength, silver is more easily separated, while Si and glass are more difficult to separate. As the field strength increases or the number of pulses increases, the components in the photovoltaic panel will have different separation difficulties due to the difference in dielectric constant, and the easily separated components will be preferentially separated to form selective fracture. However, when the field strength or the number of pulses is too low, the product is not broken enough and the selectivity is lowered (the δ values of 90 kV and 30 impulses are lower). Therefore, the field strength and pulse number should be reasonably reduced under the condition that the material is fully broken. In order to investigate the recovery effect of silver in the high-voltage pulse crushing process, the cumulative yield of the crushed product of −0.5 mm particle size after crushing and the recovery rate of Ag were calculated. The enrichment rate of Ag was calculated and the recovery effect of Ag was evaluated, the results are shown in In order to verify the recyclability of the crushing products, the recycling test was carried out for the products of each particle size more than 98% of the particles in the crushed products larger than 0.5 mm are composed of glass, the remaining 2% were mainly organic debris and a small amount of aluminum strip. Since the aluminum strip only accounts for 0.5% of the broken product, it was taken out manually in this test (Eddy current separator can be used in industrial production to remove aluminum strip from products). After the aluminum strip is picked out, due to the great difference in density between the glass and organic debris (the density of organic debris is about 1.39  g/cm For products below 0.5 mm particle size, it is difficult to sort by general equipment of gravity separation, this test uses Falcon centrifugal separator as separation equipment, which can effectively solve the problem of sorting fine particles and recover valuable components, metal components such as silver and copper were enriched to heavy products, and the obtained products are then purified by metallurgical means. The recovery rate of silver (accounting for −0.5 mm grain size) is 93.78% and copper is 94.22%.  As the field strength and the number of pulses increase, the degree of crushing of the product increases. The rate of each component varies greatly at different particle sizes. When high-voltage pulsing is used to break up photovoltaic panels, fractures are preferentially made at interfaces between materials with large differences in dielectric constant. This has the effect of preferentially separating materials, in the order Ag > Si > Glass. The enrichment rate of Ag was higher under the condition of lower field strength and pulse number. However, the decrease in voltage and pulse number has a greater impact on the recovery rate. Therefore, in order to ensure the recovery effect of Ag, electrode gap can be appropriately increased. A sorting test was performed on the −0.5 mm particle size product, and the pure glass product (rate 98.99%) was obtained; the −0.5 mm particle size crushed product was processed by a Falcon sorter, 93.78% of silver and 94.22% of copper was successfully recovered. Pengfei Zhao: Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft. Bo Zhang: Conceptualization, Visualization, Supervision, Writing - Review & Editing. Junwei Guo: Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Data Curation. Guanghui Yan: Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Data Curation. Guangqing Zhu: Writing: Review & Editing. Xiangnan Zhu: Writing: Review & Editing. Zhenxing Zhang: Writing: Review & Editing. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the financial support by