Cationic reverse flotation of quartz is the most important technique for the concentration of itabirite iron ores for the production of pellet feed. Mineral processors dealing with this industrial system face two major challenges: (i) coarse quartz particles do not respond well to the action of the amine collectors; (ii) fine iron oxide particles do not respond well to the depressant action of the gelatinised corn starch. The first challenge is addressed in this paper. Bench scale experiments were performed in a conventional mechanical machine aiming at investigating the flotation performance of quartz particles of different size ranges in the presence of four dosages of ether monoamine and ether diamine, at three pH levels. It was observed that ether diamine was more effective in the flotation of medium and coarse quartz, while ether monoamine performs better in the case of fine quartz, and also that the flotation of coarse particles is enhanced by the presence of fine particles in the system.Mineral particles in a broad size range are present in flotation pulps. The importance of size in the sequence of events that leads to the flotation of a mineral particle has been extensively recognized a long time ago ( Several equations have been developed and presented correlating maximum particle size with flotation parameters, such as particle density, medium density, liquid surface tension, bubbles radium, detachment angle, contact angle ( Results of investigations aiming at extending the range of coarse particles that respond adequately to flotation were also reported in the literature (    Fine particles exhibit much higher specific surface area (cm Particles can report to the froth product by true flotation or entrainment. In the past 10 In the present investigation, the flotation of quartz particles in different size ranges is addressed aiming at bringing light to the so-called reverse cationic flotation of itabirite iron ores. Quartz particles are removed in the froth phase leaving hematite as the non floated fraction. In this particular system, the removal of quartz particles either by true flotation or entrained in the froth is beneficial to yield a clean concentrate. In the reverse flotation of iron ores, the entrainment of iron oxide particles in the froth phase represents a serious problem, for it results lower iron recovery. The other factor contributing to the loss of iron in the froth phase is the lack of efficiency of the depressants towards fine particles of iron oxides ( The entrainment in the cationic flotation an iron ore was investigated by A very pure quartz sample from Minas Gerais state, Brazil, was carefully comminuted to avoid contamination yielding three fractions designated as F – fine (mainly in the size range −74 These fractions were submitted to chemical and size analyses. Flotation experiments were performed in a laboratory Denver, model D12, machine, using a 2L cell. The test conditions were: 1300 Two classes of amines are used in plant practice of cationic reverse flotation of iron ores: ether monoamine and ether diamine. For the present investigation Flotigam EDA 3 (monoamine, neutralisation degree 29.8%) and Flotigan 2835-2L (diamine, neutralisation degree 20.6%), manufactured by Clariant, were selected. Ether monoamine is designation, in the jargon of mineral processors, of Ether diamine is designation, in the jargon of mineral processors, of The tests were performed at three pH levels: 9.0, 10.0, and 10.5. Collector dosages were: 20 Results of chemical analyses are presented in Results of size analyses are presented in  The results shown in The results shown in The recoveries of coarse quartz are illustrated in  Recovery values of medium quartz are presented in References to the use of ether diamine as a collector for quartz are scarce in the literature. A large concentrator of iron ore, in Brazil, operates its flotation circuit using as quartz collector a combination of ether monoamine and ether diamine. The proportion of diamine in the collector blend varies from 25% to 50%, depending on the ore type and also on the specification of the product (pellet feed for blast furnace or direct reduction). The presence of amine in the collector blend is essential for the flotation performance in this plant. In general, higher quartz recoveries in all size ranges under investigation were achieved at pH 9.0. This enhanced floatability is in agreement with determinations of zeta potential of quartz, illustrated in The influence of the percentage of fine quartz in the flotation feed on the recovery of fine, medium, and coarse quartz is illustrated in It is observed that in the absence of fine quartz low recoveries of coarse and medium quartz were achieved. The recoveries increased with the increase of the percentage of fine quartz up 11.6% and then decreased. The effect of the presence of fine quartz is more significant in the case of coarse quartz than for medium quartz. At pH 9, the beneficial effect of fine quartz (11.6%) on the flotation of coarse quartz was observed even for a low dosage of ether monoamine (20 The most favourable pH for the flotation of quartz in the size ranges under investigation was pH 9.0 for both types of amine used, ether monoamine and ether diamine. Ether monoamine was more efficient than ether diamine in the flotation of fine quartz. At higher pH levels, ether diamine yielded better results than ether monoamine in the case of medium quartz, higher collector dosages being required. Ether monoamine was not effective in the flotation of coarse quartz at higher pH levels. High recoveries of coarse quartz were achieved with ether diamine at high dosages. The flotation of coarse and medium quartz was enhanced by the presence in the pulps of a defined amount of fine quartz. The presence of fine quartz affects the aspect of the froth, decreasing the bubbles size and improving the froth stability.