The year 2005 marked the 25th anniversary of the founding of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT), and I participated in a project named “A Quarter Century of Achievements in Heart and Lung Transplantation.” The ISHLT had the opportunity to invite several founding members and a slide show was created and displayed throughout the annual meeting. Among the many founders I contacted, Sir Terence English collaborated fully by offering historic material collected during his distinguished career as an outstanding cardiovascular surgeon. The project accorded me the opportunity to meet one of the great pioneers of heart transplant surgery. I am honored for the opportunity to review his outstanding new book, an autobiography that recounts the history of the development of heart transplantation and the author's determination to establish a program at the Papworth Hospital that culminated in 1979, when he performed the first successful heart transplant in Britain. Because I am a student of the history of medicine, I was familiar with many of these developments, but Dr English presents them with a clear, easy-to-read style. The book is more than a historic recount. It is also a personal tale of Terence English, not only about his place in the history of cardiovascular surgery, which is well known, but also his human side, his path to achieve what he accomplished in life, and how he followed the star! He writes, “Looking back on my life, I can see that there have been a number of occasions when being prepared to either change direction or take on a different challenge has had important consequences not only for my personal circumstances but also for those around me and for determining the sort of person I have become.” He also mentions the virtue of tenacity when one finds his “star” and also “good fortune whereby one happens to be in the right place at the right time.” The reader will know that Dr English studied mining engineering in his native South Africa but later decided that he would be a better doctor than an engineer and was accepted at Guy's Hospital. The reader will also enjoy learning about his vast interests in life beyond medicine, his different skills, his leadership abilities and travels around the world. The book contains several pictures that offer a great deal of support to the story. Among the most enjoyable parts of the book for this reviewer is an appendix in which he offers, “A collection of short pieces that have stimulated me over the years.” These pieces are priceless; they are about life, character, work, surgery and education, and were written by authors well-known worldwide. The reader will find this section of the book very stimulating. One of “short pieces” is also the favorite of another well-known South African, Nelson Mandela, taken from the W.E. Henley poem “Invictus”: “It matters not how strait the gate, how charged with punishment the scroll, I am the master of my fate: I am the captain of my soul.” 