The durability of insulating tundish linings depends on the sintering characteristics of the mix formulation and its ability to restrict corrosion. The present work studied the effect of mix variations on the performance of tundish working lining material. This was evaluated in terms of bond formation, strength and thermal conductivity of the lining material. In the present study, a siliceous olivine-periclase and a low silica magnesia based compositions were investigated. The samples evaluated were heat treated at 250–1450°C for 2h. Microstructure of the heat treated samples was analysed by QEM SCAN and SEM. A solid-state sintering by formation of high refractory phases like forsterite and magnesio-wustatite at the interface of the grains is believed to have enhanced the high temperature strength of olivine based recipe. In contrast, liquid phase sintering was predominant in periclase based formulation, imparting a lower strength at high temperature. The sintering behaviour of the mixes was also found to have a profound effect on thermal conductivity of the two materials.Despite the known problems existing in refractories for continuous casting, a continual push exists to improve steelmaking efficiency due to international competition, which has driven the need for process improvements. The search for new refractory materials to improve their performance is a priority as steel manufacturers want increased service and equipment life. Special attention has been devoted not only to the quality and elevated endurance of refractory lining, but to the effectiveness of the new technology and new materials. Given the drive to improve steel quality, several developments have been made in the continuous casting area, including adopting disposable lining to protect the permanent refractory lining of the tundish. These expendable liners are usually fabricated from a composition having heat insulating properties either in the form of boards or sprayable materials. Recently, the technology in disposable linings has shifted from boards or sprayable materials to dry vibratable material (DVM) premixed with a binder and used to obtain a disposable layer over the permanent lining In continuous casting of steel, a break in production is very common due to the poor performance of disposable lining. In practice, it has been observed that the failure of disposable lining depends not only on corrosion, but also on erosion of the refractory material. Until now, corrosion of working lining by steel slag has been the focus of many investigations Thermal conductivity of the disposable liner is another area of concern. During prolonged casting, the disposable lining must act as a thermal barrier layer, protecting the permanent liner, and maintaining the temperature of the molten steel. If the disposable liner has a high thermal conductivity, it can react with and fuse to the permanent lining at elevated temperatures. As a result, deskulling of the disposable liner becomes difficult, and the permanent lining can become damaged during the deskulling process. A number of various dry refractory materials with varying compositions are available in industry; however, the most commonly used material is made of forsteritic olivine (MgFeSiO In this context, the DVM considered is a commonly used one with DBM:olivine in the ratio of approximately 40:60. Chemical compositions of the above refractory components are given in Test samples of the above mixes were prepared by taking the dry mix in moulds of required sizes and vibrating for 10 Chemical analyses of the samples were determined by inductively coupled plasma (ICP, Model No. – ARCOS-165). The effect of sintering temperatures on the extent of bond formation was studied by measuring cold crushing strength (CCS) of the two materials at a constant load rate (Chemino, Model No. – CCS 26/501) as per ISO 10059-2:2003(E). Microstructural studies were conducted on both samples after heating to 250 The effect of heat treatment on the fraction of different phases formed at 250 Thermal conductivity of a material is dependent on the starting material and the microstructure that develops in it. The effect of starting material on thermal conductivity of the material at different temperatures was evaluated using calorimetric technique (Chemicals & Instruments Corporation, Kolkata) per standard IS:9490-1980. Mineral phase change and their relative quantities after sintering for both mixes are shown in The presence of olivine in the PO material makes it more reactive during sintering at higher temperatures. This is evident from the quantified phase changes as shown in The microstructural analyses of both mixes are shown in  In contrast, the formation of a liquid phase in sample P seemed to have facilitated the sintering process. The periclase grains are relatively pure, and a liquid forming monticellite (CaMgSiO Sintering of the refractory is important to improve the mechanical strength of a working lining. Thermo-chemical changes like grain bridging on heat-treatment varies with the composition of the used mixes, as observed in Further, it has been reported that olivine, when heated in the presence of oxygen, dissociates to forsterite or ferriolivine, depending on the composition CCS of the refractory blocks was measured at room temperature after firing at six temperatures (250 The measured thermal conductivity of mixes PO and P at temperatures 200 The thermal conductivity of refractories is known to be dependent upon chemical and mineralogical compositions as well as the glassy phase contained in the refractory and the application temperature. The manner in which thermal conductivity of refractories varies with temperature depends on the nature of the material under investigation. One way of heat transfer through a solid occurs via energy transfer between vibrating atoms. At low temperatures (up to about 400 Considering the results obtained from the present work, it could be said that although the phases of periclase based material showed a stable behaviour at high temperature, the presence of direct bonding and grain-to-grain contact in the periclase-olivine based material would have a profound effect on the strength and thermal conductivity at the working temperature. The suitability of both periclase and periclase-olivine based refractory compositions have been considered as tundish disposable liners. In spite of its very good corrosion resistance property as observed in our earlier studies, pure periclase based material may not work well in tundish linings due to their high thermal conductivity and poor sinterability to develop high temperature strength. Solid–solid bonding taking place in the periclase-olivine based mix formulation vs pure periclase based mix resulted in strength and thermal conductivity desirable for tundish applications. Further studies, however, are essential on binder selection, grain sizing and pore forming additions to explore the suitability of pure DBM system as tundish disposable lining material. The authors wish to thank Dr Tamal K Ghosh for the microstructural studies using SEM and QEMSCAN instruments.