The scale-up of batch grinding data is an attractive option for the modelling of industrial milling circuits. However, little is known in terms of the expected uncertainty attached to the predictions. This paper attempts to estimate this.
                  For simulation purposes, coarse and fine feeds were considered in the context of an open ball milling circuit and for three predefined feed flow-rates. Realistic fluctuations were allocated to the 25 input parameters making up the simulation model. The Monte Carlo approach was then used to simultaneously process the randomly generated input parameter values. Finally, average values and standard deviations on the 50% and 80% passing sizes of the mill product were calculated in order to obtain estimates of prediction uncertainties.
                  Global errors on the predicted full-scale mill product size were found to be as high as 70%. However, with appropriate assumptions on the scale-up correction factors, they were reduced to approximately 40%. It was also demonstrated that well planned batch tests and accurately determined batch data can further drop the error to as low as 20%. Finally, the scale-up model was found to work well when finer feeds were considered for milling at high flow-rates.This work is part of a sequel of papers that looked at the scale-up procedure for batch grinding data by Austin et al. In this final follow-up paper, an attempt to address the aforementioned shortcomings is made with a two-fold goal: the first is to obtain a fair and realistic estimate of the global error to be expected when Austin's scale-up model is used and the second is to find alternative models that can capture better the effects of slurry concentration. In order to meet the objectives set out, parameters relating to batch and full-scale milling were assigned acceptable levels of variation. Then, 1000 values within predefined ranges were generated for each milling parameter using a computer-based algorithm. The pseudo-random number values were simultaneously inputted into Austin's scale-up model applied to a ball mill operated in open circuit. After that, the average values and standard deviations recorded on the 50% and 80% passing sizes of the 1000 mill product were calculated. These were used to get an estimate of the global relative error on the mean inherent to the scale-up model. Finally, Austin's model was categorised in line with the level of uncertainty applicable to engineering projects. It should be noted that the developmental cycle of engineering projects goes through three stages with their respective level of accuracy: a conceptual or scoping stage, a prefeasibility stage, and a feasibility stage. In this work, the intention was to see whether Austin's model incurs less than the ± An overview of the scale-up procedure proposed by Austin et al. Austin's scale-up procedure starts with the preparation of mono-sized feed samples. These undergo a series of grinding tests in a laboratory mill run in batch mode following a technique known as one-size-fraction method The scaled-up the selection function is calculated as follows The breakage function, on the other hand, is expressed as follows The following full-scale milling conditions are needed in Eqs. This section briefly describes the mathematical model of a full-scale ball mill operated in an open circuit configuration. The classical model formed the basis of the simulator built in this work and used to meet the objectives set out. Given a cumulative feed size distribution that follows the Rosin-Rammler distribution function In Eq. When considering the full-scale mill, the mass fraction distribution of the feed corresponding to the cumulative distribution in Eq. The term The average selection function From the laboratory-based breakage function in Eq. The next factor to consider in the model of the open milling circuit is the material transport. This is described by assuming that the full-scale mill consists of three perfectly mixed reactors in series: a large one of average residence time The next parameter is the powder filling In Eq. This brings us to discuss the last parameter of the milling circuit model, that is, the average residence time, The average residence time of particles through the mill, A MATLAB® script of the ball mill model described in the previous section was written for simulation purposes. The simulation code could output the mill product size distribution as well as the corresponding 50% and 80% passing sizes. The Monte Carlo technique was then used to estimate the relative error to be expected from Austin's scale-up model. In terms of the actual implementation, coarse and fine feeds were simulated for three different feed flow-rates (300, 600, and 1200 As shown in Perhaps the most important note to make is that the intervals in The objective of the present work is to estimate the relative error to be expected from the use of Austin's scale-up model. The initial results of this effort are summarised in In terms of the mill product size, it can be seen from By and large, it is clear from Indeed, parameter Δ descriptive of the wear rate kinetics of grinding balls is constant for a particular operation So, based on the above argument, it was decided to consider the following parameters constant: Δ This brings us to discuss the next topic, which is the inclusion of the effects of slurry concentration in the scale-up model. This stems from the fact that Mulenga Eq.       In the context of the full-scale mill, the internal radius of the overflow discharge trunnion to be used in Eq. Upon substituting Eq. On another note, it can be said, based on the previous two papers A feeding policy of top-up balls of uniform diameter can reduce their contribution to the global error. Ball filling can be controlled with the installation of facilities such as the Sensomag® sensors and the Magoload® system In closing, the accuracy of Austin's scale-up procedure for batch grinding data in the prediction of full-scale milling performance has been assessed. By allowing for all possible fluctuations on all the input parameters, it has been shown that uncertainty as high as 70% can be reached. Notwithstanding this, the level of uncertainty can be reduced by proper definition of the scale-up correction factors in In terms of feed flow-rate and fineness, it was noted that finer feeds consistently incurred prediction uncertainties as low as 12% especially at high flow-rate. This suggests that Austin's scale-up model may work better for mills to be designed and operated at secondary stage. If the engineering project is done for primary milling, i.e. coarser feed, this may qualify for pre-feasibility study only after careful batch milling tests. Indeed, the laboratory tests should be designed in such a way that the selection function parameters Deniz It is finally important to note that little can be done to limit the fluctuations inherent to most parameters in The present work is part of a three-fold research project. The first and second parts studied the individual effects of batch and full-scale milling parameters on Austin's scale-up model. In an attempt to mimic reality, the combined effects of batch and full-scale milling parameters was investigated. The goal was to get an estimate of the level of uncertainty inherent to Austin's scale-up model for batch grinding data. The sequel of work on the selected scale-up model showed that prediction uncertainty can be as high as 40% when appropriate assumptions are made on key input parameters. These parameters include the scale-up correction factors, the residence time distribution, and the ball wear kinetics. In addition to this, the batch milling characteristics of the ore were identified as a viable avenue to be explored in the quest for more accurate scale-up predictions. So in a sense, the excerpt below by Austin et al. Interestingly, the present work has demonstrated the benefits of using the Monte Carlo method specifically in the minerals industry where the high level of complexity in models is more the norm than the exception. Lastly, work is currently underway looking at the impact of accurate batch grinding data on the modelling and optimisation of a copper-processing ball milling circuit. Refinements on the scale-up correction factors, the material transport, and the ball wear kinetics are also anticipated. It is hoped that this on-going experimental effort is expected to move us one step towards the precise computer-aided design of ball mill circuits.  Selection function parameter, [min Primary breakage distribution function, [−] Cumulative breakage distribution function, [−] Scale-up parameter in Eq. Matrix used for the generation of the transfer function matrix Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Concentration of solids in slurry by volume, [%] Concentration of solids in slurry by mass, [%] Diameter of grinding balls used in the full-scale mill, [mm] Transfer function matrix defined by Eq. Diameter of grinding balls used in the full-scale mill and falling in size class Diameter of smallest grinding balls inside the full-scale mill, [mm] Diameter of grinding balls added to the full-scale mill, [mm] Diameter of grinding balls used in the batch mill, [mm] Particle size of the mill product at 50% passing, [μm] Particle size of the mill product at 80% passing, [μm] Diameter of the full-scale mill inside liners, [m] Internal diameter of the batch mill, [m] Residence time distribution factor defined by Eq. Mass fraction of the initial feed in size class Solids flow rate at the mill inlet, [tph] Experimentally determined flow-rate of solids for a powder filling of unity as defined in Eq. Gravity constant whose standard value is 9.81, [m/s Adjustment made to the slurry level as a result of the volumetric discharge rate of the mill. It is defined in Eq. Volumetric slurry hold-up or volume of slurry held up inside the overflow discharge mill, [m Ball filling under full-scale milling conditions, [%] Ball filling for the bed of grinding media at rest reaching the level of the trunnion overflow of the full-scale mill, [%] Ball filling under batch milling conditions, [%] Centre-line length of the full-scale mill inside liners, [m] Mass fraction of balls of diameter Number of particle size classes, [−] Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Mass fraction of the final mill product present in size class Slurry flow rate at the mill inlet, [m Radius of the full-scale mill inside liners, [m] Radius of the discharge trunnion of the overflow mill, [m] Selection function of particles of size Selection function of particles of size Selection function of particles of size Residence time or time spent by particles inside a mill, [min] Powder filling under full-scale milling conditions, [−] Powder filling under batch milling conditions, [−] Volume of the full-scale mill, [m Mass fraction of the mill product in size class Mass fraction of the mill product in size class Upper size of the particle size interval Characteristic size of the Rosin-Rammler distribution function, [mm]  Selection function parameter, [−] Breakage function parameter, [−] Breakage function parameter, [−] Parameter describing the wear rate kinetics of grinding balls, [−] Breakage function parameter, [−] Porosity of the bed of grinding balls in rotational motion, [%] Characteristic slope of the Rosin-Rammler distribution function, [mm] Selection function parameter, [−] Experimentally determined fraction of the theoretical critical speed at which centrifuging is fully established, [% of critical speed] Rotational speed of the full-scale mill, [% of critical speed] Rotational speed of the batch mill, [% of critical speed] Breakage function parameter, [−] Fraction of material per unit time leaving the mill after time Mass fraction of feed passing size Mass fraction of feed passing size Selection function parameter, [mm] Angular position of the media charge shoulder, [rad] Angular position of the media charge toe, [rad] Specific density of the grinding balls used, [kg/m Specific density of the ore processed by the full-scale mill, [kg/m Specific density of water, [kg/m Average residence time of the full-scale mill, [min] Average residence time of the large reactor in Eq. Average residence time of one small reactor in Eq. The author wishes to express his gratitude to the University of South Africa (UNISA) for supporting the present publication. This work is based on the research supported in part by the Thanks to Dr. Murray Bwalya of the University of the Witwatersrand for sharing the data that the ball milling model used in this article is based upon and Dr. Chris Rule of Anglo Platinum for granting permission to use the industrial data for publications purposes.