 With great regret we announce the death on January 17, 2009 of our good friend Roland Kammel, Emeritus Professor at the Technical University in Berlin. Professor Kammel was born on January 10, 1925 in Schatzlar [Žacléř in Czech] in the Riesengebirge [Giant Mountains or Sudetes Mountains — the German-speaking district of the former Czechoslovakia on the border with Poland. Also known as Krkonoše in Czech or Karkonosze in Polish]. After finishing his education in elementary and secondary schools in 1943 he was drafted to the German Air Force and trained as a pilot. After World War II he was employed in the chemical industry. In 1948 he started his studies at Technische Hochschule Aachen in the fields of Nonferrous and Electrometallurgy. He received the Diplom-Ingenieur degree in 1953 and the Dr. Ing. degree in 1955. In 1956 he was awarded a Post-doctoral Fellowship of the National Academy of Science to conduct research in USA. He was Guest Professor in Japan, Korea, Turkey and Egypt. Following his habilitation in 1966 in the area of Nonferrous Metallurgy he was nominated Associate Professor for Electroplating and Surface Finishing. On April 1969 he was appointed Professor and Director of the Institute of Nonferrous Metallurgy at the Technical University in Berlin where he remained in Berlin till his retirement in 1992. From 1973–79 Prof. Kammel served as President of the German Electroplater Society. He was advisor to the Ministry of Research and Technology from 1970–88. In 1994 he received the Gold Medal of Technical University Košice in Slovakia and became honorary member of the German Electroplater Society and the Korean Metal Finishing Society. In 1971 he received an Honorary Doctor Degree from Keio University in Tokyo, Japan and another from the Technical University in Košice. In 2000 the German Metallurgical Society awarded him the Georgius Agricola Medal. During his teaching career a number of students from many countries finished their studies under his direction. Ten of these later became metallurgy professors. He was host to several guest scientists and professors from all over the world who contributed enormously during their stay to the research activities of his Institute. He also maintained long periods of co-operation with Japan, India, Egypt, Bolivia, Brazil, Finland, Poland, Czechoslovakia and later Slovakia. Main fields of interest were extractive metallurgy and electroplating. His publications and patents either alone or with his co-workers were more than 450. Since 1995 the Technical University of Košice organized the Conferences Roland is survived by his wife Ilse.