The blends of high styrene rubber (HSR) and natural rubber (NR) with nitrile blended PVC (NVC) and nanosilica are prepared by using a blending technique in presence of different types of carbon black. The effect of filler on morphological and wear characteristics is studied. ISAF type of carbon black have showed a significant effect on optimum cure time, cure rate index and mechanical properties by reacting at the interface between NVC, HSR and NR matrix. All the samples show only one melting peak on the DSC curve; this is attributed to the same backbone structure of the matrix and the carbon black reinforcement. The samples containing 20wt.% of NVC with ISAF N234 type of carbon black has shown maximum heat buildup and lower compression set value. Blends containing ISAF type of carbon black with 20wt.% of NVC shows high abrasion resistant properties against Du-Pont abrader, DIN abrader and different mining rock surfaces and also is found to be the toughest rubber against all types of rock. Coal is identified the main abrader against the rubber blends under this study.Tyres used in mining vehicles are very costly and need regular maintenance, as it is impossible to accept its replacement expense within very short term. The rugged working conditions in mining industries reduces the life span of tyres on account of cuts, contamination, abrasion, wear, speed fluctuations, etc. There are several types of damage occurred in the dump-truck tyre such as tread detachment, sidewall cuts, impact ruptures and bead damage The wear of rubber is a complex phenomenon and dependent on a combination of processes such as mechanical, mechano-chemical and thermo-chemical. Schallamach Polymer blends are being used extensively in numerous applications; this statement is also true with rubber blends, especially in tyre manufacture. Apart from blends of common rubbers, specialty rubber is also being utilized, depending on service demands and components of the tyre The effort towards improving the efficiency of such transportation system is essential for reduce running costs and cutting down the end cost figures by using the HSR and NR rubber blends with nanosilica. In this study, the cure characteristics, morphological and mechanical properties of carbon black filled blends of NR and high styrene rubber (HSR) are investigated. Also, these rubber compounds are examined in a specially fabricated experimental set-up for evaluating their wear resistance properties when abraded against various rock types. The parameters such as influence of composition of rubber vulcanizates on wear characteristics and the mechanism of wear of these compounds against different rocks are reported. A literature search shows a lack of studies about PBR, HSR with NR blends alone. With this work, we pretend to partially fill this gap. Nitrile blended PVC (grade: NVC 873) is used of Apar Industries limited. It is made by Aparene 854 (70%)/PVC (30%). High styrene butadiene rubber (HSR) used is Krylene HS 260, No.-5 of 1948 grade of Bayer AG. Its styrene content is 63.5 Silane (Si-69) is used as coupling agents to adhere nanosilica to a polymer matrix, stabilizing the composite material in this study. Zinc oxide, stearic acid, N-cyclohexyl-2-benzothiazyl sulfonamide (CBS) acts as accelerator and N-isopropyl-N-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine (IPPD) acts as anti-oxidant and anti-ozonant is supplied by Bayer (India) Ltd. Carbon black is supplied by Birla Carbon. Standard rubber grade process oil (Elasto 710) and paraffinic wax is purchased from the local market. The compounding formulation for the HSR and NR blends with its various ingredients are mixed in a two roll mill at a friction ratio of 1:2 following standard mixing sequence. Compounding formulations based on changing of the nitrile blended PVC (NVC) high styrene rubber (HSR), and natural rubber (NR) contents are shown in The cure characteristics of the rubber compound are studied with the help of a Monsanto Oscillating Disc Rheometer (ODR – 100 The cross-link density is determined by immersing a small amount (known mass) of sample in 100 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy is performed using a NEXUS 870 FT-IR (Thermo Nicolet) instrument in dry air at room temperature. Spectra are taken in the range 4000–500 Vulcanized slabs are prepared by compression molding, and the dumb-bell shaped specimens are punched out from a molded sheet by using ASTM Die C. The tests are done by means of a universal tensile testing machine (Hounsfield H10KS) under ambient condition (25 Nine samples are tested for each set of conditions, at the same elongation rate. The values of the tensile strength, tear strength, modulus at 100% elongation, 300% elongation and elongation at break are averaged. The relative error is below 5%. The hardness is measured by Shore A hardness tester followed by ASTM D2240-05. DSC measurements are carried out using a Perkin–Elmer PYRIS Diamond DSC instrument. The samples (10 TGA studies are carried out Shimadzu-DT-40 instrument in presence of air at a rate of 10 The tensile fracture surface of the samples are studied in a scanning electron microscope (JSM-5800 of JEOL Co.; Acceleration voltage: 20 DIN abrasion test is done by the DIN abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber recommended by the Indian Standards Institution vide IS:3400 (Part 3) – 1987. Du-Pont abrasion test is done by the Du-Pont Craydon type of abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber recommended by the Indian Standards Institution vide IS:3400 (Part-III) – 1965. Heat buildup study is carried out using Goodrich Flexometer for the selective compounds having higher tensile strength. The test pieces are prepared in cylindrical shape having diameter 17.8 Compression set test (ASTM D 395-03) is performed on a standard test specimen of cylindrical shape 20 The indigenous experimental set-up is specially fabricated in our lab and the full arrangement of the experimental set-up, preparation of rubber specimen and rock sample are already discussed in our earlier literature Total weight of 450 The optimum cure time for NPS-2 and NPS-6 rubber sample is higher than other rubber vulcanizates. It is possible may be due to the mixing of ISAF N234 type of carbon black which is high structure in nature with the blend system is shown in Maximum torque can be considered as a measure of stock modulus Faster cure rate index is observed in The IR spectra of the different samples are shown below in Another important observation is that unlike Padella et al. Tensile strength, modulus, elongation at break, tear strength for all the compounds are shown in The tear strength for all the samples is moderate, but it varies with varying the matrix ratio. But tear strength is tremendously increased in NPS-5 containing 20 While for other blend types, mainly use of SAF and SRF type of carbon black the tensile and tear strength is decreased may be due to the effect of carbon black which suppresses the vinyl effect in the system and the filler is uniformly dispersed in the natural rubber matrix that can be attributed to the aggregation of NVC The modulus of all the NR vulcanizates increased with increasing concentration of NVC. This is for one or two possible reasons: The restriction of molecular chain mobility, and an increase in the cross-link density. Elongations at break values are higher for the blends enriched with NR, because carbon black plays a vital role with the NR. The hardness value of the vulcanizates indicates the same trend as the modulus values; it is increased with incorporation of more NVC content. The mechanical property of rubber vulcanizates markedly depended on the number of conjugate double bonds and it is found for the samples ‘NPS-3’ and ‘NPS-6’. These observations suggest that more NVC react with the carbon–carbon double bonds of ISAF type of carbon black and slower the reversion reaction rate and hence increases the mechanical properties of the vulcanizates. Also, it should be noted that vinyl effect plays a vital role in the blend system. The hardness of ‘NPS-5’ and ‘NPS-6’ rubber sample obtained higher than other blends by the influence of ISAF type of carbon black with 20 To study the thermal response of the blends differential scanning calorimetry has been performed. The DSC curves for all rubber vulcanizates are shown in From High temperature TGA (50–650 It is observed that the onset degradation temperature is more or less same for all the samples. But for the samples containing 10 The tensile fracture samples are scanned after gold coating, and are represented in Some samples like ‘NPS-4’, ‘NPS-5’ and ‘NPS-6’, have also shown rupture type of failure. More serious effects of hysteresis arise from chemical changes to the rubber structure at higher sustained temperatures; these effects include the rubber cross-linking system, and thermal degradation leading to explosive rupture (blowout). This phenomenon is studied by Gent and Hindi The mass loss of rubber against Du-Pont abrader is given in  From both DIN and Du-Pont abrasion studies, the compounds NPS-5 and NPS-6 have given lesser volume loss. From these studies, a balancing correlation has obtained for the same compounds under standard abraders. The values of heat buildup for the compounds, those are having good abrasion resistant properties against DIN and Du-Pont abrader, are shown in The compression set of the rubber compounds are shown in Based on Du-Pont abrader and DIN abrader test results,  Since the low thermal conductivity of rubbers can result in a very high temperature at the interface, it is important to investigate the effects of frictional heating on the sliding friction of rubbers  The temperature generation during friction in rubber compound ‘NPS-4’ is slightly lower, which may be attributed to the presence of SRF N774 type of carbon black. The highest temperature is observed when rubbers are abraded against coal surfaces whereas the lowest temperature could be noticed for shale. For other rocks the temperature generation is found to be in the moderate range. Preparation of abrasion resistant tyre tread rubber with the help of an open two-roll-mixing mill represents a novel method for making valuated rubber products. The NR-HSR blends with addition of nitrile blended PVC and nanosilica obtained from this process have very good abrasion properties which can be withstand the rugged working condition of dump-truck tyre. It is seen that rubbers containing ISAF N234 type of carbon black have got the maximum optimum cure time. Faster cure rate index is observed for the compounds containing 20 The authors are deeply grateful to I-Cube Centre, Gyeongsang National University and Coal India Limited, Kolkata for their kind help. Authors wish to thank the tyre retreading companies for their immense support and supply of raw retreading compounds. Also, special thanks to the members of the project and key laboratory of Materials Science Centre and Central Research Facility at IIT, Kharagpur.