An analytical model for lightweight cemented backfill is presented. The model integrates elasto-brittle and elasto-plastic bodies, replicating responses of low-density materials and cementation that are present in backfills. The model uses a semi-implicit algorithm to iterate stress-strain solutions, and the universal shear contraction. The model was validated on a lightweight cemented backfill containing expanded polystyrene beads.breakage ratio void ratio yield locus yield strength plastic potential locus shear modulus bulk modulus slope of CSL in mean stress tip stress hardening parameter mean stress shared by elasto-brittle body mean stress shared by elasto-plastic body mean yield stress parameter used to define magnitude of plastic potential deviatoric stress deviatoric stress shared by elasto-brittle body deviatoric stress shared by elasto-plastic body deviatoric yield stress break strength time step parameter used to determine shape of plastic potential major principal stress minor principal stress strain strain constant strain of elasto-brittle body strain of elasto-plastic body virtual damage strain shear strain volumetric strain elastic components of shear strain elastic component of volumetric strain plastic components of shear strain plastic component of volumetric strain slope of CSL in e-lnp plane slope of swelling line in e-lnp plane Poisson’s ratio stress ratio of scalar multiplier Cemented backfills with low-density inclusions have been recognized as valuable substitutes for compacted soils ( Cementation affects yield surface. A cemented material, if loaded, exhibits two components of strength: cementation bonds and granular frictions. The cementation is progressively damaged during loading; the material turns gradually into an assembly of granular material. In this context, the bonds and frictions share, in changing ratios, the loads. When the bonds diminish, the frictions, as of usual granular materials, continue to withstand the load until the material reaches failure. We calibrated the bond-friction relationship using a hybrid model, i.e., an elasto-brittle body for the pre-breakage, and an elasto-plastic body post the breakage. Specifically, at the early stage of loading, the material withstands the loads mainly through the elasto-brittle body. The elasto-plastic body comes into effect when the cementation breakage occurs. As in ( The model assumes slowly compressed stress conditions and perfectly drained conditions, thus enabling the total stress analysis. The model defines a set of stress and strain parameters. The mean stress, The stresses, Eqs. (8) and (9) suggest that The stress increments of elasto-brittle body can be determined in terms of Hooke’s law, as: The stress increments of elasto-plastic body are determined in terms of model MCC ( The volumetric and shear strains, MCC uses an elliptical yield locus, as in As an example, point Combining Eqs. (18)−(21) yields: The consistency equation for the yield surface Eq. (16) is expressed as: Provided that the hardening rule, or the tip stress Substituting Eq. (28) into Eqs. (18) and (19), we have Substituting Eqs. (20), (21), (30) and (31) to Eq. (29), yields the plastic strain increments: The cementation breakage is defined by the breakage ratio The differential form for The model is implemented to computer simulation. The key step is to develop a closed-form algorithm for the stress and strain increments. The algorithm can be developed in an explicit, implicit or combined form. The explicit form is time-forwarded and straight to implement, but as per ( The semi-implicit algorithm is illustrated in The stresses at Fitting the updated stresses to the yield surface as in Eq. (16), gives The first order of Taylor series of Eq. (41) is expressed as Applying the flow rule Eqs. (18) and (19) to Eq. (42), we have On stress path Substituting Eq. (44) back to Eqs. (18) and (19), stress increments The negative values agree with the stresses overestimated for the trial and should be deducted to attain stress state at location Substituting Eqs. (47) and (48) to the total stress incremental forms in Eqs. (8) and (9), the total stress increments become: It is noteworthy that point The model was verified in a laboratory test. Triaxial tests were conducted on cemented backfills that comprised waste foundry sand, EPS beads, class-F fly ash, cement and water, with ingredients dosage provided in The samples were subjected to isotropic tests and consolidated drained (CD) triaxial tests respectively. In the CD tests, three confinements were used: 100, 200 and 300 kPa. The test procedure and results were provided in ( The stress-strain relationships are provided in To gain further insight into the model, the stress paths in An analytical model that was developed for cemented backfills is presented. The model considers the combined elastic, plastic and brittle behaviors of the material. The collective behavior is approximated by connecting an elasto-brittle body and an elasto-plastic body in parallel, thus enabling simulation of progressive breakage of cementation structure. The model uses a non-associated flow rule to assess hardening. This non-associated flow rule allows for greater flexibility in reproducing material stress-strain relationships. The model introduces a semi-implicit form for the time step and determines the stress increments more preciously. The above formulation enables the model to simulate complex shear behavior, including ductility and contraction, for materials containing compressible inclusions. The model was verified on a lightweight cemented backfill that incorporated expanded polyethylene beads.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by