To investigate the effect of slimes on the flotation recovery and kinetics of coal particles, batch flotation and flotation rate tests were carried out using flotation mixtures including slime particles and coal particles within 0.5–0.25 mm, 0.25–0.125 mm and 0.125–0.074 mm size ranges, respectively. Six flotation kinetic models were applied to fit all the flotation test results. It was found that both the flotation recovery and rate of coal particles decreased with the increase in the mass proportion of slime particles under the mixed flotation conditions, especially coarse coal particles. Compared with the flotation performance of coal particles in the individual flotation, slimes enhanced the flotation recovery of coal particles at a low mass proportion of slime particles. In contrast, slimes decreased the flotation recovery of coal particles at a high mass proportion of slime particles. Furthermore, for the coal particles in 0.5–0.25 mm size range, slimes increased its flotation rate at a low mass proportion of slime particles, otherwise slimes decreased its flotation rate. Slimes mainly improved the flotation rate of coal particles in 0.25–0.125 mm size range, while it primarily reduced flotation rate of coal particles in 0.125–0.074 mm size range.With the unprecedented demand for resources and the rapid depletion of high quality mineral resources, there is increasing need to process low-grade and hard-to-handle ores Although there are few studies on the contamination behavior of slimes in coal flotation, the contamination behavior of fine gangue particles in mineral flotation process has been widely studied An actual flotation process is a highly complex separation process involving three phases (air bubbles, water, and solids) and a large number of sub-processes, such as particle-bubble collision and attachment, transport of particle-bubble aggregate to the froth phase, and recovery of particle from the froth phase to concentrate launder In this study, six flotation kinetic models were selected to test their applicability for various size fractions of coal particles under the mixed flotation condition of coal and slimes, and a major attempt was to completely discuss the effect of slimes on the flotation recovery and kinetics of different particle size coal. The coal sample was collected from a coal preparation plant in Shandong province, China. It was the bituminous coal. From this coal sample, the lump coal with a size range of 25–13 mm and a density of less than 1400 kg/m The proximate and ultimate analysis results of the coal particles are given in The slime particles were prepared using lump gangue, which was also collected from the same coal preparation plant. The density of the lump gangue was heavier than 2000 kg/m The mineral compositions of the slime particles were determined using an x-ray diffractometer, and the results are presented in The flotation tests were performed in a 1.5-L RK/FD-11 flotation cell at an impeller speed of 1800 rpm and a constant air flow-rate of 0.24 m The test sample was a mixed sample of the coal particles and slime particles, and the mixing ratio was 80:20%, 65:35%, 50:50%, 35:65% and 20:80% by weight. In order to facilitate the separation of coal particles and slime particles, the size range of the coal particles was 0.5–0.25 mm, 0.25–0.125 mm and 0.125–0.074 mm, respectively, while that of the slime particles was below 0.045 mm in size. During the flotation speed tests, the froth products collected from the flotation tests were divided to 5 products according to the collection periods: 0–5 s, 5–10 s, 10–30 s, 30–60 s and 60–180 s. However, in the conventional flotation test, the collection time for the only one froth product was 180 s. After the flotation tests, both the collected froth products and tailings were wet sieved at a size of 0.045 mm. Then the sieved samples were filtered, dried and weighed. Therefore, the flotation yield of the coal particles and slime particles can be calculated respectively. In these flotation tests, the flotation yield was also the flotation recovery. In this investigation, six flotation kinetic models were selected to study the effect of slimes particles on the flotation kinetics of coal particles within different size fractions, as shown in Both the root mean square error (RMSE) and correlation coefficient (R The RMSE was defined by the following expression: The R The PRESS was defined by the following expression: To generate this measure, firstly, the data point (t Generally, the model having the smallest RMSE value and the biggest R  Furthermore, the recovery of coal particles within different size ranges in the mixed flotation was greater than that of coal particles in the individual flotation when the mass proportion of slime particles was less than 20%. On the contrary, the former was smaller than the latter when the mass proportion of slime particles was more than 20%, and the recovery of coal particles within various size ranges decreased with the increase of mass proportion of slime particles. In addition, the decreasing trend in the recovery of coal particles was more obvious as the particle size increased. These results indicate that the effect of slime particles on the recovery of coal particles varied with the change of the proportion of slime particles. When the mass of slime particles was less than a certain percentage, the slime particles promoted the flotation of coal particles; conversely, the slime particles inhibited the flotation of coal particles when its mass was greater than this certain percentage. And, the inhibition effect of slime particles on the coal particles was more obvious as the particle size of coal particles increased. In a flotation system, the solid particles have an important effect on the stability of flotation froth, especially fine particles  As shown in It can be seen from Since the expression of the flotation rate constant (K) in different flotation kinetic models was different, the K value obtained by different models was not comparable. In order to ensure the comparability of the K values under different test conditions, the K values of coal particles within different size fractions calculated by the first-order matrix distribution model was selected to analyze the effect of slime particles on the flotation kinetics of coal particles, and the results are shown in the As illustrated in However, the K value of coal particles within different size fractions exhibited the different relative magnitude relationships when it compared with that of the individual flotation of coal particles. For the 0.5–0.25 mm size range coal particles, when the mass proportion of slime particles was less than 50% in the mixed flotation, the K value of coal particles was larger than that of coal particles in the individual flotation. However, the former was less than the latter when the mass proportion of slime particles was bigger than 50%. For the 0.25–0.125 mm size range coal particles, the K value of coal particles in the mixed flotation at the different mass proportions of slime particles was greater than that of coal particles in the individual flotation. In contrast, for the 0.125–0.074 mm size range coal particles, the K values of coal particles in the mixed flotation were smaller than that in the individual flotation. The above results indicate that the effect of slime particles on the flotation rate of coal particles was related to both the particle size of coal particles and the content of slime particles. For the coarse coal particles, slime particles increased its flotation rate when the amount of slime particles was small in the flotation pulp. In contrast, the slime particles decreased its flotation rate at a high content of slime particles in the flotation pulp. For the medium size coal particles, slime particles mainly improved its flotation rate. However, for the fine coal particles, slime particles primarily reduced its flotation rate. In addition, the increase in the concentration of slime particles in the flotation pulp decreased the flotation rate of coal particles with different particle size under the mixed flotation condition. In this investigation, the effect of slimes on the flotation kinetics and recovery of coal particles within different size fractions was thoroughly explored. Six flotation kinetic models were applied to fit the flotation data that obtained from flotation tests under various mixing ratios of coal particles and slime particles. The MATLAB software was used to estimate calculate the model parameters (K and ε The effect of slime particles on the flotation recovery of coal was depended on the content of slime particles and the particle size of the coal. When the mass proportion of the slime particles below 20%, the flotation recovery of coal particles within all size fractions in the mixed flotation was greater than that of coal particles in the individual flotation. However, the former was lower than the latter when the mass proportion of the slime particles over 20%. Furthermore, the flotation recovery of coal particles within all size fractions decreased with the increase in the content of slime particles. Besides, the effect of slime particles on the flotation recovery of coarse coal particles was more obvious. The secondary matrix distribution model was considered to be the most reasonable for fitting the flotation results obtained with the coal particles in 0.5–0.25 mm among the tested models, while the first-order matrix distribution model was the best model for the coal particles both within 0.25–0.125 mm and 0.125–0.074 mm size ranges. The effect of slime particles on the flotation kinetics of coal was also depended on the particle size of the coal and the content of slime particles. In the mixed flotation, the flotation rate of coal particles within all size ranges was reduced as the content of slime particles increased. However, compared with flotation rate of coal particles in the individual flotation, the flotation rate of coal particles within 0.25–0.125 mm size range in the mixed flotation increased, while that of coal particles within 0.125–0.074 mm size range decreased. The flotation rate of coal particles within 0.5–0.25 mm size range increased initially decreased afterwards as the content of slime particles increased. This work was funded by the