Various methods have been described to establish maxillomandibular fixation in the treatment of fractures of atrophic, edentulous mandibles. We used the Synthes MatrixWAVE™ system (DePuy Synthes) in combination with dentures in two patients with fractured, edentulous, atrophic mandibles. Fixation was maintained for fractures that were not amenable to, or did not require, open reduction and internal fixation, and the mandibles were both well-healed and had good function at the end of treatment.Fractures of atrophic, edentulous mandibles are a challenge to treat. Because of the lack of supporting dentition, there is often a deficiency in bony mass, height, blood supply, and strength. Recently, the combination of the MatrixWAVE™ system and the patient’s own dentures has become our preferred way to establish fixation in edentulous patients. The study was granted an exemption from Institutional Review Board approval by the University of Kentucky because it was retrospective and we studied so few patients. The procedures were completed under general anesthesia. In each patient, we used three circummandibular wires to secure the lower denture to the mandible, then secured the MatrixWAVE™ to the denture with 6–8 Both patients had healed, functional mandibles at follow up with no evidence of non-union at six months. The dentures were still useable even though they had been manipulated and involved in the process of fixation. The successful management of mandibular fractures mandates the restoration of occlusion, facial height, and balance of the muscles of mastication, the temporomandibular joint, and the mandible. Use of intermaxillary fixation screws is an additional option that allows the surgeon to use the patient’s dentures. However, with severely comminuted fractures, more control of the mandibular segment is required, which can be difficult to attain with simple fixation screws. Our technique provides long-term durability throughout healing, and allows us to change to elastic fixation for early protected, guided, mandibular excursion to maintain the maxillary and mandibular occlusal relations. There are currently no other methods that we know of that allow for this. Damage to the dentures is an obvious limitation of the method, but in these two instances they were fully functional after treatment. Duplication of the dentures will be a feasible option in the future where time permits, and when the damage is too great to reuse the original set. By the year 2050, the US population over the age of 65 will be more than 85 million people, We have no conflicts of interest. Ethics approval has been obtained. The patients have given permission for the use of the material in this paper.