The effectiveness of O3, O3/Fe2+, and O3/nZVI processes on biomethanated distillery wastewater (BMDWW) was evaluated in terms of biodegradability index (BI) enhancement, biofuel production, COD, color & toxicity reduction. A significant increase in biodegradability, COD, color and toxicity reduction was observed in O3/nZVI compared with O3, O3/Fe2+ due to more hydroxyl radical production. The O3/nZVI pretreated wastewater with enhanced BI (up to 0.71) showed 60% COD removal with additional biogas generation (64% methane content). From the Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis, 18 foremost organic compounds were predominantly detected in the raw distillery wastewater. The disappearance of the corresponding FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy) & GC-MS spectra during pretreatment processes signified the degradation or transformation of the recalcitrant present in the distillery wastewater. Subsequent (AnO + AO, AO) of pretreated BMDWW resulted in biodegradation rate enhancement by (1.83, 1.67), (3.5, 2.4) and (4.7, 2.9) times for O3, O3/Fe2+ and O
                        3
                     /nZVI processes respectively.Distillery industry produces large volumes of high strength wastewater (14-22LL The BMDWW (biomethanated distillery wastewater) was collected from the molasses based distillery located in Nagpur, India, and stored at 4 °C and brought to room temperature prior to the experiments. The detailed physico-chemical characteristics of BMDWW are given in The zero valent iron nanoparticles were prepared as per the protocol reported by The Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) of distillery wastewater was analyzed using closed reflux method in a Hach COD reactor (spectroquant TR 320, D64271, Germany). Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) was determined by modified Winkler's method and TSS (Total Suspended Solids), TDS (Total Dissolved Solids) and TS (Total Solids) were analyzed as per the method described in American Public Health association ( The ozone reactor was made up of glass column (75 cm height and 5.7 cm internal diameter) packed with 2 kg (dry weight) ceramic rasching ring (dimension: 3 × 3x1 mm; bulk density: 1300 kg/m The biomethanation batch experiments were carried out in 125 mL capacity serum bottle with a working volume of 48 mL (40 mL BMDWW and 20% (v/v) of anaerobic sludge). Anaerobic condition in the serum bottle was maintained by purging nitrogen and subsequently tightly closed and sealed with butyl rubber stopper and aluminium crimp. The batch experiments were carried out at 37 °C with continuous mixing at 100 rpm in triplicate till biogas production stop. The gas was collected from the headspace of the serum bottle and analyzed for methane by GC equipped with thermal conductivity detector and packed with molecular sieve column (Model name – Clarus 500 and Make – PerkinElmer). Hydrogen gas at the flow rate of 25 mL/min was used as the carrier gas where the temperature of column, detector, oven and injection port were 60 °C, 200 °C, 75 °C, 220 °C and respectively. The microbial inoculum or activated sludge was collected from the sewage treatment plant, Nagpur, India. The BMDWW was initially acclimatized to inoculum to carry out the aerobic batch study ( To assess the toxicity reduction of the pretreated BMDWW seed germination test was carried out using Spinach ( GP = Number of seeds germinated/Number of seeds planted *100 The XRD image of nZVI confirms the presence of iron and iron oxide with abundance of elemental iron of 86.4% (metallic state) in the sample as indicated by broad peaks at 2θ of 45 °C, 65 °C and 85 °C ( The use of AOPs for biodegradability enhancement of wastewater by partial oxidation of recalcitrant compounds present in the wastewater is a more economical and viable treatment option instead of complete mineralization of wastewater to CO The rate of ozone consumption was monitored through the measurement of the ozone reactor inlet and outlet concentration using a UV analyzer BMT 964, Berlin. The difference in the values of inlet and outlet ozone concentration as shown in To improve the efficiency of ozonation process for BI enhancement of BMDWW combination of ozone with Fe The effect of Fe In the last decade nZVI has been widely used for the degradation of hazardous/recalcitrant contaminants present in the groundwater and wastewater due to its high surface area and reactivity. The addition of nZVI to the ozonation system improves the efficiency of the oxidation process by producing more hydroxyl radicals, as there are two extra electrons available per Fe atom to form the OH At an optimized ozone dose different doses of nZVI particles (2–10 gL In a research by FTIR spectra of the control and pretreated BMDWW and the corresponding functional groups are shown in The pretreated BMDWW with reduced COD, color and enhanced biodegradability index was further tested for toxicity reduction via seed germination method using seeds of Spinach ( The O The pretreated BMDWW was subjected to anaerobic digestion process followed by aerobic (AnO + AO) biodegradation to evaluate COD removal efficiency and biogas generation. The catalyzed ozone pretreatment via Fe Sameena. N. Malik is grateful to