The most important limitation of leached Waelz Oxide from the pyrometallurgical treatment of Electric Arc Furnace Dust (EAFD) is its high fluorine content. This work deals with the reduction of the harmful effects of the Double Leached Waelz Oxide fluorine content in the hydrometallurgical process for electrolytic zinc production process when it is used as raw material directly in the leaching stage. The resulting process is a purification treatment of Double Leached Waelz Oxide leach solution to remove the dissolved fluoride in this unpurified zinc liquor. Leached fluorides from this liquor are precipitated in order to reduce their concentration until the specified values, avoiding cathode corrosion in the electrowinning cells. In this paper a selective precipitation process to maximize the fluoride removal and to minimize the zinc losses is presented, achieving the industrially specified solution composition when the Zinc Calcine is the used raw material. The formation of aluminium-fluoride complexes and the variation of their solubilities with the pH evolution are the basis of the proposed treatment. In addition, this fluoride removal has also been improved and optimized in order to be integrated in the overall industrial hydrometallurgical process and the obtained results are presented and discussed proving the viability of this improved stage.The steelmaking industry produces around 1.606 Zinc is the fourth most common metal in use, trailing only iron, aluminium, and copper with an annual production of about 12 Nowadays, the WO is useful as one of the raw materials for metallic zinc production in the Imperial Smelting Furnace, but some impurities limit its use in the leaching stage of the industrial electrolytic process. Some impurities in the electrolyte severely affect the zinc adherence in the electrolysis, being the strong effect of F The goal of this paper is to present the development of an improvement of a fluoride removal step to be integrated in the electrolytic process for metallic zinc production from WO. For this purpose, a selective precipitation of dissolved fluorides from the DLWO leach solution has been studied by formation of aluminium-fluorine complexes and their removal occurs within the low solubility range of the formed AlF The sample of Double Leached Waelz Oxide under study originates from the BEFESA ZINC ASER S.A. plant (Spain) and it was used as received. The reactants used during the experimental works are aluminium chloride 6-hydrate (pure, Panreac) and aluminium sulphate 18-hydrate (pure, Panreac) as aluminium source and sulphuric acid 95% technical grade (Panreac), hydrochloric acid 37% p.a. (Panreac) and sodium hydroxide pellets pure (Panreac) as pH modifiers. All experiments were carried out in a 2 Chemical analysis of the used DLWO sample and the generated solid waste were carried out using a microwave acid digestion procedure and the subsequence analysis of the metal contents with an ICP-AES Perkin Elmer 2000-DV model. The metallic ions concentrations in the liquid samples of the obtained zinc liquors were also analysed by ICP-AES (Perkin Elmer 2000-DV model). Argentometry tritration (Crison 8661 Titromatic) was used to measure the chloride concentration and a fluoride ion selective electrode (Crison 9655) was used for fluoride analysis. Solid residues obtained in the leaching stage were also analysed by X-ray diffraction (using a Brucker D8 Advance Diffractometer), equipped with a primary germanium monochromator with Bragg–Brentano geometry and with a CuKα1 wave-length of 1.5406 The DLWO was leached (with a S/L Ratio From the obtained results (see The effect of temperature on the fluoride solubility was studied taking into account the zinc recovery in order to optimize the leaching stage. The optimal temperature for within a reasonable range for later industrial application was found to be 60 The zinc leaching yield at optimal conditions was higher than 90% with an iron concentration of 282.4 The designed methodology uses the formation of complex ions adding soluble aluminium salts to remove the fluoride from the leached DLWO. Once the AlF Therefore, the goal of this study was to find the pH value that makes the solubility product constant (K In order to find the optimal pH, the leaching liquor at the aforementioned conditions with the pH fixed at 2 (with Al The results plotted in The operational conditions of the leaching stage were optimized maximizing the zinc recovery from the DLWO, taking into account the impurities limitations in the industrial plants to make viable the improved fluoride removal stage. Thus, a sulphuric acid leaching adding Al It can be observed (see In the obtained liquor, the Fe concentration exceeds the limit which is admissible in the electrolysis feed. In most of the industrial plants where the Zinc Calcine is treated, the leaching stage is carried out at neutral pH (avoiding the zinc ferrites dissolution) with simultaneous oxidation of the dissolved Fe After the study of the developed new hydrometallurgical process in order to remove an important part of the fluoride ions from the DLWO leaching liquor, the generated wastes in these stages must be characterized. This characterization is necessary to evaluate the average Zn recovery and to design a waste management strategy to reduce the environmental impact of the process fulfilling the limits established by the legislation. In this case, the proposed hydrometallurgical process only generates solid residues. Optimizing the operational costs, the leaching stage and selective precipitation stage could be carried out consecutively without a filtration step after leaching, to avoid the zinc losses (the remaining moisture in the cake contains dissolved zinc) and the additional cost generated by a filtration operation. But, the inclusion of this additional separation operation is due to the reduction of the environmental impact of the process, obtaining a marketable lead concentrate in the leaching stage (see The other waste is generated in the selective precipitation stage. This solid obtained as filter cake after the fluoride removal by selective precipitation is a zinc and aluminium concentrate with a high fluorine content. It could be blended with the EAFD or/and the Blast Furnace Flue Dust as fed for the Waelz process reducing the zinc losses and the environmental impact of the plant (see A selective precipitation stage is developed for the removal of dissolved fluorides when DLWO is used as raw material in the leaching stage of the zinc electrolytic process. The improved hydrometallurgical process permits metallic zinc production from secondary zinc recycling, increasing the sustainability of the overall zinc industry. It is concluded that the optimal conditions for this stage are 60