A flow sheet was developed to recover thorium from Egyptian monazite sands. The results of a detailed investigation on the extraction and stripping of thorium in the hydrous oxide are obtained after alkaline dissolution followed by leaching with alkaline carbonate solutions. This cake was dissolved in 4 M HNO3 and thorium was extracted selectively by a counter-current extraction system using a mixer–settler contactor and Aliquat-336 in kerosene as extractant. The results show that 2 h of continuous operation are necessary to reach the steady state condition for the process. The extraction efficiency is found to be 80% and the stripping efficiency is 82%.In a previous study, a modified leaching and extraction process of uranium from hydrous oxide cake of Egyptian monazite was reported ( Different approaches for thorium extraction from monazite leach solutions were reported. Unless otherwise stated, all chemicals used in this work were of analytical grade and used without further purification. Thorium nitrate, uranyl nitrate, sodium carbonate, sodium hydroxide, hydrogen peroxide, nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, ammonium ceric nitrate, neodymium oxide, Aliquat-336 and 1-octanol were Merck products. Kerosene was supplied by Misr Petroleum Company, Egypt and used as purchased. The hydrous oxide cake of Egyptian monazite was obtained by alkaline dissolution of monazite mineral as previously reported ( Thorium, uranium, cerium and neodymium were determined spectrophotometrically. The Arsenazo-1 method ( Organic extractant solutions with the required concentrations were prepared from the mother solution, 20 vol.% Aliquat-336 in kerosene containing 5% octanol, by dilution with kerosene. Before use, the organic phase was pre-equilibrated with the nitric acid aqueous phase. Unless otherwise stated, extraction experiments were carried out at 25 Where: This study was carried out using MSU-0.5 type mixer–settler constructed from polypropylene, MEAB-Sweden. The dimensions are 26 cm length, 6 cm width, and 24 cm height including motor. The active mixer volume is about 0.12 l while the settler volume is 0.48 l with a loading surface area of 0.006 m After leaching uranium, the hydrous oxide cake which contains mainly thorium, rare earth elements, iron, zirconium and minimum amounts of uranium ( Preliminary extraction experiments were carried out to find the time required to reach equilibrium extraction of Th Variable concentrations of Aliquat-336 in different diluents (containing 5% octanol as modifier) were used to extract thorium from 4 M HNO The effect of HNO The effect of thorium concentration dissolved in 4 M nitric acid on its extraction by 5 vol.% Aliquat-336 in kerosene is given in To establish the extraction equilibrium of the system, the main extracted species should be considered. In aqueous nitrate solution, a numerous hydrolysis species of thorium were reported. ( Based on this information, the dimeric form of thorium, Th This equilibrium is supported by the slope analysis of the experimental results shown in Where, bars indicate the organic phase. Taking the log of The average value of The effect of temperature on the extraction of Th(IV) was studied in the range 8–65 °C. It was found that the extraction percent decreases with the increase in temperature. The E% was about 67% at 8 °C and 48% at 65 °C. The relation between Where The enthalpy variation (Δ The free energy (Δ From The stripping of uranium and thorium from the loaded organic solutions was investigated using different reagents. The results shown in From the bench scale experimental results, a continuous counter-current extraction process using a horizontal mixer–settler unit containing eight extraction stages and five stripping stages was carried out to test the efficiency of the process for extraction and stripping of thorium from 130 g of monazite. After alkaline carbonate leaching of uranium from the hydrous oxide cake, it was found that about 17% of uranium and the different lanthanides together with thorium are present in the hydrous oxides cake. This cake was dissolved in 4 M HNO The stripping solution used was 5 M HCl and fed at stage No. 13 (equivalent to stage No. 5 in the stripping bank) at a flow rate of 4500 ml/h. The conditions used for the continuous counter-current extraction experiment are given in The data of the raffinate analysis showed that the steady state conditions are obtained after about 2 h of continuous operation. Samples from both aqueous and organic phases were taken after attaining the steady state conditions and the results are presented in Based on the above experimental results, the following conclusions could be made: Thorium is preferentially extracted by Aliquat-336 from 4 M HNO Hydrochloric acid is a good selective stripping agent for thorium from uranium. The continuous extraction stripping run for thorium was carried out using a horizontal mixer–settler in which the feed solution (650 mg/L in 4 M nitric acid) and organic solution (0.05 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene) were fed at flow-rates of 3000 ml/h and 4500 ml/h, respectively. Chemical analysis of the withdrawn samples showed that the steady state conditions are reached after about 2 h of continuous operation. The extraction efficiency was found to be 80%, whereas the stripping efficiency is 82%.