Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and inorganic polyphosphate (poly(P)) have been recognized as therapeutic agents that enhance bone regeneration. It has also been shown that poly(P) may enhance the mitogenic activity of bFGF. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the combined effect of bFGF and poly(P) on bioactivities of osteoblasts and initial bone regeneration in vitro and in vivo. MC3T3-E1 cells were treated with bFGF, poly(P) or bFGF+poly(P), then subjected to cell proliferation assay, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity measurement, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Alizarin S Red staining. In an in vivo study, bFGF-, poly(P)- and bFGF+poly(P)-modified interconnected porous hydroxyapatite (IPHA) complexes were fabricated, and placed into the femurs of rabbits to evaluate new bone formation histologically and histomorphometrically. The highest enhancement of cell proliferation were observed in those treated with bFGF+poly(P) on days 5 and 7. Cells treated with bFGF+poly(P) also exhibited increased ALP activity on days 5 and 10, up-regulated mRNA levels of osteocalcin and osteopontin, and enhanced calcification when compared to the non-treated cells. In vivo, the highest bone formation ratio was observed in bFGF+poly(P)-modified IPHA complexes. This study indicated that co-application of bFGF and poly(P) may provide enhanced bone formation by modulating cell proliferation and the mineralization process. It is anticipated that a combined application of bFGF and poly(P) can provide a novel method for bone regeneration in clinical use.The repair of bone defects is of key interest in dental implant treatment and in orthopedics. Although bone graft substitutes, including autogenous bone, allogeneic bone, xenogeneic bone and some ceramics, such as hydroxyapatite (HA) and tricalcium phosphate, are currently available options for defect repair, none of those have been demonstrated to be fully satisfactory Most recently, a number of therapeutic agents, such as the basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), polyphosphate (poly(P)), platelet-derived growth factor and bone morphogenetic protein, have been used with tissue engineered techniques to enhance the bone regeneration Recently, Shiba et al. This study was designed to evaluate effects of the combined application of bFGF and poly(P) on MC3T3-E1 cell proliferation, ALP activity, osteogenic marker genes expression and cell calcification, and to test the initial bone regeneration in bFGF+poly(P)-modified interconnected porous hydroxyapatite (IPHA) complexes placed into the femurs of New Zealand rabbits. Poly(P) (a sodium salt with an average chain length of 60 phosphate residues, Regenetiss Inc., Japan) was selected and its concentration is provided in terms of phosphate residues. bFGF was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA) for in vitro experiments and from Kaken Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) for in vivo experiments. MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells were obtained from Riken Cell Bank (Tsukuba, Japan). Eagle’s minimum essential medium alpha modification (α-MEM), MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells were seeded on 96-well culture plates at a density of 3000 cells well Cells were seeded on 24-well culture plates at a density of 2 Total RNA was extracted by QIAshredder and Rneasy Mini kits (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) strictly according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration and purity of freshly isolated RNA was measured at 260 Cells were washed three times with PBS and fixed in 10% neutral formalin for 5 Cylindrical IPHA (3 Animal protocols were approved by Research Facilities Committee for Laboratory Animal Science, Hiroshima University School of Medicine. Ten New Zealand rabbits (weight: 3–3.5 After 1 and 3 Data were statistically analyzed using one-way analysis of variance followed by Newman–Keuls post hoc tests and are reported as mean values Both 1 The presence of poly(P) increased the ALP activity of MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells. In contrast, bFGF significantly inhibited ALP activity during the entire observation period ( The levels of both OCN and OPN mRNA were significantly up-regulated by co-treatment of bFGF+poly(P) and single treatment of poly(P), whereas only a few-fold increase was observed with bFGF treatment ( On days 15 and 25, cells treated with bFGF+poly(P) or poly(P) showed intensive calcium deposition, while no calcification was observed in the controls or in cells treated with only bFGF ( Structural characteristics of IPHA were surveyed by SEM before ( Penetration of regenerated tissue into the pores was observed in all samples 1 Identifying methods of accelerating bone regeneration through biological and mechanical approaches is a key field of research. Previous evidence has indicated that poly(P) functions as a control of bFGF activity and of osteogenic differentiation We show that, although cell growth was stimulated by bFGF, the levels of growth stimulation are greater in the presence of bFGF+poly(P). In vitro, cell growth in medium containing bFGF+poly(P) was significantly higher after 5 and 7 We also found that cell proliferation was slightly increased by the presence of 1 We further show that ALP activity increased in cells treated with bFGF+poly(P), although the increase was smaller than for cells treated with poly(P) alone. ALP activity in both cases was higher than that of either the control or the bFGF-treated cells. Many in vitro studies have shown that additional exogenous bFGF inhibits ALP activity Our results also showed that both OCN and OPN mRNA levels are up-regulated by bFGF+poly(P). OPN and OCN are associated with extracellular matrix formation and mineralization The histological observations show that the bFGF+poly(P)-modified complex promotes bone formation in the pores of IPHA. Its new bone formation ratio was significantly higher than those of other three groups. Taking the in vitro results into consideration, these in vivo results further confirm the enhancement of osteogenesis by bFGF+poly(P). Although the use of bFGF alone slightly increased the new bone formation ratio, there was no significant difference between bFGF and the control. This result may be due to the short half-life time of bFGF and the ease with which it is cleared by the blood or other body fluids. However, the presence of poly(P) may prolong the bioactivity of bFGF and facilitate binding to its receptors. It has also been suggested that poly(P) may be a hemostatic regulator that accelerates clot formation and stability Various materials, such as hydroxyapatite, collagen, gelatin, fibrin gel and methacrylic polymers, have been used as carriers of growth factors The concentrations of bFGF and poly(P) used in this study, 30 The co-application of bFGF and poly(P) is very feasible for clinical use since these two ingredients are readily available and have been demonstrated to be safe We have shown that the combination of bFGF and poly(P) may induce cell proliferation, ALP activity, osteogenic marker genes expression and cell calcification. The results of our in vivo study further confirm that the bFGF+poly(P)-modified IPHA complex has the ability to enhance initial bone regeneration. It is anticipated that combined application of bFGF and poly(P) with an IPHA scaffold can provide a novel bone substitute material for bone regeneration in clinical use. We thank Michael Densmore, a research associate of the Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, for his help with the manuscript preparation. This work was supported in part by Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (No. 20791428) and China Scholarship Council (No. [2007]3020).