The process of pelleting flocculation, a further development of classical flocculation technology, is defined as a formation of wet pellets directly in a liquid medium. Apart from well described mechanisms of flocculation like perikinetic and orthokinetic flocculation, the mechanism responsible for the formation of dense agglomerates is the mechanical syneresis guaranteed by the appropriate reactor form. Upon the two established models in the literature: the series system and the parallel system, experiments were performed to simulate a layer-by-layer particle deposition on the so-called “mother seeds” conforming to the parallel system.
                  The present paper deals with the results originating from laboratory scale experiments with model sludge, kaolin suspension. The layering process was conducted in the presence of different cationic flocculants and the resulting relationships with respect to their nature and to the applied energy level have been assessed. The achieved agglomerates exhibit an “onion like” structure with densities up to 1.42 g/cm3 and solid matter content up to 48% after gravity dewatering. Thus generated sludge agglomerates reveal the optimisation potential for sludge treatment manifested by improved characteristics achieved during the conditioning.Pelleting flocculation process refers to a modified conditioning sludge treatment, whereas the densification and increased dewatering of slurry occur already in the pelletizing reactor during conditioning with organic polymers. In comparison to the conventional methods pelleted sludge results in dense agglomerates with high stability and exhibits improved dewatering characteristics during the subsequent treatment. The favourable attributes of pellet-like flocs in the area of wastewater and sludge treatment have been presented first by Yusa ( Continuing the researches in this field A later paper reports on kaolin agglomerates conditioned with high molecular organic flocculant (e.g. partially hydrolysed polyacrylamide) with particle volume fraction of 0.22 on average ( More recent publication Hemme et al. also deals with sludge treatment optimisation by means of pelleting flocculation. The results obtained showed that sludge conditioned with the help of a reactor with a special construction possess excellent dewatering properties in comparison with those treated by traditional flocculation methods. The pelleted sludge released a larger volume of sludge water during centrifuging and/or vacuum filtration in comparison to classically treated sludge at an equal driving force and dewatering time as well ( Three mechanisms have been postulated to be responsible for this process: i.e. i) perikinetic flocculation (Brownian movement), which plays a minor role in real flocculation systems, ii) orthokinetic flocculation (velocity gradient) and, the indispensable mechanism, iii) mechanical syneresis as a mechanical energy provided by a adequate reactor construction. Finally, the physical models of pelleting flocculation, which are described briefly in The decisive factor for the formation of pellet-like flocs in presented models is the aforementioned mechanical syneresis.  The pelleting flocculation is based on two physical models, which have been derived from experimental observations.   The tested material was a 0.5 wt.% kaolin suspension. The experiments were conducted at a pH between 6 and 7, so the particles have a definitely negative surface charge ( Based on preliminary tests two suitable cationic flocculants, Cytec-498 and Zetag-7692, distributed by Superfloc® Cytec and by Ciba® Zetag®, respectively, were selected as a bridging material. Both of them are of high molecular weight but of different charge activity ( For the performance of experimental work a rotating tube reactor (diameter of 10 cm) with divided input for suspension and flocculant along the reactor axis was constructed ( Since the rotating tube reactor might be considered as a set of small batch reactors, the simulation of the parallel system has been carried out by alternate charging of only one batch cell with a length of 10 cm with suspension and flocculant. The experimental set-up thus arranged guarantees subsequent layering of solid particles and flocculant onto the original seeds supplied at the beginning. The experimental procedure involved the placing of 1 g of specially prepared seeds (kaolin agglomerates with very narrow size distribution from sieve classes ranges 0.500–0.630 mm ( Knowing one of the listed features in the considered case—the porosity The layering experiments involved variation in the type of flocculant, the revolution speed and the size of the primary seeds. The growth progress of pellet flocs due to particle deposition onto seeds with respect to the influence of energy input until the end size was reached can be clearly followed in The obtained thicknesses gains per layer between 5.3 μm (30 rpm)–6.9 μm (20 rpm) for Cytec-498 and 2.5 μm (30 rpm)–4.4 μm (20 rpm) for Zetag-769 correspond to the kaolin particle size range. The decrease of the layer thickness with the higher energy input is assumed to be the effect of stronger wall impact, which causes a more platy orientation of the irregular kaolin sheets toward the gravity centre. Generally, Two sets of layering experiments with seeds of different initial sizes ( From the comparison of the pellet flocs generated by the same energy regime, but in the presence of different flocculants, it is apparent that the pellet flocs conditioned with Cytec-498 are slightly bigger and grow in fewer layering cycles than those treated with Zetag-7692. The mean layer thickness for Cytec-498 is about 6.2 μm and for Zetag-7692 arrives at 3.2 μm. These phenomena may be attributed to the different charge activity of the respective flocculants. The Cytec-498, with 55% charge activity, has a greater operative range inside the solution due to the cationic group repulsions and consequently generates thicker and more porous layers (see point 4.2) in comparison to the Zetag-7692, with 24% charge activity. Additionally the higher charged flocculant will be strongly attracted to the negative kaolin and can withstand longer the surface erosion under the same mixing conditions, and this is reflected in the maximum size reached. When turbulences increase, shear forces become size restricting parameter and the activity of the flocculant nature is not so decisive. At 20 and 30 rpm the same size relations have been explicitly observed. Porosity measurements were conducted only for pellet flocs generated over the seed sizes of  The pellet flocs are distinguished significantly in form in comparison to classical flocs. They preserve a round shape (roundness 1.09 This paper outlines the results of the parallel model derived from pelleting flocculation. Experiments conducted in the rotary tube reactor in batch mode simulate the continuous process along a pipe reactor and yield a product with very homogenous characteristics. The results of the layering study have confirmed the layer-by-layer particle deposition on the “mother seeds”. The deposition process indicated by layer increase between 2.5 and 6.9 μm ends at the point when shear forces governed by the revolution speed of the reactor exceed the binding forces coming from high molecular organic polymers. The size of seeds has minor significance for the growth process. However, a relationship between the nature of the flocculant and the mixing regime resulting in the pellet flocs characteristics has been found. It is demonstrated that a flocculant with medium charge activity contributes to the creation of more compacted agglomerates than the high cationic polymer, provided that they have the same molecular weight. The reason for that is the operative range of polymer chains into the solution phase, due to charge repulsion. Simultaneous compaction and dewatering has led to formation of spherical agglomerates with very high solid matter content. The values between 37% and 48% after gravity dewatering confirm significant consolidation. According to the references, pellet flocs densities significantly higher than those of classical flocs are possible ( It is clear that more detailed studies with real pelleting systems are needed in the future in order to verify the results and the hypothesis presented here. Experiments with continuous test systems instead of batch should be of special interest in this regard and for such, the rotating tube reactor seems to be a convenient unit. Furthermore, the mode by which this special process is carried out should be definitely improved, since it is not realistic to perform a relatively time-consuming layering process. The combination of the classical flocculation with the advantages offered by the parallel model should be taken into consideration to yield a product with the desired quality within a reasonable time frame. The results show that the stability, density and other features of wet agglomerates thus achieved are encouraging and worthy of trying to disseminate on a large-scale.