This report summarizes observations of returned Apollo rocks and soils, lunar surface images, orbital observations, and experimental impacts related to the erosion and comminution of rocks exposed at the lunar surface. The objective is to develop rigorous criteria for the recognition of impact processes that assist in distinguishing “impact” from other potential erosional processes, particularly thermal fatigue, which has recently been advocated specifically for asteroids. Impact in rock is a process that is centrally to bilaterally symmetric, resulting in highly crushed, high-albedo, quasicircular depressions surrounded by volumetrically prominent spall zones. Containing central glass-lined pits in many cases, such features provide distinctive evidence of impact that is not duplicated by any other process. Additional evidence of impact can include radial fracture systems in the target that emanate from the impact point and clusters of fragments that attest to the lateral acceleration and displacement of each one. It is also important to note that impact produces a wide variety of fragment shapes that might totally overlap with those produced by thermal fatigue; we consider fragment shape to be an unreliable criterion for either process. The stochastic nature of the impact process will result in exponential survival times of surface rocks; that is, rock destruction initially is relatively efficient, but it is followed by ever increasing surface times for the last rock remnants. Thermal fatigue, however, is essentially a thermal-equilibrium process. The corresponding distribution of survival times should be much more peaked in comparison, presumably Gaussian, and diagnostically different from that due to impact. Given the abundance of evidence that has been gleaned from returned Apollo rocks and soils, it is surprising how little has been learned about the impact process from the photography of rocks and boulders taken by the astronauts on the lunar surface. This suggests that it will require rocks and soils returned from asteroids to evaluate the relative roles of thermal versus impact-triggered rock erosion, particularly when both processes are likely to be operating.An unconsolidated, global surface deposit of debris typically a few meters thick, the lunar regolith is the result of impact-cratering processes that extend over scales from sub-micrometers to kilometers ( An important aspect of this regolith-maturation process is the additional, in-situ comminution of comparatively coarse, fresh, bedrock ejecta that are deposited at the surface and thus exposed to incessant bombardment by small-scale impacts. The mass of an exposed rock relative to the energy of each individual impact is the principle factor in determining how erosion will proceed. Small impacts will cause abrasion through a cosmic, high-speed version of sandblasting, ( It has been suggested that thermal cycling provides an additional erosion process on the surfaces of planetary bodies without atmospheres, including the Moon ( Impact and thermal-fatigue processes should occur concurrently, and their effects should be manifested in returned lunar samples that can be investigated at scales ranging from decimeters to sub-micrometers. The two processes might produce some similar features, but they should also differ in ways that are consistent with their modes of energy deposition, amplitudes of stress, and rates of deformation, which differ between the two processes by many orders of magnitude. It is paramount, therefore, to develop criteria that could be diagnostic of each process, with the ultimate goal of understanding the relative roles of both processes in the destruction of surface rocks and the development of lunar and asteroidal regoliths. Our goal in the present paper is to summarize the impact process, primarily by examining the surfaces of returned Apollo rocks. The general approach is based entirely on visual examples and characteristics of the collisional process from micrometer to decimeter scales. Thus, we examine that energy regime which dominates the comminution of fresh, relatively coarse, bedrock ejecta. Where possible, we complement the lunar observations with experimental analogs, which form the basis for a more quantitative understanding of the impact process. We first introduce the size-dependent morphologies of typical craters in dense rock, which differ dramatically from the bowl-shaped structures in unconsolidated targets. We then proceed to typical features of lunar rocks that illustrate erosion via small-scale, sandblasting effects as well as catastrophic, collisional-fragmentation processes. We conclude with statistical models of lunar-rock erosion, lunar-surface observations into the survival times of meter-sized boulders, and the impact-generated nature of the fine-grained regolith matrix. The insights gained from these investigations should be helpful in distinguishing between impact processes and erosion induced by thermal stress. Hypervelocity craters on returned lunar rocks and soil grains are usually referred to as “microcraters,” and their morphologies indicate targets of considerable cohesion, As we will demonstrate below, the significance of these three morphologic features varies with size of the crater ( As documented by many during the early Apollo program ( The smallest craters (<1 ​μm) are manifested only as relatively deep pits, with typical depth/diameter values ​> ​0.5 ( Also, the spallation process undercuts the pit, making it more prone to removal, a process that seems to require little energy ( In summary, all craters on glass targets <1 ​μm in diameter are of the “pit-only” type and all structures >10 ​μm have fully developed spall zones with transitional stages occurring over the 1–10 ​μm size range. Many craters >50 ​μm might have lost their glass-lined pits, yet all have highly crushed centers which are typically of high albedo. Unfortunately, electron-microscope methods have not yet been used in morphologic studies of craters in the 1-1000-μm size range on crystalline rocks. The glass surfaces are simply much more suitable for the study of craters in this size range. Deducing crater-production rates and associated fluxes of small-scale impactors also meets with fewer complications when using homogeneous glass. The most detailed morphologic studies of millimeter-to centimeter-sized craters on breccias and crystalline rocks are those by   In Summary, Of course, craters much larger than centimeters, especially those greater than decimeters, cannot be sustained and observed on the relatively small, typically <1 ​kg, lunar rocks returned by Apollo. One of the largest craters on all returned rocks, 3.5 ​cm in maximum spall diameter, is illustrated in There can be no doubt that large boulders (>1 ​m) will suffer impacts that produce decimeter-sized craters, given the size-distribution and the frequency of prospective impactors ( The apparent lack of recognizable cratering events on lunar boulders points towards the limitations of planetary surface images versus the potential of returned samples. Little would be known about the small-scale bombardment history and associated effects from the surface photography of Apollo alone, yet every returned surface, from rocks to tiny soil grains exposed to space, displays unambiguous signs of impact. This could be due, in part, to the spatial resolution of the images and the lack of true, close-up boulder photography from Apollo. It is probably related more, however, to the production of shallow spall zones and their relatively rapid degradation when crater diameters attain decimeter scales and larger. Importantly, major morphologic features of microcraters can be reproduced in the laboratory as shown in To summarize this section of detailed crater morphology, we observe that the ideal and unambiguous crater in dense rocks is characterized by a glass-lined central pit that is surrounded by a concentric zone of crushed, high-albedo material, with both residing within a much larger concentric zone of prominent, but shallow, spallation. The radius of the high-albedo material is typically twice the diameter of the pit, with the spall zone 3–7 times the pit diameter, depending on the cohesion of the target rock and the rock’s local surface relief. Both the pit and the halo reside in the center of a local depression created by the spall. Submicron craters are of the pit-only type, while decimeter-sized craters contain no pits and manifest themselves only as relatively shallow spall zones with crushed, high-albedo material in the center. Depending on the physical heterogeneity of the target site and its topographic relief, individual craters can deviate substantially from the ideally centrosymmetric plan view.  Impact is a stochastic process, and the size, spatial distribution and formation times of the regolith-forming craters are random. Given the steep, cumulative size-distribution of craters and associated impactors (   The different components making up breccias, such as matrix and diverse clasts, have different physical properties that result in idiosyncratic erosion rates for each component, with the less-consolidated matrix generally being removed more easily, and competent clasts forming topographic highs, if not promontories. At the Apollo 16 site is House Rock ( As discussed above, there is a finite probability that any surface rock might suffer an impact sufficiently energetic to fragment and thus destroy it. The process of collisional fragmentation has been extensively studied experimentally ( As defined by With the exception of regolith breccias that formed essentially in situ by shock compaction, all returned Apollo rocks are either primary ejecta fragments from bedrock or collisionally produced rubble of surface boulders, yet no morphologic or morphometric criteria exist to distinguish between these two scenarios. Nevertheless, unambiguous evidence for collisional fragmentation does occur for some rocks that suffered energetic impacts with less than the critical rupture energy. Additional examples of the collisional fragmentation process can be seen in lunar-surface images of boulders. Finally, We now turn to laboratory impact experiments that explore the collisional fragmentation of finite-sized objects. The results of a cratering experiment using an ordinary-chondrite target are shown in Finally, Experiments at ​> ​ It is also important to note that high-speed images of collisional fragmentation experiments have been used to determine the velocity distributions of the resulting fragments (  In summary, the collisional-fragmentation process is rather well understood experimentally. It is more efficient than abrasive impact processes in obliterating surface rocks. Examples of nearly catastrophic collisions can be observed in the Apollo rock collection, and examples of collisionally ruptured rocks exist in the Apollo surface images, ranging from rocks that are barely split to clusters of fragments that reflect the complete, in situ disintegration of a larger parent. Numerous, similar instances have been identified in Hayabusa images of the asteroid 25,143 Itokawa ( Cratering experiments using dense, crystalline rocks as targets establish the relationships between the kinetic energy and momentum of a projectile and the volume of the resulting crater, and thus of displaced crater mass. There is no subsurface movement in decimeter-sized, experimental craters in dense rocks, unlike the case for much larger, natural structures on the scale of kilometers and greater ( A number of probabilistic models, based on Monte Carlo techniques, have simulated both particle abrasion and the collisional-fragmentation process, with the objective of arriving at absolute abrasion rates and collisional lifetimes of the hand-specimen sized rocks returned by Apollo. The discussions above indicate that the experimental inputs regarding specific energies for both processes seem to be well established, as is the size-frequency distribution of the impactors ( The abrasive erosion of lunar rocks was modeled by If exposed to space, each lunar rock will suffer the effects of solar and high-energy cosmic radiation; these effects can be measured and related to total exposure time, such as the density of solar-flare tracks ( We now address the survival times of rocks against collisional fragmentation as modeled by The 50% line in The model by We now turn to observations at the lunar surface that address the survival times of large, meter-scale boulders. Numerous studies describe the morphologic degradation of “large” lunar craters with time. In this context, “morphologic degradation” refers to the gradual disappearance of an initially distinct, lobate, often striated, and boulder-strewn ejecta deposit, as well as to the gradual lowering of a crater’s raised rim and the progressive infilling of the actual crater cavity. Using this Apollo-based “calibration” of crater degradation, Yet another independent approach regarding the survival of boulders exposed at the lunar surface was explored by The ultimate and final product of the impact-triggered erosion process is the generation of a fine-grained regolith matrix. The components with sizes <1 ​cm totally dominate the loose regolith samples returned by Apollo. By convention, lunar “soils” are <1 ​mm in size; their average grain size by weight is generally in the range of 75–100 ​μm, with the <20 ​μm fraction commonly around 10% by weight ( A wide range of evidence suggests that impact is the major process in generating this fine-grained material, foremost among which is the presence of impact-produced glasses. These glasses occur in two forms, the first of which is relatively transparent, mostly spherical, glass beads, the compositions of which cluster about that of local bedrock. They represent impact melts from local rocks, either from craters sufficiently large to penetrate the regolith and produce bedrock melts or from microcratering on surface rocks and boulders ( The agglutinate melts characteristically contain numerous submicrometer-sized, paramagnetic spherules of metallic iron derived from Fe Note that the bulk compositions of individual sieve fractions of lunar soils vary, especially the <20-μm fraction, which is enriched in feldspathic components ( Finally, the complex process of “space weathering” — the modification of the surfaces of individual regolith grains at submicrometer scales — also involves a significant, impact-related component that operates in parallel with energetic solar and galactic particles ( This report attempts to summarize how the impact process erodes and comminutes rocks on the lunar surface, and it develops criteria by which the impact process might be distinguished from other erosive agents, such as thermal fatigue. We described the detailed morphology of impact craters in solid rock. Craters <1 ​μm are composed of a glass-lined “pit” only, while craters >10 ​μm possess a prominent spall zone that surrounds the central pit; craters between 1 and 10 ​μm are transitional between those morphologies. Additionally, the pit resides in a high albedo “halo” of finely crushed and shocked material. In many cases, even fresh-appearing craters, the central pit has been lost, and all that remains is a finely crushed, high-albedo center and a spall zone. We suggest that removal of the pit becomes increasingly more prominent as crater size increases, and ultimately all craters in the decimeter-size range and larger will lose their pits as an integral part of the cratering process. Such “large” impact features will display only a relatively flat spall zone (or its eroded remnants), with a high-albedo patch in its center. At all scales, however, every impact leaves a circular depression that could still be recognizable in significantly eroded structures, in which both pit and high-albedo material are gone and the spall zone is preserved only in partial arcs. It is this centrosymmetric aspect of the mass-removal process that distinguishes hypervelocity impact from all other erosive mechanisms. Deviation from this symmetry is permitted for highly oblique impacts ( We also describe how bulk erosion of lunar-surface rocks and boulders occurs by processes of both impact abrasion and collisional fragmentation. Given the size frequency distribution of impact craters and its associated projectile-size distribution, abrasion reflects the low-energy “background” as opposed to the more efficient but much less frequent disruptive event(s). What constitutes the low-energy background versus a catastrophic event is very much a function of target mass, as the fate of a 1 ​kg rock versus a 10 ton boulder (equivalent to cubes with edges of ~7 ​cm vs. ~150 ​cm), for example, is obviously controlled by impact events of dramatically different energies and frequencies of occurrence. It follows that “large” boulders will have higher absolute abrasion rates than “small” rocks. By the same token, “small” rocks will have relatively short survival times because “energetic” impactors for small specimens are so much more frequent than they are for massive boulders. In the final analysis, collisional fragmentation dominates at all sizes, comminuting and eroding approximately The abrasive impact process is not readily demonstrable with planetary-surface images, other than by the rounding of initially irregular and jagged shapes or surfaces. This rounding includes large boulders, with breccias frequently displaying rather knobby surface textures, if not outright protrusions, that reflect the different physical properties of component clasts and matrix. Rounding and differential erosion controlled by the physical properties of diverse rock components, however, might also be accomplished by other erosional processes and thus do not appear to be diagnostic of impact. We suggest, however, that the collisional fragmentation process might be recognized in planetary surface images by a number of diagnostic criteria. “Split boulders” (see We also introduced evidence from the analysis of lunar soils regarding the role of impact in generating the fine-grained matrix of the lunar regolith. Impact-produced glass beads and agglutinates commonly make up 50% or more of individual soil samples. The finest fraction (<20 ​μm) of most lunar soils is enriched in feldspar, a consequence of mineral-specific comminution that has been duplicated experimentally in the laboratory by impact. On still smaller scales, the surfaces of many lunar grains display evidence for space weathering in the form of impact-generated melt splashes or vapor deposits. Impact also produces metallic-Fe beads over a wide range of sizes by reducing oxidized iron from mafic minerals at the high temperatures generated by shock heating at cosmic impact speeds. The study of lunar soils thus provides overwhelming evidence that impact is the dominant process on the Moon in accomplishing the erosion and comminution of surface rocks. Indeed, the final product of this process, the exceptionally fine-grained lunar soil, bears little mineralogical resemblance to the initial bedrock, because much of it has undergone melting and conversion into mineral detritus and polymict breccias. All of these modifications are driven by impact; most have been duplicated in the laboratory and are thus relatively well-understood. In summary, on the basis of many observations of returned lunar samples, from images acquired at the surface or from orbit, from controlled laboratory experiments, and through some statistical modeling, one can derive an internally consistent view that impact is the dominant process of rock fragmentation and regolith formation on the Moon. Throughout this report we mention and illustrate ( We now turn to thermal fatigue as a potential agent in eroding and comminuting lunar surface rocks, and especially those on asteroids where thermal cycling appears to be more severe ( Thermal fatigue seems capable of producing stresses high enough to split rocks in half ( The acceleration of collisional fragments into “extended” clusters is not duplicated by thermal fatigue, as there will not be enough kinetic energy from thermally driven fragmentation to displace individual, massive fragments over sizeable distances, measured in multiples of the host rock diameter. Fragments resulting from thermal fatigue should be piled up rather close to their source, as local gravity only will act on them. For example, the “puzzle rocks” observed in the Antarctic Dry Valleys and attributed to thermal stresses (for example, Fig. 10 of In its most general form, the centrosymmetric propagation of an impact-induced shock wave results in stress and strain distributions that differ dramatically from those imparted by thermal fatigue. These differences occur not only in overall geometry, but also in amplitude and strain rate by orders of magnitude. Centrally symmetric deformation features on planetary rock surfaces are thus the most telling evidence for impact. As illustrated by the lunar-rock collection, most impact features on rocks display circular spall zones or remnants thereof, and rare rocks display radial fracture systems, with or without a glass lined pit in their centers. Thermal fatigue lacks this centrosymmetric property. Another potentially telling aspect for distinguishing between impact and thermal fatigue relates to current models of rock survival times as detailed in The above observations include the presence of a few ‘stragglers’ that exist multiple times longer at the surface than their mean survival time ( Rocks exposed at the surfaces of atmosphereless planetary bodies erode by a number of processes, such as sputtering, impact, thermal fatigue, and possibly others. Hypervelocity impact is characterized by the production of a high-pressure shock wave that propagates quasi-spherically into the target; this stress wave deposits sufficient energy to vaporize, melt, and fracture parts of any target rock. The centrosymmetric geometry, the amplitude of the stress wave, and the associated strain rates are not duplicated by any other geologic process. In combination, these characteristics lead to centrosymmetric crater structures and associated fracture systems, spallation processes at the target’s free surfaces, and a host of phase transformations of the target rock, ranging from plasmas, vapors, and melts to high-pressure minerals and solid-state deformations. Examples and effects of these phenomena can be found throughout the lunar regolith, an extraordinarily dynamic sediment On the basis of lunar-surface observations, returned Apollo samples, and laboratory experiments, we have attempted in this report to develop criteria by which we can recognize impact as a process that can erode surface rocks. We emphasize macroscopic criteria that can assist in the interpretation of planetary surface images, including: generally centrosymmetric depressions caused by spallation processes, which might or might not include a central, glass-lined pit and a highly crushed and shocked, high-albedo zone surrounding the pit, radial or concentric fracture systems, prominent fracture systems at the free surfaces of target rocks, surface rocks either split in half or into a small number of clustered fragments, and the possible presence of impact melt splashes on exposed rocks. In many cases it will be impractical to distinguish among different processes, as they can generate similar products. Such ambiguous factors are the detailed shapes of rock fragments, the gradual rounding of rocks exposed at the surface, and the differential erosion of matrix and clasts, resulting in knobby surfaces of breccia boulders. Identification of specific erosional processes also strongly depends on the spatial resolution of remotely obtained imagery or other information from spacecraft targeted to diverse planetary objects. For example, the information gleaned about the impact process solely from the interpretation of Apollo surface photography is minor compared to that extracted from detailed analysis of returned rocks and soils. Similar analyses might be possible with very high-resolution and/or microscopic imagers and supporting analytic instrumentation on landed spacecraft. In the absence of landers with such capabilities, however, only sample-return missions could unequivocally reveal the significance of small-scale impacts in the erosion of surface rocks and the overall evolution of regoliths on the Moon and other airless bodies. While we favor impact as the dominant macroscopic, erosive process on the Moon, we expect that thermal fatigue would also be a contributing factor, especially on asteroids. A major goal for the community going forward is to develop criteria by which we can recognize the effects of thermal fatigue and to compare these to the impact criteria that we have advanced in this analysis. It is also very possible that the two processes complement each other. For example, is thermal fatigue enhanced by operating on rocks that have impact-induced microcracks and/or fracture systems? Regions permanently shielded from sunlight at the poles of the Moon are essentially at constant, albeit low, temperatures ( This is a review article that is the outgrowth of earlier papers by this group of authors on the subject of impact erosion and rock survival times, the latter senior authored by A. Basilevsky, who was thus a natural to come along. The present paper was substantially written by Friedrich Horz and Mark Cintala, due to their experience with Apollo rocks and experimental craters in dense rocks. James Head contributed examples of terrestrial erosion by thermal fatigue. All 4 authors participated in the iteration of this paper. This review article was motivated by the ever increasing prominence of thermal fatigue-related proposals that presumably shaped the surfaces and their rocks of asteroids Bennu and Ryuga as revealed by the recent OSIRIS REX and Hyabusa 2 missions. The paper points out that the evidence used in support of thermal fatigue processes is compatible also with impact in many cases. There is obviously lots of overlap between the two processes, and we encourage our colleagues to develop a list of diagnostic criteria for thermal fatigue, as we have done here for impact. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We appreciate the skill and dedication with which R. Montes, F. Cardenas, and the late G.L. Haynes conducted many experiments mentioned in this paper. Emily S, Costello and an anonymous reviewer provided helpful comments. All authors gratefully acknowledge their financial support from diverse sources: FH from JETS Contract Task The following is/are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at