The entropy functional in the tetrahedron approximation of the cluster variation method (CVM) for the body-centered cubic structure has been modified to yield accurate consolute temperature for a phase separating system. The improvement is achieved by a change in the multiplicity of the basic tetrahedron cluster and approximately accounts for truncation errors in the entropy functional of CVM owing to finite size of the basic cluster. We demonstrate that the phase diagram, thermodynamic properties and short range order parameters show improved agreement with more accurate results, without involving additional computational burden. Hence, the modified entropy functional could be used as a standard for CVM.Computational thermodynamics provides a unified and quantitatively reliable description of the thermodynamics of disordered and ordered phases and their equilibria. Such a description is essential for the design and development of multicomponent alloys. This is most often based on the CALPHAD method There have been several earlier attempts to improve the CVM entropy functional. The conceptually simplest approach is to use larger basic clusters. The increased computational burden makes this procedure impractical for multi-component systems. The next approach is to use a hybrid Monte Carlo—cluster variation method (MC–CVM) in which correlation functions obtained from MC simulations are used in the CVM expression for entropy to achieve greater accuracy The source of inaccuracy in the CVM entropy functional, particularly near phase transitions, can be attributed to truncation of the entropy functional corresponding to a basic cluster of finite size The configurational Gibbs energy of the bcc phase is expressed as The exact CVM entropy can be expressed as an infinite series The series given in Choose a particular energy parameter set corresponding to a phase separating system and find the consolute temperature by using the highly accurate octahedron–rhombohedron–cube (ORC) Find the consolute point for the same energy parameter set using the tetrahedron approximation of CVM for various values of Find the value of The value of the entropy depends on the energy parameters (CECs) as well as macroscopic variables, temperature and composition and so do the residual terms in the series For the pair energy set and the generalized energy set, the modified values of The applicability of the method for different temperatures and compositions is illustrated in In general, the phase boundaries, thermodynamic properties and sro parameters obtained from all the three models are in mutual agreement with each other for compositions and temperatures far away from the consolute point. Since major departures are expected near the consolute point, it follows that a correction in consolute temperature is expected to improve other properties as well near this temperature as is indeed observed in the present case. All the previous calculations are concerned with a phase separating system where the ratio The above equation is obtained by calculating the consolute temperature at various values of the ratio An identical change in the multiplicity of the tetrahedron cluster is expected for a bcc ordering system since the critical temperature for the A2–B2 order–disorder transformation shows a similar dependence on the first and second neighbor pair interactions. This occurs as there is no frustration in the bcc structure. We have shown that the error associated with the truncation of the CVM entropy functional is corrected to a significant extent by a modification of the multiplicity of the term corresponding to the basic cluster in the entropy functional. The modified multiplicity is found by equating the consolute temperature to a more accurate value. Although the modified value of the multiplicity depends on the CECs for a particular system, the dependence has been shown to be weak except for pair interactions. Thus, for a constant ratio of the pair CECs, the modified value of the multiplicity can be used universally. We note that the modification of multiplicity of basic clusters in the entropy functional as given in this communication leads to improvement on all fronts, namely, better estimates of enthalpy and entropy, correct consolute temperature as well as better estimates of sro are obtained, without involving additional computational burden and hence could be used as a standard for CVM entropy functional.