The generation of electronic waste (e-waste) is an issue with global consequences and therefore the proper management and recycling of e-waste are of increasing importance. Printed circuit boards (PCBs), which are a common component of e-waste, have a high valuable metal content which also makes this material an important secondary resource. In this study, biohydrometallurgical extraction of metals from PCBs was investigated as a potential alternative to conventional hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical processing options. An indirect non-contact leaching approach using ferric iron generated by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans was compared to chemical ferric sulfate leaching of Cu, Ni, Zn and Al from milled high-grade PCBs at 1% pulp density at Fe3+ concentrations of 5–20 g L−1 and at a pH range of 0.6–1.2. The roles of redoxolysis and acidolysis were examined by comparing ferric leaching with sulfuric acid leaching conducted at initial pH values of 0.8–1.4. Results showed that the supplementation of ferric iron significantly (p < 0.05) improved the chemical leaching yields as compared to sulfuric acid leaching for Cu (47.4% to 66.3%), Al (55.3% to 100%), Zn (45.5% to 92.4%) and Ni (61.0% to 97.7%) at pH 0.8. Increase in ferric iron concentration and decrease in pH also significantly (p < 0.05) improved the yield for both biological and chemical leaching. The optimal condition for overall metal bioleaching was at 20 g L−1 ferric iron at an initial pH of 0.6, yielding 87% for Cu and 100% for Al, Zn and Ni. Since no significant variation was found between chemical ferric sulfate and biogenic ferric sulfate leaching at a majority of the tested ferric concentrations, this study suggested that using biogenic lixiviants for extracting metals from PCBs is a viable alternative to chemical leaching.Electronic waste (e-waste) is a fast-growing waste stream worldwide. According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, e-waste is defined as waste electrical and electronic equipment that require electrical currents to function ( Safe disposal of e-waste is a challenge due to the complex composition of the waste ( Unrecycled e-waste also represents a massive loss of recourses. For example, the amount of copper sent to the landfill in Australia alone in 2015 was estimated to be valued at US$103 million ( PCBs are a fundamental part of electronic equipment ( The first step of recovering value from e-waste involves the manual dismantling of components and separation into various fractions including metals, plastics, ceramics and devices such as capacitors and batteries ( Hydrometallurgy involves the use of aqueous chemistry to extract metals from a solid feedstock. Chemical leaching is typically conducted with strong acids such as sulfuric acid, nitric acid and hydrochloric acid, and in some occasions in conjunction with chelating agents such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) and nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) ( Biohydrometallurgy is a subset of hydrometallurgy that utilises microorganisms, such as bacteria, archaea and fungi, to extract and recover metals. Various species of microorganism can use inorganic reduced sulfur compounds or ferrous iron as energy sources to generate biogenic lixiviants for metal solubilisation ( The iron and acid used in the microbially driven redoxolysis and acidolysis can be derived from a variety of sources, including pyrite ( Shredded (2 cm) high grade PCBs removed from electronic equipment were supplied by MRI e-cycle solutions. The PCBs were ground using a LM1-M ring mill from LabTechnics Australia and sieved to three size fractions: <365 μm, 365–500 μm and 500–750 μm using a Retch AS200 control sieve shaker. The mass of each size fraction was weighed to determine the relative proportions of each size fraction. Each size fraction was then individually subsampled using Rotary Sample Divider from Wallerby Mining Products to obtain representative samples for leaching experiments and elemental analysis. The three size fractions of PCBs were sent to LabWest Minerals Analysis Pty Ltd., Western Australia for elemental analysis in triplicate. Sample analysis involved digestion of the PCBs with mixture of HF, HCl and HNO The Cu content was analysed at the CSIRO Mineral Resources Waterford laboratory. Triplicate samples were sonicated and floated in water to remove the plastic followed by digestion of in aqua regia (35 mL concentrated HCl, 15 mL concentrated HNO A series of leaching experiments were conducted with the milled PCBs using dilute sulfuric acid, or chemical or biologically generated ferric sulfate in basal salt media (g L Chemical leaching of milled PCBs with dilute sulfuric acid was conducted to evaluate the role of acidolysis in metal extraction. Concentrated sulfuric acid (96% H Chemical leaching with ferric sulfate was carried out with ferric iron concentrations of 5, 10, 15 and 20 g L Biogenic ferric iron was produced in a 4-L continuous flow stirred tank glass reactor. Biomass carriers (Mutag BioChip™) were used to facilitate biomass retention. The reactor was inoculated with After collection from the reactor, the biogenic ferric sulfate lixiviant was filtered (0.2 μm filter) to remove microorganisms. Ferric iron concentration of the filtrate was determined as the difference between the soluble ferrous iron concentration and the soluble total iron concentration. The solution was diluted using basal salt media to achieve desired ferric iron concentrations (5, 10, 15, 20 g L Solution pH and redox potential in leaching experiments were determined with a TPS SmartCHEM meter using a TPS SmartCHEM Lab pH probe and TPS SmartCHEM Lab redox probe with Ag/AgCl reference electrode, respectively. The solution samples taken from the leaching experiments were filtered through a 0.2 μm filter before 1 mL of the filtered sample was diluted with nitric acid (0.07 HNO During the leaching experiments, samples were taken at various time intervals in order to determine the leaching yield and rate over time. Leaching yields (Y) were calculated as follow: The mass of the dissolved metal collected during sampling (MR Cumulative mass of dissolved metals removed (CMR, mg) in samples was calculated using Eq. The mass of metal dissolved in the remaining leachate in the flask (SM, mg) was estimated using Eq. The leaching yields (Y, %) were calculated from TL and PCB metal mass (mg) using Eq. Averages and standard deviations of leaching yields were determined for each time point. The leaching rate (LR in mg h The statistical significances of the results were determined using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with replication with differences considered significant at The content of major metals in the three size fractions of the milled e-waste are shown in Leaching of milled e-waste was evaluated using dilute sulfuric acid and chemical or biologically generated ferric sulfate at various pH values. To determine the extent to which acidolysis contributes to the leaching process, chemical leaching experiments with dilute sulfuric acid in basal media were conducted at various pH values (0.8–1.4) in the absence of ferric iron to discount the role of redoxolysis. Leaching yields over time are shown in Significant differences ( The effect of initial pH on metal leaching in the presence of various concentrations of ferric iron (5–20 g L The results showed that decreasing initial pH increased metals leaching in the presence of ferric iron ( The addition of ferric iron notably increased leaching yield as compared to sulfuric acid leaching alone ( The presence of ferric iron notably increased the leaching of Cu, for which the highest leaching yields was achieved at a ferric iron concentration of 20 g L The results also suggested that a change in the concentration of ferric iron did not cause a proportional change in leaching yields as would be expected from the stoichiometry of reaction 1. This was most notable with the leaching of Cu. Using chemical ferric sulfate at an initial pH of 0.6, at 5 g L A previous study conducted by Leaching rates of the metals were calculated for each of the sampling intervals and results were as shown in Supplementary Tables S4-S8. The leaching rates for sulfuric acid leaching were highly variable ( The highest leaching rates using a combination of ferric sulfate and sulfuric acid was achieved in the first 4 h ( In this study, all ferric iron concentrations and pH values were tested using both biogenic and chemical ferric sulfate. When comparing leaching yields across various ferric iron concentrations at each individual initial pH, no significant variation ( One potential issue with the use of either chemical or biological ferric sulfate is the concentration of ferric iron that remains in the pregnant leach liquor after leaching, which in this study was most notable at high initial ferric concentrations (Supplementary Tables 9–12). At initial ferric concentration of 5 g L Several studies have explored the bioleaching of PCBs in either one- or two-step processes ( Numerous factors need to be considered when designing leaching processes. Metal content varies depending on the type of PCBs used as well as the fraction size ( This study applied shake flask experiments to screen a range of parameters to identify optimal leaching conditions and guide the selection of conditions for future reactor experiments. Biogenic ferric sulfate used in this study was produced in a continuous flow reactor. Knowing the minimal concentration of reagents (ferric iron and acid) required to achieve efficient leaching yield is important for optimising biogenic lixiviant generation and leaching processes. Future work should explore the leaching of PCBs at higher pulp densities, reagent recycling and the integration of the biogenic lixiviant production and leaching processes as well as metal recovery from leach liquors. Moreover, future research should include a techno-economic analysis that considers all these variables to determine the economic feasibility of PCB bioleaching. The large scale implementation of biohydrometallurgical processes also requires the processes to be competitive against existing technologies such as pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes, which are employed in a number of countries to recover value from PCBs ( This study investigated the effects of pH and ferric iron concentrations on the leaching of PCBs and compared biogenic and chemical ferric sulfate leaching. The use of sulfuric acid alone was not sufficient to efficiently leach high grade PCBs, achieving a maximum leaching yields of 47.4% Cu, 59.4% Al, 50.5% Zn and 62.1% Ni. The leaching yield was greatly improved with the use of chemical ferric sulfate, achieving leaching yields of 84.3% Cu, 98.4% Ni and 100% for both Zn and Al. This demonstrated that the combination of acidolysis and redoxolysis was required for efficient leaching. An increase in ferric iron concentration and a decrease in pH resulted in higher leaching yields, indicating that the concentration of the lixiviant is critical, especially when using high grade PCBs. Importantly, for most test conditions no significant differences in leaching yields were found between biogenic and chemical ferric sulfate leaching. This demonstrated that the use of biological ferric sulfate lixiviant is a suitable alternative to chemical ferric sulfate. Further work should explore the effect of pulp density and temperature on leaching and a techno-economic analysis should be conducted to determine the economic feasibility of the process. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships. that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support of  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at