There appears to be several mechanisms affecting the recovery of coarse KCl particles as they flow through the flotation circuit of the Taquari Vassouras mine (Companhia Vale do Rio Doce; CVRD), Aracaju, Brazil in the presence of continually increasing concentrations of carnallite. The increase in carnallite assists in the deposition of fine NaCl and KCl crystals on the surface of the coarse KCl particles. The effect seems to be a slight net improvement in the surface hydrophobicity and therefore flotation recovery of the coarse KCl particles. As the concentration of Mg2+ ions increase, the precipitation of fine crystals of NaCl and KCl starts to increase. These NaCl crystals appear to have fine inclusions of KCl on the surface (and vice versa) which appear to attract collector, thus reducing hydrophobicity and flotation recovery of the coarse KCl feed. It is at this stage that the removal of fine precipitates appears to become critical in order to provide enough collector coverage of the coarse KCl particles to keep them floating.The Taquari Vassouras mine (Companhia Vale do Rio Doce; CVRD), Aracaju, Brazil produces potash using flotation of a sylvinite ore (KCl–NaCl), and periodically experiences poor flotation performance as a result of carnallite (KCl One possible mechanism causing the failure for the flotation circuit is the contamination of the surface of the sylvinite by NaCl such that collector coverage is inhibited and recovery reduced. Another possible mechanism is the generation of a large quantity of fines which may, because of their large surface area, reduce the amount of collector reaching the surface of the coarse KCl. In this Part II of the research (for Part I see The objective of this Part II of the research was not to investigate at length all the possible surface species that might exist on the surface of the KCl under various conditions of temperature, concentration and residence time. Rather, the purpose of this research was to attempt to apply the information gained in Part I, which was basically laboratory research conducted at the IWRI in Australia, to the CVRD plant in Brazil. It is hoped that this information will be of assistance to plant metallurgists in solving some of their problems with respect to high carnallite contamination. The authors have deliberately attempted to replicate plant conditions in this research. The reason for this is to attempt to provide data which will be of use to plant metallurgists. The authors make no apology for this, and feel that it will make a fundamental contribution to the research in this area. The Taquari Vassouras mine is in the State of Sergipe, Brazil, 45 The flotation circuits consist of four lines, three (lines 1–3) of DENVER 3 The tails from the Roughers, Scavengers and Cleaners are forwarded for regrind while the concentrates are centrifuged (not shown) to produce a final concentrate. The circuit water (brine and some fines) are re-cycled back to the Rougher feed. The head grade of KCl to the plant is approximately 30% and the percent of Mg  From the mass balanced data, the performance of the circuit was determined (see The rate of solids recovery rate for the Rougher cells 1 and 2 in line 4 was significantly greater than Rougher cells 3 and 4 or the Scavenger. Also, the recovery of solids for Roughers cells 1 and 2 was very high relative to the other cells in line 4 and the Scavenger. However, the rate of recovery of solids for line 4 Roughers and Scavenger was almost identical to line 3. The Cleaners in line 4 also had excellent recoveries. The Centrifuge performed well with high recoveries in the coarse sizes. The metallurgical survey carried out on site indicated that the circuit was stable (when carnallite was not present) and recovery of the KCl was approximately 93%. A study of the batch cell flotation performance of samples of the flotation feed was performed in the CVRD laboratory, with different concentrations of carnallite. Surface analysis was completed on various samples taken from both the batch flotation tests as well as the plant. The surface analysis instruments used were a CamScan Model CS44FE field emission scanning electron microscope and a physical electronics TRIFT II time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometer. Samples from the feed to the rougher flotation circuit indicated typical mineral compositions as shown in The plant water consisted of saturated brine, which had a density of 1230 The results of the various flotation tests are presented in In Test 02, the KCl recovery is lower than in Test 01 (51.3% compared to 58.0%), but the only significant difference between these two experiments is the point of time in the test sequence when the carnallite was added. In Test 02 the carnallite was added to the liquid phase in the absence of the coarse solid and thus there was no possibility of modification of the coarse KCl surface. However, in Test 01, modification of the coarse KCl surface may have occurred because the carnallite was added to the liquid and coarse solid mixture. As indicated in the laboratory experiments outlined in In Test 03 the flotation recovery significantly improved. This confirms the laboratory results and adds weight to the conclusion that if the precipitates are removed prior to flotation, then the recovery of the coarse KCl improves. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of samples of concentrates from batch flotation Tests 01 and 03 are shown in Samples of precipitates that were formed by the addition of carnallite to plant brine solution were collected and analysed using SEM. Images of the precipitates are shown in Samples were taken from the rougher concentrate, scavenger tail and centrifuge when the levels of carnallite in the circuit were low and the fines submitted for ToF-SIMS analysis. In When these results were compared to the previous laboratory research ( It is clear that the addition of carnallite does significantly reduce the recovery by flotation of coarse KCl. It also seems likely that the coating of the surface of the coarse KCl with NaCl and KCl crystals has an initial net increase in surface hydrophobicity and therefore recovery. It also seems clear that removal of the precipitates produced from the addition of carnallite to the flotation feed, before the addition of collector, improves the recovery of coarse KCl. It seems clear therefore that the precipitated fines are attracting collector therefore reducing the amount available for coarse KCl flotation. Surface analysis of the scavenger tail fines indicated that there were small inclusions of KCl in the NaCl crystals and vice versa. This seems to be consistent with previous laboratory findings which showed similar inclusions with the precipitates from high Mg The authors wish to thank the sponsors