The Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) is the most widely known test method for identification of rock abrasivity. The CAI value is related directly to cutter life in the field. On account of this, it is significant for building and constructions materials especially for the dimension stones. This paper presents strength tests, which are uniaxial compressive (UCS) and direct shear (DSS) influencing the CAI value. Additionally, the relationship between CAI and abrasion test methods that are Bohme abrasion (BA) and Wide-Wheel (WW) values are investigated. In the study tests were performed on 15 different marbles stone specimens. Results show that a strong correlation exists between CAI value, strength and abrasion test values. Based on this information, two converter charts were developed using multi regression analysis method.Marbles are among the most common building stones. Cutting is the crucial operation during both production and processing of marbles. Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) value is used as an input parameter for cutting operation performance of the building stones especially for the selection of the cutting materials. CAI is also one of the commonly used tests to evaluate rock abrasiveness Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) has been examined by several researchers. Suana and Peters In the study, in order to determine strength and abrasion properties of rocks using CAI was investigated using simple and multi regression analysis method. Fifteen commercially available marble samples which are widely used both in Turkey and in the world are selected. In all previous studies, no attention has been paid to the relationship between CAI values and both strength and abrasion values of the rocks expect UCS. Depending on the analysis results, two novel converter charts are created. The first chart shows the relationship between CAI–UCS–DSS, while the second chart displays the relationship between CAI–BA–WW. These two charts can be used practically to predict the strength and abrasion values using CAI of marble rocks. The applicability of these two charts is important in engineering and academics that are engaged in working on construction and building materials. In the study following properties of the specimens were measured: bulk density, grain density, Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), direct shear strength (DSS), Bohme abrasion (BA) and Wide-Wheel (WW) abrasion. The specimens were prepared and tested according to the procedures given by Ulusay and Hudson Cerchar abrasiveness index (CAI) test device features a vice holding the rock specimen, a rack for the steel stylus, a dead weight of 70 Uniaxial compression tests were performed on cubic (7_7_7 Direct shear strength test was performed on prepared rock cubes (5_5_5 The axial and shear stress, The abrasion value of the specimens was tested using Bohme and Wide-Wheel abrasion equipments. For Bohme abrasion test, a specimen (71_71_71 In the Wide-Wheel abrasion method; a wheel with a diameter of 200 A polarized microscope Olympus BX41TF model was used for the petrographic analyses of the tested samples. The petrographic analyses were examined according to the methods suggested by CEN EN 12407 In the study, test results were evaluated with the help of regression analysis as the statistical method. Regression analysis is used when two or more variables are thought to be systematically connected by a linear relationship. There are two types regression analysis. They are simple and multi regression analysis. In simple regression, only two variables which are Multiple regression is a flexible method of data analysis that may be appropriate whenever a quantitative variable (the dependent or criterion variable) is to be examined in relationship to any other factors (expressed as independent or predictor variables). Relationships may be nonlinear, independent variables may be quantitative or qualitative, and one can examine the effects of a single variable or multiple variables with or without the effects of other variables taken into account Many practical questions involve the relationship between a dependent or criterion variable of interest (call it To apply the equation, each Xj score for an individual case is multiplied by the corresponding Bj value, the products are added together, and the constant  The Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is the most widely used method of statistical analysis of quantitative data. It calculates the probability that differences among the observed means could simply be due to chance. ANOVA is actually a rather specific and restricted example of the general approach adopted in multiple regressions. The results of the ANOVA are presented in an ANOVA table. This table contains columns labeled “Source”, “SS or Sum of Squares”, “df – for degrees of freedom”, “MS – for mean square”, “F or F-ratio”, and “p, prob, probability, sig., or sig. of F”. Results of ANOVA test appears At this point, it has been established that there are two methods of estimating variance, Mean Squares Within (MS The hypotheses are tested with an F-test in ANOVA as below: Null ( For the mineralogical identification, cross-sections of the stones were studied under the polarizing optical microscope. The specimens are characterized by coarse-grained (200–400 The CAI value is related directly to cutter life in the field. CAI values vary between less than 0.5 for soft rocks (such as shale and limestone) to more than 5.0 for hard rocks (such as quartzite). Soft rocks create very little wear on the pin. Therefore, to determine the CAI value is too difficult. In hard rock, pin splash on the sample surface during the test. Because rank weight (70 When CAI and UCS are statistically evaluated, a functional relation is monitored between the two groups. The function derived by using the Least Squares Method can be seen in The predictable interval and confidence interval on the relation between CAI and UCS values are shown in When CAI and DSS are statistically judged, a function is obtained to define the relation between CAI and direct shear strength (DSS) values. The function achieved by using the Least Squares Method is given in In When CAI and Bohme abrasion values (BA) are statistically considered, a functional relation is obtained as shown The predictable interval and confidence interval on the relation between CAI and Bohme abrasion values are seen in When CAI and Wide Wheel value (WW) are statistically assessed, a functional relation seems to exist for the two values concerned. The function obtained by using the Least Squares Method is given in All data points are accumulated within the 95% confidence interval. Although some of the data points range out of the 95% confidence interval, they are all accepted to be within predictable lines. The first multi regression analysis is applied for predictable CAI using UCS and DSS values and the analysis results are listed in When reporting the results of the multiple regression analysis, The UCS versus CAI and similarly that of DSS versus CAI show that there could be a linear relationship ( The regression equation comprising both the explanatory variables is: In The second multi regression analysis was carried out for BA and WW versus CAI. The results of this analysis are given in It is also necessary to mention the significance of the model by citing the multiple For the final consequences, it is possible to say that the Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) is a significant parameter for dimensional stones as building materials. It is not one of the commonly used tests to evaluate rock abrasiveness for cutter life/cost estimations but also used in predicting the uniaxial compressive strength, direct share strength, Bohme abrasion and Wide Wheel abrasion values for marble stones. Results of this study imply the importance of the CAI for the rock properties. In the study CAI of marble stones and its relations to strength and abrasion test methods was investigated. All measurement results were evaluated based on CAI values using simple and multi regression analysis method. Results are summarized in the following paragraph. From simple regression analysis it is concluded that there are strong positive correlations between each strength test (UCS and DSS) values and CAI while there are strong negative correlations between each abrasion test (BA and WW) values and CAI. Four correlations are formulated (Eqs.