Forward shear normal extrusion (FSNE) as a new single pass severe plastic deformation (SPD) method was based on conventional extrusion combined with planar twist extrusion. The proposed method was studied by finite element analysis to investigate the effect of FSNE die geometrical parameters, i.e. deformation zone Length (LDZ) and distortion angle (α), on uniform stress-strain distribution during deformation. Consequently, the optimum condition was considered in design and the process was experimentally performed on aluminum alloy (0.27% Fe, 0.08% Si and balance Al (wt. %). It was found that L = 15 mm and α = 40° are the optimum die parameters that can result in higher effective plastic strain with a more uniform distribution. Microstructural evolution was also studied to demonstrate the capability of this technique in grain refinement and microstructure observations revealed the presence of ultra-fine grains after FSNE. Tensile testing results indicated that yield (YS) and ultimate (UTS) strengths increase 2.7 and 2 times for the processed sample compared to the annealed sample. Hardness results showed increase in hardness level from 25HV0.3/10 for non-processed to 53 HV0.3/10 for the processed state. The uniform distribution of hardness values in both transverse and longitudinal directions was achieved due to the uniform distribution of effective strain resulting from the optimum die design. Compared to other SPD methods, the present technique resulted in high accumulated plastic strain and hardness with uniform distribution and significant grain refinement after one pass.It has been indicated that superior strengths can be achieved by grain refinement in ultra-fine grain (UFG) materials [ Segal et al. [ However, achieving grain refiner microstructure with higher mechanical properties, an ultra-high effective strain is necessary while the conventional deformation processes with medium or high strains cannot meet this expectation. Therefore, researchers try to introduce the SPD processes as combination of SPD methods such as twist channel angular pressing (TCAP), torsional-equal channel angular pressing (T-ECAP), planar twist channel angular extrusion (PTCAE) to impose more effective plastic strain and to achieve a grain refiner micostructure in one pass. Furthermore, the first pass in most of the SPD techniques has a key role on the final microstructure since the grain refining rate is higher at the first pass of SPD processes [ Generally, in SPD techniques, it needs to repeat the process in many times to supply a desired amount of strain in the sample while causes to decrease the process efficiency based on time and cost. Recently, the direct extrusion has found considerable important in producing UFG materials with high workability due to hydrostatic pressure. Therefore, researchers introduced single pass methods combined with extrusion such as torsion extrusion (TE) [ In current work, for achieving higher effective plastic strain with uniform distribution, a single pass process with a novel die configuration was proposed by the combination of conventional extrusion and planar twist extrusion called "Forward shear normal extrusion (FSNE)". The proposed method in this paper can provide the products with the desired properties and with less consumed time and cost that is very important for industrial users. The current method (FSNE process) is based on applying additional plastic shear strain in deformation zone of conventional extrusion process. This additional shear strain is imposed by forcing the sample cross section to be deformed by simple shear. In addition, the sample cross section area decreases from A to A/4. Therefore, the cross-section of the deformation zone varies along the die axis from a squared cross section with the area of A, to a parallelogram-shaped cross section with the maximum distortion angle (α) in middle of the deformation zone, and finally back to square with area of A/4 until a maximum distortion angle (α) is reached. Consequently, the sample is forced to deform back to its initial configuration ( As shown in The proposed method was studied by finite element analysis to investigate the effect of FSNE die geometrical parameters such as deformation zone length (L Finite element analysis (FEA) of the introduced process was performed using Deform-3D V.5 software to simulate and investigate the deformation behavior of the pure aluminum. Eq. This equation was experimentally determined by Chinh et al. [ The as-received 1050 pure aluminum plate with chemical composition as reported in Extrusion die was prepared based on the optimum conditions (α, L) obtained from the simulation results. In this method, the die channel contains three distinct segments, namely entry channel, deformation zone and exit channel. The entry and exit segments have square cross-section with the area of A (100 mm The processed sample in optimum condition and the annealed sample were cut perpendicular with the extrusion direction for microstructure examinations. The EBSD maps on the annealed aluminum as well as the processed aluminum were obtained using a Hitachi SU-8230 Field Emission-STEM equipped with the EBSD camera. Colour orientation contract imaging (COCI) technique was used to observe microstructure of deformed sample. A COCI can detect changes in orientation that are below the orientation accuracy of most EBSD systems (±1°) and it can acquire a single point within an image in a few milliseconds. Specimens for this purpose were polished by standard metallographic techniques followed by a final polishing on the Buehler Vibromet 2 polisher with 0.05 μm colloidal silica suspension. Grain size was measured according to ASTM E-112 standard. Tensile tests of the annealed and processed samples were performed at ambient temperature according to ASTM E8M-05 by Zwick testing machine with cross head speed of 0.5 mm/min. Hardness of the processed sample as well as the annealed aluminum was measured according ASTM E384-10 by Vickers micro-hardness tester (Qv-1000DM) at load of 300 g and dwell time of 10 s. Hardness measurements were performed across the sample (normal to extrusion direction) and along the three horizontal, vertical and diametrical directions (  It was shown by Pardis et al. [ Filling fraction in experiment state is more than simulation one (   Strain inhomogeneity index ( Strain inhomogeneity index ( It can be seen ( In addition, we simulate the effective strain and stress levels in deformation zone (parallel with the extrusion direction) ( In the previous section, α = 40° was found to be the optimum distortion angle in our design.  COC imaging of different zones of the processed sample (perpendicular with the extrusion direction) at the distortion angle of 40° and the deformation length of 15 mm are shown in The stress-strain curves of the annealed and processed samples by FSNE process have been shown in A comparison of the effective plastic strain and hardness values of aluminium 1050 processed by FSNE and other SPD methods is presented in  Increment in α angle from 0 to 45° increased the required force for deformation of sample due to increase in the required deformation energy and the frictional contact at die-sample interface. The optimum design conditions for achieving maximum effective strain with uniform distribution was found at α = 40° and L Very small grains ( The yield and ultimate strengths enhanced 2.7 and 2 times and elongation decreased 20% for the processed sample in comparison with the annealed sample. Higher effective plastic strain and hardness values with more uniform distribution were obtained after one pass of FSNE in comparison with other SPD methods. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: