This study examined the use of coal bottom ash (BA) from Tuncbilek Thermal Power Plant, Turkey, as an aggregate to produce aerated concrete. The BA was used as an aggregate with different replacement amounts. To determine the effect of ash incorporation on the final product properties, chemical, physical, mechanical, and microstructure analyses were performed. Results show that using BA in autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) formulations caused a unit weight decrease in the produced AAC for all concerned BA replacement ratios. However, it was observed that for the concrete having 25% and 50% BA usage has also beneficial effect on the strength gaining of the AAC. Thermal conductivity values reduced with increasing BA replacement ratio.Generally, autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) is made from quartz-rich sand, lime, cement, and calcium sulfate with traces of aluminium powder as pore-forming agent ( In recent years, the preparation of lightweight concrete by incorporation of pozzolanic siliceous material such as silica fume, coal fly ash, and slags has received further attention because of the economical use of naturally occurring raw materials, waste material recycling, and saved energy ( Coal fly ash is a well-known substitute material, a binder or aggregate for the production of concrete and nowadays a large amount of fly ash has already been utilized in the construction industry as a partial cement replacement or mineral additive in cement production. Using BA, however, is limited because of its relatively higher unburned carbon content and different structural properties when compared with fly ash ( In this study, the received BA was first pretreated by crushing and particle size classification method to decrease its higher unburned carbon to desirable level or that generally accepted by concrete industry (<6%). The pretreated ash was then used as an aggregate with different replacement amounts. The mechanical, physical and microstructural properties of the raw and final products were examined to find out the effect of BA incorporation in the AAC properties. The bottom ash aerated concrete (BAC) mixture were produced by using ordinary Portland cement (CEM I 42.5R), limestone, quartz sand, BA and water. The BA sample used in AAC mixture was supplied from Tuncbilek Thermal Power Plant, Turkey. All granular raw materials were mixed and ground in a ceramic ball mill to obtain required homogenization and to reduce the particle size near 100 Pretreatment of received BA were performed by crushing and particle size classification method to decrease its higher unburned carbon to desirable level or that generally accepted by concrete industry (<6%). The details of the pretreatment process can be found elsewhere ( Chemical analyses of the raw materials were carried out by using an X-ray fluorescence (XRF) unit (Spectro X-Lab 2000). The mineralogical analyses of BA samples were determined by using X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (Rigaku, Rint 2200). The microstructural evolutions of BAC specimens were observed by using versatile analytical ultrahigh-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), Zeiss Supra 50 VP on gold-coated sections. The unit weights were determined on 70 The chemical analyses obtained from XRF results that identify the main oxide compositions of the major ingredients of BAC specimens are given in Compared with other cement-based composite construction materials, the main important property of AAC is the unit weight. The oven-dry unit weight variation of concrete specimens, cured for 8 and 18 The porosity of BAC specimens was determined by ultrasound pulse velocity (UPV) test. This test was based on the theory of ultrasound transfer inside the material. Solid materials transfer the sound faster than porous materials. Thermal insulation properties of BAC specimens were determined by thermal conductivity test. The measured thermal conductivities for BAC specimens cured for 18 The variations of the compressive and flexural strengths of BAC versus BA replacement ratio are presented in Although measurable flexural strength values were not obtained for the specimens cured at 8 The unit weight and strength of the cement-based composite materials decrease with the increase in the porosity for the same binder, water and aggregate ratios. Therefore, the balance between unit weight and strength should be well designed for lightweight concrete materials as required in related codes. In this part of the study, a performance factor value ( The material structure of AAC is characterized by its solid microporous matrix and macropores. The macropores, which were generated by hydrogen, shown in Alite and belite in cement were mainly transformed to the C–S–H phases and Ca(OH) The micrographs of the BAC, cured in autoclave for 18 The observed lathlike thin plates of tobermorite crystals confirmed the strength increase of the BAC, determined by strength tests ( This study has shown that coal bottom ash can be used as an aggregate in AAC production. On the basis of the test results, the following conclusions should be drawn: The replacement of BA with quartz sand increases the tobermorite formation in the composite matrix owing to the pozzolanic activity. This formation demonstrates the strength increase of BAC specimens with lower unit weights when compared with traditional AAC. As seen from test results, insufficient autoclaving times have detrimental effects on final AAC product properties. Utilization of porous BA in AAC mixture decreases the thermal conductivity values up to 39% when compared with the reference AAC specimen. According to physical and mechanical tests, the optimum replacement ratio of BA in AAC mixture was 50% for both curing times. The increased strengths were 10% and 16% higher than those in reference AAC at 18 This study forms part of an Eskisehir Osmangazi University (ESOGU) sponsored research project 2005/150/8. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the ESOGU for its financial assistance.