In different European countries new legislative regulations and laws demand the reduction of the amount of wastes. In nature, the reduction steps of organic compounds in waste material are managed by symbiotic organisms, where a combination of aerobic and anaerobic degradation sequences leads to a near mineralization of organic material. Modeled on this principle, the process presented here combines a two-stage digestion with a following aerobic mineralization step. To gain a maximum amount of methane which is a regenerative energy carrier, the process reducing organic waste—in this case kitchen refuse— was begun by a run through a digestion cascade. The residues from the anaerobic step, containing mainly lignocellulosic substances that are recalcitrant to anaerobic degradation, were concentrated and then treated aerobically by white-rot and soft-rot fungi. In this article, it is demonstrated that many fungi species can use digestion residues as a substrate. The soft-rot fungus Chaetomium cellulolyticum could aerobically degrade the digestion residues, measured as volatile solid reduction of 39%. Within the process, lignin was reduced by almost 45%. Exposed again to the digestion, these residues of the aerobic treatment were degraded anaerobically with a rate of 42%. Therefore, a three-stage process combining anaerobic, aerobic and anaerobic degradation leads to organic matter reduction of more than 96% of the original amount.
                  It can be concluded at least that organic waste material can almost completely be mineralized by biotechnological treatment.biomass continuous stirred tank reactor dissolved organic carbon total solids anorganic dry weight organic dry weight volatile solid yield coefficient (biomass/substrate), describing growth and maintanance metabolism yield coefficient (biomass/CO organic loading rate reactor volume Degradation pathways of anaerobic micro-organisms allow the mineralization of polymers such as starch, cellulose, lipids and proteins ( To realize a complete mineralization of organic waste, it is necessary to integrate an aerobic step in the degradation process. Organisms like white- and soft-rot fungi are preferable for aerobic degradation, as they are specialized on degradation of lignin and related polymeres, and, compared with bacteria, much more effective ( Digestion residues are typically composed of recalcitrant and anaerobic biomass (BM) besides an anorganic matter content of more than 40% which is a highly selective medium for lignolytic microbes. Therefore, the degradation potential of white- and soft-rot fungi towards digestion residues is investigated. This step plays an essential role in the complete mineralization process of organic matter. Kitchen refuse was digested in a two-stage cascade. The digestion residues were concentrated by centrifugation at 12,000 All fungal species used in these experiments were available from the Institute’s collection. Fungal species were maintained on two malt agar slants each (3% malt extract) and stored at 5°C. The medium used in these experiments consisted of (adapted from ad 1000 ml H Solution of trace elements: ad 1000 ml H The sample was filtered through paper filter (Macherey-Nagel, Düren. MN 615) and was placed overnight in a drying oven at 105°C. The biomass concentration was estimated from filter weight difference without and with the dried sample. Total and dissolved nitrogen was determined by the Kjeldahl procedure. Samples in ceramic crucibles were dried overnight at 105°C. After determining the weight difference before and after drying, the samples were burnt at 500°C. The volatile solid contents was estimated from the weight difference. The culture samples were centrifugated at 40,000 CO Samples adapted from The samples were prepared in the same manner as for glucose determination. The DOC estimation was carried through with a Total Carbon Analyser TOC-5000 (Shimadzu, Duisburg). The Injection volume was 32 10 ml of fermentation solution were centrifugated at 40,000 Screening of 24 species in 1-l flasks was carried out for 28 days incubation with 250 ml of digestion residues with a TS content of 10% (see For inoculation of fermentations with digestion residues, cultures of fungi were grown in 1% cellulose nutrient medium. Mycelia were harvested from the exponential growth phase and centrifugated at 12,000 A fermenter with spiral mixer was used for the high concentrated digestion residues. Solid-state fermentations were conducted in a tray fermenter, fitted with a slit-sieve bottom. The substrate was spread evenly over the bottom to a depth of about 1 cm. Sterile humified air was introduced through the sieve bottom. Anaerobic fermentation was carried out at OLR=3.0 g l Measurement of volatile solids includes both organic digestion residues and the fungal biomass. To distinguish between volatile solid-reduction and real volatile solid-degradation, the estimation of volatile solid-degradation cannot be carried out without taking into account the biomass generation. As digestion residues contain a multitude of organic compounds, it was not possible to determine fungal biomass by common methods. To evaluate the biomass concentration during fermentation of digestion residues, growth of fungi was described by the Monod model with the help of the CO First experiments were run in Erlenmayer flasks to evaluate the degradation potential of lignolytic fungi (see The best degradation result was obtained with With the fungi that showed good volatile solid-degradation results in flasks, growth experiments on glucose as sole energy and carbon sources were carried out in 1-l fermenters. With the experiments on the glucose medium, growth parameters and biomass were determined. Exemplary fermentations with Fermentation of Fermentation of As the model also considers a death rate, the real biomass concentration reaches less than it is indicated by the yield coefficient To check plausibility of biomass evaluation, the biomass concentration was also calculated with the data obtained from fermentations on cellulose. The good results for the calculated biomass generation confirmed this method of biomass estimation (data not shown here). These fermentations also showed no delay in CO After growth of fungi has been described on glucose and cellulose medium, fermentation of digestion residues were carried out. In After incubation with the fungus To evaluate the influence of the soluble substances of digestion residues, a fermentation with the supernatant and 10 gl According to our model, the biomass concentration increased from 1.3 gl The fermentation with the species In conclusion of our model, biomass concentration increased slightly to reach 1.6 gl Regarding the effect of soluble substances to the activity of the fungus (see above), experiments show that they did not have any influence on the degradation effectivity of The results of degradation experiments at 10% TS with several fungi species are outlined in In order to examine the highest volumetric degradation activity, fermentations with various concentrations of TS were carried out. Experiments with 30–75% TS indicate clearly optimum dry weight contents at 30% TS for all fungi species tested. Solid state fermentations at 30% TS with To find the highest volumetric degradation activity with a reactor system that is practicable, the degradation potential of  With these experiments it could be shown, that digestion residues are degradable through the activity of A following anaerobic fermentation at mesophilic temperatures could reduce these fungi treated residues additionally with 42% of volatile solids. Summarizing the results of anaerobic/aerobic/anaerobic degradation steps, a volatile solid reduction of 96% was achieved (see In this article, it is demonstrated that many fungi species can use digestion residues as a substrate. After a screening for a high volatile solid degradation on digestion residues, fermentation of the best species was carried out. Growth parameters for these species were determined on glucose medium. The yield coefficient Parameters found for each species on glucose medium were used to estimate biomass generation in the fermentation of digestion residues. We claimed that An estimation of biomass production in digestion residues as a substrate is presented. Regarding the biomass concentration produced during the fermentation, it was possible to evaluate the volatile solid degradation of each fermentation. At a high substrate concentration, the yield of degradation generally rises because of high biomass concentration and a favorable degradation velocity ( The favorable substrate concentration of ca 20% TS was also found by To obtain a complete mineralization, the fungi-treated digestion residues were digested anaerobically in a further step. In a full scale plant this substrate would be fed again to the first anaerobic digestor. Here, volatile solids could be degraded with 42% volatile solid reduction. Other materials like straw or saw dust were degraded anaerobically to 6–59% after a treatment with white-rot fungi (  Organic waste material can be completely mineralized by multistage biological treatment combining digestion with aerobic lignolytic degradation steps. The best suited lignolytic biocatalyst for the degradation of digestion residues is Pasteurisation of digestion residues is sufficient to realize high specific lignin degradation by the fungus at 20% TS in a totally mixed bioreactor. We thank the German Ministry of Education and Research and the Schwarting-Uhde company for financial support.