The Qiongheba porphyry Cu deposit is characterized by geochemical features of island arc and adakitic intrusions with fractional crystallization playing a key role in the formation of the ore-bearing rocks. Calculated sulfur concentrations in silicate melts at sulfide saturation show that two-thirds of the sulfur was exsolved during the fractional crystallization process to contribute to the formation of sulfides. The ore-bearing rocks in the Qiongheba area yielded U-Pb zircon ages of 414–412 Ma coeval with the 412 Ma Re-Os age of molybdenite indicating that sulfide mineralization is broadly coeval with magmatic crystallization. The color cathodoluminescence of quartz (purple) and K-feldspar (pink) in the fibrous veins and miarolitic cavities (Qtz-2 and Kfs-2) are the same as those (Qtz-1 and Kfs-1) in the granitic porphyry whereas the hydrothermal quartz (Qtz-3) and K-feldspar (Kfs-3) are black and green, suggesting that the color cathodoluminescence can be used to unravel the paragenesis of PCD. The oxygen isotopic values of Qtz-1 and Qtz-2 range from 9.15 to 10.1‰ and 8.93 to 10.4‰ with calculated equilibrium fluid compositions of 9.86 to 11.7‰ and 10.5 to 12.0‰, respectively, indicating a magma-dominated fluid composition, whereas Qtz-3 veins have very low oxygen isotopic values from −4.60 to −1.25‰ with corresponding fluid compositions of −3.51 to −0.17‰, implying that the fluid formed via the mixing of magmatic and meteoric water. Titanium-in-quartz thermometry constrains the magmatic crystallization to 580–627 °C, whereas the magmatic to hydrothermal transition occurred at 523–613 °C.Porphyry Cu ± Mo ± Au deposits are widely accepted to have formed in magmatic–hydrothermal systems when metal-rich oxidized magma saturated with H Previous studies have suggested that disseminated sulfide assemblages in miarolitic cavities (MCs) in porphyry deposits can record the initial compositions of magmatic–hydrothermal ore-forming fluids ( Porphyry copper deposits (PCDs), discovered in the Qiongheba area, East Junggar, contain magnetite and sulfide (pyrite, bornite, chalcopyrite) fibrous veins in the porphyry as well as bornite–chalcopyrite–rich MCs, making it an ideal laboratory to investigate the magmatic–hydrothermal transition in ore systems. We present a comprehensive data set of petrographic, geochemical, and geochronologic analyses to investigate the magmatic to hydrothermal transition. Porphyry copper deposits, discovered in the East Junggar area, are situated within the eastern segment of the Paleozoic Yemaquan arc of the East Junggar terrane between the Kelameili and Armantai ophiolites in the Central Asian Orogenic Belt (CAOB) ( The East Junggar terrane consists of, from the bottom to top, the Middle‐Upper Ordovician Huangcaopo Group (mostly mafic to intermediate volcanic tuff; mudstone), the Lower Devonian Tuoranggekuduke Group (mostly marine pyroclastic and sedimentary rocks), the Middle Devonian Beitashan Formation (mafic‐intermediate volcanic, pyroclastic, and carbonate rocks), the Lower Carboniferous Heishantou Formation (intermediate volcanic tuff with minor interbedded limestone and basalt) and coal‐bearing sedimentary rocks Permian ( Mineralizing processes in the Qiongheba belt in East Junggar terrane have been inferred to be mainly related to the emplacement of Late Silurian to Early Devonian porphyritic intrusions and also includes some granite plutons and albite porphyry dikes and is cut by granodiorite porphyries and dioritic porphyrite dikes ( Several porphyry Cu deposits have recently been discovered in the Naomaohu (Hami) area, East Junggar, China, including Qiongheba, Hersai, Tonghualin, Mengxi, Livshigou, and Sangnan ( Drilling results ( The Qiongheba PCD consists of disseminated and vein mineralization similar to the Hersai and Mengxi PCDs ( Internal textures and structures of the miarolitic cavities and fibrous veins were analyzed by optical color cathodoluminescence (CCL) microscopy with an electron microprobe at the Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IGGCAS). The optical-CL microscope consists of an LV100 POL with a DS-Ri1 camera (Nikon, Japan) and a Reliotron III stage (Relion, USA). The Reliotron III stage has a cold-cathode electron gun that bombards the surface of well-polished thin sections with an electron beam in a moderately-high vacuum. Beam voltage and beam current during analysis were 4–8 kV and 0.3–0.5 mA, respectively. Samples from the Qiongheba PCD, including granitic porphyry, oligoclase granitic porphyry, K-feldspar granitic porphyry, quartz granitic porphyry, and K-feldspar granite were selected for whole rock analysis. Samples were crushed in a tungsten carbide swing mill, sieved, ultrasonically cleaned several times in deionized water and then ground in an agate mortar. Rock powders (~1.2 g) were then dissolved with Li Sixty-seven zircon grains used in SIMS U–Pb dating were hand-picked under a binocular microscope from more than 1000 zircon grains, which were separated by conventional heavy liquid and magnetic techniques and mounted in epoxy resin. Zircon SIMS U–Pb dating was conducted using a Cameca IMS 1280 large-radius SIMS with a 30-μm spot at the IGGCAS. Detailed descriptions of the instrumentation, analytical methods, and calibration procedures have been provided by Molybdenite samples were loaded in a Carius tube. A mixed Whole rock samples used for isotopic analysis were dissolved in Teflon bombs after being spiked with Trace element analyses of quartz were performed by Laser Ablation – Inductively Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) using a NexION 2000 (PerkinElmer, Canada/USA) fast-scanning quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to a COMPex 102F (Coherent, Germany) ArF (193 nm) excimer laser ablation system at ETH (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology) Zurich. Eighty analyses were completed on six thick sections according to lithology and zonation of the grains based on SEM-CL images. An in-house ablation cell designed to fit one thin/thick section was used, fluxed with carrier gas consisting of high-purity He (5.0 grade; 1 L. min Quartz oxygen isotope analysis was carried out at the Institute für Geowissenschaften Universität Heidelberg using SIMS. SIMS analysis of Phenocrysts of quartz and K-feldspar in the K-feldspar granitic porphyry are respectively purple (quartz) and pink (K-feldspar) under CCL microscopy ( Vein mineralization of the Qiongheba PCD is mainly represented by fibrous sulfide and magnetite veins (as defined by Miarolitic cavities have been recognised in the Qiongheba PCD containing bornite–zoisite-quartz and chalcopyrite–bornite–quartz. Zoisite–bornite–quartz miarolitic cavities ( All the samples from this study have broadly similar major and trace element contents with enriched light rare earth elements (LREE), Ba, K, Pb, and Sr, and depleted Th, Nb, P, and Ti ( Zircons from the granite sample ZK1104-2 contain 4–28 ppm Pb, 42–349 ppm U, and 13–216 ppm Th, and yielded a concordia age of 414.2 ± 1.5 Ma (MSWD = 0.0024; In five different molybdenite samples, the concentrations of Aluminum concentrations in quartz from the granitic porphyry range from 88.7 to 176 ppm, with a median of 141 ppm, whereas Li has a range of 4.09–10.1 ppm (median = 6.62 ppm). Titanium in quartz from the granitic porphyry has concentrations of 39.3–64.5 ppm, and K content fluctuates between 5.49 and 135 ppm (Table A1). Phosphorous, Sr, and Zn concentrations are mostly above their respective detection limits, whereas Fe and Cu are rarely above detection. The average Fe and Mo concentrations are 65.4 ppm (n = 7) and 2.63 ppm (n = 10), respectively (Table A1). The oxygen isotopic compositions of MQ from granitic porphyry fall into a narrow range of 9.15–10.1‰ ( Lithium concentrations in quartz rims of zoned quartz in the MCs and fibrous quartz veins are from 7.35 to 18 ppm (Table A1). Aluminum ranges from 77.5 to 211 ppm, whereas Ti mostly ranges from 20.3 to 45.6 ppm with a median of 34.0 ppm. Potassium and P contents fluctuate between 4.38 and 33.5 ppm and 53.4 to 229 ppm, respectively. 10–30% of Sr and Zn analyses are below the detection limits, whereas 70–90% of Fe and Cu analyses are below detection (Table A1). The average Fe and Mo concentrations are 19.6 ppm (n = 7) and 4.58 ppm (n = 23), respectively (Table A1). The oxygen isotopic compositions of quartz rims in the MCs and fibrous quartz veins are relatively homogeneous from + 8.93 to + 10.6‰ (Table A1). Quartz cores of zoned quartz in the MCs and fibrous quartz veins have Li from 14.0 to 30.3 ppm, Al from 106 to 207 ppm, Ti from 42.4 to 56.0 ppm, K from 7.16 to 38.6 ppm, and P from 53.7 to 252 ppm, respectively (Table A1). The oxygen isotopic compositions of quartz cores in the MCs and fibrous quartz veins are relatively homogeneous from + 9.16 to + 10.4‰ ( The LA-ICP-MS analysis could not be undertaken on quartz in the late hydrothermal veins because the quartz was too small. However, we obtained the oxygen isotopic compositions of quartz using SIMS. The oxygen isotopic compositions of hydrothermal quartz vary between −4.60‰ and −1.25‰ (  Magnetite occurs in the groundmass of the K-feldspar granite porphyry and fibrous quartz veins ( The U–Pb zircon ages (414–412 Ma; The quartz chemistry has been converted to atoms per formula units (apfu; Table A1). If Si Calibration of Ti-in-quartz thermometry requires knowledge of the activity of rutile ( The calculated equilibrium fluid compositions of δ Quartz and K-feldspar in the phenocrysts of the granite porphyry likely crystallized from silicate melts ( The sulfur concentration in silicate melts at sulfide saturation (SCSS) has been experimentally investigated by where We calculated The calculated The origin of MCs has been attributed to the exsolution of an aqueous solution from granitic melts, in which the aqueous solution forms an interconnected network of bubbles ( The fibrous quartz veins also have purple CL colored quartz and pink colored K-feldspar, similar to the quartz- K-feldspar phenocrysts of the granitic porphyry. The quartz in fibrous veins also has similar Ti-in-quartz temperatures and in-situ SIMS O-isotopic results to the quartz phenocrysts of the granitic porphyry. This suggests that the fibrous quartz also formed at magmatic temperature. The interdigitation of quartz, magnetite, and bornite ( The Qiongheba porphyry Cu deposit is characterized by two-domain textures presented by disseminated intergranular miarolitic cavities and fibrous veins, and by geochemical features of island arc and adakitic intrusions. Occurrences of sulfide-rich miarolitic cavities and fibrous veins indicate that some Cu sulfide minerals formed during the magmatic–hydrothermal transition and likely represent the initial ore-forming fluids of porphyry Cu deposits. The results of Ti-in-quartz thermometry and O–isotopic compositions of quartz in miarolitic cavities and fibrous vein indicate that initial ore-forming fluids of porphyry deposits were derived from temporally and genetically related magma at high temperatures but the incursion of meteoric water contributed to sulfide precipitation during the hydrothermal stage. Calculated sulfur concentrations in silicate melts at sulfide saturation show that two-thirds of the sulfur was exsolved when the quartz granitic porphyry formed from the granitic porphyry through fractional crystallization, and the sulfur contributed to the initial sulfide-bearing mineralizing fluids in the Qiongheba PCD during the magmatic-hydrothermal transition. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was jointly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Number 41802093 and Grant Number 41390442), the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant Number 2017YFC0601201 and Grant Number 2018YFC0604002), the priority strategic program of Chinese Aca-demy of Sciences (No. XDB41000000), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018 M630201), as well as the 2018 Sino-German (CSC-DAAD) Postdoc Scholarship Program to Tao, Hong, the UCAS Joint PhD Training Program of China [UCAS (2015)37] and Foundation of Key Laboratory of Mineral Resources, Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (KLMR2017-10). We are indebted to Prof. Qiu-Li Li and Xiao-Xiao Ling for assistance during Cameca IMS-1280 ion microprobe analyses. We thank Prof. Wolfgang Siebel, Prof. David Dolejš, Prof. Kezhang Qin, Prof. Lianchang Zhang, Prof. Ping Shen, and Dr. Mingjian Cao, Guangming Li, Malte Junge, and Kateřina Schlöglová for valuable discussions. We also thank the anonymous reviewers’ for their comments. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 