Maceral and microlithotype partitioning among several coals processed through a column flotation system installed at Powell Mountain Coal Mayflower Plant in Virginia was examined. Column flotation produces a product enriched in vitrinite and the vitrinite-rich varieties of individual microlithotypes were compared to the feed coal. Similar trends were observed for several Eastern Kentucky froth flotation installations. Rank variation among the coals, while subtle, was sufficient to preclude holding rank as a constant in comparisons between the coals.Column flotation for the purpose of fine coal beneficiation was refined at the University of Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research (CAER) in the late 1980s. The details of the “Ken-Flote” process are reported elsewhere The process went from laboratory bench scale to field testing to installation of commercial-scale units within a few years. The commercial unit, consisting of four 8-ft (2.44-m) diameter by 20-ft (6.10-m) high columns was installed at Powell Mountain Coal Mayflower Preparation Plant, St. Charles, Lee County, VA, in December 1989. Prior to installation of the column flotation unit, Powell Mountain was rejecting all coal finer than 100 mesh (150 μm), effectively wasting the potential saleable coal in the fine stream. The commercial column flotation cells are fed the minus 100 mesh stream from 10-in. (25.4-cm) diameter classifying cyclones at 13 t/h coal and 2.5% solids. A frother (Sherex frother 173©) and collector (fuel oil) are added prior to the column flotation units. The clean coal is dewatered in a screen bowl centrifuge and then sent to the clean coal stockpile. The mines feeding the Powell Mountain plant typically have portals in Virginia with much of the coal production actually being from Harlan County, Kentucky. Interstate production between Kentucky and Virginia is counted in the state containing the portal. Powell Mountain produces two products: a compliance coal blend produced 3 days/week from a variety of low-sulfur coals and a high-sulfur product produced 2 days/week from the Upper Mason coal bed (correlative with the Path Fork coal bed in Kentucky). The high-sulfur product is gasified to produce a feedstock for the production of acetic anhydride at Eastman Chemical's Kingsport, TN, plant. The objective of this study was to examine the petrographic response of individual coals to the commercial system. The high-sulfur Upper Mason coal and the low-sulfur Lower Mason, Darby, Wallins Creek, and Pardee coals were sampled individually (the relative stratigraphic position of the coals is shown in Arnold and Aplan Powell Mountain Coal Mayflower Preparation Plant was sampled on two occasions in 1992 by CAER personnel and once by Powell Mountain personnel in 1993. Coal samples were collected at five points throughout the plant. The run-of-mine plant feed coal was collected as a stopped-belt sample. The column feed was collected from the classifying cyclone, the column clean coal was collected from the froth at the top of the column The petrographic evaluation of the test procedure relies on the combined analysis of macerals and microlithotypes. Petrographic examination was made using a Leitz microscope with a final magnification of 500×. The microscopic analysis consists of the simultaneous recording of the maceral or mineral under the cross-hair in the field of view and the microlithotype, the maceral association, surrounding the maceral (nomenclature in The feed coals are all from mines within a short distance of the Mayflower Preparation Plant and, as such, we should expect the coal rank to fall within a narrow range. While coal rank for any single coal in the Lee County, VA, and Harlan County, KY, area would be expected to be relatively constant over the area considered here (about one 7 The maceral and microlithotype composition of the plant feed and clean coals and the column flotation feed, concentrate, and tailings are shown in The first observation regarding column flotation as employed for the individual feed coals is the success in producing a relatively low-ash clean concentrate. The comparison of the Pardee column clean concentrate and the tailings provides an excellent example of the system working at the optimum efficiency in the removal of clay [Sil (silicates) column in The sulfur content of the Upper Mason column clean concentrate is higher than the Upper Mason feed and tails sulfur content. This is a reflection of the relative efficiency of flotation processes in removing silicates from coal compared to pyrite partitioning. The sulfur content of the column clean coal is 1% lower than the whole-plant clean coal sulfur content. The column flotation product is a constituent of the whole-plant clean product. It should be emphasized that the objective of the Upper Mason processing is not to produce a low-sulfur product. In general, the column tails had a lower vitrite and a higher trimacerite content than the corresponding column clean concentrate. Sun Among the five coals, only the Darby plant clean product would be considered to be a high-vitrinite coal and, in fact, the column feed in that case has a considerably different petrographic composition than the plant clean coal product The maceral composition of the microlithotypes can be plotted on a triangular diagram. We previously employed this technique in the analysis of coals processed via oil agglomeration Several eastern Kentucky preparation plants were sampled by the CAER in the mid-1980s. Aspects of maceral partitioning at these plants were discussed by Hower and Wild The maceral and microlithotype composition of the flotation feed and products and vitrinite maximum reflectance for the three plants is reported in The three coals show varying degrees of vitrinite and vitrite enrichment in the clean concentrate relative to the tails. In general, fusinite and semifusinite are enriched in the tails relative to the concentrate. The latter trends are better established in the froth flotation products than in the column flotation products examined. Column flotation did consistently produce a lower ash clean concentrate than did the froth flotation operations examined. Column flotation is employed at a Virginia coal preparation plant to process a fine coal (less than 100 mesh) stream previously sent to the refuse. The processing of five coal seams was examined and compared to the froth flotation processing of three Eastern Kentucky coals. The feed to the column flotation system is higher in the macerals vitrinite, fusinite, and semifusinite and the microlithotypes vitrite and inertite compared to the raw coal entering the plant. The latter monomaceral microlithotypes are more brittle than the bimaceral and trimaceral microlithotypes, particularly the liptinite-rich trimacerites. Brittle materials are more likely to report to the fine fractions produced by continuous mining and abrasion in preparation processes upstream of the column flotation. There is a tendency towards enrichment of vitrinite and, in particular, vitrinite-rich microlithotypes in the column clean concentrate. Froth flotation of the three Eastern Kentucky coals used for comparison produced a better differentiation of vitrinite and inertinite macerals than was observed in the coals processed via column flotation. Column flotation did produce a lower-ash product than did froth flotation. Direct comparison of the two methods is hindered since we are only comparing coals of similar rank and maceral/microlithotype composition, not the same coals.