Nanosizing is one of the most important drug delivery platform approaches for the commercial development of poorly soluble drug molecules. The research efforts of many industrial and academic groups have resulted in various particle size reduction techniques. From an industrial point of view, the two most advanced top-down processes used at the commercial scale are wet ball milling and high pressure homogenization. Initial issues such as abrasion, long milling times and other downstream-processing challenges have been solved. With the better understanding of the biopharmaceutical aspects of poorly water-soluble drugs, the in vivo success rate for drug nanocrystals has become more apparent. The clinical effectiveness of nanocrystals is proven by the fact that there are currently six FDA approved nanocrystal products on the market. Alternative approaches such as bottom-up processes or combination technologies have also gained considerable interest. Due to the versatility of nanosizing technology at the milligram scale up to production scale, nanosuspensions are currently used at all stages of commercial drug development, Today, all major pharmaceutical companies have realized the potential of drug nanocrystals and included this universal formulation approach into their decision trees.Drug nanocrystals are without any doubt one of the most discussed drug delivery technology of the past twenty years. In contrast to other nanoparticulate systems, drug nanocrystals consist mainly of pure API. They are often prepared in aqueous media which contain stabilizers for the colloidal state; therefore these systems can also be referred to as nanosuspensions. Often drug nanocrystals are referred to as drug nanoparticles. This leads to confusion with polymeric nanoparticles, which have normally a significantly lower drug load since they consist mainly of a polymer material loaded with API. The pioneering works of many academic as well as industrial researchers have laid the foundation for broad utilization and acceptance of this approach within the field of pharmaceutical sciences. Before the first top-down processes were developed (i.e. techniques reducing the size of larger crystals by means of attrition forces) nanosized drug particles had to be produced by using rather simple precipitation techniques, also referred to as bottom-up approaches. However, it is often very difficult to control the particle growth using this technique. Therefore it was suggested to perform the precipitation step in conjunction with immediate lyophilization or spray-drying in order to reduce the risk of crystal growth ( Around the 1990s Gary Liversidge and his colleagues from Sterling Drug Inc./Eastman Kodak have applied a wet media-based milling technique (wet ball milling, WBM), adapted from the paint and photographic industry, to reduce the particle size of poorly water-soluble drugs ( In 1994 Müller and his colleagues have developed an alternative technology based on piston gap high pressure homogenization (HPH) to produce nanosuspensions ( In 1999 the Nanopure By reducing the particle size to the nanometer range, the bioavailability of many poorly soluble compounds could be improved significantly, which eventually led to a broader acceptance of the WBM and HPH techniques as enabling technology. Today, the two techniques are by far the most industrial relevant technologies to produce drug nanocrystals. Six different commercial pharmaceutical products based on nanosizing approaches have already been approved ( Following the success of these two technologies, this has triggered the development of completely new or slightly different technologies. During the first ten years after the invention of the NanoCrystal Alternative technologies have mainly been developed based on bottom-up approaches, mainly because of more freedom to generate new intellectual property (IP) ( In recent years many drug delivery companies have started to develop production methods for drug nanocrystals based on supercritical fluid technologies ( Although the results obtained with these alternative approaches are very promising, they are currently not as widely used in the pharmaceutical industry to produce drug nanocrystals. Most of these approaches require custom-made production equipment and special processing expertise, which limits their applicability mainly to dedicated research groups. It is important to mention in this context that the development of drug nanocrystals requires suitable analytical techniques such as microscopic techniques or particle size analysis. These technologies have also evolved over time. Nowadays, the equipment is much more user-friendly than some years ago. Particle characterization can be easily performed on routine basis and the results are available within minutes ( This review will focus mainly on drug nanocrystals produced by applying the industrial relevant and well-established top-down technologies wet ball milling as well as high pressure homogenization. Obviously like many other newly developed technologies the top-down approaches had initially also some drawbacks. The discussion will focus on how the top-down particle size reduction technologies have evolved over the years to mature as established techniques which are now widely accepted and frequently applied by the pharmaceutical industry. In addition, this review will discuss how drug nanocrystals in general can be successfully used as enabling technology for poorly water-soluble drugs. Wet ball milling (also referred to as pearl milling or bead milling) is by far the most frequently used production method for drug nanocrystals in the pharmaceutical industry. The milling procedure itself is rather simple; therefore this process can be basically performed in almost every lab. The easiest way of doing WBM is through low energy ball milling (LE-WBM) using a jar filled with milling media (often just very simple glass beads). This system is charged with coarse drug substance, preferably in micronized form, which is suspended in dispersion medium containing at least one stabilizing agent. By moving the beads either with an electric stirrer ( Alternative milling procedures based on high energy processes had to be developed in order to make this process more desirable for industrial pharmaceutical applications. The NanoCrystal™ process in its current form is based on such a high energy wet ball milling process (HE-WBM) ( It is obvious that high energy mills require special milling media which has to be properly selected based on the material of the inner surfaces of the mill, the agitator types and other factors. Using just glass beads or zirconium oxide milling beads can lead to significant contamination of the nanosuspension caused by the abrasion either of the milling beads or parts of the milling chamber ( In the early nineties, there was no equipment available to produce nanosuspensions at very small scale. Hence, it was difficult to use this formulation approach for discovery purposes. Initially several grams of API were needed to produce prototype formulations ( With the commercial availability of suitable equipment for small scale production up to the commercial scale production, wet ball milling can be regarded as scalable approach. This aspect has definitely helped for broader acceptance of this rather complex technology ( The versatility of wet ball milling is certainly another, if not the most important aspect for the success of this technology. Almost any API can be processed with wet media milling ( HPH can be regarded as the second most important technique to produce drug nanocrystals. The broad acceptance of this approach is supported by many examples from the literature (e.g. references of The application of HPH as particle size reduction method requires the availability of special equipment; it cannot be tested with a system as simple as “beads in a beaker”. Interestingly, high pressure homogenizers were already widely available in the pharmaceutical industry as well as in the food industry at the time the first nanosuspensions based on HPH have been developed. The use of homogenizers was already described for the production of liposomes and emulsion systems ( The steps involved in producing nanosuspensions by means of HPH are similar and as simple as for WBM. Normally, a pre-mix of the coarse drug and the dispersion medium is prepared using high speed stirrers. The dispersion medium contains normally similar surfactant and/or stabilizer systems used for the WBM approach ( The particle size reduction itself is caused by cavitation forces, shear forces and collision. In general, several homogenization cycles are needed to reach the minimal particle size. The number of passes (i.e. homogenization cycles) depends on many factors. Thereby, the employed drug delivery technology defines the type of homogenizer as well as the process conditions (e.g. IDD-P™ technology, Dissocubes HPH is less prone in generating process impurities as consequence of abrasion and wearing of the equipment compared to WBM. Although high pressure homogenizers consist mainly of steel parts, the impurity levels found in nanosuspensions prepared via HPH processes are considerably low. A comparative study revealed that a typical nanosuspension after 20 cycles at 1500 HPH is a scalable process, which is applied not only in the pharmaceutical but also in the cosmetics and food industry ( Some references report an enzyme inactivation and a reduced microorganism load as a result of HPH processes ( There are numerous examples in the literature where HPH was applied successfully to produce nanosuspensions. As opposed to WBM, it seems that the particle size reduction effectiveness of the standard processes depends more on the physico-chemical properties of the processed drug. Although the standard technologies WBM and HPH are in the meantime widely accepted and applied, there were still some disadvantages which have been addressed by continuous improvement of these processes. For both, WBM as well as HPH it is suggested to start with micronized starting material. Clogging of the equipment can occur when the process is conducted with too coarse drug particles. In case of agitated ball mills in re-circulation mode this clogging can occur at the media separator; for high pressure homogenizers clogging can occur within the feeding system of the homogenizer or at the narrow homogenization gap as well as the interaction chamber. Relatively long process times are another disadvantage of the standard approaches. This stands in contrast to the above-mentioned 30–120 In order to address the above-mentioned disadvantages, alternative processes have been developed. Significant reduction of process times can be achieved when the drug is pre-treated before the top-down process step is performed. These relatively recently developed techniques are referred to as combinative particle size reduction methods. The company Baxter developed the first combinative method, the so called Nanoedge™ technology. It consists of a bottom-up step (micro-precipitation) followed by a top-down step (high-pressure homogenization). The drug is dissolved, e.g. in a water-miscible, non-aqueous media and precipitated in form of a suspension consisting of brittle drug particles. This suspension is then further processed to a nanosuspension by means of HPH ( Obviously, no micronized starting material is needed to perform the two above-mentioned technologies. However, a remaining disadvantage is the presence of the non-aqueous solvent in the final nanosuspension. The non-aqueous solvent can act as a co-solvent which increases the solubility of the drug to an extent which could potentially compromise its physical and chemical stability. In most cases, the non-aqueous solvent has to be removed in order to reduce the risk of Ostwald ripening. To avoid this problem, alternative combinative methods have been developed by Möschwitzer and colleagues, which are referred to as H 42 and H 96 technologies (  It should be mentioned in this context that any pre-treatment step increases the complexity of the overall process and can add significant costs. Therefore it is obvious that combinative particle size reduction methods will be only used, in case the more established methods, like wet ball milling or standard high pressure homogenization cannot be used to come to the desired results. One example is the production of nanosuspensions from amorphous APIs with particle sizes smaller than 100 The selection of the right formulation approach is one of the key activities of formulators in the pharmaceutical industry. Key factors are the physico-chemical properties of APIs, such as aqueous solubility, melting point and temperature and chemical stability. In addition, the formulator needs information about the potency of the compound and the desired route of administration, as this determines the type of the final dosage form as well as the required drug load. All these factors can be considered in decision trees, which are often used in the industry to guide the formulator. However, there are some biopharmaceutical relevant aspects which need more attention, in order to avoid false negative results. Like any other formulation technology, drug nanocrystals as enabling technology can only be successful when all of these factors are taken into account. It would not be sufficient to assume that the oral bioavailability of any poorly soluble drug can be increased just by formulating it as drug nanocrystal. The well-known BCS system (Biopharmaceutics Classification System) is used very frequently to categorize compounds ( Therefore it was recommended to classify compounds into slightly different categories, as they can show dissolution rate limited, solubility or permeability limited oral bioavailability. The result is known as the “Developability Classification System”, which is another way to categorize compounds in a more biorelevant manner ( In order to select the right formulation approach and to address the compound specific issues with a suitable formulation type it is imperative to first understand the bioavailability limiting factors. It is important to note that there is no one-fits-all formulation approach. Each technology has its own advantages and disadvantages. The main approaches to address poor water-solubility are summarized in The better the formulator understands the interplay of the physico-chemical properties of the drug, the special aspects of the various formulation options and the required in vivo performance, the higher the chance that the optimal formulation approach will be chosen. This minimizes the risk of late failures in human clinical trials, e.g. due to insufficient or highly variable drug exposures. Compounds showing dissolution rate limited bioavailability can be referred to as DCS class IIa compounds. Obviously, they represent only one part of the BCS class 2 compounds. The extent of the oral bioavailability of such compounds is directly correlated with their dissolution rate in vivo. The fraction of the dose that dissolves in the lumen is readily absorbed through the intestinal membrane. Consequently, the bioavailability of such compounds can be improved by any technique which increases primarily the dissolution rate. Various formulation approaches are known which lead to an increased dissolution rate, including salt formation, the use of co-crystals or particle size reduction. The formulator has to select the optimal formulation approach according to the properties of the specific drug molecule. Salt formation is often preferred by pharmaceutical chemists, as crystallization of salts can be used to produce very pure material. However, it can only be applied when the compound is ionizable. Salt formation can be regarded as conventional way to increase the dissolution rate of APIs ( APIs can also be crystallized together with guest molecules, in order to create fast-dissolving co-crystals. Although this approach seems to be very promising it is not frequently used as standard formulation approach for poorly soluble compounds ( Particle size reduction is by far the most important approach to address dissolution rate limited bioavailability. According to the well-known Noyes–Whitney equation (Eq. Two particle size reduction approaches can be distinguished, namely micronization and nanosizing, often also referred to as nanonization. Micronization can be regarded as standard technique, which is used on a routine basis to produce standardized API starting material having a certain particle size distribution. This unit operation is often carried out under the responsibility of the chemical department, which delivers API with a standardized size distribution. Micronization techniques include hammer milling, pin milling or air jet milling. Depending on the technique employed, the mean particle size generally ranges between 1 and 50 Nanosizing is particle size reduction to another dimension. The term nanosizing subsumes the various formulation techniques which generate drug nanocrystals with a mean particle size between 1 and 1000 For compounds belonging to DCS class IIb and IV the intrinsic solubility and the related achievable intraluminal drug concentration are too low in order to achieve sufficient flux over the epithelial membrane. These compounds possess solubility limited oral bioavailability. In order to achieve sufficient exposure levels they have to be formulated with techniques that increase substantially the apparent solubility of the drug in the lumen. Basically, this can be achieved by solubilization, complexation or solid state manipulation. When formulations based on these principles are ingested orally, drug concentration levels above the thermodynamic equilibrium are reached in the gastrointestinal lumen. This leads to an increased concentration gradient and a higher flux across the membrane ( Solubilization using lipid based systems or co-solvent systems is a simple and elegant way to formulate poorly water-soluble compounds ( Alternatively, cyclodextrines, a class of functional excipients, can be used as solubilizers to increase the bioavailability of poorly water-soluble drug molecules ( Another way to address solubility limited bioavailability is the manipulation of the drug's solid state. In general, these techniques result in formulations which carry the drug molecules in a higher energy state, e.g. in form of amorphous solid dispersions (ASDs) ( For the sake of completeness it should be mentioned here that recently a novel technology called NanOsmotic The previous section discussed the application for drug nanocrystals as compared to other formulation approaches. As a consequence of the very fast dissolution rate and other specific factors drug nanocrystals possess some unique features with regard to biopharmaceutical performance which will be discussed in more detail in the following section. When particle size reduction is used to formulate dissolution rate limited compounds (DCS class IIa), the extend of the oral bioavailability can be described as a function of the particles size. A smaller particle size leads to higher Compounds with a pronounced absorption window in the upper intestinal tract do also benefit from fast dissolving formulations. The accelerated dissolution of drug nanocrystals leads to sufficiently high drug concentrations at the absorption site. The drug aprepitant, which is marketed as Emend Furthermore, an increased dissolution rate of poorly water-soluble drugs can lead to faster onset of action. This can be beneficial for compounds, where the pharmacodynamic effect is directly linked with the achievable plasma concentration, e.g. pain treatments like naproxen ( As briefly mentioned above, the use of nano-formulations can lead to reduced variation between the drug absorption in fasted and fed state. This is another important reason for choosing drug nanocrystals as formulation approach. Many studies have reported reduced food effects when poorly water-soluble drugs were administered as drug nanocrystal formulation. Poorly water-soluble compounds administered as standard formulation based on micronized API show often an enhanced absorption when administered together with food. One potential explanation is that bile salts and food components can have a positive effect on the solubility and consequently on the dissolution rate of micronized drugs. In addition, the dissolution is also prolonged by a reduced gastric emptying rate; this can further enhance the oral absorption. In contrast, nano-formulations show maximum dissolution already in fasted state. Therefore the extent of absorption cannot be further increased for those compounds when administered together with food ( Special attention is needed when ionizable compounds are formulated as drug nanocrystals. The particle size reduction itself is a rather versatile approach which works for all compounds irrespectively of their chemical nature. When neutral or acidic compounds are administered orally in nanosized form the pH shift from acidic to alkaline conditions works in favor for an increased extend of dissolution in the intestine. An opposite situation exists for basic compounds. When they are formulated as nanosized product, sometimes a decreased bioavailability is found in in vivo studies. The pH shift from acidic to neutral or alkaline conditions can cause a decrease in solubility of these compounds, which can result in uncontrolled precipitation of already dissolved material ( Nanosizing is a versatile formulation approach which can be potentially used for all routes of administration ( Injectable formulations are the most important non-oral application area for drug nanocrystals. The various aspects of nanosuspensions for parenteral administration have already been discussed extensively. For detailed information, the reader is referred to these references ( Nanosuspensions show some advantages over other formulation types which contain the drug in solubilized form. Solutions of poorly water-soluble compounds bear always the risk of precipitation upon administration. This can be avoided when stable nanosuspensions are administered. Furthermore, the injection of large amounts of solubilizers can be associated with side effects, such as pain on the injection site. Therefore, stable nanosuspensions, produced with a minimum amount of safe and well-tolerated stabilizers, can be advantageous. Moreover, in contrast to other injectable formulations, nanosuspensions are highly concentrated systems, with a relatively low viscosity. Since the viscosity of nanosuspensions mainly depends on drug concentration and vehicle composition, it can be to some extent adjusted. Sterility is an important requirement of injectable products. It could be shown, that sterile nanosuspensions can be obtained either by aseptic production ( The same holds for the various presentations of drug nanocrystals. The final drug product can be provided either as ready-to-use suspension or as lyophilized powder. In 2009 a first parenteral product was successfully launched on the market. Paliperidone palmitate is marketed as ready-to-use pre-filled syringe containing a nanosuspension prepared by the NanoCrystal The correct use of nanosuspensions for injectable dosage forms requires some considerations. Depending on the particle size and the aqueous solubility of the drug, nanosuspensions can perform comparable to solutions types ( The value to use drug nanocrystals as enabling technology to improve the performance of poorly water-soluble new chemical entities has been recognized by many companies. They have added this approach to their formulation toolbox and have included it to their formulation decision trees ( Over the years many companies have recognized the need for adopting their development strategies in order to address the increased complexity of their pipeline candidates. Some have even shifted their development efforts to the very early stages, an approach which is often referred to as frontloading. This approach is used to increase the success rate of the drug discovery by enabling a robust and reliable testing of poorly water-soluble compounds very early on ( Their scalability is one important factor why drug nanocrystals are included in the formulation decision trees of so many companies. As mentioned earlier, drug nanocrystals can be used at all development stages, since nanometer-sized drug particles can be produced from extremely small scale up to commercial production. The first formulations for animal studies are needed when various lead compounds are tested in early pharmacokinetic studies (PK) as well as in efficacy studies using pharmacological animal models (PD). Such tests are normally performed at relatively low dose levels. However, already at this stage nano-formulations can offer some advantages: (1) due to the versatility of the nano-approach almost any substance can be formulated in this way provided it is poorly soluble enough so that a nanosuspension can be made. The only strict prerequisite, like for any other top-down method, is that the drug has to be poorly soluble in the dispersion medium (e.g. an aqueous medium). The solubility limit differs depending on the employed nanosizing technique between 10 In contrast to the simple PK formulations, the requirements for pharmacological models are more complex. Depending on the indication and the pharmacological model the selection of a universal formulation can be sometimes very challenging, especially when some frequently used systems are excluded because of their interference with the model read-out ( When the efficacy of the new chemical entities (NCEs) is sufficiently high, one needs to demonstrate and establish the sufficient safety margin for the selected lead compounds. Nanosuspensions are ideal formulations for toxicological studies as they can be relatively easily formulated with safe vehicle compositions that are already established as standard excipients for toxicological testing. In many cases standard cellulose/poloxamer nanosuspensions can be produced which differ only in their distinctly smaller particle size from NCEs formulated into standard suspensions for toxicological studies ( The use of nanosuspensions for toxicological studies has been intensively discussed in the literature ( The next stage of development begins when a series of NCEs has been successfully tested in pre-clinical programs and at least one compound could be qualified as clinical candidate. Many companies have implemented formulation ranking or special PK screening studies with the aim to identify the most appropriate formulation approach for the first-in-human (FIH) studies. Several factors do play a role in the selection of the optimal formulation approach for human clinical trials. In most of the cases the desired drug product will be an oral solid dosage form. Nanosuspensions can be transferred into solid dosage form by applying various conventional drying techniques. Spray drying is a straight-forward method for drying of nanosuspensions ( Fluidized bed granulation is an alternative method to produce a dry intermediate. Due to the available equipment it requires somewhat larger quantities of nanosuspension and is therefore used at a later stage. During fluidized bed granulation the nanosuspension is normally layered onto a core material, e.g. lactose or microcrystalline cellulose ( Energetically nanosuspensions can be regarded as high energy systems, because surface area is significantly increased when the particle size is reduced. Consequently, nanosuspensions tend to reduce their free energy by either aggregation or crystal growth. For a long time this led to the perception that nanosuspensions as such would have a limited shelf life and would not be suitable as ready-to-use formulations. The physical stability of a nanosuspension depends on many aspects, e.g. the selection of the right stabilizer principle, the solubility of the API in the liquid phase of the suspension and last but not least also on the employed nanosizing method. But with all parameters selected carefully, nanosuspensions can be physically as well as chemically very stable systems. For both top-down methods, examples have been reported, where the particle sizes of physically stable nanosuspensions remained unchanged for years ( In view of the flexibility of this approach it is to some extent surprising why not more formulations based on drug nanocrystals have reached the market yet. Many pharmaceutical companies do not have sufficient in-house capabilities both in terms of equipment and know-how to develop drug nanocrystals for clinical studies. Even if all necessary prerequisites would be fulfilled, companies may not have all IP rights to use the different approaches for late-stage development programs ( Over the past twenty years nanosizing has become a well-established and proven formulation approach for poorly soluble drugs. Extensive research has generated many different techniques to produce drug nanocrystals. Up to now the standard top-down techniques WBM and HPH could sustain a leading position in this area, mainly because these techniques have also evolved with the time. Many open questions and technological disadvantages from their infancy have been addressed and could be solved as a result of continuous and dedicated efforts of many researchers in this area. The great versatility of the nanosizing approach is certainly a main driver for the success. It can be used for almost every compound and for almost every route of administration. Although only a few products have reached the market so far, nanosizing is definitely well established and widely applied in the pharmaceutical industry. Drug nanocrystals can be used for all stages of industrial pharmaceutical development, from the very early studies up to commercial manufacturing. In addition to the technological improvement also the understanding of the biopharmaceutical aspects has advanced. Nowadays, it is clear that drug nanocrystals used for oral administration can only lead to better bioavailability when the compounds show dissolution rate limited bioavailability. However, this approach can add tremendous dosing flexibility for other administration routes, especially when highly concentrated formulations are needed. The researchers in this area will continue to use the original idea of making very small drug particles in order to make drugs more effective. The full potential of this approach has not been fully capitalized yet. For the future it can be speculated that more intelligent drug delivery systems based on drug nanocrystals will be developed. It will become possible to guide the nanosized drug particles with special ligands or other surface modifications to their target site in order to further increase the performance of these systems. At the end the drug delivery system can only be a tool to optimize the pharmacodynamic effect of a drug substance in order to treat patients in the most effective way.