The quality of borehole sealing has significant influence on the gas extraction. Inorganic sealing material has the advantages of low cost, multiple functions and high performance; therefore, it has been widely used in many fields. In the paper, the single factor experiment was conducted on the new inorganic sealing material, and the effect of the polymer and the expansive agent on the properties of the new inorganic seal material was studied, on the basis of which such three factors as polymer-to-cement weight ratio, dosage of dispersant, and dosage of the expansive were used as the research object of the orthogonal experiment; the flexural strength, compressive strength and expansion coefficient were used as the evaluation indicators to analyze the effect of such three factors on the properties of the inorganic material. The results of the research show that the final proportion of the new inorganic sealing material is: 1.2% dosage of dispersant, 6% polymer-to-cement weight ratio, and 0.1% dosage of expansion agent. The water cement ratio exerts great influence on the mechanical properties of the material; the higher the water cement ratio is, the lower the compressive strength and the flexural strength are. Furthermore, the water cement ratio also has significant influence on the fluidity of the slurry; the water cement ratio is determined to be 1.5:1. According to the aforesaid proportion, the sealing performance test was conducted on the new inorganic sealing material, and the comparison was made with the Portland cement material. The results of the test show that the time required for the air space to restore from the initial pressure value to the atmospheric pressure value is much greater than that needed for the cement material, so the sealing performance of the inorganic sealing material is much better than that of the Portland cement materials. It is of practical significance to develop the new inorganic seal material, which can improve the quality of sealing, increase the gas extraction rate and reduce the mine gas accidents.Gas extraction can prevent and control the occurrence of gas disaster accidents in coal mines [ According to the actual needs for gas extraction borehole sealing, ideal sealing material shall meet the following requirements: The sealing material shall be compact and have better anti-permeability and cracking resistance; In order to plug the fractures and pores around the borehole, the material shall have a certain expansion capacity; The sealing material shall have a better fluidity, so as to facilitate the pumping of the grouting and sealing; The raw materials shall be cheap and readily available. In order to develop the sealing material with better sealing performance, with the inorganic cement as the base material, the polymer shall be added to increase its bond strength and durability, enhance its anti-permeability and cracking resistance, and improve the performance of cement paste. Appropriate expansion agent shall be added to produce the volume expansion of the inorganic sealing material during the process of drilling, so as to enhance the plugging of the fracture. Other admixtures shall be added to improve the fluidity of the inorganic seal material and combine the components into an integral. According to the development target of the inorganic sealing material, the main indicators for evaluation of the material performance include mechanical properties (Including compressive strength and flexural strength), compactness (Indicated by the porosity), expansion property, and slurry fluidity. In practical applications, the sealing material will be subjected to gas pressure and borehole wall pressure. In order to prevent gas leakage and protect borehole wall from collapse, the sealing material is required to have certain compressive strength and flexural strength. Thus it is necessary to test the sealing material for compressive strength and flexural strength, and study the safe use of the sealing material in the process of borehole drilling. KZJ-T anti-fracture testing machine as shown in When testing the flexural strength of the test specimen, place one side of the specimens on the supporting column of the testing machine. The load column was located in the middle of the two supporting points and the load was applied uniformly in order to ensure that equal pressure was applied on the specimen. Record the flexural strength of the specimen upon the breakage. The ultimate flexural strength was the average value of the flexural strengths of the three specimens. The broken block from the flexural strength test was used for the compression strength test. Use the side of the specimen as the compression face, align the clamp to the center of the pressing plate of the press, apply the load uniformly until the specimen is broken, and record the compression strength of the specimen upon the breakage. Tight compactness of the sealing material is an essential condition to achieve better sealing effect. A large number of the open structures will become the flow channels for gas and water, eventually leading to failure of compactness. Therefore, good sealing material shall be able to avoid a large number of harmful pore structures. Measurement of porosity: Porosity refers to the percentage of the void volume to the total volume. Porosity has direct influence on the compactness and anti-permeability of the cement. The calculation formula of the porosity is: These include MDMDY-350 full-automatic density meter, drying oven, measuring cylinder, liquid paraffin, and electronic balance.  First, crush the cement specimen, and select the samples in the size meeting the requirement of the density meter; Dry the specimen in the drying oven, and then weigh up with the electronic balance; Measure the actual density of the specimen with the full-automatic density meter; Measure the volume of the specimen by the wax sealing method, so as to obtain the apparent density of the specimen; Calculate the porosity according to the formula. Expansion property is not only an important evaluation indicator distinguishing the new inorganic sealing material from the Portland cement material, but also the guarantee to achieve the plugging of the fractures and pores surrounding the borehole. The measuring method is shown as follows: Pour the prepared slurry material into the measuring glass in the volume of 100 ml, record the initial volume; observe the volume of the slurry at an interval, until the final volume is available upon the solidification; the ratio of final volume to the initial volume is the coefficient of volume expansion. In the test, the proportion was determined on the water cement ratio of 1.5:1, and the polymer-to-cement weight ratio of 0%, 2%, 4%, 6% and 8% respectively; the triple mold of the specimen in the dimension of 40 mm × 40 mm × 160 mm was used, being cured in the natural conditions. The performance was measured after 7 days.  The results of the test show that: (1) Due to the increase in the dosage of polymer, the flexural strength of the specimen of the new inorganic sealing material increases to a great extent; the flexural strength reaches the peak if the dosage of the polymer is 6%, and decreases slightly if the dosage of the polymer is 8%; however, the flexural strength of such new inorganic sealing material is better than that of the Portland cementer; (2) If the polymer-to-cement weight ratio is 2%, the compression strength of the new inorganic sealing material increases slightly, and then decreases gradually with the increase in the dosage of the polymer (See This is because the polymer has good gluing performance and flocculation performance. During the hardening process of the cement slurry, the polymer can be interlaced into a three-dimensional net structure, and filled into the slurry pores to produce flexible reinforcement, so as to reduce the production of the micro cracks, and improve the flexural strength. Measure the true density and apparent density of the new inorganic sealing material after the curing for 7 days, and calculate the porosity of such material. The results of the measurement are shown in The results of the test show that: (1) Due to the increase in the dosage of the polymer, both the actual density and apparent density of the specimens increase, and reach the peak if the dosage is 6%; (2) The porosity of the specimens decreases with the increase in the dosage of the polymer, and the decrease in the porosity leads to higher compactness of the specimen of the new inorganic sealing material, which is more conducive to the sealing of the borehole. This is because that during the hardening process of the slurry, the polymer is filled into the pores of the hydration products of the cement, and interpenetrated with the hydration products of the cement to form the bridging, so as to improve the physical tissue structure of cement paste, and enhance the compactness of the cement specimen. In the test, the water cement ratio is 1.5:1, the dosage of the expansion agent is 0%, 0.06%, 0.08%, 0.1%, 0.12%, 0.14% and 0.16% of the dosage of cement respectively; the triple mold of the specimen in the dimension of 40 mm × 40 mm × 160 mm was used, and cured in the natural conditions. The performance was measured after 7 days. As seen from In order to further study the comprehensive effect of the polymer, expansion agent, and dispersant on the new inorganic sealing material, the orthogonal experiment method was used to analyze the functions of the components, so as to obtain the optimal proportion of the inorganic sealing material with better sealing effect. Select three factors - polymer-to-cement weight ratio, dosage of dispersant, and dosage of expansion agent as the research objects of the orthogonal experiment, and use flexural strength, compression strength and expansion coefficient as the evaluation indicators, and analyze and study the effect of such three factors on the performance of the inorganic material. This experiment involves three factors, and three levels shall be designed for each factor; therefore, L After seven days of natural curing, remove the mold for performance test. See Make the range analysis, which is commonly used in the orthogonal experiment, on the test data; See K k R: The range, i.e. the difference between the maximum value and the minimum value of k With the magnitude of the range R, it is possible to measure the effect intensity of the relevant factor in the experiment. The factor with the large range indicating the great difference in the indicator caused at three levels is usually the main one; the factor with the small range tends to be the secondary one. Based on the average value k According to range analysis on the flexural compression ratio, we can draw the following conclusions: (1) From intuitive perspective of the test results, the maximum flexural compression ratio is achieved at the Test No.8 (A By ANOVA of the orthogonal test, the condition variation and the test variation are stripped off for comparison and analysis, so as to find out the experimental factors leading to the significant data discrepancy and the effect degree of the experimental factors on the data. See From the results of ANOVA, it can be concluded that: (1) The primary and secondary order of the factors is B (polymer-to-cement weight ratio) → C (dosage of expansion agent) → A (Dosage of dispersant), which is completely consistent with the result of the range analysis; (2) If F See According to the results of range analysis: (1) From the direct perspective of the test results, the maximum coefficient of expansion is achieved at test No.5 (A See According to the results of ANOVA, it can be concluded that: (1) The main and secondary order of the factors is C (Dosage of expansion agent) → A (Dosage of dispersant) → B (Polymer-to-cement weight ratio), which is consistent with the result of the range analysis; (2) If F Based on the analysis of the expansion performance, the optimal proportion shall be the dosage of dispersant of 1.2%, the polymer-to-cement weight ratio of 6%, and the dosage of expansion agent of 0.12%; however, the excessively large dosage of the expansion agent will lead to large sealing hole, and even cracking; based on the analysis of the mechanical properties, the optimal proportion shall be the dosage of dispersant of 1.2%, the polymer-to-cement weight ratio of 6%, and the dosage of expansion agent of 0.08%; moreover, the dosage of the expansion agent has an insignificant effect on the mechanical properties. Based on the overall consideration, the final proportion of the new inorganic sealing material can be the dosage of dispersant of 1.2%, the polymer-to-cement weight ratio of 6%, and the dosage of expansion agent of 0.1%. In addition, it is important to note that the water cement ratio has great effect on the mechanical properties of the material; the higher the water cement ratio is, the lower the compression strength and the flexural strength are; furthermore, the water cement ratio also has significant effect on the fluidity of the slurry. In consideration of no higher requirement of the gas borehole sealing for the cement strength and the groutability of the mortar, the water cement ratio is determined as 1.5:1. The test method for the new inorganic sealing material is shown as follows: Select a piece of FRP tube in the diameter of 75 mm and the length of 1.2 m; seal both ends of the pipe with the new inorganic sealing material in a sealing length of 0.4 m respectively and with an air space in the length of 0.4 m in the middle, which is connected to the vacuum meter and the valve via the rubber tube, and the terminal is connected to the vacuum pump. After the solidification of the new inorganic sealing material, start up the vacuum pump to pump the air space to a negative pressure, close the valve of the rubber tube and the vacuum pump, observe and record the pressure value of the vacuum meter at an interval of time. At the same time, seal another same FRP tube with the Portland cement by the same method, which was used as the control group. The better the sealing performance of the material is, the lower the pressure recovery rate of the air space is, and the longer the time for the air space to recover to the atmospheric pressure is. The time length for the air space to recover to the atmospheric pressure is used to judge the sealing performance of the material. The schematic diagram for sealing performance test method is shown in From the intuitive perspective of  The single factor experiment was conducted on the new inorganic sealing material. With the increase in the dosage of polymer, the flexural strength of the specimen of the new inorganic sealing material increases to a great extent; The porosity of the specimens decreases with the increase in the dosage of the polymer, and the decrease in the porosity leads to higher compactness of the specimen of the new inorganic sealing material; with the increase in the dosage of the expansion agent, the volume of the new inorganic sealing material will increase gradually at a slightly decreased rate. The orthogonal experiment was conducted on the polymer, expansion agent and dispersant. Select three factors - polymer-to-cement weight ratio, dosage of dispersant, and dosage of expansion agent, three levels are set for each factor, use the flexural strength, compression strength and expansion coefficient as the evaluation indicators, and adopt L Conduct the sealing performance test of the inorganic sealing material at the proportion selected for the orthogonal experiment and use the cement material for comparison. The results of the experiment show that the time for the air space of the inorganic sealing material to recover from the value of the initial pressure to the value of the atmospheric pressure is much more than that for the cement material, so the sealing performance of the inorganic sealing material is better than that of the Portland cement. This research is financially supported by