This paper presents the experimental results on the Hardgrove and Bond grindabilities of the Hungarian lignite and its isolated textural components. It is shown that for such heterogeneous materials as lignites, the Hardgrove grindability index can be used only as a quantitative feature. Nevertheless the Bond-work index is the genuine grindability parameter. A Smith formula for re-calculating the Bond-work index from the Hardgrove grindability is also analysed. A new self-developing algorithm for the simulation of Bond grindability is introduced: this algorithm fits the experimental data better than the ones proposed earlier and, at the same time, has shorter testing times. It was proved experimentally that selective grinding was a very effective technique for producing an advanced solid fuel or other products with low ash and high humic acid contents from lignites having a high tendency for size degradation. The paper also deals with the theoretical and experimental possibilities of the further improvement of the advanced lignite product by steam dehydration.ash content (dry basis), (%) ash content as received, (%) regression parameters mineral matter factor Hardgrove-grindability combustion heat, (kJ/0.01 kg) calorific value on dry basis, kJ/kg calorific value as received, (kJ/kg) total sulphur content as received, (%) moisture content as analysed, (%) Bond-index calculated from experimental Bond-work index, (kWh/t) moisture content as received, (%) density, (kg/dm The lignite deposit in Gyöngyösvisonta–Bükkábrány, Eastern Hungary has a very high energetic and economic importance due to the relatively cheap open-pit mining operation and its advantageous sulphur content. The advanced fuel or other products can be processed from the lignite by the removal of the mineral matter or by the decreasing the moisture content. The upgrading of the lignite should be done in an economic way and take into account the high tendency of the lignites for severe size degradation. Hence, the ash content should be removed preferentially by an appropriate dry-technique, for which selective comminution is one of the applicable and advantageous preparation techniques. Its feasibility can be determined by a thorough investigation of the grindability of the isolated individual components of the lignite. The appropriate water-removal from the lignites can be achieved by steam dehydration. Grindability is a complex material characteristic involving the mechanical properties of the material, the principal breaking forces generated in a given grinding apparatus and the interactions of the formers. Therefore, the expressions for the grindability should be a relevant complex parameter. The expressions for the grindability, as measured by relative generation of a certain size-fraction or the specific energy required for grinding 1 ton of a given material below 100 μm, have been developed: they are known as the Hardgrove grindability index and the Bond-work index respectively However, determining the selective grindability actually means the determination of the difference in the grindabilities of the individual components. The grindability of fossil coals is governed by the grindabilities of their petrographic components. Consequently, the selective grindability of lignite has to be established by measuring the grindability of its main petrographic components. The lignite sampled in Gyöngyösvisonta used the sink-float procedure to obtain the following fractions: the xylitic fraction of the mineral matter-fraction of the intermediate-fraction of The Hargdrove and Bond grindability was then experimentally determined using standard Hardgrove- and Bond-mill in the laboratory of the Department of Process Engineering, University of Miskolc for these isolated components as well as for the raw lignite with various moisture contents. The obtained results are shown in Having analysed the obtained experimental results, the following conclusions can be drawn. The grindabilities of the xylitic fraction and the mineral matter are significantly different. The grindability of xylite is much more difficult to obtain than that of the mineral matter. The grindability of the intermediate component of the lignite was found as high as Nevertheless, the difference in the Bond-work indexes obtained for these components is more dramatic than in the case of the Hardgrove-index. While the Bond-work indexes for the xylitic component and the mineral matter are 30.11 and 14.03 kWh/t respectively, their Hardgrove grindability parameters of 42.94 and 69.87 both belong to the same “hard grindable” Hardgrove category. That means that the petrographic components of the lignite show remarkably different behaviours, being comminuted by blowing rather than the rubbing effects. Having compared the Bond-work index values with the re-calculated ones from the Hardgrove-indexes, it can be noticed that the proposed Smith re-calculating formula is valid only for the cases when the material in question has a similar resistance to the blow effect and rubbing or attrition. That is the reason why the basic requirement of the proposed formula The value of the Bond-work index calculated for the lignite as the weighted mean value of the Bond-work indexes of the individual components was 26.60 kWh/t as compared with the measured 27.17 kWh/t. The appropriate accuracy of the calculated value indicates that the Bond-work index is the real grindability parameter. However, the average Bond-work index evens up the differences in the grindability of the components making up the tested material. That is why the proper approach to the determination of the grindability of a given complex material is to determine the individual grindabilities of its components.  The grindability change with moisture content exhibits a minimum, i.e., there is an optimal moisture-content corresponding to the easiest grindability. The endeavour to simplify the Bond-procedure is not new, since the test usually takes from 6 up to 14 grinding cycles including sieving in each cycle by 100 μm of 0.7 dm In our grindability research, we found none of them to be appropriately accurate for such inhomogeneous materials as the fossil-coals of different ranks. Hence, a new self-developing algorithm BOKCSÖ (Bokányi-Csöke) was developed. According to this algorithm, only three first grinding cycles have to be conducted. The first grinding-cycle provides information on the grindability of the absolutely fresh material. The second and third are needed for gaining information on the grindability of the once and twice ground and recycled material. The estimation of the One of the novelties of the BOKCSÖ algorithm is that the numerical determination of the regression parameters is based on the stored experimental database. Its extension can be optionally chosen in accordance with the characteristic grindability of the material in question: difficult-to grind, inhomogeneous, etc. The database is being continuously developed by the input of new data. While the estimated Bond-work index values of the lignite and its isolated components as compared to the measured ones, according to the Karra algorithm, incurred an error of 11→31%; the error of the BOKCSÖ algorithm was only 0.7→7.8%. Based on the experimentally-determined possibility of the selective grinding of the lignite, the technological design of a measuring rig can be carried out. Screening can easily separate the ground components of different fineness. To determine the cut size of the screening, it is necessary to examine the composition of the different-size fractions. A very useful technique for this is the Henry–Reinhardt diagram. It was determined that a cut size of 4 mm is the optimum. For the processing of the advanced product from the Gyöngyösvisonta lignite, the technology shown in The run-of-mine lignite is characterised by relatively high moisture-content varying between 20 and 45%. The removal of the moisture of the lignite can improve its calorific value very much. Nevertheless, as was already mentioned in connection with wet processing, the lignites, being low coalification ranked fossils, are inclined to severe size degradations. This size degradation occurs while the lignite contacts with water or is exposed to heat. The latter is accompanied by water evaporation from the outer shells of the particles while their core is still moist: then the weathering takes place. The only way to remove water from the lignite without this disadvantageous phenomenon is to keep the diffusion of water from the core to the surface of the particles at a rate in agreement with the rate of shrinkage The steam dehydration resulted in a significant decrease of the moisture content and a very considerable increase in the calorific value, while there is a certain increase in the ash- and sulphur contents. The calorific value of coal is a two-variable linear function Taking Therefore: Based on the above numerical results, it can be established that due to the steam dehydration, the calorific value of the pure combustible matter of the lignite increases by 833 kJ/kg. Along with that, the mineral matter factor decreases by 50.1 kg/0.01 kg and the These conclusions are generally valid for all refining processes of the lignites. The steam dehydration offers a good opportunity for the further improvement of the advanced xylitic product obtained by selective grinding. The most important results of the research on the processing to obtain an advanced fuel from the Hungarian lignites are as follows. The determination of selective grindability of lignites should be carried out based on the experimental determination of the grindability of their individual isolated constituents: this is also true for all coal types. The Hardgrove grindability for lignites or other heterogeneous materials can be applied only as a qualitative grindability characteristic, for example, to categorise them as difficult, easy or mediocre grindable. The Bond-work index, however, is the genuine grindability parameter. In order to save time, a new self-developing simulation algorithm BOKCSÕ was developed and tested. The accuracy of this algorithm is greater than that of the other simulating algorithms developed earlier. The algorithm makes it possible to shorten the Bond procedure. The grindability of the xylitic component of the lignite significantly differs from that of the mineral matter. So there is a promising possibility for the appropriate dry processing of the advanced fuel or other products with low ash and high humic acid contents by the selective grinding technique. The technology was elaborated and tested experimentally. The steam dehydration of the lignites provides a very considerable increase in the calorific value of the lignite as well as of the pure combustible matter, while avoiding their unfavourable size degradation. The dehydration treatment combined with the selective grinding process is a very effective technique for the processing of an advanced fuel from Hungarian lignites.