The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of closed reduction and the effects of the time of intervention on young patients’ satisfaction. Patients older than 16 years and those with additional maxillofacial fractures were excluded. All patients were treated by closed reduction and external fixation. The patients and parents were asked about their satisfaction in a survey 6 months’ postoperatively. They were divided into groups according to the time of intervention, and the results. Twenty-four patients, age range 4–16 years, with isolated nasal fractures were included in the study. The mean (SD) time before intervention was 5.5 (1.8) days. The first group comprised 16 patients whose fractures were reduced between days 1 and 5 after the injury, and the second the 8 whose fractures were reduced between days 6 and 10. At 6 months 15 of the 24 were satisfied with the result, and 9 were not. In the group treated between days 1–5, 12/16 were happy with the result, and in the group treated between days 6–10, 3/8 were satisfied. Closed reduction gives good results in the treatment of nasal fractures in children. Early intervention increases the rate of satisfaction.The central position of the nose and its anterior projection on the face make it susceptible to injury, and therefore fractures of the nasal bones are the most common facial fractures and the third most common of the human skeleton. The management of nasal trauma in children differs considerably from that in adults. In children, the evaluation is more difficult because the patient is unlikely to cooperate and the anatomical features differ. Fractures of the nasal bones are generally treated by closed reduction in both children and adults. It is a relatively simple procedure with generally acceptable cosmetic and functional outcomes, but few studies have evaluated its efficacy. We have therefore aimed to evaluate both its efficacy and the effects of the time before intervention on the patients’ satisfaction. Only children aged under 16 years of age with isolated nasal fractures were included in the study, and we also excluded patients who were first seen more than 10 days after the fracture. All patients were treated in Sakarya University Training and Research Hospital Department of Otorhinolaryngology from December 2009 through August 2012, and their data were evaluated retrospectively. All patients had a detailed otorhinolaryngological examination, and lateral nasal and Water's view radiographs preoperatively to evaluate the type and extent of the fracture. They were also photographed preoperatively. Patients were classified into 5 types according to the type of fracture, using the previously described classification Before operation informed consent was obtained from the parents. All the patients were treated by closed reduction and external fixation. General anaesthesia was used for small children or for patients who requested it. Older children were treated under local anaesthesia with sedation. The operation was done using standard techniques with digital pressure and manipulation with a Freer elevator and Walsham forceps. Bilateral anterior polyvinyl acetate sponge nasal packs (Merocel™, Pope Epistaxis Packing, Medtronic Xomed, Jacksonville, FL, USA) were inserted after reduction. Packing was removed on the second postoperative day. The patients were followed up on the 7th and 28th days and 6 months later. On the 7th postoperative day the external fixation splint was removed. Patients and parents were asked about their satisfaction in a survey 6 months postoperatively. Patients were divided into groups according to time before intervention, and the results of the survey were evaluated. Twenty-four children whose age ranged from 4 to 16 and who had isolated nasal fractures were included in the study ( At the early assessment 28 days postoperatively we did not obtain a straight nose and septum in every patient, but most parents and patients were satisfied with the aesthetic result. When we evaluated patients 6 months postoperatively 15/24 were satisfied with the aesthetic result, and 9 were not ( Facial fractures are rare in children younger than 16 years of age because the mandible and cranium provide protection and absorb most of the impact of the trauma. These facial bones are also extremely elastic and soft in children. However, nasal fractures in children are different from those in adults, and the diagnosis and treatment are more difficult. Because a large part of a child's nose is cartilage it is anatomically flexible, so most of the nasal fractures in children are greenstick fractures. There are several methods for treating fractures of the nasal bones, including closed reduction, open reduction, and rhinoplasty. For many years the standard treatment has been closed reduction as it is simple and easy. There are conflicting opinions about the optimal timing of closed reduction in children. Generally it is recommended that if the patient is seen during the first 3–6 It is thought that closed reduction is adequate for most fractures in children, but if the reduction is not maintained, open reduction can be done months later using a traditional septorhinoplasty. Indications for open reduction are similar to those for adults, but should be guided by conservative principles that emphasise repositioning rather than excision of fractured segments, as aggressive open reduction may influence subsequent midfacial growth in children. Similar to adults, nasal fractures are the most common facial fractures in children. Closed reduction gives good results in the treatment of pediatric nasal fractures. Early intervention increases the patient satisfaction rate. In case of necessity, open reduction should be performed less agressively. No conflict of interest.