This paper proposes a practical formulation to investigate the dynamic response of structures laterally vibrating in contact with water on one or both sides. The proposed technique accounts for structure’s flexibility, soil flexibility, varying water levels and various boundary conditions. Simplified procedures are developed for practical assessment of the vibration periods, hydrodynamic loads and seismic response of structure-water systems including higher mode effects. The efficiency of the proposed techniques is validated through examples of structure–water systems with different configurations. We show that the proposed methods give excellent results when compared to more advanced finite element solutions including fluid–structure interaction capabilities.Appropriate account of fluid-structure dynamic interactions has been shown an important factor in the design and safety evaluation of earthquake-excited civil engineering structures vibrating in contact with water. The pioneering work of Westergaard In this paper, we focus on the developing original analytical and simplified solutions for structures vibrating in contact with water as schematically illustrated in  The structure’s cross-section is first modeled using plane-strain finite elements. Assuming a unit harmonic free-field horizontal ground motion Considering the above assumptions and based on previous studies The hydrodynamic pressure within water domains depends on the applied boundary conditions, including: A compatibility-based boundary condition at water–structure interface A rigid boundary condition at water domain bottom A boundary condition neglecting the effect of gravity waves at water surface BC-I: A rigid wall located at a distance This condition will be referred to as the moving rigid wall boundary condition in what follows. BC-II: A non-disturbed boundary condition at the far end of water domain on side ℓ to study infinite water domains BC-III: A rigid boundary condition located at a distance This boundary condition is introduced to study the extent of water domain that should be taken into account to obtain the same results as the non-disturbed boundary condition BC-II. It will be referred to as the fixed rigid wall boundary condition in the rest of the paper. Using the above-mentioned boundary conditions, we show that frequency response functions Using modal superposition and mode shapes orthogonality, we show that the vector Substituting the frequency-independent hydrodynamic pressures given in Eqs. The structural displacement and acceleration time-history responses to a ground acceleration ü The analytical formulation presented above is used in this section to develop a simplified method for practical assessment of the dynamic response of structure-water systems and the evaluation of coupled vibration periods. The system of Eq. A simplified procedure to estimate these coefficients is developed next based on the approach proposed in Ref. We define the frequency-dependent parameters The objective of this section is to investigate the effect of boundary conditions on the dynamic response of structure-water systems. For that purpose, we first show in The proposed analytical and simplified methods described in Sections System A ( System B ( The structure-water systems A and B are studied using the following four analysis types: Analysis type I: a finite element analysis where both the structure and the water domains are modeled using finite elements as shown in Analysis type II: a finite element analysis of the structure where hydrodynamic loading is modeled approximately using Westergaard added mass formulation Analysis type III : the analytical method proposed in Section Analysis type IV : the simplified procedure proposed in Section To assess the effect of boundary conditions, we also evaluate both analysis types III and IV by replacing the rigid moving wall boundary condition BC-I by a non disturbed boundary condition BC-II. For the sake of brevity, these analyses will be denoted as types III We first investigate the ability of the proposed methods to estimate the 8 first vibration periods of the two structure-water systems described above. Such periods can be obtained using Analysis types I, II and IV. The results are normalized by the vibration period of the dry structure obtained through reference analysis type I. For systems A and B, analysis type IV In this section, the techniques described previously are applied to determine hydrodynamic pressure profiles corresponding to different vibration periods. For the sake of brevity, only the results of system B are illustrated in In this section, the four analysis types are conducted to assess the seismic response of the structure–water systems described in the previous section, subjected to two ground motions from Imperial Valley earthquake (1940) and Saguenay earthquake (1988), characterized by low and high frequency contents, respectively. For analysis types I to IV, the CPU times that were required to compute time-history displacements at point P of system B under El Centro earthquake are compared for illustration purposes. The same time step of 0.005 For analysis types I and II: Modeling and post-processing are ignored in the CPU time, as well as the added mass computations for Analysis type II. For analysis type III and IV: Modeling and post-processing of the modal analysis of the structure are ignored in the CPU time, while the finite element modal analysis needed to retrieve dynamic properties of the structure are included. MATLAB The obtained CPU times are presented in In this paper, we developed and validated an original analytical formulation to study wall-type structures with vertical or slightly inclined faces, vibrating in contact with water on one or both sides. The proposed method accounts for structure’s flexibility, soil flexibility, varying water levels and boundary conditions corresponding to: (i) semi-infinite water domains, or (ii) finite water domains delimited by rigid walls. The proposed analytical formulation was then used to develop a simplified procedure for practical assessment of the vibration periods and seismic response of structure-water systems including higher mode effects. We first proved that the vibration frequencies of a structure-water system can be obtained by solving a simple second order polynomial equation. We also investigated the effect of boundary conditions at the end water domains, and we showed that: (i) for a structure-water system in contact with a semi-infinite incompressible water domain, only a finite water domain truncated by a fixed wall boundary condition at twice water domain height needs to be modeled, thus allowing a considerable gain of time when using finite elements; (ii) for a structure-water system in contact with a finite incompressible water domain with a length less than three times its height, the effect of the end moving rigid boundary condition should be taken into account. If a structure in contact with a semi-infinite water domain or a finite water domain of length longer than tree times its height, closed-form expressions were provided to determine hydrodynamic pressure distributions exerted on the structure. To assess the efficiency and accuracy of the proposed techniques, several analysis types were applied to structure-water systems with different configurations, including the effect of massless flexible soil foundation. The methods were validated against classical Westergaard added mass formulation as well as more advanced finite element techniques. The proposed approach presents a significant advantage over conventional Westergaard’s added-mass formulation, namely because it can directly account for the flexibility of the structure and its soil foundation, as well as a finite extent of water domain, while Westergaard’s solution assumes that both the structure and its foundation are rigid and that the water domain is semi-infinite. The following conclusions could be drawn from the comparison of the period ratios and hydrodynamic pressure profiles obtained from the different analyses: (i) the proposed simplified procedure give excellent period predictions for the first and higher vibration modes, (ii) an excellent agreement is obtained when comparing hydrodynamic profiles obtained using the proposed analytical and simplified methods to those from advanced finite elements, (iii) the proposed analytical and simplified techniques account appropriately for structure and soil flexibility as well as higher mode effects, all parameters that were shown to affect significantly the magnitude and distribution of hydrodynamic loads in a manner that generally differs from classical added-mass solutions. The seismic response of the structure-water systems subjected to typical low and high frequency earthquakes was also examined, and the proposed analytical and simplified methods gave an excellent agreement when compared to finite element solutions including fluid-structure interaction capabilities. In addition, the proposed methods performed within low execution times, namely the simplified procedure. Finally, we illustrated throughout the paper that the proposed techniques constitute interesting alternatives to conventional methods, and that they can be efficiently implemented in simplified and practical earthquake analysis of the structure-water systems. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the For practical programming, this appendix proposes expressions to separate the real and imaginary parts of the frequency dependent generalized coordinates In this appendix, we rewrite Eqs.