Laboratory pull-out tests were conducted on the following rock bolts and cable bolts: steel rebars, smooth steel bars, fiberglass reinforced polymer threaded bolts, flexible cable bolts, IR5/IN special cable bolts and Mini-cage cable bolts. The diameter of the tested bolts was between 16 mm and 26 mm. The bolts were grouted in a sandstone sample using resin or cement grouts. The tests were conducted under either constant radial stiffness or constant confining pressure boundary conditions applied on the outer surface of the rock sample. In most tests, the rate of displacement was about 0.02 mm/s. The tests were performed using a pull-out bench that allows testing a wide range of parameters. This paper provides an extensive database of laboratory pull-out test results and confirms the influence of the confining pressure and the embedment length on the pull-out response (rock bolts and cable bolts). It also highlights the sensitivity of the results to the operating conditions and to the behavior of the sample as a whole, which cannot be neglected when the test results are used to assess the bolt-grout or the grout–rock interface.Fully grouted rock bolts and cable bolts are two reinforcement techniques widely used in civil and mining engineering. These support systems combine efficiency, flexibility, ease of installation and low cost ( In general terms, a rock bolt or cable bolt consists of a bar inserted in a borehole that is drilled into a soil or rock mass and anchored to it by means of a fixture ( Worldwide experience suggests that failure of fully grouted bolts most likely occurs at the bolt-grout interface, by means of a debonding process that starts if the axial force on the bar exceeds a critical value, and then propagates along the interface ( As mineral resources are decreasing in Europe, mining companies are searching deeper underground to meet customers' needs and maintain their activities. At large depth, stresses are higher and support systems must be intensified. In this context, a new laboratory pull-out set-up has been conducted within the framework of the RFCS AMSSTED research programme ( This paper is organized as follows. First, we describe the experimental bench used at laboratory-scale and the set-up designed to prevent unscrewing when testing cable bolts. Then, we present the samples preparation procedure, as well as the main characteristics of the bolts, the grouting materials and the rock type used to prepare the samples. Later, the main results obtained for rock bolts are presented, followed by the results for cable bolts. For a given bolt type and dimensions, our results compare well with past investigations ( A pull-out bench based on the double-embedment principle was recently designed by MINES ParisTech ( As it can be seen in the cutaway section, the bolt links together the upper and the lower parts of the bench. The The axial force on the bolt is applied by a The set-up shown in A laboratory pull-out test sample consists of the bolt (rock bolt or cable bolt), the rock sample, the metallic tube and the materials used to grout the bolt to the rock and to the tube. The proper preparation of the samples, in particular the accurate coaxiality of all elements, is very important to ensure the correct assemblage of the experimental bench. The main steps in the preparation of a laboratory sample are: Drilling of the rock sample and central borehole. The borehole radius depends on the bolt type and the desired annular space. In this study, the ratio between the radius of the borehole and the bolt remains practically constant. In order to facilitate decoupling at the bolt-grout interface, the borehole wall is rifled to improve the bond between the rock sample and the grouting material. Preparation of the metallic tubes (cutting, rifling of the internal surface and external threading). Grouting of the bolt into the borehole (resin or cement grout). Grouting of the bolt into the metallic tube (fast cure adhesive). Once the sample is ready, the bench is assembled. We note that in the case of smooth bars, a barrel and wedge system is installed above the metallic tube to prevent the tube from sliding off the bolt. In fact, in the case of rough bolts, the bolt profile (plus the grooves made along the metallic tube inner surface) makes the slip inside the metallic tube difficult. However, a smooth bar makes such slip easier, especially if the confining pressure applied to the rock sample is high. In the case of cable bolts, a barrel and wedge system is also used to avoid any possible relative slip between the bolt and the tube (the embedment length within the rock sample is longer for cable bolts). During a pull-out test, first the confining pressure is applied to the rock sample and then the jack is put into operation. Note that as the bolt is pulled out of the rock borehole, the embedment length decreases. The tests are conducted in static conditions and under displacement control (constant displacement rate). The following measurements are taken (frequency of 5 Hz): Axial force (limit: 350 kN); Axial displacement (relative vertical displacement between the fixed body of the jack and the LVDTs support) (limit: 100 mm); Confining pressure (limit: 25 MPa); Hollow ram jack pressure (limit: 70 MPa). Once the test is finished, the pressure of the jack is relieved before relieving that of the biaxial cell, in order to prevent failure of the rock sample. All the pull-out tests have been conducted using sandstone samples and all the bolts have been grouted with either resin (Minova Lockset Sis SF-L 32/500) or a cementitious grout (Portland cement and water). For grouts with water/cement ratio Three types of rock bolts have been tested: 25 mm diameter steel rebars: HA25 bars conforming to 25 mm diameter FRP rock bolts: Power thread bars manufactured by Minova-FiReP, referred to as FRP rock bolts; 25 mm diameter smooth steel bars: type SS 316L, manufactured by Acieries de la Seine, referred to as SSB. The first two rock bolts are commonly used as support in long wall mining ( Three types of cable bolts have been tested: 23 mm diameter flexible cable bolts: indented seven-wire strands manufactured by Osborn Strata Products, referred to as Reflex cable bolts; 16.2 mm diameter Mini-cage cable bolts: flexible, smooth seven-wire strands with a flow bulb construction for better grout migration, manufactured by Osborn Strata Products; IR5/IN special cable bolts used in Polish coal mines and manufactured by PPUH Interram. The mechanical properties of the three cable bolts are listed in The IR5/IN cable bolts were provided by Glowny Institut Gornictwa in Poland and Jastrzebska Spolka Weglowa SA (a Polish mining company). This support is totally different from the cable bolts commonly used in coal mines. As far as design is concerned, this cable bolt is very similar to the Megastrand bolt produced by Megabolt Australia Ltd., but the wires are smooth. A typical 8 m length cable bolt is composed of three parts from right to left (see A 1.1 m long section equipped with an injection head; An intermediate 5.6 m long and 25.7 mm diameter section composed of eight smooth steel wires around a central injection tube. Due to the light twist of the strand, the wires are kept in position with steel rings installed along the total cable length. Note that the grout can spread across the gaps between the wires; A 1.3 m long and 22 mm diameter section with only the eight smooth steel wires, welded at the end to a steel cap dedicated to resin mixing. The pull-out tests performed on SSB, HA25, and FRP rock bolts are listed in For a given test, results are presented in the form of two curves: axial load versus axial displacement, and confining pressure variation versus axial displacement. The load–displacement response of HA25 and FRP bolts can be divided into four stages ( A quasi-linear response for small values of axial displacement. In this stage, interface adhesion, mechanical interlock and friction contribute to the bolt-grout bond. The axial stiffness drops and the load–displacement response becomes nonlinear before the peak force is reached. This stage is associated with the development of a joint, which damages the bolt-grout bond gradually, thereby decreasing its bearing capacity. The axial load reaches a maximum value. The load decreases steeply initially, followed by a residual phase. The damage of the interface is believed to occur in an unstable manner in this stage. The residual load depends on both the confining pressure (friction) and the mechanical interlock (due to the bolt profile).  Debonding also occurred at the bolt-grout interface in the case of HA25 rock bolts. The effects of the embedment length and the confining pressure are shown in The same overall behavior is obtained for FRP rock bolts, although some differences are visible in the post-failure phase (see Regarding the state of the samples after the test, radial fractures were observed in the rock and grouting material at low confining pressures. This well-known phenomenon affects the pull-out response and makes the study of the bolt-grout interface difficult ( The results obtained on rock bolts are analyzed in terms of the following parameters: yield bond strength, defined according to the British Standard Institute ( As shown in   The Mini-cage cable bolts were tested with a bulb located at the center of the embedment length. As a consequence, the axial displacement during the pull-out test is accompanied by a significant outer radial displacement induced by the bulb. After around 10 mm of axial displacement, a radial fracture occurred in the rock sample. The failure of the rock samples did not allow to investigate with confidence the effect of the confining pressure on the post-failure phase. In the same way, the radial displacement, which is governed by the dilatancy induced by the bulb, is totally disturbed by this failure. On this basis, only the phase preceding the creation of the fractures has been analyzed (see Section IR5/IN cable bolts are designed to be used in prestressed conditions; unfortunately, it was not possible to prestress the cables in our laboratory-scale bench. Therefore, the results obtained for IR5/IN cables should not be considered for comparison purposes or as a reference in other situations. Owing to the smooth profile of the wires, a process similar to the SSB occurred during the tests, i.e. the bolt-grout bond within the metallic tube failed at an early stage, and subsequently the barrel and wedge system started to act, causing a second increasing phase of the axial load corresponding to the bolt-grout interface inside the rock sample. After failure of this bond, the load decreases steeply. Different set-ups were tried in order to test the influence of the steel ring welded at the extremity of the cables (see The results of the tests conducted on Reflex cable bolts are summarized in Overall, the four parameters displayed increase with the confining pressure and the embedment length (tendency less obvious for the axial stiffness). For Mini-cage cable bolts ( This paper presents pull-out test results performed at laboratory-scale on three types of rock bolts and three types of cable bolts. Each bolt has been tested using different embedment lengths and confining pressures. Resin and cement have been used as grouting materials, and in all cases, the bolts have been grouted into a sandstone sample. The tests have been performed using a pull-out bench that allows testing a wide range of parameters. Constant confinement or constant radial stiffness has been used as boundary conditions. The study presented has been performed in static conditions, and its main goal is to investigate debonding at the bolt-grout interface. Experimental results show that interface adhesion, friction and mechanical interlock (threaded bars) contribute to the bolt-grout bond. The comparison between pull-out results of smooth and threaded bolts clearly shows that the bolt profile plays an important role: not only the maximum load is greater for threaded bolts, but also the post-peak phase shows a more gradual force decrease. Moreover, the bolt profile is reflected in the oscillations measured in the post-peak phase, whose periodicity matches the indentations of the tested bar. Results for HA25 and FRP threaded bolts show overall similar trends, with a stiff, quasi-linear pre-peak phase, followed by a drop of stiffness, a maximum force and finally a post-peak phase in which the axial force decreases towards a residual value, much lower than the peak force. Depending on the confining pressure, oscillations on the load occur according to the bolt profile; these oscillations are less clear for high pressures, for which the grout between the bolt asperities is sheared. The operating conditions in the radial direction affect both the radial and the axial responses. In the current bench configuration, the advantage of using constant radial stiffness conditions is that the confining pressure variation can be used to estimate the radial displacement. Results obtained for cable bolts are also consistent and show similar trends to rock bolts, with the axial load–displacement relationship showing four different phases, and the bolt profile and geometry being observed in the post-peak phase. However, the results obtained for rock bolts and cable bolts show important differences in the post-peak phase, with a much steeper load decrease in the case of rock bolts. Two likely reasons to this difference are the bar type (solid against initially twisted wires) and the bolt profile (geometry of indentations). Regarding the Mini-cage cable bolts, their profile induced severe damage to the rock sample. In the case of the IR5/IN bolts, pull-out results were very sensitive to the configuration at the free end. These results, together with the radial fracturing that often occurs at low confining pressures (rock bolts and cable bolts), highlight the difficulty of assessing the bolt-grout interface behavior from raw pull-out data, and also the importance of addressing the behavior of the sample as a whole before focusing on the interface. In order to study the interface response accurately, the bench configuration should be kept as simple as possible to reduce uncertainty in the measurements and the processes underneath (fracturing, rock response, bench calibration, etc.). The results presented are consistent with previous pull-out test results on similar rock bolts and cable bolts, and provide an extensive database of laboratory-scale results, focusing on the influence of the confining pressure and the embedment length on the pull-out response of fully grouted bolts. These data can be used both as a technical reference under the specified conditions, and as a means of comparison between model predictions (which include operating conditions, and sample components and behavior) and laboratory-scale data. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work has been supported by the