The effect of Ni additions on the peritectic reaction and phase formation in the Sn-10 wt%Cu alloy is investigated through cooling curve analysis, in situ synchrotron observation during alloy solidification, and microstructural analysis of as-cast alloy by optical and electron microscopy. More specifically, this study examined the effect of Ni to determine whether Cu3Sn can be completely suppressed. The results showed that the addition of Ni in the range of 0.06 wt% - 1 wt% completely suppressed the formation of primary Cu3Sn phase, and instead Cu6Sn5 directly nucleates from the melt. It is proposed that increasing the amount of Ni decreases the amount of Cu3Sn until it is completely suppressed by shifting the Cu3Sn phase boundaries, such that Cu6Sn5 forms throughout the microstructure. The results from this study provide an opportunity to better understand the solidification behaviour of Sn-10Cu alloys with Ni additions.The electronic manufacturing and assembly sector has become integral in supporting the rising international demand for smaller and more reliable electronic components. Environmental and health-related concerns associated with the toxicity of lead have also dramatically impacted the electronics assembly sector and driven research on the development of reliable Pb-free solders [ Numerous studies have been conducted on peritectic solidification [ The Sn-Cu alloy system has been [ In the Sn-Cu system, increasing the Cu concentration beyond 7.6 wt% (in the case of higher-Cu containing solders – typically high-temperature solders), results in a peritectic reaction which facilitates the formation of an elongated and needle-shaped Cu Furthermore, alloying Sn-Cu based alloys with certain elements may also influence the peritectic reaction and reduce or prevent the formation of the primary Cu The Sn-10 wt% Cu base alloy was made by melting commercial purity 99.9 wt% Cu and Sn ingots in a boron-nitride coated clay-graphite crucible using an induction furnace at 600 °C and pouring into boron-nitride coated ingot moulds. To prepare Sn-10Cu-xNi (x = 0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.1, 0.5 and 1 wt %) alloy samples, the base alloy was remelted in a boron nitride coated clay-graphite crucible using a Nabotherm electric resistance furnace at 600 °C and appropriate amounts of Sn-10 wt%Ni master alloy (supplied by Nihon Superior Co. Ltd.) were added. This melt was equilibrated for 1.5 h to ensure complete melting. Samples for cooling curve analysis (CCA) and metallography were collected in tapered boron-nitride coated steel cups, and for synchrotron X-ray radiography, samples were cast into 10 mm diameter boron-nitride coated cylindrical steel moulds. For all experimental alloys, the average cooling rate of the liquid before the first point of solidification was 1 °C/s. The composition of the alloys was analysed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry ( CCA was conducted for each composition by taking three samples (approximately 85 g each) from the melt in tapered boron nitride coated steel cups. The cups were placed on a 10 mm thick Kaowool® insulation board (two samples with K-type thermocouples positioned at the centre and the third sample without the thermocouple) and allowed to cool at room temperature with the same insulation material covering the steel cups. The third sample collected without the thermocouple was used for metallographic observation. The schematic presented in All microscopy samples were vertically cross-sectioned down the central axis and cold mounted in epoxy resin, and polished to a finish of 0.05 μm. A Reichert-Jung Polyvar light microscope and a JEOL JSM-6460 scanning electron microscope (SEM) with backscatter electron imaging (BEI), set to 21 kV acceleration voltage were used to observe the microstructures and conduct energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) measurements for compositional analysis. Real-time   The growth morphology of Cu A still image from the The image stills from Quantitative analysis was conducted on the images obtained for all Ni additions at, < 0.06 wt% Ni, reduce the percentage area fraction and growth rate of the primary Cu The primary Cu We propose that Ni suppresses Cu  The addition of Ni seems to not only have an effect on Cu Ni also appears to have an effect on the morphology of peritectic Cu Sn-10Cu was alloyed with Ni to promote the suppression of Cu A range of Sn-10 wt%Cu alloys with up to 1 wt% Ni were investigated for Cu Ni was observed to have a dramatic impact on the microstructure of Sn-Cu alloys to the effect that Cu The It is proposed that Ni shifts the phase boundary of Cu Avoiding these elongated needle-shaped Cu The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary video related to this article can be found at The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the