Purpose
                  To compare the finite element models of two different composite radius fracture patterns, reduced and stabilised with four different fixed-angle dorsal plates during axial, dorsal and volar loading conditions.
               
                  Methods
                  Eight different plastic models representing four AO/ASIF type 23-A3 distal radius fractures and four AO/ASIF 23-C2 distal radius fractures were obtained and fixed each with 1 of 4 methods: a standard dorsal non-anatomical fixed angle T-plate (3.5mm Dorsal T-plate, Synthes), anatomical fixed-angle double plates (2.4mm LCP Dorsal Distal Radius, Synthes), anatomical fixed angle T-plate (2.4mm Acu-Loc Dorsal Plate, Acumed) or anatomical variable-angle dorsal T-plate (3.5mm, Dorsal Plate, Zrinski). Composite radius with plate and screws were scanned with a 3D optical scanner and later processed in Abaqus Software to generate the finite element model. All models were axially loaded at 3 points (centrally, volarly and dorsally) with 50 N forces to avoid the appearance of plastic deformations of the models. Total displacements at the end of the bone and the stresses in the bones and plates were determined and compared.
               
                  Results
                  Maximal von Mises stress in bone for 3-part fracture models was very similar to that in 2-part fracture models. The biggest difference between models and the largest displacements were seen during volar loading. The stresses in all models were the highest above the fracture gap. The best performance in all parameters tested was with the Zrinski plate and the most modest results were with the Synthes T-plate.
               
                  Conclusion
                  There was no significant difference between 2-part (AO/ASIF type 23-A3) and 3-part (AO/ASIF 23-C2) fracture models. Maximal stresses in the plates appeared above the fracture gap; therefore, it is worth considering the development of plates without screw holes above the gap.Distal radius fractures are among the most common skeletal injuries, accounting for 14% of all fractures In younger patients, ORIF is associated with a well-developed and firm cortex, and dense cancellous bone allows less strain on the screw-bone connection, thereby ensuring a stable stronghold for the screw and high pressure between the bone fragments, which reduces the possibility for osteolysis and development of microfracture on the contact surface Fixed-angle volar plates are favoured by many authors for dorsally-comminuted distal radius fractures because of fewer tendon complications and improved fixation When treating dorsally-unstable distal radius fractures, there is the theoretical concern about a disadvantage of volar plating in cantilever bending when the distal radius is axially loaded at a point dorsal to its neutral axis. This concern could lead to a delay in starting early postoperative rehabilitation. Dorsal plating has some important indications, including excessive dorsal comminution, intra-articular reduction with direct articular visualisation and dorsal wedge osteotomy, when external forces may exceed the fixation capacity of a volar locking system. A large cohort study by Simic If there is bone contact on the compression side, the bending strength of a plate placed on the tension side is about 100 times higher Meanwhile, newer polyaxial dorsal-locking plates for distal radius allow insertion of a screw at a variable angle to meet the fracture pattern requirements to hold specific bone fragments. Unfortunately, manufacturers usually do not reveal the actual stability of the polyaxial locking interfaces of their implants. The aim of this study was to investigate the strength of three different dorsal radius polyaxial locking interfaces and to compare it with that of a standard dorsal locking T-plate using the finite element method. In this study, the finite element analysis was performed to determine the stability of four locking plate constructs. The first construct was the standard dorsal non-anatomical plate (Synthes T) with monoaxial locking screws (3.5 The intact artificial right distal radius (SKU #1018–20, Sawbones Europe AB, Malmö, Sweden) was used in the present study. The bone was wedged in its ends, the distal articular surface and the distal part of the radius body, which corresponds to real conditions for fixation of the radius at the elbow. Two fracture models were made. Firstly, a 2-part osteotomy was created using an idealised planar cut: 1 Secondly, a 3-part osteotomy was made like the first one, with the added sagittal split osteotomy between the scaphoid and lunate fossa creating an unstable intra-articular fracture with both radial styloid and ulnar-sided fracture fragment, which simulates a 3-part intraarticular distal radius fracture with dorsal metaphyseal comminution (AO/ASIF 23-C2) ( The finite element models were generated based on 3D scans from an optical 3D scanner (Atos III Triple Scan, GOM In all computational models, contact interactions using surface-to-surface and finite sliding formulation were defined between the plate and bone and between the osteotomy interfaces with a coefficient of friction of 0.3 The plate constructs were meshed using 10 node quadratic tetrahedral elements. The number of elements in the models ranged from 405327 to 561167 depending on the type of plate and the number of screws ( All material properties were defined as homogeneous, isotropic and linear. The plates and screws material was titanium alloy with an elastic modulus of 110 GPa. The moduli of elasticity used for the cortical and cancellous bone were 17 GPa and 1.3 GPa, respectively Non-linear computational simulations were performed for axial compression, and volar and dorsal bending. To avoid the appearance of plastic deformations, the models were loaded with 50 N. The force was chosen based on previous biomechanical studies Total displacements at the end of the bone were determined and compared ( The displacements at the distal end for all models were the largest under volar bending, followed by dorsal bending and axial compression. These results were expected because of the contact between the bony fragments during the axial load and dorsal bending. The largest displacements appeared in the 3-part fracture Synthes T plate model ( Maximum displacements at the distal end for the 3-part fracture models and the intact bone are shown in Comparing the results of maximum displacements, it is evident that there is no significant difference between the 2-part and 3-part fracture models under the same load conditions. Under dorsal bending, the highest maximum displacement appears at the distal end of the 3-part fracture Synthes DP model. The maximum displacement at the distal end were the lowest for the model with the Zrinski plate in all three load conditions. The difference in the displacements is most pronounced under volar bending, whereas under axial load there is no significant difference between the various plate constructs. Under axial load and dorsal bending, the intact bone showed similar displacement as the plate constructs, whereas under volar bending there was up to 6.1-times lower maximum displacement. The stresses in the bones and plates were also analysed and are summarised in In plates, von Mises stresses were generally the highest under volar bending and the lowest under axial load. The maximum Mises stress values were the highest in the Zrinski plate in all loading conditions. The location of the maximum Mises stresses in all plates depended on the load conditions. Under axial load and dorsal bending, the maximum stress values in the Zrinski plate occurred in the left distal hole close to the fracture gap (3-part fracture model) and under volar bending in the proximal hole next to the fracture gap. Under axial load the lowest Mises stress occurred in the Acumed plate (proximal hole closest to the gap) and under dorsal and volar bending, the stress values were the lowest in the Synthes T plate (proximal hole closest to the gap and hole above the dorsal comminution). The purpose of this study was to compare the finite element models of two different composite radius fracture patterns, reduced and stabilised with various fixed-angle dorsal plates during axial, dorsal and volar loading conditions. The finite elements method is a complementary method for evaluation of biomechanical properties of different fracture fixation techniques. This method is non-invasive and enables stress evaluation and biomechanical response without clinical influence (which depends on bone quality under plate). The models were loaded axially in three ways – centrally, dorsally and volarly with 50 N forces to avoid the appearance of plastic deformations Most of the published studies simulated extra-articular fractures of the distal radius; fractures with articular involvement were simulated very rarely and authors used mainly volar locking plates Dorsal plating has advantages because it provides buttress for dorsally-unstable fractures and also enables visualisation of the articular surface for better reduction of intra-articular fracture A disadvantage of dorsal plating is the possibility of tenosynovitis and rupture of extensor tendons because of the prominent implant (plate thickness and screw head size) Volar locking plates could be associated with problems such as dorsal bone cortex penetration, irritation and extensor tendons rupture (partial or complete rupture, extensor tenosynovitis), and a possibility of flexor tendons irritation as a result of plate malposition and tendon wear over the edge of a prominent plate – the “watershed” line) We did not use osteoporotic models in this study, but we consider that our results could also be applied on osteoporotic models. Regardless of osteoporotic bone strength (less elastic modulus), biomechanical testing results (stress and model rigidity) would have the same tendency. It is evident from the results presented here that there are no significant differences between 2-part and 3-part fractures, which is in accordance with the results of the clinical study by Souer The smallest displacements appeared during the central axial loading, with no significant difference between models. The difference in displacements during dorsal loading was also minimal (less than 1 Although the number of screws in distal fragments differed (from 2 to 6), there was no significant difference between models. The results were also not significantly different between monoaxial and polyaxial screw models. The largest difference between models and the largest displacements were seen during the volar loading. The best performance in all the parameters tested was with the Zrinski plate while the Synthes T-plate showed the most modest results. The highest stress value was in the area of empty holes above the dorsal comminution of all models, which could be the reason for poor results during volar loading. We consider that the development of new plates with full profile (without holes) above dorsal comminution could improve resistance to volar loading. The Zrinski plate has a special construction of locking holes (like a flower), which is the reason for the highest stress in spots where the screw carves in the plate hole, particularly if the carving angle is more than 0°. In those circumstances, the contact area between the screw and the plate is significantly diminished. The locking plate does not need to be in contact with the bone (periosteum) because if it isn’t this enables a better vascularisation of bone fragments, which is a requirement for faster bone healing and fewer complications Of course, we did not take into consideration anatomical variations ( New locking plates with variable angle screws (15°) are good tools for distal radius fractures because they provide better fixation of each fracture fragment. Advantages of polyaxial locking plates are a deeper insertion of distal screws into the subchondral bone and bicortical placement, which provide better buttressing for the fracture fragments, particularly in osteoporotic and articular fractures The Zrinski plate showed the best results for all loading types tested. This plate is the thickest of all the plates with 3.5 There was no significant difference between 2-part and 3-part fracture models. Regarding the maximal plate stress above the fracture gap, we consider that the development of new plates with full profile (without holes) above dorsal comminution could improve resistance to volar loading. None declared.