Addition order of both PAX (potassium amyl xanthate) and CMC (carboxymethyl cellulose) was investigated to separate pyrite from chlorite. The investigation included both flotation and adsorption tests. The flotation results showed that CMC can depress the flotation of chlorite but was found not to be selective against pyrite. When pyrite was conditioned initially with PAX before CMC it was found that the CMC slightly depressed pyrite flotation. The depression effect of CMC on pyrite was significantly higher when pyrite was conditioned first with CMC before PAX. Flotation of chlorite was not influenced by order of addition of CMC and PAX. Adsorption tests showed that CMC and PAX compete in adsorbing on pyrite and the adsorption density of PAX decreases in the presence of the pre-adsorbed layer of CMC. PAX was found not to adsorb onto chlorite irrespective if chlorite was conditioned initially with or without CMC. Therefore there was no competitive adsorption on chlorite surface between PAX and CMC. PAX can assist to protect the pyrite surface when conditioned initially first and allow the benefits of CMC depression for chlorite.Chlorite is a magnesium rich phyllosilicate mineral that occurs as gangue component of many metal sulphide ore deposits around the world. Chlorite may report to the flotation concentrate, thus reducing concentrate grade ( In order for CMC to exert its depression effect it must first adsorb on the surface of the mineral. The mechanisms of adsorption of CMC onto minerals have been widely studied and various mechanisms have been proposed. Due to the multitude of binding mechanisms through which CMC can interact and adsorb onto surfaces ( Xanthate is a commonly used collector for pyrite flotation and has been found not to interact directly with chlorite ( In the present work, addition order effects between PAX and CMC were investigated to determine if the depression effect of CMC on pyrite was affected by the presence of a pre-adsorbed layer of PAX. The mechanism of addition order effects was also studied providing a reference for further study. The chlorite used for all experiments was obtained from Haicheng, Liaoning Province, China. Mineralogical and X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the chlorite sample was of high purity with trace amounts of talc. Pyrite was obtained from Yunfu, Guangdong Province, China. The result of chemical analysis showed that the composition included Fe 44.96% and S 52.98%. The samples were dry ground and screened through 150, 75 and 37 The sample of CMC used in the study was obtained from Tianjing Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre, Tianjing, China. The DS (degree of substituent) of CMC is 0.9 and the molecular weight is 700,000. The CMC solution was prepared by dispersing a known weight of sample in cold distilled water and then dissolved it in boiling distilled water. The solutions were prepared fresh each day. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength and HCl (hydrochloric acid) and KOH (potassium hydroxide) were used as pH regulators. All the reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Deionized double distilled water was used for all tests. Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine with a 40 For mixed mineral flotation, 2.0 For the adsorption tests, 1 The effect of pH on the flotation recovery of pyrite and chlorite is shown in  The order of addition effects between CMC and PAX were studied and the results can be seen in  The effect of depressant on the adsorption behaviour of collector has been extensively studied. Prestidge found that the addition of cyanide prior to xanthate addition produces the most marked reduction in ethyl xanthate adsorption. Cyanide competes strongly with ethyl xanthate for adsorption sites on pyrite surfaces is an important mechanism in the depression of pyrite ( The concept of site blocking agents can be raised on the base of competitive adsorption between collector and depressant. The site blocking agents can adsorb only onto the desired mineral and prevent depressant adsorption. For the system studied here, as the competitive adsorption of PAX and CMC occurs on pyrite surface only, it is possible to use PAX to reduce the amount of CMC adsorbed on pyrite and allow the benefits of using CMC to depress chlorite while minimising the effect of CMC addition on pyrite flotation. The results from the mixed mineral flotation study are shown in Based on the results of this investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn: CMC can be used to depress chlorite in the flotation separation of pyrite and chlorite, but it also affects the flotation collection of pyrite when added before PAX. Order of addition between PAX and CMC has great influence on flotation separation of pyrite and chlorite. In the presence of a pre-adsorbed layer of PAX, the depression effect of CMC on pyrite is reduced while the flotation recovery of chlorite does not change. The decreased depression effect of CMC on pyrite in the presence of a pre-adsorbed layer of PAX is attributed to the competitive adsorption of CMC and PAX on pyrite surface. The authors acknowledge the support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51174229).