Coating titanium implants with artificial extracellular matrices based on collagen and chondroitin sulfate (CS) has been shown to enhance bone remodelling and de novo bone formation in vivo. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of estrogen deficiency and hormone replacement therapy (HRT) on the osseointegration of CS-modified Ti implants. 30 adult female, ovariectomized Wistar rats were fed either with an ethinyl-estradiol-rich diet (E) to simulate a clinical relevant HRT or with a genistein-rich diet (G) to test an alternative therapy based on nutritionally relevant phytoestrogens. Controls (C) received an estrogen-free diet. Uncoated titanium pins (Ti) or pins coated with type-I collagen and CS (Ti/CS) were inserted 8weeks after ovarectomy into the tibia. Specimens were retrieved 28days after implantation. Both the amount of newly formed bone and the affinity index (P
                     <0.05) were moderately higher around Ti/CS implants as compared to uncoated Ti. The highest values were measured in the G-Ti/CS and E-Ti/CS groups, the lowest values for the E-Ti and G-Ti controls. Quantitative synchrotron radiation micro-computed tomography (SRμCT) revealed the highest increase in total bone formation around G-Ti/CS as compared to C-Ti (P
                     <0.01). The effects with respect to direct bone apposition were less pronounced with SRμCT. Using scanning nanoindentation, both the indentation modulus and the hardness of the newly formed bone were highest in the E-Ti/CS, G-Ti/CS and G-Ti groups as compared to C-Ti (P
                     <0.05). Coatings with collagen and CS appear to improve both the quantity and quality of bone formed around Ti implants in ovarectomized rats. A simultaneous ethinyl estradiol- and genistein-rich diet seems to enhance these effects.Postmenopausal osteoporosis is a highly relevant disease, caused by naturally or surgically induced restriction of the ovarian function, resulting in estrogen deficiency, pronounced bone loss, increased fracture risk, severe accessory symptoms and high social and financial burdens GAGs are ubiquitous components of the ECM and cell membrane in all eukaryotic organisms bridging extracellular stimuli and intracellular signalling. GAGs are negatively charged, linear polysaccharide chains composed of repeating disaccharide units which carry different amounts of sulfate groups at varying positions. Most of the GAGs have a molecular weight ranging between 10 and 100 Anchorage and stability of endosseous implants depend on the quantity and quality of peri-implant bone formation The quality of bone formed around aECM modified Ti implants has not yet been investigated. The present study was therefore performed to evaluate the effects of CS-coated Ti implants on the peri-implant bone quantity and quality using SRμCT, nanoindentation, histomorphometry and histology. The impact of CS coatings on the osseointegration under estrogen deficiency was investigated using ovarectomized rats as an osteoporosis model. To test for the effects of an HRT on the osseointegration of CS-coated Ti implants under estrogen deficiency, an ethinyl-estradiol-rich diet was used to simulate a clinical relevant HRT. Furthermore, a genistein-rich diet was used to evaluate an alternative therapy based on the nutritionally relevant phytoestrogens. Titanium (Ti6Al4V) pins of 0.8 All animal handling and experimental conditions were licensed by the local animal care committee and carried out according to the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines as regulated by the federal law governing animal welfare. 30 adult female Wistar rats (Charles River Laboratories, Sulzfeld, Germany) with a mean BW of 250–300 28 SRμCT was used to quantify the bone formation and the affinity index (AI) around the implants three-dimensionally. The tibiae of three different animals per group were measured at the BAMline of the Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing at the Berlin Electron Synchrotron (BESSY II, beamline 7TWLS) and at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht at the Hamburg Synchrotron Laboratory (HASYLAB, beamline W2). At BESSY II the X-ray energy was set to 30 After SRμCT the specimens were cut into two sample blocks in the middle of the measured CT volume. The distal block was cut perpendicular to the bone length axis in 1 In order to provide information about bone quality and quantity from exactly the same locations within the samples, ESEM in BSE mode was used to quantify the peri-implant bone formation and the AI in the sections prior used for nanoindention. The ESEM was operating in low vacuum (0.3 All data are presented as box plots, using the 25 and 75 percentile as box width. The mean value and the median are indicated as square and line within the box, respectively, and the standard deviation as whiskers. The differences between the groups were analysed for significance with SigmaPlot (Systat Software, Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) using a one-way analysis of variance with a Tukey post-hoc test for multiple comparisons of the mean values. Statistical significance was assumed at Ovariectomy induced a decrease of the relative uterine wet weight measured at the time of explantation. This effect was antagonized partly by the ethinyl-estradiol-rich diet (E) while the soy extract substituted genistein-rich diet (G) had no significant effect on the uterine wet weight. The relative uterus wet weight averaged 0.35 All implants healed uneventfully without wound infection, hardware loosening or chronic adverse reaction. Histologically, no accumulations of inflammatory cells or foreign body giant cells were seen around any of the implants. 28 3-D reconstruction of the SRμCT data revealed a mesh-like coverage of the titanium pins with mineralized bone ( The de novo bone formation, 100 The indentation modulus ( Bone regeneration and osseointegration of implants are highly coordinated processes regulated by a complex and balanced interplay of bone cells, growth factors, cytokines and components of the ECM. The crucial role that PGs and their GAG constituents play in these processes has received increasing scientific recognition over the recent years Based on the similarities between the alterations in bone metabolism induced by estrogen deficiency in ovarectomized rats and post-menpausal women, we and others used the ovarectomized rat as a reliable and accepted model to study bone regeneration under estrogen deficiency In the present study we were able to consistently evaluate the peri-implant bone quality and quantity at the same defined area within the specimens for the first time. Anchorage and stability of endosseous implants depend on the amount of peri-implant bone and BIC but also on the quality of the surrounding bone tissue When analysing our data with respect to the diet, HRT seemed to enhance osseointegration around uncoated implants. Newly formed bone and AI, as measured with SRμCT, increased with ethinyl-estradiol- (E) and genistein-rich (G) diets, although not significantly ( Implant coating with collagen I and CS alone had no effect on the AI and tissue hardness but resulted in a moderately increased peri-implant bone formation and indentation modulus in the tibiae of ovariectomized rats. Remarkably, this trend became more pronounced with both types of HRT, especially with ethinyl estradiol supplement. Under these circumstances CS-coated implants were characterized by an increased AI and significantly stiffer and harder peri-implant bone, indicating a higher mineralization degree and a more mature bone as compared to the uncoated Ti pins. Thus, the combination of CS-containing aECM coatings, with their potential for accelerating bone regeneration, and HRT appears to exert synergistic effects on the quality of peri-implant bone under estrogen deficiency. Surprisingly the amount of peri-implant bone was not increased substantially. The positive effects of CS on osteogenesis and bone remodelling have been shown in few in vivo studies using healthy rodents Besides being a scaffold and substrate for bone regeneration, GAGs within the ECM are known to directly interact with cytokines and growth factors essential for bone regeneration like TGF-β, FGF-2 and BMPs Coatings of titanium implants with type I collagen and CS enhanced osseointegration in the tibiae of ovarectomized rats and improved the mechanical properties of the newly formed peri-implant bone. Artificial ECMs of collagen and CS appear to create a Ca- and P-trapping matrix on the implant surface, capable of facilitating matrix mineralization and retaining and modulating growth factor and cytokine activity during the initial stages of osseointegration. HRT both with ethinyl estradiol and with genistein could offset some of the negative effects caused by OVX such as reduced BIA, AI, tissue hardness and indentation modulus. The combination of HRT and CS-containing aECM coatings exerted synergistic effects and appears therefore to be beneficial for the quality and quantity of the newly formed peri-implant bone under estrogen deficiency. These findings are of potential clinical relevance because surface modification of implants with aECM may provide a useful additional strategy when treating osteoporotic patients. Further studies should aim at confirming these results in preclinical models and using GAG derivatives with different sulfation patterns. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for financial support (TRR 67, SCHA 570/9-2), BESSY, HASYLAB and S. Manthey, A. Wenke, A. Dudeck, P. Leibner, A. Martens, F. Beckmann and G. Weidemann for technical assistance. We thank Solbar Plant Extracts, Israel, for the delivery of Solgen 40. Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 2–4 and 7, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full color images can be found in the on-line version, at