The possibility of utilizing alkaline electrolysis technique in zinc electrowinning has been investigated. Effects of electrolysis conditions on the morphology of deposited zinc were also studied. The composition of the electrolyte was selected to be in accordance with the industrial practice, 25 g/l Zn2+ and 240 g/l NaOH. The investigated parameters were current density (500, 1000, 1500 A/m2) and electrolyte temperature (35, 50, 65 °C). Considerably high current efficiencies (97–99%) were obtained with energy consumptions of 2.46–2.7 kWh/kg Zn as compared to 3.25–3.4 kWh/kg Zn of industrial electrowinning, which resulted in 20% energy savings. Zinc deposits obtained were in spongy and powdery form.Zinc is an important member of the non-ferrous metals and primarily produced from its ores of sulfide, oxide and siliceous types via pyro- and hydro-electrometallurgical routes. Zinc electrowinning is the main process step of hydro-electrometallurgical route for both from primary and secondary sources and about 80% of the world zinc production is carried out by this technique ( In the alkaline zinc electrowinning process hydrogen evolution on the cathode surface is even more impeded than the one in acidic electrowinning. Current efficiencies of 100% can thus be reached when high current densities are applied. Recent investigations in zinc industry have been mainly focused on decreasing the energy costs in reduction electrolysis, which is an energy intensive process. These researches clearly demonstrated that alkaline zinc electrowinning has distinct advantages over acidic electrowinning process ( The optimum conditions of alkaline zinc electrowinning have been investigated through a series of lab-scale experiments. Electrolyte composition of 25 g/l Zn As it can be seen from As a result of the experiments carried out at different temperatures, the average cell potential values dropped from 2.9 to 2.7 and 2.6 V by increasing the temperature from 35 to 50 and 65 °C, respectively. Surface photographs of the deposited zinc showing the effect of temperature are given in Since iron, nickel and cobalt have little solubility in alkaline media the effect of lead dissolution in the electrolyte on deposited zinc morphology is investigated and the results can be seen in The following observations are confirmed by the alkaline zinc electrowinning experiments carried out in a laboratory-scale cell and at high current densities, in contrast to the classical electrolysis operation: Alkaline zinc electrolysis is accomplished at 1000 A/m It is possible to operate alkaline zinc electrowinning with an energy consumption of 2.46–2.7 kW Cell potential increases as the current density increases. Cell potential drops as the temperature increases. If the current density was lowered, growth in three dimensions was favored, giving a less flat product. Impurity content of the zinc powder deposited was 0.22% (Cu, Al, Na, Fe, Pb). Spongy and powdery zinc deposits were obtained on the cathode surface. Produced zinc is usually preferred in gold and silver cementation. Cathode rinsing waters must be recycled back to the electrolysis step in a controlled manner in order to avoid evaporation losses and to comply with the environmental responsibilities. The alkaline electrowinning process appears to be the most promising technological alternative for industrial zinc production of the future. This work has been supported by the Istanbul Technical University Research Fund with the Project Number 2037.