Uncertainties in a rock mass quality measure are due largely to the inherently heterogeneous nature of the rock mass itself. Traditional deterministic methods for the assessment of rock mass quality are not based upon a complete understanding of these inherent uncertainties, which can result in adverse impact on overall design performance. To address this problem, a Monte Carlo simulation (MCS)-based uncertainty analysis framework is proposed in this study to probabilistically quantify the uncertainties in the Q-system of rock mass classification. The proposed framework is then implemented in a highway tunnel case study. The probability distribution of the Q-value is obtained using the MCS technique in which the relative frequency histograms of the input parameters are used to probabilistically assess the rock mass properties and responses with appropriate empirical correlations. The probabilistic estimates of the rock mass properties are also adopted as the input for a finite element model for probabilistic evaluation of the excavation-induced tunnel displacement. In addition, a probabilistic sensitivity analysis is conducted to rank the relative importance of the input parameters in the Q-system according to the regression coefficients, Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficients, contributions to variance and effects on output mean. The effects of the distribution types of uncertain input parameters in the Q-system are also examined. The proposed framework is shown to be capable of systematically assessing the uncertainty in the rock mass quality measure before construction as well as providing insightful information for the probabilistic evaluation of the ground response and support performance of underground structures. Although applied specifically to the Q-system, the proposed probabilistic framework should also be applicable to other rock mass classification systems.Rock mass classification systems have been widely used to provide a quantitative index of rock mass quality and as guidelines for engineering design ( The Q-log chart is commonly used to record the statistics of all the input parameters in the Q-system for the field mapping of surface exposures, core logging or underground excavation logging ( Fortunately, probabilistic analysis, which encompasses the complete probability distribution of the rock mass parameters, is capable of adequately characterizing the uncertainties in rock mass conditions. The probabilistic rock mass quality can capture the intrinsic and subjective variability of the rock mass conditions and has a significant influence on the probabilistic design in underground construction ( Similarly, However, no attempts in current research have been made to investigate the relative importance of the input parameters in the probabilistic Q-system. Additionally, many studies fail to take into account the interdependencies between uncertain Q-parameters and the effects of the distribution type of the Q-parameters. In this paper, an MCS-based uncertainty analysis framework for the Q-system has been proposed. By conducting the MCS, the probabilistic sensitivity analysis can be used to investigate the impact of the input parameters on the Q-system. The effects of the correlations between input parameters and the effects of the input parameter distribution types on the Q-value and associated rock mass properties and responses can also be examined. The proposed MCS-based uncertainty analysis framework for the Q-system is described in detail in The Q-system, an empirical rock mass classification system, was proposed by The Q-value is the product of three quotients of its input parameters. The first quotient (RQD/J The MCS is a stochastic simulation method where the probability distribution of possible outcomes is produced from different randomly sampled sets of values from the probability distributions of the input parameters. The probability distribution is specified for each input parameter, and the randomly selected input values are used to simulate a wide range of possible output values ( The Excel add-in program @RISK is an advanced statistical risk analysis system that implements MCS in a standard spreadsheet package, in which the uncertainty in the input parameters can be explicitly characterized to produce outputs that describe all the possible outcomes ( In the Q-system, all the input parameters can be regarded as random variables. The variability of the input parameters can be described by the relative frequency histograms, which can be accessed from the Q-histogram logging data by drilled core logging, exposed outcrop mapping, and tunnel mapping. When the statistical distributions are obtained for the six input parameters, the distribution of the Q-value can be calculated according to Eq. Once the probability distributions of the Q-value and other input parameters have been determined, the rock mass properties and responses can be similarly characterized probabilistically according to empirical equations using the MCS with the @RISK program. Once the probability distributions of the rock mass properties have been determined, they can be used as the inputs for a numerical model to probabilistically evaluate the rock mass responses. To achieve this, a finite element method (FEM) or a finite difference method stress analysis may be performed, taking the variability of the input parameters into account and including the rock mass properties and the in situ stress ( The PEM can combine probabilistic input parameters and evaluating the probability distribution of the output variables. In the PEM, several estimation points are sampled to calculate the possible values of the outcome, and proper weights should be assigned to obtain an approximation of the probability distribution for the output variable ( For PEM-based probabilistic modeling in RS2, the normal distribution is assumed for all the uncertain input and output parameters, and the mean and standard deviation from the estimated distributions of the rock mass properties are used as the inputs for numerical modeling. For the MCS model, the distribution types of the rock mass parameters are derived from the best fit distribution for each parameter, while the statistical values, such as the mean, standard deviation, min, and max, are estimated from the actual relative frequency histograms which are used for the Q-parameters. After performing the numerical calculations and interpretations, the statistics (mean, standard deviation) of the rock mass response parameters can be obtained at arbitrary points in the model based on a certain number of iterations. Several sensitivity analysis techniques, including the differential sensitivity analysis, one at a time sensitivity analysis, factorial design, the sensitivity index, and the importance factors, can be used for determining the relative importance of the input parameters to the output variables ( In the tornado graphs, the numbers shown at the two ends of a bar graph describe the calculated values for the different ranking techniques used during the simulation process. Note that the numbers at the two ends of the double-sided tornado, showing the effect on the output mean, are the means of the output variable from the iterations with the lowest and highest 10% of input values, respectively. The rank of the input parameters is based on the range between the highest and the lowest mean value caused by that input parameter, i.e., the length of the bar. The regression coefficient and the percentage contribution to variance are obtained based on a stepwise multiple regression, an iterative process where input variables are entered into the regression sequentially. Spearman’s correlation coefficient is calculated based on the Spearman rank-order correlation, which works well for linear or nonlinear correlations. In addition to the tornado graphs, @RISK also provides a spider graph of input parameters which show how the output mean value varies with an increase in the input parameter across its range. The steeper the gradient of the trend line is, the greater the effect this input parameter has on the output. A spider graph shows more information than a tornado graph, when used to describe the effect on an output mean, since the spider graph shows the rate of change for the input parameters while only the overall range of the output is shown in the tornado graph. The relationship between the RQD and the volumetric joint frequency The volumetric joint frequency It can be seen that the RQD is negatively correlated to the volumetric joint frequency, Because the correlation between RQD and J In rock engineering, the uncertainties include the aleatory variability, caused by randomness, and the epistemic uncertainty, caused by the lack of knowledge ( The Shimizu tunnel No. 3, located in the city of Shimizu in Japan, is an important section of Japan’s Tomei-Meishin Expressway project. It is a research tunnel with a length of 1.12 km (height 12 m, width 18 m). The depth varies from 30 m to 190 m with an average of approximately 83 m. The in situ stresses are 2 MPa and 1.73 MPa in the vertical and horizontal directions, respectively, giving a stress ratio of 0.83 ( At the Shimizu tunnel No. 3, the tunneling boring machine (TBM) pilot and enlargement method were utilized. The TBM tunnel was first bored within the top heading cross-section using a 5 m diameter triple shield TBM. After the TBM pilot tunnel had progressed to some extent, the gradual enlargement of the tunnel was performed by drilling and blasting top heading, a bench and finally an invert. Since the Shimizu tunnel No. 3 is a research tunnel, extensive instrumentation was installed to monitor the tunnel response during tunnel construction. Total stations with reflex targets and 12 m long multipoint extensometers were used to monitor the tunnel deformation ( According to Traditionally, an interval analysis based on the statistics obtained from the Q-histogram logging in the site investigation stage is used to estimate the Q-value. In addition to the interval analysis, both the geometric mean and the weighted average calculations are deterministic approaches to obtaining a representative value of the Q index. By definition, the geometric mean is calculated as the n  The probabilistic distributions of the rock mass properties estimated by the normalized estimation approach, including the UCS, deformation modulus, cohesion, and friction angle of the rock mass, are shown in The FEM program RS2 was used to conduct the numerical analysis for this case study. It is assumed that the surrounding rock mass followed the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, and the material behaved elastically. The tensile strength of the intact rock was not available in this case study; thus, the following equation was used to estimate the tensile strength ( The UCS of the rock mass has been estimated using Eq. (9), and its distribution is shown in The interpreted results of the MCS-based probabilistic analysis from the RS2 program is depicted in To investigate the effects of uncertainty in the rock mass properties and in situ stress in the crown displacement, deterministic and probabilistic analyses were performed in RS2 using PEM and MCS modeling. For the deterministic scenarios, only single mean values of the rock mass properties and in situ stress were used. For the probabilistic scenarios, uncertain input parameters, such as the rock mass elastic properties and in situ stress, were described probabilistically. In the PEM model, the mean and standard deviation of the probabilistic parameters were used as model inputs. In the MCS model in RS2, the best-fit distribution type, mean, standard deviation, and min and max of the probabilistic parameters were required as model inputs. It should be noted that for a normally distributed parameter, the max and min can be estimated at 3 standard deviations above and below the mean value according to the three-sigma rule. The Poisson’s ratio and the stress ratio are examples of this in this study. For the MCS model in RS2, the Latin hypercube sampling was applied, and 1000 iterations were performed.  A sensitivity analysis has also been carried out during the MCS of the Q-value in the @RISK program to examine the impact of the Q-parameters. Traditionally, the one-way sensitivity analysis is used to investigate the impact of the input parameters on the output by changing one input parameter while keeping the other parameters constant. The sensitivity index (SI) is a measure of the impact that the input parameters have on the output variable in the one-way sensitivity analysis and is calculated as the percentage difference in the output when an input parameter varies across its entire range ( In this case study, the The SI-based sensitivity analysis, which is one-way sensitivity analysis, fails to account for the distribution form and the probability function of the input parameter and their effects on the sensitivity analysis. In contrast, the sensitivity analysis for the MCS in the @RISK program can perform a multi-factor sensitivity analysis, in which the effect of changes in several input parameters can be investigated by simultaneously varying different parameters. In this way, the compounded effect of a given variable can be evaluated. It is thus a probabilistic sensitivity analysis in which probabilistic distributions are utilized to consider the variations of input parameters rather than assigning certain values to input parameters. The calculation of the regression coefficients can reflect the simultaneous random sampling from the input distributions by displaying the sampled input values versus the output values calculated. Additionally, A sensitivity analysis is a useful tool to characterize the relationship between the input parameters and the output parameters as well as identify the most influential input parameters. However, in ground characterization and rock mass classification, sensitivity analyses of geological parameters are not adequately conducted. Instead, it is often assumed that all the geological parameters are equally important, which obviously fails to realistically assess the different impact that input parameters have on output parameters. Thus, it is essential to perform sensitivity analyses on ground parameters in the site investigation stage, especially for complex and challenging ground conditions. It is also beneficial to know which input parameter is the most influential overall to the rock mass quality, so that precautionary measures (e.g., dewatering, grouting, freezing, pre-blasting) can be taken in advance to improve the rock mass quality before excavation. The different ranking techniques in the sensitivity analysis can be used for comparative and cross-checking purposes. The effect of the negative correlation between the RQD and J  Unfortunately, few studies have focused on the correlation among input parameters in rock mass or ground classification. The interdependencies among ground parameters are mostly overlooked, and it is assumed that all the input parameters are independent. However, dependencies among ground parameters can be critical to obtaining proper numerical results in engineering practice, particularly in probabilistic assessments and reliability analyses of geotechnical structures ( To investigate the effect of the Q-parameters distribution types on the Q-value and associated output parameters, different distribution types have been assigned, relative to the relative frequency histogram in Scenario 1, to each Q-parameter according to commonly used distributions, as shown in  If a theoretical distribution is well fitted to the empirical frequency data (e.g., the relative frequency histogram), then random samples can be drawn from the fitted distribution in the MCS ( If sufficient data are available, the distribution that best fits the histogram of the data should be selected. However, in rock engineering, the subsurface information is often scarce, and only a limited number of samples in limited regions are used for estimating the rock mass quality in the site investigation stage ( A Monte Carlo simulation-based uncertainty analysis framework for the Q-system has been proposed to probabilistically assess the uncertainty in the input parameters and its effect on the Q-value and associated rock mass parameters. A case study of the Shimizu highway tunnel was adopted to implement the proposed framework. Based on the analysis and discussion of the obtained results, it is concluded that the MCS-based probabilistic analysis allows the quantitative characterization of uncertainty and variability in the input parameters and its impact on the output parameters. The probabilistic distribution of the Q-value is obtained with the MCS technique based on the relative frequency histograms of the input parameters. Based on the empirical correlations between the rock mass parameters and the Q-value, probabilistic estimates of the rock mass parameters can also be obtained, which are subsequently used as inputs to numerical models for stress analysis and stability assessment. Great care should also be taken to select the appropriate empirical correlations during the probabilistic calculation process. In this case study, the empirically estimated probabilistic tunnel displacement, obtained by the Barton approach, agrees well with that generated from the probability analysis of the numerical model using the PEM and MCS techniques. In addition, the results of the uncertainty analysis of the probabilistic Q-system suggest that the probabilistic sensitivity analysis provides a quantitative ranking of the impact of the input distributions on the Q-value. The superiority of the probabilistic sensitivity analysis, a multi factor analysis in which distributions are utilized to allow simultaneous variation of all the input parameters, over the traditional one-way sensitivity analysis is also revealed. The use of different ranking techniques for the probabilistic sensitivity analysis is recommended for comparative and cross-checking purposes; it is also a more realistic way to account for the negative correlation between the RQD and J The proposed framework of the MCS-based uncertainty analysis in the probabilistic Q-system provides an approach for systematically assessing the uncertainty in the rock mass quality and its impact on rock mass properties by applying the MCS technique with appropriate empirical correlations. The most influential input parameters can also be identified with the probabilistic sensitivity analysis so that a more detailed investigation plan can be proposed and executed to reduce the uncertainty in the preliminary design stage. The framework can also serve as a useful tool to obtain insightful information for the probabilistic evaluation of ground responses and rock support systems of underground structures. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: