High dense bulk specimens of 0.55% C steel with ferrite grain sizes in the nanocrystalline and ultrafine regimes have been produced by a warm consolidation process from ball-milled iron powder and subsequent heat treatments. The resulting microstructure was investigated and related to the mechanical behavior studied by uniaxial compression tests. It was found that the samples containing nanocrystalline ferrite presented very high strength with low ductility. As the ferrite grain size increased to the ultrafine regime, larger cementite particles appeared inside ferrite grains and along the grain boundaries. As a consequence, the amount of strain hardening and total plastic strain increased and the maximum strength diminished. With a consolidation temperature of 500°C and a heat treatment temperature of 775°C, an average ferritic grain size of 0.85μm was obtained. This steel showed a yield strength of 1070MPa and strain hardening up to a plastic strain of 31%.Nanocrystalline metals have been attracting much scientific interest due to the potential mechanical characteristics they may offer In the case of steel, useful bulk materials with ferrite grain sizes smaller than 1 In this paper, samples of medium carbon steel with different ferritic grain sizes and cementite distributions have been obtained by combining warm consolidation with subsequent heat treatments. The study covers extensively the nanocrystalline and ultrafine regimes with the aim of studying the evolution of the microstructure as the ferritic grain size increases as well as the concerning mechanical response. Commercial pure iron powder was severely deformed in a planetary ball mill with stainless steels balls under an Ar gas atmosphere for 52 The consolidation process of milled steel powder was divided into two steps. In the first one the powder was cold compacted at 1100 The ferrite grain size was determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The samples were thinned by jet-polishing in an electrolyte solution of 94% acetic acid and 6% perchloric acid in the case of ductile samples and by ion milling in the case of the fragile ones. The grain size in the nanocrystalline samples was measured combining bright and dark field TEM images. This procedure allowed identifying the contour of grains free from overlapping effects. Selected-area diffraction (SAD) was obtained in all cases The average ferritic grain size of the samples obtained by different consolidation procedures are summarized in In these samples, the final grain size of the ferrite increased as the compaction temperature was increased. However, the ferrite grain size keeps in the nanocrystalline or low ultrafine regime. As expected, the SAD patterns showed peaks of cementite which where more evident at the compaction temperature of 500 In these samples, an increase of the average ferrite grain size was observed as the heat treating temperature increased. The grain growth is limited at temperatures below 700 At this temperature and with carbon content around 0.55% C, nearly all the ferrite transforms to austenite. The diffusivity of carbon is faster now and consequently greater amounts of carbon can leave the ferrite grains and dissolve into the austenite. The resulting microstructure after slow cooling consists mainly in cementite precipitates distributed along the ferrite grain boundaries. However, the size and distribution of this cementite depends on the temperature of compaction, as shown in The hardness of every sample is plotted as a function of The true stress–strain curves for all the ferrite grain sizes are illustrated in For the nanocrystalline samples (30 In this case (samples with grain size of 340 In the samples with average grain sizes of 0.85 Although the direct comparison between the ductility results determined by compression and tensile tests is not possible due to the high asymmetry, the yield strength is less asymmetric The combination of powder consolidation at different temperatures and the subsequent heat treatment allowed obtaining samples with ferrite grain sizes covering the nanocrystalline and the ultrafine regimes. The grain size was quite homogeneous in nanocrystalline and low ultrafine samples, whereas it turned very heterogeneous as the grain size increased. The cementite particles were difficult to observe in nanocrystalline samples but their presence was more evident as the temperatures of the consolidation and heat treatment processes increased. At 775 Nanocrystalline samples showed very high strength with low plastic strain and no signs of strain hardening. Samples in the low ultrafine regime showed some strain hardening but specimens failed showing brittle behavior. Samples in the ultrafine regime showed some strain hardening followed by a strain softening that could be related to a dynamic recovery. Finally, samples with a grain size close to 1 Authors wish to thank Dr. Jordi Llumà for his help in the grain size distributions studies as well as Pep Bassas and Montserrat Marsal for their assistance in XRD and SEM observations, respectively. This work was supported by Spanish CICYT (project DPI 2005-09324). R. Rodríguez-Baracaldo is also grateful for the Fundación Carolina grant.