The purpose of this work was to study the feasibility at laboratory-scale of a new hydrometallurgical process for treating electric arc furnace dusts (EAFD). The proposed process is intended to extract zinc and lead from EAFD without destroying the iron oxides matrix. So, this material can be recycled by the steel industry. Independently of the origin of the samples, major mineralogical forms present in these wastes are Fe3O4, ZnO, ZnFe2O4 and PbOHCl. The proposed process consists of a hydrometallurgical treatment of wastes based on selective leaching of zinc and lead. Initially, a leaching is carried out utilizing a chelating agent, nitrilotriacetate anion (NTA3−), as the protonated form HNTA2−. Treatment of five EAFD samples for an hour at room temperature with a molar solution of reagent results in total leaching of the ZnO. In all cases the solubilized iron does not exceed 3wt.%. The recovery of zinc and lead is performed by precipitation of metallic sulfides with a solution of Na2S4 sodium tetrasulfide 2M. These metallic sulfides can be used as metallurgical raw materials and the chelating reagent can be reused in the process after pH adjustment. The results of the normalized leaching test AFNOR X31-210 conducted on the leaching residues, shows that all the samples meet acceptance thresholds for hazardous wastes landfill. However, the residues contain a considerable amount of zinc as ZnFe2O4. The extraction of the zinc element requires the destruction of the ferrite structure. In this process, ZnFe2O4 is treated by FeCl3·6H2O. The reaction consists in a particle O2−/Cl− exchange allowing the recovery of zinc as ZnCl2 and iron as hematite Fe2O3. The separation of these products is accomplished by simple aqueous leaching. All of the zinc is extracted in a 8h treatment at 150°C with a molar ratio FeCl3·6H2O/ZnFe2O4 equal to 10. Ultimate solid residues, which have been concentrated in iron, can be oriented towards the steel industry.Production of steel in the electric arc furnace generates a dust by-product mainly composed of iron oxides and non-ferrous metals. The average iron concentration in the dust is approximately 30 World production of crude steel by electric way was about 286 At present time, in France, the only alternative to landfilling is treatment utilizing the Waelz process The inventory of different existing processes for EAFD treatment shows that pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes have both advantages and disadvantages. Pyrometallurgical processes are more expensive than hydrometallurgical processes and do not allow total beneficiation of the dusts in spite of a very high yield of non-ferrous metals extraction. Hydrometallurgical processes are cheaper but do not allow lead extraction or ZnFe In this paper, a new hydrometallurgical treatment is proposed. It consists of the following steps: direct atmospheric leaching of dust using solutions of sodium hydrogenonitrilotriacetate allowing the selective dissolution of easy leachable compounds such as ZnO and PbOHCl; recovery of zinc and lead in the leachate by sulfide precipitation; treatment of the solid residue with FeCl The results discussed in this paper have been obtained with five different samples of EAFD. The different dust samples used in this investigation came from carbon steelmaking except sample E which came from stainless steelmaking. A sample of 10 X-ray powder diffraction was performed on each sample (INEL CPS 120 diffractometer with a curved position sensitive detector using Co Kα radiation). The diffraction patterns were analyzed with WINDIF Software allowing to perform a search by matching experimental file and database. The AFNOR X31-210 leaching test Reagent of selective leaching utilized is nitrilotriacetate ion N(CH The effect of the temperature was investigated using a temperature controlled bath. Leaching was performed on samples at 20, 50, 80 and 110 For the study of the above parameter, experiments were performed at 20 The precipitation reagent used was a sodium polysulfide solution (Na After each leaching experiment, the solid residue was characterized by chemical and XRD analysis and was subjected to the AFNOR X31-210 leaching test, previously applied over the original samples of dust. After the first leaching step, the solid residue, which contains zinc in ferrite form (ZnFe The results of chemical analysis are shown in The results of XRD analysis are shown in The leaching test AFNOR X31-210 was conducted on all dust samples. The results are presented in The different leaching parameters were initially studied on a reference sample: EAFD A. This dust was selected because of its high lead content allowing us to study zinc and lead leaching simultaneously. A protonated form of nitrilotriacetic acid was chosen for its ability to dissolve significative amounts of ZnO and PbO without solubilizing iron oxides. The maximum solubilities reached, determined in a previous work The results of temperature investigations are plotted in  After HNTA   The results of leaching test AFNOR X31-210, presented in Zinc ferrite presents a very stable crystallographic structure of spinel type. Leaching by HNTA The solid residue resulting from HNTA  Samples A, C, D, E were treated in two steps of the process whereas sample B was directly treated with FeCl Composition of metallic sulfide cakes obtained after HNTA  In the solids obtained at the end of the process, it can be observed that there was a doubling of the iron content in most of the samples studied, due to the use of a reagent containing iron. The final solids contained more than 40 With regard to nickel and chrome in the sample E (stainless steel dust), the two-step process had no effect on their mineralogical forms. This work showed the feasibility at laboratory-scale of a new hydrometallurgical two-step process for EAFD. The first step consists of a preferential leaching of ZnO and PbOHCl, leading to an inert solid residue suitable for disposal. Precipitation of metallic sulfides with Na This process may be applicable to other zinc- or lead-bearing solids (roasted sulfides, Waelz oxides, metallurgical scraps, etc.) and can be adaptable to the composition of the matrix. For example, if in a given sample, zinc is majoritary under ZnO form, only the first step will be practiced. On the other hand, if zinc ferrite is the predominant mineralogical form, the solid will be directly treated by FeCl