It was previously found that peritectic-forming solutes are more favourable for the grain refinement of cast Al alloys than eutectic-forming solutes. In this work, we report that the eutectic-forming solute, Mg, can also significantly grain refine cast Zn. Differential thermal analysis (DTA) of a Zn–Mg alloy, in which efficient grain refinement occurred, evidenced an unexpected peak that appeared before the nucleation of η-Zn grains on the DTA spectrum. Based on extensive examination using X-ray diffraction, high resolution SEM and EDS, it was found that: (a) some faceted Zn–Mg intermetallic particles were reproducibly observed; (b) the particles were located at or near grain centres; (c) the atomic ratio of Mg to Zn in the intermetallic compound was determined to be around 1/2. Using tilting selected area diffraction (SAD) and convergent beam Kikuchi line diffraction pattern (CBKLDP) techniques, these faceted particles were identified as MgZn2 and an orientation relationship between such grain-centred MgZn2 particles and the η-Zn matrix was determined. Hence, the unexpected peak on the DTA spectrum is believed to correspond to the formation of MgZn2 particles, which act as effective heterogeneous nucleation sites in the alloy. Together with the effect of Mg solute on restricting grain growth, such heterogeneous nucleation is cooperatively responsible for the grain size reduction in Zn–Mg alloys.Through the addition of efficient grain refiners into metal melts, the formation of fine, equiaxed and uniform grain structures can be enhanced. Such grain-refined microstructures deliver casting soundness and improved mechanical properties, further facilitating subsequent mechanical processing and therefore the service performance of polycrystalline metallic materials Over the past six decades, research on grain refinement of cast metals/alloys has been extensively conducted in Al, Mg and their respective alloys The present authors previously found that peritectic-forming solutes, Ag and Cu, substantially reduce the grain sizes of cast Zn even at concentrations below In order to add Mg into liquid Zn, a master alloy (Zn–60 Metallographic samples were sectioned at a position about 10 In order to investigate the possibility of heterogeneous nucleation occurring in the Zn–Mg binary systems, the grain-refined alloys were also examined with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to identify the heterogeneous nucleation particles (also called nucleants). The nucleants were located within the grains. Because the size of the grain-centred particles is small (1–6  To understand the grain refining mechanism in cast Zn by Mg, the as-cast Zn–Mg alloy specimens were further examined using XRD to identify the phase constituents in the alloys. In order to accurately identify the unexpected phase and to understand its role(s) in grain refinement of the cast Zn alloys, the following questions need to be answered first. (a) What is the morphology of the phase? (b) When was it formed during the solidification process? (c) Are there any crystallographic relationships between this phase and Zn matrix? To characterise the morphology of the unexpected phase, the cast Zn–0.6 To understand when such particles formed, the solidification process was investigated by differential thermal analysis (DTA). As expected, compared with pure Zn, an additional inflexion point (or an extra peak) appears on the DTA curve (or on the first derivative of DTA curve) of the alloys containing over 0.1 The crystallographic orientation relationship (OR) between the grain-centred MgZn A similar HCP-HCP OR has been previously reported in the Al In light of the experimental errors, the present determined OR (1) between MgZn It is generally considered that both potent nucleant particles and solute additions are essential for grain refinement StJohn's model is normally applied to a grain refining system with solute concentrations below the maximum solubility ( The above modelling indicates that both heterogeneous nucleation and solute effect cooperatively contribute to the grain refinement in Zn–Mg alloys. However, one may argue that it is the solute effect that predominately governs the reduction in grain size of these alloys. It was previously reported The question that arises is how the MgZn Freezing range (∆ In addition, as indicated by the free growth model  Through the addition of Mg into cast pure Zn, significant grain refinement was achieved. Using XRD, EDS, selected area diffraction (SAD) and TEM tilting techniques, the faceted MgZn The significant grain refining efficiency of Mg in Zn results from the cooperative contributions from (a) the growth restriction effect of Mg solute and (b) the enhanced heterogeneous nucleation of Zn on MgZn Using convergent beam Kikuchi line diffraction pattern (CBKLDP) technique, an orientation relationship (OR) between MgZn All authors would like to acknowledge the A modified FIB-TEM process has been developed to efficiently prepare site-specific TEM thin foil from the ion beam-sensitive Zn alloys. The process includes deposition of an initial protective Pt layer using an electron beam, followed by another Pt coating using an ion beam with higher efficiency, as shown in For materials with weak conductivity, a conductive 2 Deposit a 0.5 Deposit another 1.5 Mill the target area into a TEM thin foil from bulk samples using FIB cross-section milling operated at 30 Clean the TEM foil using FIB cross cleaning operated at 30 Weld the lift-out TEM thin foil to Cu grid using the electron beam. Refine the TEM foil using FIB milling at 5