In this study, network and main path analyses were conducted on 1856 studies related to text mining, by extracting keywords and citation information from the text of each paper. Our findings indicate that research papers on text mining have been published in 45 academic disciplines in the 1980s and 1990s, 105 disciplines in the 2000s, and 171 disciplines in the 2010s. The results show that using text mining as a research topic and method has rapidly increased. We also demonstrate that the main theme of text mining research is discourse and content analysis in the 1980s and 1990s, biology and data mining in the 2000s, and medicine and advanced text mining in the 2010s. Moreover, we examined the main citation path for text mining studies and suggest that the main focus of text mining studies has evolved from information science to information systems and technology management. Additionally, influential papers have been recently published in fields such as architecture and social ecology revealing the wide scope of text mining. This article presents an understanding of previously unexplored research trends in text mining and how these trends shed light on the most influential academic papers in the field.Text mining is a technique for extracting meaningful information from data in text form. The targets of text mining range from academic literature to social networking sites, posts and comments about the news, voice of the customer, speech to text (STT) data, and more. Text mining is also actively used as a means of analyzing research trends in various fields of study, such as information systems, technology management, education, library and information science, psychology, sociology, and others. However, there has not been enough study on the research trends of text mining itself, in spite of fact that text mining is being utilized in a variety of fields of study. Therefore, when researchers need to find papers with academic importance and contribution on text mining, they primarily rely on the reputation of the journal in which the paper is published and number of the citations the paper has received. The purpose of this study is to define which papers make a significant academic contribution, what is the main research path of current text mining studies, and to predict future research trends in text mining. To answer these questions, we analyzed 1856 papers about text mining stored in the international academic citation databases, Scopus and Web of Science. To find current trends in text mining, semantic network analysis and main path analysis are implemented as text mining methods in this paper. “Text” in text mining is defined as a symbol stored in digital form. Images and video files are also defined as objects of text mining ( Network analysis, often called “keyword network analysis” or “semantic network analysis”, interprets phenomenon through the use of networks built by linking words and words appearing in the text to create a map of relationships. Network analysis describes the structured results from uncategorized data rather than fully categorized data. In other words, from a relational perspective, not an independent object but the relationships between the objects that help a situation or phenomenon to be understood more clearly. The network consists of nodes corresponding to keywords and lines or links indicating the relationship between them. In this study, we utilize Gephi 0.9.2 and VOSviewer 1.6.9 as the software for network analysis. The measures to determine the centrality of a node, such as degree centrality which measures how many nodes are directly connected, closeness centrality which Main path analysis establishes the important route among the citation relationships of papers. It is a technique that sheds light on the academic, behind-the-scenes relationship and the broadening path of knowledge by visualizing the use of citations between institutions. In this study, the main path is derived based on the search path count (SPC). The SPC is the total number of times that a link is traversed from the source to the end of the path in which a paper is cited. We used four types of main path analysis; forward local main path, backward main path, global main path, and key-route main path analysis. Forward local main path and backward local main path analyses select and connect the link with the largest SPC at each contact point. The global main path analysis selects the path where the total sum of the SPCs is the largest and the key-route main path analysis selects the path where the largest link is first and combines the important path forward and backward. The key-route main path search solves the problem of missing some routes and includes all important connections. We used the software, Pajek 64–5.07a as the main path analysis tool. There have been several studies on research trends of academic fields such as information science ( The data sources used in this study were Web of Science and Scopus. However, when searching for two consecutive words like “text mining” or “text analysis”, papers such as, “Affect analysis of text using fuzzy semantic typing” (   We conducted a semantic network analysis based on the keywords created by the author(s) in the abstract. Python software was used to extract keywords from each paper from Scopus and to derive the network between simultaneously occurring keywords in the same abstract. During data extraction and analysis, the threshold, which represents the frequency of pairs of keywords presented at the same time, was set at 2 from 1980 to 1999, 4 from 2000 to 2009, and 7 from 2010 to 2019. The network data between keywords in each paper was derived as shown in The analysis of the keyword network showed that the number of studies about text mining had increased along with the broadening of the scope of the studies so that the inter-keyword network was gradually becoming more complex. However, when the number of studies was smaller, such as in the 1980s and 1990s, words that might come from any paper such as “research”, “information”, and “theory” were highlighted as the main keywords, making it difficult to infer any specific implications. We analyzed the text of abstracts for 1,856 papers and used Python to extract the frequency of keyword pairs appearing together within the same abstract and visualized them through Gephi. Keyword networks derived for each period are shown in A network analysis software, VOSviewer, was chosen for the simultaneous mapping and a clustering of nodes and the density visualization which can make it intuitive to identify critical areas. In VOSviewer, similarity between two words is proportional to the number of times they appear simultaneously and words with high similarity are placed close together. We designated the minimum total link strength of an item as one. In We conducted a main path analysis on two citation databases. The targeted set of studies of the main path analysis are the same as the set used in the previous network analysis. The software used for the main path analysis was VOSviewer, Gephi, and Pajek. First, we used VOSviewer and Gephi to create citation network relationships between studies on text mining and utilized Pajek to calculate the SPC and visualize the main path. Since the paper’s publication year is displayed in the visualization results, we implemented the main path analysis both by separating the time periods and by combining the time periods ( In this study, four types of main path analysis and visualization were performed; forward local main path, backward local main path, key route local main path, and standard global main path. The final results of the main path analyses are shown in We have analyzed studies on text mining from different time periods and derived research trends from the databases of peer-reviewed literature, Web of Science and Scopus. The results reveal that the number of academic fields where text mining is utilized has increased significantly and specifically identify in which areas of study text mining is being actively applied. In addition, we have extracted keywords occurring simultaneously from the abstracts of text mining papers to analyze network paths and identify the major keywords for each time period based on eigenvector centrality. Our findings indicate that conversational and speech-related keywords such as “discourse” and “speech” in the 1980s and 1990s, biomedical words like “gene” in the 2000s, and medical-related keywords such as “cancer”, and keywords related to advanced analytical techniques such as “topic” and “algorithm” are prominent in the 2010s. In addition, we specifically demonstrate the changes in keywords by year suggesting that research on big data, social media analysis, and emotion analysis (“big data,” “twitter,” “sentiment analysis”) are emerging as the latest research trends. Based on the results of keyword analysis of the abstracts of papers, we can expect that the academic fields publishing papers related to text mining will be steadily expanded in the future and new analysis techniques will also continue to be developed. We also examined the main path of citation networks among 1,856 studies on text mining and presented evidence regarding influential authors and important contributing papers to the advancement of knowledge and development in the field of text mining. To sum up the results of the four main path analyses, the papers contributing to the academic development of text mining were produced in the information science literature until the early 2000s and in information system and technology management literature in 2010s. In addition, recent important research concerning text mining has been published, surprisingly, in social ecology and architecture and we observed the widespread spread use of text mining throughout various academic fields. We also highlight which studies have had an extensive impact on various academic fields. Recently it has been shown that text mining is increasingly used as a means of research rather than as the purpose of research. Based on the international databases of academic literature, we extracted and preprocessed citation and cited data between the studies. The contribution of this study is that it unearthed research trends on text mining from 1980 to the present and derives the implications of these trends by analyzing semantic networks and main paths within these networks. A future extension of this research would be to analyze research trends of text mining comparing “text mining as a means of study” with “text mining as a subject to study”.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: See