A silica-rich tailing from vanadium extraction has been used for geopolymer synthesis in combination with metakaolin (MK) as an additional-Al source. Results show that alkaline roasting pretreatment effectively enhance geopolymerisation ability of the tailing in terms of XRD analysis and leaching tests. Strengths of samples can be improved by adding proper quantities of MK, or appropriately raising curing temperature. Curing temperature also affects the Si/Al ratio since higher curing temperature is more favorable for releasing Al. The highest compressive strength of 55.7MPa can be obtained.The geopolymerisation process involving leaching, diffusion, condensation and hardening steps ( Tailing wastes are mainly disposed of by dumping or landfill ( In this investigation, alkaline roasting pretreatment of the raw vanadium tailing (RVT) was conducted. The activated vanadium tailing (AVT) acted as the main source material for geopolymerisation in combination with MK as an additional-Al source. Operation parameters of the AVT/MK mass ratio and curing were analysed with regard to strengths of samples. A typical RVT containing 64.17% SiO Considering alkaline solution is corrosive, solid NaOH (analytical grade) was used as activator throughout the experiment. Distilled water was used to initiate geopolymeric reaction in the powdered precursor. Standard river sand with maximum grain size of 2.5 The AVT was mixed with the MK at various mass ratios of 100/0, 90/10, 80/20, 70/30 and 60/40. Molar ratios of Na/Al and H In preparing mortar samples for strength tests, standard river sand was finally added to paste at a sand/binder mass ratio of 2/1 and mixed for one more minute. Same compressed casting and curing were applied for preparing paste and mortar samples. The typical mix design, leading to the highest strength of sample cured at 20 The RVT, the AVT and the MK were characterized by XRD, using a D/MAX X-ray diffractometer (Japan) with Cu Kα radiation generated at 40 Leaching tests of the three alumino-silicate materials were conducted, following the previous method ( Compressive strength tests were performed on a compression testing instrument (1341 Instron Co. UK) with a loading rate of 1 Si and Al in gel phases of paste samples were quantitatively analysed on 30 individual spots using an EDS (Phoenix, USA) coupled with the JSM-5610LV SEM. Instead of typical SEM imaging conditions of 20  Leaching tests shows that, dissolution extent of Si Compressive strengths of samples and the Si/Al molar ratio in gel phase are summarized in  When curing temperature raises from 20 to 60 Alkaline roasting pretreatment of the RVT makes crystalline structures decomposed partly, effectively enhancing its geopolymerisation ability. Adding proper quantities of MK to AVT improves strengths of samples by producing more gel phases and adjusting the Si/Al ratio. Appropriately raising curing temperature accelerates dissolution and condensation rate, causing higher strengths of samples. Higher curing temperature is more favorable for releasing Al. On condition that solid NaOH is used as activator throughout the experiment, the highest compressive strength of 55.7 This investigation was supported by the