Noble metals refer to ruthenium (Ru), rhodium (Rh), palladium (Pd), silver (Ag), osmium (Os), iridium (Ir), platinum (Pt), and gold (Ag). Except Ag and Au, the others are collectively called platinum metals. Noble metals are widely used in petroleum, chemical, electronic, electrical, marine, and aviation industry, known as the industrial “vitamin.”Noble metals refer to ruthenium (Ru), rhodium (Rh), palladium (Pd), silver (Ag), osmium (Os), iridium (Ir), platinum (Pt), and gold The minerals for Au are mainly natural Au, kustelite, telluride compounds. Ag has more mineral species, which are natural Ag, compounds of sulfur (S), arsenic (As) and Te, and kerargyrite. Huge amount of Ag also occurs in the iso-morphism manner within heavy metal minerals, such as tetrahedrite, galena, enargite, chalcopyrite, pyrite, arsenopyrite, etc. The platinum metals have multitudinous mineral species; say around 200, with great differences in compositions. The most common ones are stillwaterite, As-Rh-Pa-Pt mineral, millerite, etc. Noble metals have not only individual, but also symbiotic deposits. Regarding naturally occurring noble metals, their abundance in the earth’s crust is low and the distribution is scattered. Large-scale deposits of platinum metal deposits are mainly located in high altitude areas. Ninety percent of the world reserves of platinum group metals distributes mainly in South Africa, followed by Russia, which account for about 10% of the world’s total storage. The rest of the world shares the balance of 1–2%. South Africa and Russia also possess most of the Au reserves, around 75% of the total. For Ag, the majority of the reserves are held by countries in America and Russia. China is the world’s biggest Au producer. Currently, noble metals recovered from secondary resources have taken a substantial proportion in the total output Au and Ag are soft and have excellent ductility. Au is soluble in aqua regia [1:3 nitric acid (HNO The block flowsheet for a typical mining and metallurgical process for Au production is shown in Extraction of gold by cyanide process is based on the theory of oxidation by dissolved oxygen and corrosion. The overall reaction is as follows: The dissolution rate is described using the following equation: Accordingly, in the lower concentration range of CN Acid mine drainage (AMD) is one of the most tough environmental problems challenging mining industry. It is the result of oxidation of sulfide compounds in mining waste, tailings, and components of mines. It is characterized of low pH and high concentration of sulfate, metals, and metalloids. It has already been evidenced that membrane separation processes have the potential for treating AMD from mining processes of other metals AMD was collected at an Au mining company site in the state of Minas Gerais, Brazil In Aguiar et al.’s work Thereafter a preliminary capital and operational costs (CapEx and OpEx) evaluation were made The AMD composition and concentration fluctuated throughout the year. The components of particular interest to this research are presented in The AMD was pretreated by ultrafiltration (UF) prior to NF and RO experiments, to prevent damaging the RO and NF membranes due to suspended solids in the raw AMD. It was found that the RO membranes tested exhibited considerably lower permeate fluxes than the NF The retention efficiency of all the membranes is high. The pollutant content in the permeate is lowest with process using TFC-HR RO membrane; the BW30 RO membrane displayed even lower rejection than all the NF membranes. Based on the aforementioned information, NF90 and NF270 were more suitable for AMD treatment than the other membranes. The extremely low permeate fluxes of the RO membranes enhanced the initial investment cost of the membrane unit. When using NF270 membrane at pH 5.5, the maximum RR for a single step was 60%. The permeate quality achieved at a recovery rate of 60% was superior to that of the process water generally utilized by this company (ie, 13.3 mg L In CapEx and OpEx estimation, the variables considered are membrane unit cost, membrane replacement, alkalizing agents, chemical cleaning agents, energy consumption, and maintenance. The capital cost for the UF-NF unit was evaluated according to the price of US$8750.00(m Membrane replacement was based on a life span of 5 years. The alkalizing agent used was NaOH and the cleaning agent was HCl solution at 0.2% w/w. The energy cost evaluation comprised the requirements on UF power and NF feed pump in a once-through operation process. The UF power requirement was around 0.2 kW h m Based on the aforementioned conditions, the CapEx of the NF treatment system was estimated at US$131,250.00, and the OpEx was 0.263 US$/m The liquid separated from Au and Ag solid precipitated by zinc (Zn) is cyanide barren solution Wang employed special industrial membrane (SIMS) in separating copper cyanide complex [Cu(CN) A noble metal smelting factory produces 150 m Previously in fact, conventional NF membranes were also utilized to separate the cyanide complexes of Cu and Au, but with low efficiency  As implied by the aforementioned researches, an indivisible aspect associated with barren solution from Au extraction is regarding cyanide treatment. Due to its potential hazards, many countries and environmental protection agencies have imposed limiting standards for the discharge of cyanide-contaminated effluent There exist a variety of technologies for controlling cyanide discharge and some of them have been briefly touched upon in aforementioned investigations. The more traditional one is destruction by chemical reagents with high oxidation potential, which are very efficient but expensive In Zheng et al.’s work  The experimental results indicate that an extraction or RR of 87.1% for CN A study developed by Estay et al. focused on the cyanide recovery from Au mining solutions using the gas-filled membrane absorption (GFMA) process Another work investigating the GFMA in recovering free cyanide from Au mining solutions The OpEx for the GFMA and the other two conventional processes (ie, SART, AVR) was estimated considering the following aspects: labor, reagents, water, energy, metallurgical control, maintenance, contractors, membrane modules replacement in GFMA case, packing replacement in AVR case, and contingencies (corresponding to 5% of the total cost). The CapEx estimation was broken down into equipment acquisition, construction, and indirect (engineering costs, general expenses, contractor profits, spare parts, commissioning, owner costs, and start-up). The major indicator for the economic assessment was net present value (NPV) based on incomes and OpEx and CapEx. The effect of the cyanide/Cu molar ratio on the economic evaluation was evaluated using a sensitivity analysis approach for the feed solution composition selected in the experimental part. The experimental results showed that a high footprint area is required to treat 240 m In view of the aforementioned findings, it was concluded by the work that the new GFMA process was not suitable for dealing with solutions with low cyanide/Cu ratio. The SART or hybrid of GFMA and SART would be the best alternative. Unlike SART, GFMA retains HCN gas inside the membrane pores during its operation, and hence depressing the amount of gas leakages. In Lin et al.’s work An Au smelting enterprise in Henan Province, China produces a large volume (approximately 120 tons day A demonstration project was constructed with the membrane stack being composed of BPM, CEM, protective CEM, and AEM; the area of each membrane is 7 m As mentioned in the introduction part, secondary resources, such as electronic scraps, anode mud, spent catalyst, metal concentrates, take progressively more important position in noble metal production. At present, the recovery mainly relies on electrolysis, ion exchange, displacement, and precipitation. These methods have their respective advantages and disadvantages. Precipitation is a traditional method, which could be further divided into sodium sulfide (Na Recovery of Au and other precious metals from secondary resources is generally actualized by an initial dissolution using aqua regia. Under such conditions, Au is oxidized to Au(III) and forms chloro-complexes, predominantly AuCl Selective separation of Au(III) ions from acidic aqueous solutions, using methyl iso-butyl ketone (MIBK) as a carrier and LK-80 as an emulsifier, has been investigated Ionization: Complexation and extraction: Stripping: Au(III) was reduced to Au(I) in the sulfite solution. Au(I) ions are not able to form complex with MIBK. The extraction results from modeled solution containing Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Cu(II), and Fe(III), showed that only the Au(III) ions transported across the liquid membrane and nearly all of other ions remained in the feed without variation in their concentration. There exist several models for description of emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) systems, and the one that considers diffusion and simultaneous chemical reaction has better compatibility with the system under investigation. MIBK in effect is a carrier that can combine with many metal ions such as those of Pd and Pt. Therefore, the selective separation of Au(III) from other ions relies on selection of reagent used in the stripping phase as shown in aforementioned reaction and the adjustment of extraction condition. Two macrocyclic compounds based on thiacalix[4] arene bearing three and four amide substituents, respectively, are investigated for the extraction of Au and Pd in chloride media The work has also investigated the influence of different solid supports [ie., Accurel polypropylene (PP), Durapore polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF), and Fluoropore polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)]. Fluoropore with lowest ɛ(porosity)/ In past 10 years, several new processes emerged attracting increasing attention from the researchers on rare metal extraction are membrane absorber or affinity membrane, and solid–liquid extraction or polymer inclusion membrane (PIM). The schematic illustrating the steps involved in the separation by affinity membrane, or membrane adsorber is given in A novel membrane adsorber with a high density of adsorption sites that can selectively capture Au(III) ions is fabricated using poly-thiosemicarbazide (PTSC) The resulting PTSC membranes show mechanical stability and can be used in a pressure-driven permeation process, which can eliminate the diffusion limitations commonly required in packed column adsorption. Ninety percent of the Au in a solution which has also 9-fold higher Cu concentration was achieved. operating at a flux as high as 1868 L m The extraction of low concentration (100 mg L In the work by Bonggotgetsakul et al. The resultant PIM is very stable in the aqua regia solution. Au(III) is back-extracted from the PIM by Na Research using digested solution as the feed and 0.50 mol L1 Na Yet another new type of PIM membrane for Au(III) transport from concentrated HCl medium was based on organic–inorganic hybrid material With the development of noble metal smelting technology, new technologies and processes emerge in large numbers, greatly enhancing the utilization of this group of materials. In the leaching unit, cyanide method is still the major approach. The high cyanide consumptions in leaching operations have increased the cyanide contents in leach tailings. For this reason, the inclusion of processes to recover or eliminate cyanide from the discharge should be the focus to reduce pollution risk. ED and GFMD were confirmed to be feasible in recovering cyanide. Application of SIMS special filtration membrane in Au metallurgy enables the recycling of cyanide, and in turn enhances the noble metal recovery efficiency. As secondary resources, particularly electronic wastes, take more and more critical position in noble metal production, a series of membrane technologies were investigated to recover noble metals from acid solutions. Liquid membrane is undoubtedly the major research target, but not given most space in this review. The others include affinity membrane, PIM, organic–inorganic hybrid membrane. Most of them demonstrate reasonable performance.  Anodic concentrated compartment Anodic concentrated solution Anodic electrode compartment Anion exchange membranes Silver Aluminum Acid mine drainage Arsenic Gold Acidification volatilization and regeneration Bipolar membrane (Total) capital cost Cathodic concentrated compartment Counter-current decantation Cathodic concentrated solution Cathodic electrode compartment Cation exchange membranes Copper Diluted solution Electrodialysis Emulsion liquid membrane Electrode solution Iron Gas-filled membrane absorption Hydrochloric acid Hydrocyanic acid High density slurry Nitric acid Hydrogen sulfide Ion exchange membranes Ionic liquid Iridium Potassium Magnesium Methyl iso-butyl ketone Sodium Sodium hypochlorite Sodium cyanide Sodium bisulfine Sodium hydroxide Sodium sulfocyanate Sodium sulfide Nanofiltration 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether Net present value (Total) operational cost Osmium Lead Palladium Polymer inclusion membrane Polypropylene Platinum Polytetrafluoroethylene Poly-thiosemicarbazide Poly(vinyl chloride) Polyvinylidene difluoride Poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropene) Rhodium Reverse osmosis Recovery rate Ruthenium Sulfur Sulphidization, acidification, recycling, and thickening Special industrial membrane Supported liquid membrane Telluride Ultrafiltration Zinc