The present study reports surface modification of extender calcite with silicone to give surface functionalized calcite. The surface modification was confirmed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy and dynamic light scattering analysis. Coatings were formulated by incorporation of this functionalized calcite into the epoxy polymer matrix and compared for coating properties with untreated calcite. The effect of the functionalized calcite on various coating properties with respect to physico-mechanical properties, anticorrosion efficiencies, UV resistance and chemical resistance were studied in detail. The results revealed remarkable enhancement of coating properties with functionalized calcite when compared with the coatings formulated with untreated calcite.Coating and paint formulations are the dispersion of pigment and extender particles in organic polymers and solvents. Pigments and extenders intensely contribute to various properties like mechanical scratch and abrasion resistance, optical properties and wide-spread potential applications Generally, these particles are homogeneously dispersed into the paint vehicles with the help of various surface active agents which act as wetting and dispersing additives to obtain the best performance properties of paints and coatings Literature shows that the nanometer- and micrometer-sized particles with good coupling agents dramatically improve the dispersion and improve the coating properties Bauer et al. In this work, we have selected calcite a commonly used extender in the paint formulations and functionalized the same by silicone treatment. This functionalized calcite was then used to formulate epoxy paint and evaluated its effect on the coating performance. It was observed that epoxy coatings formulated using silicone functionalized calcite exhibited phenomenal improvement in properties when compared with that using untreated calcite. The epoxy resin (GY250) with epoxy equivalent 180 and viscosity 10,000–12,000 Surface functionalization of calcite surface was carried out as per the adsorption method provided in the literature A similar procedure was followed for untreated calcite without the use of polymethylphenyl methoxy siloxane whereby calcite was added to double distilled water whose pH had been adjusted to a value of 3 by adding acetic acid. The suspension was vigorously stirred for about 1 The epoxy paint EPCU and EPCT was prepared separately using untreated calcite and F-Calc respectively with the use of high speed disperser. Untreated calcite and F-Calc powder was directly added to vessel charged with epoxy resin and solvent mixture (butanol/xylene) followed by addition of additives. The extender was dispersed by stirring at 400 rotations per minute (rpm) for 30 For curing, epoxy paint and cycloaliphatic amine were mixed in a weight ratio 100:27 of epoxy to amine. Solvents mixture of xylene and butanol were used for dilution as per the convenience of spray coating application. Coatings films were prepared on carbon steel panels as substrates having dimensions 120 Physicochemical properties such as oil absorption value and bulk density of calcite before and after modification are determined as per ASTM D281-07 and ASTM B329-06 respectively. The surface modification of extender and type of reaction between a silicone coupling agent and calcite were evaluated using FTIR (Nicolet 6700) spectroscopy. FTIR analyses of the untreated calcite and F-Calc were conducted in the spectra range of 400–4000 Studies of the morphology and microstructure of the untreated calcite and F-Calc particles were conducted using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of ZEISS make at an accelerated voltage of 15 The size distribution of the untreated calcite and F-Calc particle agglomerates and aggregates was estimated using Dynamic light scattering technique (DLS) Malvern Inst, UK Nano ZS by a quasi-static light scattering detector at 173° using laser wavelength of 630 Water vapor transmission of free films containing untreated calcite and F-Calc powder was measured as per ASTM E96-94. Scratch hardness was measured on hardness tester according to ASTM D 171. The adhesion test was carried out using pull off adhesion tester as per ASTM D4541. Flexibility of the coatings from substrate was measured by conical mandrel and impact tester as per ASTM D 522 and ASTM D 2794. Abrasion resistance of the coated sample was measured using Taber abrasion tester as per ASTM D 4060. The modulus at 100% elongation of free films containing untreated calcite and F-Calc powder were measured on a universal tensile test machine as per ASTM D 882 (Instron, USA) under tensile rate of 500 All polarization studies were carried out at room temperature in 3.5% NaCl solution. Test system consisted of a three-electrode cell, in which a saturated calomel electrode (SCE), a carbon steel electrode and a coated coupon were used as reference, counter, and working electrodes, respectively. The exposed area of the coupons to the NaCl solution was 12.56 Accelerated weathering test was conducted in the QUV chamber (Model QUV/Spray, Q-Panel Co.) as per ASTM G 154. Coated panels were then placed in the QUV chamber for 120 F-Calc was characterized using FTIR spectroscopy as shown in  Further silicone treatments are known to make the surfaces hydrophobic and contact angle measurement is the most important parameter for quantitative characterization of hydrophobicity The physicochemical parameters were evaluated for untreated calcite and F-Calc and tabulated in As mentioned earlier, dispersion of inorganic material in organic polymer matrix plays a crucial role not only to make a defect free paint but also its long term performance. The F-Calc was further evaluated for coating properties in epoxy paint. Two epoxy paints namely EPCU and EPCT were separately prepared using F-Calc and untreated calcite and both were cured with polyamide curing agents as discussed in Sections The epoxy coatings were then subjected to water vapor transmission test and the results are compared in The role of F-Calc in the performance parameters of epoxy coating was evaluated in detail. The results of mechanical characterization of EPCU and EPCT coating are compared in In As epoxy coatings are well known for their chemical resistance, the study would be incomplete without investigating their anti-corrosive properties using F-Calc. EPCU and EPCT were subjected to accelerated corrosion test using Tafel analysis. In The weatherability of EPCU and EPCT was tested against the control by exposing to accelerated weathering cycle in QUV weathering tester. The coated panels evaluated for gloss value reduction before and after exposure are highlighted in Investigation of surface functionalization of calcite and characterization revealed that surface treatment of calcite particles with silicone rendered calcite hydrophobic with lower oil absorption. The presence of majorly primary particles after modification led to better dispersion and compatibility with epoxy system. It can be concluded that mechanical properties of epoxy based paint such as impact resistance, adhesion, flexibility, hardness and tensile strength are considerably enhanced using silicone functionalized calcite as compared to the properties using untreated calcite based epoxy paint. Functionalized calcite also contributes towards improved hydrophobicity, corrosion resistance and gloss retention of the epoxy coating.