Cylpebs are slightly tapered cylindrical grinding media with a ratio of length to diameter of unity. The manufactures have made conflicting claims regarding the milling performance of Cylpebs in comparison with balls. One major point of interest is which one grinds finer at the same operating conditions. The difficulty in comparison is due to the shape difference. The two grinding media have different surface area, bulk density and contact mechanisms in grinding action.
                  Comparative tests were conducted using the two types of grinding media in a laboratory Bond ball mill at various conditions of equality such as media mass, size distribution, surface area and input specific energy. The laboratory results indicate that at the same specific energy input level the Cylpebs produce a product with slightly less oversize due to their greater surface area, but essentially the same sizing at the fine end as that produced with the balls. The reason may be that the advantage of greater surface area is balanced by the line contact and area contact grinding actions with the Cylpebs.
                  A new ball mill scale-up procedure [Man, Y.T., 2001. Model-based procedure for scale-up of wet, overflow ball mills, Part I: outline of the methodology. Minerals Engineering 14 (10), 1237–1246] was employed to predict grinding performance of an industrial mill from the laboratory test results. The predicted full scale operation was compared with the plant survey data. Some problems in the original scale-up procedures were identified. The scale-up procedure was therefore modified to allow the predicted ball mill performance to match the observed one. The calibrated scale-up procedure was used to predict the Cylpebs performance in the full scale industrial mill using the laboratory tests results.Grinding media exert a significant influence on milling performance in terms of product size, energy consumption and grinding costs due to media wear. Grinding balls and rods are traditionally used as grinding media in the mineral industry. In the recent years other grinding media with different shapes have appeared in the market, such as Cylpebs developed by the Doering International, Powerpebs by the Donhad and Millpebs by the Wheelabrator Allevard Enterprise. For example, the Doering Minipebs were used in a Discrepancies were found in the literature regarding grinding efficiency using Cylpebs. It was claimed by the manufacture (Doering International) that for a given charge volume, Cylpebs provide 25% more grinding media surface area for size reduction. The grinding performance of the Cylpebs should then be correspondingly higher compared with the steel balls (Doering website: These conflicting conclusions are confusing to mill operators regarding whether the Cylpebs would produce a coarser or a finer product in a grinding mill. Several questions may be asked regarding the manufactures’ claims. The comparative tests conducted by Donhad were made at an equal specific energy input level, which implied an identical media mass when the grinding time and feed were kept constant. As the shapes of the three grinding media are different, in order to keep the same mass different media sizes must be used. Thus the results may only reflect the media size effect. Unfortunately the actual media sizes used for the comparison were not mentioned. While the Donhad result reflected the media size effect, Doering’s claim emphasized the surface area effect, but the increased surface area is at a cost of increased power and wear consumption. It is also noticed that the Donhad tests were undertaken in a stirred mill using single size media. In a real milling operation, the grinding media are seasoned. This is particularly true in ball milling. Therefore it is open to question whether the indications from the laboratory result using single media size are valid for the full-scale operation. In a research project conducted by the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) in association with the WMC Fertilizers it was proposed to investigate grinding media options for fines minimisation in milling circuit at the Phosphate Hill Operation. Realising the complexity of the interrelationship of grinding media mass, size distribution and surface area due to their shape, detailed laboratory tests with Cylpebs and balls were carefully designed to distinguish the individual effects of the type of media. The experiment was carried out at the JKMRC Pilot Plant. One major challenge in this study was to predict the full-scale operation from the laboratory results. This has been achieved using a modified ball mill scale-up procedure published by Cylpebs are slightly tapered cylindrical grinding media with length equalling diameter, and all the edges being radiused ( Doering Cylpebs are made from low-alloy chilled cast iron. The molten metal leaves the furnace at approximately 1500 Because of their cylindrical geometry, Cylpebs have greater surface area and higher bulk density compared with balls of similar mass and size. As the objective of this study was to predict the grinding performance of Cylpebs in a full-scale ball mill, a model-based procedure for scale-up of ball mill was adopted, which involved laboratory tests using the Bond ball mill, and a set of model parameter scale-up criteria to simulate the steady state performance of full-scale mill circuit from the laboratory results ( Ore samples used for the laboratory tests were collected from the ball mill feed conveyor in the Phosphate Hill Beneficiation Plant during a grinding circuit survey. The ore is locally known as “soft ore”, with a Bond ball mill Work Index of 14.3 Three media conditions were considered as the major factors affecting size reduction performance, viz. media mass media surface area, and media size distribution. For the comparative tests the standard Bond ball charge was set as the base case. The Cylpebs charge was controlled to match two of the three media conditions of the balls, with the third one being different, in order to distinguish one effect in each test. Charge 1 is the standard Bond ball mill charge condition which was used as the base case for the comparison. For some ball size fractions, however, no equivalent size of Cylpebs was available. Cylpebs of the nearest two sizes were therefore combined in various ratios (as indicated in the first columns) and their weighted average size was taken as the equivalent size to the balls. The combined ratio was calculated to match the two required ball conditions. Charge 2 ( Two types of comparative tests were conducted: Locked-cycle (multi-stage) grinding tests, and Open circuit single-stage batch grinding tests. The locked-cycle (multi-stage) grinding test was developed by There are two major differences between the locked-cycle test and the standard Bond test. The first is the selection of circulating load. In the Bond ball mill test, 250% circulating load is used. In the locked-cycle tests, the circulating load is selected according to the feed condition. The plant used DSM screens in a closed-circuit ball milling operation. This resulted in a very low circulating load to minimise fines generation ( The data of mill feed and product of the last run in the locked-cycle grinding test are used for fitting the breakage rate parameters of a ball mill model ( The test conditions for both the locked-cycle and the single-stage open circuit tests are summarised in Two locked-cycle milling tests using balls and cylpebs charges at the same mass and similar size distribution were conducted respectively. The results are summarised in The limiting screen aperture and the circulating load exert a significant impact on the Bond Work Indices. Comparing Test 1 with the standard Bond ball mill test (both tests using exactly the same balls charge and the same feed ore), the Bond WI increases from 14.3 The size distributions of the final-run mill content and the new feed are shown in It appears that the Cylpebs grind coarser for particles below 1 This is a problem in the design of the locked-cycle test. The test procedure requires to stop the test when the grindability reach equilibrium, which is normally assumed within less than 3% variation between the last two runs, or reverse its direction of increase or decrease. This is similar to the standard Bond test procedure. It has been found that in some locked-cycle tests, particularly with low circulating load, it takes long runs to stabilise and requires more mill revolutions (implying more energy consumption), sometimes never reaches equilibrium. Thus in the locked-cycle test, the energy input is not controlled. Although in the Bond test the mill revolution in the final run varies for different ores, it has been factored in the calculation of grindability (net grams of screen undersize produced per mill revolution), and it is the major variable to determine the Bond Work Index ( Since the locked-cycle test does not take the actual energy usage into account, the difference in the product size distributions as shown in Four batch dry grinding tests were undertaken using the Bond ball mill with various media charge conditions. In the four tests the mill run at the identical 338 revolutions and treated the same mass of the same ore. Results of the single-stage batch tests are given in In order to perform statistical analysis on the comparative test results, additional one single-stage batch test at Charge 1 condition (Bond balls) was conducted. A standard deviation of 5% relative was estimated on the base of percent retained size distribution. It is accepted that in such a well controlled open-circuit batch test running at sufficiently long grinding time, the experimental error is small.  This observation may reflect the fact that the cylpebs have a greater surface area than the ordinary balls at the same charge mass and similar size distribution ( The reason why at the coarse end the Cylpebs generate finer product while at the fine end they do not was sought from the contact mechanism in grinding action. Beside the point contact action similar to the balls, Cylpebs have other grinding actions resulted from line contact along the cylindrical section and area contact between the end faces on the ore particles. As illustrated in  An interesting observation in A ball mill scale-up procedure ( The procedure involves a number of criteria to scale-up the appearance function, breakage rate distribution and the discharge function. The variables taken into consideration in the scale-up procedure include ball size, mill diameter, feed size distribution, particle segregation and classification effect. The scale-up procedure has been coded by the author using the JKSimMet Software Development Kit (SDK) and has been tested with Man’s original data ( The discrepancy is obvious. Interestingly the predicted and measured 80% passing sizes are very similar. However, the rest of the size distribution is very different. This emphasises the need to present full size distribution for comparison, rather than a single size such as the P Analysis of the scale-up procedures identified that the plant feed was much coarser than the database that Man used to develop the scale-up criteria ( A similar approach was taken to calibrate the scale-up procedures from the single-stage batch grinding with balls to match the full-scale ball mill operation. The calibrated scale-up criteria were then applied to the single-stage Cylpebs grinding data. In the simulations, the charge was set at 23% volume as in the plant survey. As the bulk density of Cylpebs is higher, the model predicted that the Cylpebs mill would draw more power. Another comparison was made at the same mill power draw by reducing the Cylpebs charge volume. Two types of make up Cylpebs were used for the simulations ( The following trends are found in the simulations for full-scale operations from the laboratory single-stage grinding tests: With the calibrated scale-up parameters, the model predicts that the Cylpebs mill with a make-up size of By reducing the charge volume to allow the Cylpebs mill to draw the same amount of power as the ball mill, the mill charged with A truncated Cylpebs distribution (no fine Cylpebs) will produce a product with about 5% less −0.038 The simulations indicate that the media size distribution exerts a more significant influence on fines generation than the media type. Laboratory tests were conducted using a standard Bond ball mill to compare the milling performance of Cylpebs against balls. Effects of the three charge conditions—mass, size distribution and surface area—were investigated. Single-stage batch grinding tests indicated that the ground product using the Cylpebs of the same mass and the same size distribution as the balls contained slightly less oversize. This may be due to the greater surface area of the Cylpebs. This advantage, however, may be balanced by the line contact and area contact grinding action of the Cylpebs. As a result, Cylpebs produce a similar product at the fine end compared with the balls at identical charge mass, and hence at the identical specific energy input level. When compared at the same surface area and a similar size distribution, the Cylpebs produced a much coarser product, because their specific energy level was smaller than for the balls. When compared at the same mass and the same surface area, the fine-Cylpebs truncated media produced a product with significantly less fines (−0.038 These results have emphasised that due to the difference in the shape, the two grinding media have different surface area, bulk density (implicitly the charge mass or volume when one of them is fixed) and contact mechanism in their grinding actions. All these factors need to be taken into account when comparing the milling performance using the two types of grinding media. In order to predict the Cylpebs performance in an industrial mill from the laboratory results, a ball mill scale-up procedure was employed. A problem associated with the locked-cycle test, one of the major components in the procedure, has been identified: the grinding time in the locked-cycle test is not controlled, and the energy usage in the test is not factored in the scale-up procedure. Thus variation in the comminution energy input may overcast the effect of different media on grinding performance. It was also found that the original ball mill scale-up procedure could not predict the Phosphate Hill ball mill operation correctly. One contributing factor is the feed size being much coarser than the database used by Man to develop the scale-up criteria. Modifications on the scale-up criteria were made and model using the calibrated scale-up criteria was able to predict the plant operation reasonably well. With the calibrated scale-up criteria and the breakage parameters determined from the single-stage grinding data, the model predicts that there is no significant difference in fines generation between using the 100 The simulations indicate that the media size distribution exerts a more significant influence on fines generation than the media type. This work was conducted as part of a research project sponsored by WMC Fertilisers Pty. Ltd.—the financial support and the permission to publish this paper are greatly appreciated. The comminution circuit surveys were conducted at the Phosphate Hill Beneficiation Plant, Queensland, Australia. Dr. Mark Nott and the other plant staff in organising the surveys are acknowledged. The Cylpebs used for the comparative tests were kindly provided by Doering International. This research project was initiated by Dr. Walter Valery. Useful discussions were held with Dr. Rob Morrison.