The validity of three-dimensional discontinuous deformation analysis (3-D DDA) is examined by comparing its solution for dynamic block displacement with an analytical solution. Displacement of a single block on inclined planes subjected to dynamic loadings is studied for analytical solutions derived with respect to the frictional resistance offered by the planes. 3-D DDA predicts accurately the analytical displacements, and the results were found sensitive to the maximum displacement ratio, and the size of the time step, which are defined by the user. Best results were achieved when the actual displacements were approximately equal to the assumed maximum displacements per time step. Furthermore, edge-to-edge contact constraints have been improved by using the augmented Lagrangian method instead of the penalty method. Using the augmented Lagrangian method to enforce contact restraints retains the simplicity of the penalty method, and reduces its disadvantages. The new formulation of edge-to-edge contact using the augmented Lagrangian method is implemented in 3-D DDA and has been programmed in VC++. Finally two illustrative examples are presented for demonstrating this new approach.In the history of rock mechanics and rock engineering, more attention has perhaps been paid to slope instability considerations than any other topic, and this topic remains one of the most important today DEM is a force-based method developed in the early 1970s In this paper, analytical solutions derived with respect to the frictional resistance offered by the slope are compared with numerical solutions of 3-D DDA for displacement of a single block that rests on an incline in 3-D. Four different sinusoidal functions of increasing complexity were used for the dynamic load input function. We also investigated the effect of the numerical parameters on the results. Clearly, the analytical validation of the numerical method can only be performed for a single block. Since in formulation of 3-D DDA that is used to validate dynamic block displacement, blocks are modeled using a 3-D description and their response is investigated in 3-D space, it can be used for 3-D validation. In order to validate dynamic displacements, determined by 3-D DDA for a system of blocks, comparison with physical models would be necessary. However, this study for a single block would be the first necessary step for such research. As the second contribution of this paper, a modified formulation of edge-to-edge contact using the augmented Lagrangian method is implemented into the 3-D DDA, and has been programmed in VC++. The advantages of this formulation are demonstrated by two illustrative examples. Similar to 2-D, 3-D DDA analyzes the problem as an assembly of discrete blocks. The displacement function of 3-D DDA describes the motions (the translations, rotations, normal strains, and shear strains) in three-dimensions, as follows: Using this equation, the displacements of any arbitrary points in the block can be calculated. The array Since 3-D DDA conforms to the principle of minimum total potential energy, the total potential energy is the summation of all potential energy sources for each block. The potential energy includes the strain energy of the initial and induced stresses, the external work of the point loadings, body loadings, inertia forces and the displacement constraints, as well as the potential interaction between two elements such as normal and shear contacts. For each of the cases stated above, the element or nodal matrices of stiffness and force are formed by taking the derivatives with respect to the displacement variables from the corresponding potential energy. Taking the direct summation of these individual submatrices to form the global stiffness matrix [ The simultaneous equilibrium equations derived by minimizing the total potential energy for a system with The solution to the system of Eq. Before applying dynamic DDA to a full-scale problem of a jointed rock excavation, it is necessary to check whether dynamic DDA displacements are in agreement with analytical solutions. Yeung In this section, the ability of 3-D DDA to predict displacements of a single block on inclined planes subjected to gravitational and dynamic loading is studied and the results are compared with analytic solutions. An important aspect of numerical simulation is verification using simple geometries for which analytic solutions exist. Such investigations are also important for validating the implementation of the method in a specific computer program. The ease with which 3-D DDA and other discrete element methods model dynamic motion of a single block on an incline is one of the features that set these methods apart from the continuum-based finite element and finite difference methods. The general form of the equations of motion for a rigid block on an inclined plane subject to Coulomb frictional resistance may be expressed as a one degree-of-freedom system taking the coordinate system parallel to the incline. Under the downhill assumption, the analytic solution for the displacement Consider the centroid displacement  It can be seen from Newmark In this case, acceleration would have the form Comparison has been made between the analytical solution and 3-D DDA results. The input acceleration record for 3-D DDA was the horizontal component only and the other acceleration components were set to zero. The results were sensitive to numerical parameters which must be entered by the user, namely the assumed maximum displacement per time step ( The function Comparison between analytical solution for displacement and 3-D DDA results, absolute and relative errors of 3-D DDA computed displacement and analytic solution are shown in A sum of two sine functions can be written as follows:  The influence of higher-order terms in a series of sine functions is negligible, and therefore the validation effort beyond the sum of three sine functions will not be carried on. For the case of three sine functions, Comparison between the analytical solution for displacement and 3-D DDA results are shown in In the contact theory for DDA, the first step is to determine the type of contact between any arbitrarily shaped polyhedra. The type of contact is important because it determines the mechanical response of the contact. In 2-D, the contact types include corner-to-corner, corner-to-edge and edge-to-edge. In the DDA method, contact sliding is allowed but not interpenetration. There are many more types of contacts for 3-D blocks than for 2-D ones. In 3-D, contact types include vertex-to-vertex, vertex-to-edge, vertex-to-face, edge-to-edge, edge-to-face and face-to-face. Shi The penalty method was originally used by Shi The essential concept behind the augmented Lagrangian method is to use both a penalty number, When an edge-to-edge contact occurs as shown in At the The first component of Eq. The main features of the augmented Lagrangian method are From physical point of view the Lagrange multiplier, DDA algorithm using the augmented Lagrangian method The algorithm described in the previous sections has been programmed in VC++. To investigate it, two examples (which are used to test the original developed edge-to-edge contact algorithm  This example involves a system of two blocks as shown in In the first part of this paper, sliding of a block under gravitational and dynamic loading using 3-D DDA was investigated. The displacement, residual (absolute error) and relative error were examined and for a case, relative errors were inspected for a variety of time step sizes. Four different sinusoidal functions of increasing complexity for the dynamic load input function were used. Several conclusions regarding 3-D DDA modeling emerge from this study: The computed solution grows away from the analytic solution for different values of the upper limit of time interval, evidently at a linear rate, that is, the 3-D DDA computation gets farther from the analytic solution as the system evolves through time. The absolute value of the error for a sliding block increases at every time step, but the relative error with respect to block displacement decreases and the numerical solution approaches the analytical solution. Larger time step values show less initial perturbation. Reducing the perturbation of the system during the first few time steps will improve the accuracy of the solution. Similar results have been obtained by Doolin and Sitar The results are sensitive to the assumed maximum displacement ratio, and the size of the time step. The best results are achieved when the actual calculated displacements during a time step are approximately equal to the assumed maximum displacements per time step at the end of the analysis. In this research which the formulation of the analytical solution is obtained taking into account the frictional resistance offered by the inclined slopes, the error was found to be less than 2% at the end of the cycle, while previous nearly 15% error was seen in 2-D DDA In the original 3-D DDA method, block contact constraints are enforced using the penalty method. In this approach, the contact solution depends highly on the choice of the penalty number and the optimal number cannot be explicitly found beforehand, if the penalty number is too low, the constraints are poorly satisfied, while if it is too large, the simultaneous equilibrium matrix becomes difficult to solve; therefore using the augmented Lagrangian method is significant. As the second part of this paper, edge-to-edge contact constraints are enforced using the augmented Lagrangian method and this contact model has been programmed and two illustrative examples are presented to demonstrate the new model. Using the augmented Lagrangian method to enforce contact restraints retains the simplicity of the penalty method and reduces the disadvantages of it. The authors thank Yossef Hatzor for his friendly guidance.