This, our second reply to Östensson, supplements our earlier more technical analysis with a simple intuitive explanation of how investor demand can be driving commodity prices higher even when investor stocks are falling.Our recent exchange of views with Olle Östensson ( In our original article, we use a model based on supply and demand curves to demonstrate this conclusion for spot commodity prices. Here, we provide a simple intuitive explanation to complement that analysis. The argument we are making, it is important to stress, applies as much to futures prices as to spot prices. Moreover, it does not matter whether spot and futures markets are in strong contango, weak contango, or backwardation. Nor does it matter whether different investors face different storage and capital costs; whether investors purchase stocks on the spot market for inter-temporal arbitrage or other reasons; whether the investor demand curve is best constructed as a demand curve, a supply curve, or possibly both; whether the investor demand curve shows demand as a function of price or as a function of the difference between futures and spot prices; or whether investors during strong contango have at times incentives to sell as well as buy stocks. These are all interesting points that we can debate but how they are ultimately resolved is of no importance for our contention that investor demand can be driving commodity prices higher when investor stocks are falling. The only assumptions we make are (a) a commodity's price is determined by the intersection of its market supply and market demand curves—the spot supply and demand curves in the case of spot prices, and the futures demand and supply curves in the case of future prices, (b) market demand is the sum of the consumer and investor demand, and (c) at high prices investor demand can be negative in which case investors are selling rather than purchasing stocks. All of these assumptions seem quite reasonable to us. Now, consider a commodity market that is equilibrium and where the price is sufficiently high that investor demand is negative. So investors are drawing down their stocks. Further, assume that supply and consumer demand remain unchanged but that for some reason investor demand increases, reducing the rate at which investors are selling their stocks. This increases market demand (or if one prefers, reduces market supply), which causes the commodity's price to rise. Note that in this hypothetical situation, which seems quite plausible to us, consumer demand and market supply have not changed. So the entire increase in price is due to the increase in investor demand, and it occurs at a time when investor stocks are declining.