One of the biggest challenges in the mining industry is the need for water management systems that consider production-related issues when the quality of process water is subject to variations. Part of the work required to tackle this challenge is the development of simulation platforms that correlate the quality of the process water to the processing plant performance. In this paper, the application of a previously developed method to include the impact of process water chemistry in the simulation of a flotation plant performance is presented. The water chemistry-dependent plant simulation is then used to investigate the impact of intensified process water recirculation on the flotation plant performance, thus showing the relevance of the previously developed approach to help implementing water-saving strategies in the mineral processing industry.The availability and efficient management of water resources is crucial for the development of mankind, so much so that the United Nations have made it one of its key Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). For instance, SDG6 states that integrated water resources management must be implemented at all levels and water-use efficiency across all sectors must be substantially increased by 2030 ( Where water quality is no issue for the mineral beneficiation plant, water management systems that solely focus on maximizing water reuse are sufficient. However, in froth flotation plants, water quality is particularly likely to influence the process performance ( The development of online water quality measurement methods; The development of a platform that links the quality of process water to the plant performance. Great efforts are already being made in that direction, with a notable example being the EU Horizon 2020 ITERAMS project (grant agreement No 730480). Simulation platforms, which can be used as a base for the desired water management systems, have also been subjected to valuable developments in the recent years. Some of those developments were highlighted in a previous work from the authors ( In continuation of the previous work, a sampling campaign was carried out in the flotation plant of the previously investigated fluorite ore. Based on this sampling campaign and the results of the previous work, the simulation of the processing plant performance as a function of the process water composition was enabled. This technical note thus aims at briefly highlighting the suitability of advanced mineral processing simulators to investigate potential water-saving strategies, thereby making them a pertinent tool to be integrated in water management systems in the mining industry. The flowsheet of the fluorite flotation plant on which this study is based is presented in To create a digital twin of the flotation plant in the Outotec mineral processing simulation platform HSC Sim, a complete sampling of the plant was first necessary. The sampling campaign was designed to allow for the mass balancing and parametrization of the full plant in the simulation platform, and lip sampling was also performed in the different flotation stages of the process to determine the plant flotation kinetics in the rougher, scavenger, and cleaner banks. The determination of the plant flotation kinetics was a crucial step in order to determine the scale-up factor required to apply the lab-scale kinetic model determined in the previous work ( Where    This method enabled the determination of a linear relationship between the model parameters and the process water composition, thus allowing the simulation of the flotation performance as a function of the water chemistry parameters Ca The model equivalent to Eq. In the current state of the processing plant, The fact that the flotation kinetics had to be “reset” before each rougher cell could be explained by at least two factors: The bubble carrying capacity can be a limiting factor when floating high grade ores; The reagents were added stepwise in the plant vs. single addition in lab-scale tests. It is worth noting that those two factors could as well partially explain the high kinetic scale-up factor that was used, which is typically reported in the literature to be much closer to unity ( The inclusion of a relationship between process water composition and the processing plant performance in a simulation platform enables the investigation and implementation of water-saving strategies with consideration for the production-related issues. In this case, the impact of recirculating process water leaving the flotation plant by redistributing it homogeneously throughout the plant was investigated. To do so in the simulation platform, the three water streams leaving the flowsheet in To perform this investigation, however, the accumulation of dissolved species originating from the ore must be taken into consideration. To do so, the existing link between the simulation platform HSC Sim and the thermodynamic database of HSC Chemistry was used. With this link, the dissolution of minerals in the milling circuit and thus the enrichment in the model-relevant inorganic ions could be accounted for (  The fluorite recovery curve, however, shows a much more nuanced shape with a local spike around ca. 50% water recirculation intensity before undergoing a relatively important downward trend. To understand this observation, the very different roles calcium and magnesium ions have on the process performance need to be taken into consideration. In lab-scale experiments, it was found that a sufficient amount of calcium ions would promote fluorite recovery, whereas magnesium ions would show the opposite effect even at relatively low concentrations. In addition, it was found that calcium ions would buffer or overcome the negative effect of magnesium based on the [Ca Based on the previous observations, it would appear that a suitable scenario would be to recycle around ca. 50% the process water if the slight reduction in concentrate quality can be tolerated. However, it must be noted that ca. 60% of the process water leaves the plant through the final tails stream, and the tailings are dewatered using a flocculation process before being backfilled as a thick paste in the underground mine. Therefore, under current plant set-up, recycling ca. 50% of the process water requires water from the tailings stream (rich in flocculants) and this is expected to have a very detrimental effect on the process performance. In the end, ca. 40% water recirculation can be considered as there should be no significant effect on the process performance, but the tool developed to perform this study could also be used to quickly investigate other water-saving strategies that involve modifications in the plant set-up. The development of water management systems in the mining industry is crucial to satisfy the sustainable development goals set by the United Nations. Although such systems already exist and are already implemented in certain mining operations, there is a great need to account for the production-related issues when water-saving strategies are implemented. To do so, the recent developments made with mineral processing simulation platforms were shown to enable the quantification of such issues. The study presented in this paper thus provides a good illustration for the application of the mineral processing simulation platforms as a base tool to develop smart water management systems in the mining industry that take into consideration production-related issues in the implementation of water-saving strategies. Developing an efficient water management system for the mining industry is a multi-faceted issue that requires considerable efforts. This system must operate on-line to constantly adapt to water chemistry changes, availability of water sources, etc. Therefore, the development of on-line water quality control methods such as the one developed for residual xanthates by  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported through the POF III funding of the Helmholtz Foundation in the EMR program Topic 5 Resource Technologies, to which the authors are greatly thankful for having made this research possible. We furthermore acknowledge the support and insight of international flotation colleagues in academia and industry during various discussions at the MEI Flotation’19 conference in Cape Town, November 11