Infection continues to be a problematic complication of fracture treatment, particularly in severe open fractures. The implant design and material as well as implantation technique play an important role in the pathogenesis of local infection. The aim of our study was to determine if the local resistance to infection of a cannulated IM nail is less than that of a solid nail and more similar to that of a hollow nail. In 65 female White Zealand rabbits, the intramedullary cavity was inoculated with matching concentrations of Staphylococcus aureus, and one of the three nails was inserted. The solid nail had a greater than twofold higher resistance to infection (23%) compared to that of the other two nails (hollow, 65%; cannulated, 61%) which was statistically significant (p
                     <0.02). No difference in infection resistance was detected between the hollow slotted and cannulated nail designs (p
                     =1). Although these experimental results may be clinically considered, direct extrapolation to clinical infection rates is ill advised.Although internal fixation of fractures has evolved in recent years with a change of emphasis from mechanical to biological priorities Because conventional intramedullary nailing with hollow slotted nails and reaming of the medullary cavity is believed to impair the endosteal blood supply Animal experiments have shown that greater implant surface and dead space in hollow slotted nails might represent ideal surfaces for colonisation of bacteria We used a modified version of the osteomyelitis model according to Norden and inoculated different quantities of bacteria into the left tibial medullary cavity of 69 female White New Zealand rabbits (average weight: 3.98 We used a human-pathogenic, beta-haemolysing strain of Analogous to the available tibia nails, we used specially manufactured (Mathys Medical LTD, Bettlach, Switzerland) solid (SN), hollow slotted (HN) and cannulated (CN) intramedullary nails ( All operations were performed under strict sterile conditions in a conventional operation theatre. A standard anesthetic technique was used: after premedication with a mixture of Medetomidin (0.2 After 28 days, the animals were euthanised by intravenous injection of Pentobarbital (Vetanarcol®) and radiographs in a.p. and lateral views of the left tibia of all animals were obtained. The implants and the distal 2/3 of the tibia were removed under sterile conditions. The denuded tibial bone was crushed in a sterile bone mill (Polytron PT3100, Kinematica AG Littau, Switzerland) and spread on trypton soya agar plates (TSA, bioMérieux sa, France). The nails were rolled across TSA plates and the contents from the inner dead space of the HN and CN was removed and spread on additional TSA plates. All samples were incubated at 37 To keep the number of experimental animals involved in the study as small as possible, a grouped sequential procedure was applied whereby the bacterial inoculae for the five test series were based on a phase wise “up and down” dosage technique as established for previous studies One animal died while under anesthesia and another animal had to be excluded from the study because of an undisplaced distal tibia fracture sustained during nail insertion. Two animals were euthanised during the observation period due to severe weight loss and clinical signs of sepsis. All but one rabbit were replaced in the study to remain with as balanced a design as possible. The remaining 65 animals completed the observation period without problems. No open wound infections were observed and initial weight loss was compensated in the ensuing weeks. In all cases of positive bacterial growth from the bone, there was also growth from the surface and inner dead space of the nails. In three cases, positive bacterial growth from the inner dead space of the implants was found without positive growth from the bone. There were no technical difficulties related to the preparation of the bacterial inocula. The molecular analysis of the bacterial growth from the bone confirmed the presence of no other germ than the inoculated strain of The inoculum dose of 4 The quantitative analysis of the bacterial growth did not show any differences in the number of colonies for the three nail types. The infection rate for the entire test population ( Based on the Chi-square test and the Phi correlation coefficient only the periosteal reaction ( In our study, cannulated intramedullary nails were significantly less resistant to local infection than solid nails, and behaved similar to the slotted nails. Furthermore, the hollow slotted intramedullary nails were significantly less resistant to local infection then solid nails agreeing with former experiments The three different implants which were used in our experiment had identical material and surface properties and the technical procedure for their implantation was the same. Hence, greater implant surface and dead space presence may have played a role in decreasing infection resistance. In our study the total surface area of the SN was about half of that of the HN and two third of that of the CN. The bacterial adhesion to a surface is thought to be an essential step of the infection process The animal model we used is well established for the experimental investigation of implant related infections and osteomyelitis We used a human pathogen strain of The presence of periosteal and osteolytic reactions on the radiographs was significantly correlated with the microbiological findings with high positive predictive values (100%, The grouped sequential procedure was advantageous to find the critical inoculum range and highlight the differences between the implants. By this “up-and-down” dosage technique the number of animals could be kept to a minimum. Infection rates of the SN and HN showed a statistically significant difference already after the fourth series; therefore we considered it as justified to use only the SN and CN in the fifth series of the experiment, although this resulted in an unequal number of animals in the three groups. In summary, infection resistance of solid intramedullary nails was greater than that of hollow slotted and cannulated nails. No difference in infection resistance was observed between hollow slotted and cannulated nails. It should be noted that this study was done in rabbits and because direct extrapolation of our data to the clinical situation may be limited, further clinical investigations of such effects would be helpful. Furthermore, it should also be kept in mind that other factors, i.e. degree of soft tissue damage, surgical technique, amount and virulence of bacteria, use of irrigation and antibiotics, host factors etc., may influence infection rates in fractures treated with IM nails. Nevertheless, these results may be included in the overall clinical decision making process when advantages and disadvantages of competing implant designs are considered. The authors would like to thank Mathys Medical LTD (Bettlach, CH) for providing implants. We would also like to thank Hansjörg Hoch for providing technical assistance and the Department of Microbiology, Kantonsspital Basel for microbiological identification.