In an industrial scenario, one can find measured data that do not satisfy the mass and energy laws of conservation. This problem can be approached by applying data reconciliation (DR) and gross error detection and identification (GEDI) techniques, however, authors generally validate their methods using a reduced set of problems, restricting the application of the proposed methods to them. The objective of this work is to present a collection of benchmark problems for DR and GEDI to help the evaluation of these methods in different types of flowsheets. First, challenges issues related with DR and GED are presented with examples. Then, a general overview of the benchmark collection set is presented. In conclusion, it can be observed that this challenging research area needs a common problem set for validating DR and GEDI and this paper fills this gap, helping the validation of the methods.Average error of estimation Akaike information criterion Average number of type 1 errors Dynamic measurement test Data reconciliation Data reconciliation and parameter estimation Extended measurement test Gross error detection Gross error detection and identification Generalized likelihood ratio Iterative measurement test Multiple gross error detection and identification Modified generalized likelihood ratio Modified simultaneous estimation of gross error Modified unbiased estimation technique Mixed integer Overall power Principal components analysis Standard deviation Simultaneous estimation of gross error Unbiased estimation technique Weighted least squares Incidence matrix (Jacobian matrix of the constraints) Adjustment Line of the Parameter of logistic robust estimator Vector of process constraints related to the mass, energy or momentum balance Hypotheses for the statistical test for GEDI Mass balance residuals matrix Balance residual, or the Product of the global heat transfer coefficient and the heat exchanger area Covariance matrix of residuals matrix, Weighted adjust Inverse of Σ matrix The Vector of reconciled measurements Vector of reconciled measurement lower bounds Vector of reconciled measurement upper bounds Vector of measurements MT statistics NT statistics Parameter of quasi-weighted robust estimator Value of the global test statistics Residual of measured and reconciled data, weighted by the reciprocal of the standard deviation The generic objective function of DR Standard deviation Standard deviation of measurement Chi-squared test Degrees of freedom for Chi-squared test Vector of parameters to be estimated In the chemical industry, measurement equipment plays a special role in process monitoring and control. Accurate process data are important for the application of advanced chemical process tool techniques, such as the estimation of unmeasured process variables, sensor fault identification, equipment leaking identification, process model identification, process optimization, steady-state identification, software sensors, advanced process control, and synthesis of mass and heat exchanger networks. However, some measurement equipment is subjected to climate oscillation and aggressive process conditions, which may degenerate their performance. In addition, it is not always possible to replace measurement equipment due to the type of the process to which it is attached: some chemical processes are large-scale and continuous and cannot be paused or shut down to replace a measurement sensor or instrument. Costs reduction also prevents the appropriate maintenance of measurement sensors. Consequently, process engineers must occasionally accept this performance degeneration or failure along the chemical process operation, which can be noticed when the mass and energy balances present discrepancies when it is calculated based on the measured sensor data. However, not all data oscillation is due to failures but may result from measurement equipment precision or leaking, which can also lead to mass and energy balance disagreement when it is calculated based on sensor measurements. To distinguish among sensor failure, leaking or data oscillation due to sensor variability, a procedure named data reconciliation (DR) and gross error detection and identification (GEDI) can be applied to process data and has been extensively studied since the 1960s in chemical and mineral processing. The main idea of DR is to adjust the measurements data to satisfy the mass, energy or momentum balance equations. Information about instrument uncertainty, as represented by the standard deviation (SD) or variance, is also considered in the DR problem solving. As a final result, the measurements are adjusted, thus satisfying the process balances imposed in the problem formulation. Steady-state DR is solved as an optimization problem, where the objective function is to minimize the difference between the measured variables and the adjusted ones, weighted by the reciprocal of the variance. The equality constraints of the optimization problem can be the either mass, energy or momentum balance equations, or a combination of them. In the DR problem formulation presented in Σ: Variance covariance matrix of measurements      The WLS is deduced from the maximum likelihood method and assumes that the measurement errors have a normal distribution with known variance. If the measurement errors follow another distribution or the system presents measurement instrument failure or leaking, known as gross errors (GE), other objective functions can be applied, called robust functions ( Robust functions may be used to either remove the effect of the GE in the DR or detect it if its parameters are appropriately tuned. The influence function (IF, see Analytically, the DR procedure with the WLS estimator without other method cannot evaluate the presence of GEs; to perform this task, statistical hypothesis tests must be applied to the results of DR. These tests are formulated according to the hypotheses: Although DR and GEDI have been studied since the 1960s, they still remains challenging and the reasons for proposing a collection of benchmark test problems are presented in the next section. DR techniques applied to linear (total flow rate) steady-state flowsheets with all variables measured are described in the literature ( The challenges associated with DR problems begin to arise when gross errors (GE) are presented, since one of the requirements to apply DR techniques is that the variables’ errors follow a standard Normal distribution, i.e., only purely random error with known standard deviation is present. However, systems with measurement instrument failure or a leaking, GE, do not fulfill this requirement. Because the variables are linked by the mass balance, a GE spreads the effect of the wrong measurement to other variables, known as the ‘smearing effect’. To handle this issue, other objective functions can be applied when the measurements do not exhibit a Normal distribution or in the presence of GE; these functions are called robust functions or estimators ( When the measurement errors are small, the effect of the measurement errors on the objective function is almost the same as WLS. When the measurement errors are large, the effect of the measurement errors is reduced. A demonstration of the ‘semaring effect’ and its reduction through the appropriate tuning of the robust functions can be noticed in the following example, presented in Another scenario that can be found in some industrial operations is the transition between operating points that, depending on the dynamic behavior of the process, may occur gradually. The instrument may also present some permanent or instant failure, which will affect the process data recorded. These behaviors are presented in Because typical industrial data contains random noise, it may be useful to apply some filtering techniques to reduce it when solving DR with process data. Another problem related with DR arise when the models to be reconciled are more complex and depend on measurements and unknown model parameters, which must be estimated simultaneously with DR. This class of problems is also known as error-in-variables (EVM) problems. The objective function in this case is different from that of the original DR problem and is presented in Σ: Variance covariance matrix of       In a typical DR problem, one dataset, snapshot, or windows average of the measured data is collected to be reconciled. Thus, the number of constraints equals the number of original models. In EVM, several datasets are available (one for each experiment), and the objective is to perform a reconciliation and a parameter estimation simultaneously. EVM problems increase the number of constraints because, for each data point, the number of constraints is multiplied by the number of datasets. For example, in a problem with 20 constraints and 20 data points, the number of constraints is 400. Consequently, EVM problems are quite difficult to solve. Furthermore, these constraints are, generally, implicit and cannot be isolated and placed in the objective function. Several authors have proposed techniques for solving this type of problem ( The challenges related to EVM problems can be exemplified by the results of the EVM method applied to the heat exchanger network proposed by The EVM problem must not be confused with the DRPE, since EVM addresses a parameter-estimation problem where the measurement errors occur in both dependent and independent variables ( DR problems when unmeasured variables are present in a system are also challenging, especially when nonlinear constraints are present. Some analytical and numerical methods do not impose bounds on the reconciled variables (e.g., nonnegativity of flow rates or compositions), leading to unreal adjusted data. This type of problem complexity can be demonstrated by the flowsheet presented by Another interesting topic to be explored in nonlinear DR is the selection of a rigorous or simplified model to represent each process. Several types of industrial equipment, such as distillation columns, flash separators, and pipelines, are represented by complex systems of nonlinear equations that are difficult to converge and may be a compute-intensive task. To reduce the solving complexity, and computation time these models are simplified either by linearization or polynomial adjustment (using simulation or plant data). However, such simplifications may result in error propagation along the DR process, which represents another challenging issue requiring study that has not been extensively explored in the literature. For example, In conclusion, the challenges related to DR techniques can be summarized as follows: The effect of unmeasured variables in DR. DR involving nonlinear systems of equations. GE in the process. Robust function selection and tuning of its parameters. DR in process transitions and detecting the steady-state. Data filtering before DR. Simultaneous DR and parameter-estimation improvement. Nonlinear DR with rigorous or simplified models. The accurate identification of GEs is a challenging task because many factors affect the detection methods and algorithms and may lead to incorrect results. Previous studies performed by Magnitude of measurements and bounds. Magnitude of GEs or the ratio between the GE and the respective measurement variance. Position of the measurement containing GE. Constraints and flowsheet structure. When considering the network structure, the accurate detection and identification of single or multiple GEs is a complex procedure because the redundancy needed to perform DR and GEDI (or MGEDI) may be degenerated in some flowsheets, which depreciates the results of the techniques. These redundant measures are named Flow rates with small absolute standard deviations (or small orders of magnitude) in the same balance with streams with higher standard deviations (or higher orders of magnitude). Parallel streams. Flowsheets with recycle. Measured variables that appear in only one equation with one unmeasured variable. To demonstrate the challenge involved when parallel streams are present in a system, a process from In real process operation and monitoring, the detection of a single GE itself does not provide enough information for process analysis. We want to identify multiple GEs and their types (measurement bias or leaking) and to estimate the error magnitude. Many strategies to detect and identify multiple GEs (MGE) are presented in the literature ( The solving of DR problems, specially nonlinear, may require iterative constrained nonlinear optimization methods which generally requires some parameter tuning, such as absolute or relative convergence tolerance, constraint violation tolerance. The appropriate tuning of these parameters may be crucial for the problem solving or to reduce the computational effort needed for the DR problem-solving. The tuning of the parameters of the optimization method represents a special issue and were addressed by some authors ( Although the DR and GEDI research topic is not new, there are many challenges in this field ( When a new or a modified DR, GEDI or MGEDI technique is proposed, it is compared with the existing techniques to validate the method itself. However, when authors propose new techniques for DR and GEDI (or MGEDI), only a few cases are used to validate the new methods, whereas the ideal case should involve testing in several cases (flowsheets) to verify and guarantee the generality of the proposed method. From a review of the DR and GEDI methods proposed in the literature, in many cases, only a few examples are studied, as presented in Test problems are well accepted by the scientific community, and many research areas have consolidated benchmark sets. Such as optimization, ( In this context, the aim of this work is to collect and present challenging examples to help researchers test their DR and GEDI techniques. In the present work, several examples were selected from a literature review or proposed. The main challenge related to each type of problem is presented. The structure of the problems set are presented in The data and flowsheets of these problems are described in the Supplement material. The test problems are divided in two groups: one group for DR and one group for GEDI. The problems were categorized into five types: Steady-state linear DR and GEDI examples for robust functions or unmeasured variables testing (16 examples). Steady-state parameter estimation with DR (4 examples using the error-in-variables approach). Data treatment and dynamic for DR and GEDI (one example with 5 test cases for DR and 2 examples with 10 test cases each for GED). DR and GEDI with time-varying systems with steady-state and dynamic cases (2 example with 10 cases each). Steady-state nonlinear examples with redundant, observable and unobservable variables for GEDI and DR (5 examples for DR and 8 examples for GEDI). In this class of problems, the 16 linear steady-state challenge test problems were selected via a literature review to cover a wide range of process flowsheets. In these problems, only total flow rates were selected, and all streams were measured and redundant. The measured dataset and standard deviations (SD), or variances, were either obtained from the original paper or, in some cases, when these data were not available, proposed in this work. The problems were selected to test the most common phenomena that negatively influence the performance of DR and GEDI algorithms, such as: Magnitude of measurements and bounds. Effect of unmeasured data on DR and GEDI. Magnitude of GE or the ratio between the GE and the respective SD. Position of the measurement containing GE. Constraints and flowsheet structure. Flow rates with small absolute standard deviations (or small order of magnitude) with other streams in the same balance. Parallel streams. Flowsheets with recycle. Changing the bounds on measurements for DR and GEDI problems. Changing the status of a measured stream to unmeasured and observing the impact on the data classification, DR and GEDI. Changing the value of a measurement or adding a single or multiple GE. Selecting the magnitude of GE or the ratio between the GE and the respective SD. Selecting another objective function (robust estimator), proposing a new one (using an existing function as a template) or tuning its parameters. Tuning the parameters of the existing optimization method. In the Scilab implementations, it is possible to test a very large combination of measured and unmeasured streams and also to add multiple measurement bias, multiple leakings, or a combination of them. Since, for large flowsheets, there is a large number of possible combinations of measured, unmeasured streams and GE, the authors did not fix its position, leaving this decision for future researchers. As previously mentioned, when DR must be performed together with parameter estimation, the number of equality constraints increases with the number of data points, and even for small problems, this type of optimization may be difficult to solve. The goal of this problem set is to present this type of challenge problems. The selected problems were chosen because they either exhibit substantial nonlinearity or several data points, making the problem relatively complex. Furthermore, the selected problems were the most commonly applied by the previously mentioned authors and represent a good basis for comparing methods. All the models are described in the Supplement material and listed below: Kinetic constant estimation of a heterogeneous reaction. Kinetic constant estimation of a CSTR reactor. Estimation of thermodynamic constants from VLE data. Estimation of heat exchanger parameters of a heat exchanger network. It is also possible to customize the 4 problems as follows: Selecting, removing or adding new data points (adding GEs, for example). Adding new inequality constraints to improve convergence rates. Changing initial guesses and evaluating the resulting influence on the problem convergence and presence of local minima. Tuning the parameters of the existing optimization method. The main challenge in the area of data filtering and DR is the proper selection and tuning of filters to reduce the noise before applying DR without removing the effects of GEs, which must be properly identified. Another problem associated with DR of dynamic systems is that the effect of the dynamics may spread along other variables that are not influenced by the dynamics. The objective of this benchmark category is to test the influence of data-filtering techniques on DR when measured and unmeasured variables and GE are present in steady-state and dynamic flowsheets. The proposed flowsheet consists of 2 parallel tanks with a by-pass valve and is the same as previously presented in Steady-state flowsheet with all streams measured and no GEs. Steady-state flowsheet with some streams unmeasured and no GEs. Steady-state flowsheet with all streams measured and GEs. Dynamic flowsheet with all streams measured and no GEs. Dynamic flowsheet with all streams measured and GEs. These problems can be modified in the following ways: Changing the operating point time and set-point amplitude. Modifying the SDs of the measurements. Adding single or multiple GEs and selecting the time and amplitude. Removing measurements to evaluate the impact on the DR results. In the dynamic case, changing the dynamic behavior (transfer function) of the system and adding or removing GEs (position, time and amplitude). Tuning or implementing new filtering strategies for the data. Although several GEDI techniques proposed in the literature perform tests in datasets where only one operation point is considered, in industrial scenarios, the process frequently changes its operating conditions; consequently, the data obtained by sensors are time-varying. To test GEDI in this class of problems, two flowsheets were proposed: a two tanks with by-pass system and a simplified reactor-separator flowsheet, both of which are linear (total flow rate) with all streams measured. In each of the flowsheets both steady-state and dynamic behavior are present, with 10 cases for each problem. The objective of this benchmark category is to test specific failures in sensors and leaking individually and combined, such as: Sensor bias with a fixed magnitude along the simulation. Drifting bias (with a time-varying magnitude) along the simulation. Equipment leaking. Sensor miscalibration. Multiple errors with a fixed bias and equipment leaking. The influence of the dynamic behavior on GEDI for the aforementioned cases. Data pretreatment before DR and the influence on GEDI. The first example for a time-varying system consists of 2 parallel tanks with a by-pass valve and 8 streams. The flowsheet is the same as previously presented in For this flowsheet, 5 test cases were introduced for both steady-state and dynamic systems: Sensor bias with a fixed magnitude along the simulation (8 cases, one for each stream). Drifting bias (with a time-varying magnitude) along the simulation (8 cases, one for each stream). Equipment leaking (4 cases). Sensor miscalibration (8 cases, one for each stream). Multiple GE with a fixed bias and equipment leaking (4 cases). The second problem consists of a simplified reaction-separation system (where only total flow rates are considered) with 3 pieces of equipment and 8 streams, as presented in Sensor bias with a fixed magnitude along the simulation (6 cases, one for each stream). Drifting bias (with a time-varying magnitude) along the simulation (6 cases, one for each stream). Equipment leaking (3 cases). Sensor miscalibration (6 cases, one for each stream). Multiple GEs with a fixed bias and equipment leaking (4 cases). Other details of the models are presented in the Supplement material. Although the dataset already provides challenging cases for GEDI techniques evaluation, these problems can be modified to test a wide range of scenarios in the following way: Change the operating point time and set-point amplitude. Modify the standard deviations of the measurements. Change the start time, end time and magnitude of a single or multiple GEs. Modify sensor behavior, such as drifting rates and drifting type (positive, negative or oscillatory). Modify calibration parameters. Remove measurements to evaluate the impact on the DR and GEDI results. In the dynamic case, change the dynamic behavior (transfer function) of the system. Tune or implement new filter strategies. In this class of problems, 5 steady-state nonlinear test problems were selected from literature or proposed, they are presented in The aim of this class of problems is to test DR and GEDI in more complex and nonlinear problems. Some features can be tested, such as: How DR and GEDI methods behave with unobservable and observable unmeasured variables. How DR and GEDI methods behave when rigorous process models are approximated by simplified models. How to design and tune robust functions to the nonlinear cases described above. How DR and GEDI are influenced by the parameters of the optimization method and how to detect appropriately global optima of the optimization problem. Customizations are also allowed for all nonlinear problems mentioned: Change the measurement value or standard deviation or add a GE at a specific position. Change the status of a measurement stream to unmeasured and determine the impact in the data classification, DR and GEDI. Select another objective function (the same as included in the linear test set), propose a new one (using an existing function as a template) or tune its parameters. Tune the parameters of the existing optimization method. Along the organization of this work, several papers and methods were revised. In this context, with the intention of helping the scientific community to select the appropriate DR or GEDI method, the authors organized a table with the suggested method for DR or GEDI problem solving. The results and discussion of some selected problems can be inspected at the Supplement material. As presented in In the problems selected, special care was taken to cover the challenges related to DR reported in the literature. Although the test platform selection (computational software and optimization solver) and implementation of the problems in Scilab were not presented and discussed in great detail, the implementation modularity and the easy extension and customization of the tests, resulting in various possible test combinations, were highlighted. Regarding the GEDI tests, GT, MT or NT were chosen because they are the basis for several simultaneous or iterative strategies for GEDI. If GT, MT or NT do not present good GEDI performance (low OP), it may indicate that the techniques that use these tests as a base will also present difficulties in the correct GEDI. For this reason, this benchmark test set could help the scientific community drive their efforts in the selection or proposal of individual or collective statistical tests to perform simultaneously or iterative GEDI methods. In future works, the authors encourage the scientific community to engage in increasing the number of relevant and challenging problems available for the DR and GEDI field. The authors also encourage the industrial community to contribute with problems from their area since DR and GEDI methods can promote many benefits to industrial plants. The DR and GEDI techniques can be influenced by many factors, such as flowsheet connections, measurement variance, position of the GE, and unmeasured variables. Consequently, GEDI is still a challenge even for fully measured, linear, steady-state diagrams ( In this work, special care was taken in the selection of the benchmark tests, it is presented the main characteristics of each problem, and the issues that the example intends to test are presented. The benchmark problems provide the reader with an idea of the particularities that appear when performing DR and GEDI techniques. The public availability ( The most important step in developing a new DR technique is validation, which, in most cases, is performed fairly non-rigorously because the methods are analyzed in a limited universe of potential test problems (as presented in The authors thank Professor Fernando Gonçalves Amaral and Professor Fernando Luiz Pellegrini Pessoa for suggestions in the paper structure, Professor Zhengjiang Zhang, (for the flowsheets diagrams and streams exact values of linear problem ‘P16’) and Professor Christopher Swartz for providing the paper with the heat exchanger network problem (‘nonlin_sw89’). This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. ε :error definition:  Influence Function WLS  Contaminated Normal  Cauchy  Logistic  Lorentzian  Fair  Hampel’s redescending M-estimator  Quasi-Weighted  The global test (GT) uses the results of the DR, the variance matrix and the mass balance constraints matrix to perform statistical tests. First, the mass balance residuals matrix, In the next step, as proposed by Then, As The nodal test (NT) is applied to the balance residuals without considering its iteration (  Another test used to detect measurement bias is the measurement test (MT), which is based in the adjustment after the reconciliation (defined by To calculate the MT statistic, Then,   The measurement test is performed using a monovariate statistical hypothesis test In Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at   