I’m always pleased to find a new review paper on a subject for which I have more than a passing acquaintance; but without direct mention of important early activity, key research can be missed. When it comes to reviewing grain-growth inhibition in sintered hardmetals, it's important to consider the early and important work of Walter Dawihl, research chief of Krupp-Widia in the 1940s [1], and perhaps even some of my own research on the subject in the 1950s [2,3]. With that in mind, I take a look back at some important developments, including work that has remained unpublished until comparatively recently, to help complement recent reviews and provide another perspective.With only a few years’ previous experience of powder metallurgy (at BNFMRA, the British Non-Ferrous Metals Research Association), it was for ten years my privilege to be responsible for both research and production at Teco, the Tungsten Electric Company, in London ( Additional plant and expertise were acquired from the Krupp-Widia Essen plant in 1945 as post-war reparations, augmented by some useful home-grown experience. The on-site hydrogen plant had during the war made gas for the ring of barrage balloons that helped protect London from Nazi dive-bombers. Unlike most of its competitors, Teco had the know-how and equipment to carry out virtually all stages of hardmetal production in-house, except for tungsten-ore refining, for which there was insufficient room on a relatively small site in Central London. Due to the excessive secrecy endemic in the Industry, I was in no position to evaluate competitors other than by our customer reports and submitted samples, but I assumed that most were similar in plant capabilities and product performance. They weren’t. My supposition could hardly have been less correct, though it would be many years before I could (in retrospect) be sure. Away from key users of hardmetals and its other customers, Teco was almost unknown. Apart from a modest catalogue of standard shapes and sizes, it spent nothing on publicity, advertising or sales promotion. Everything was sold on quality, delivery and performance, and my job was to ensure that Teco hardmetals outperformed all competitors in every critical application. In spite of the vast literature on hardmetal research, in some respects the industry has made little progress since the 1950s. This is in part due to academic research being based on commercially available raw materials rather than industrial processes and practice, particularly so where grain-growth inhibitors are concerned. But it's also due to endemic secrecy in the industry and to many research results being published obscurely and not retrieved by supposedly infallible Internet search engines. There are only two grain-growth inhibiting additives for WC/Co considered powerful enough to be worth considering in present-day commercial practice, chromium carbide Cr Tungsten carbide particles are hard, surprisingly tough and expensive. Commercial chromium and vanadium carbide powders are comparable but typically coarser and take much time and energy to break down into smaller sizes. Oxide particles are brittle and cheap. So we added small and optimized amounts of chromium or vanadium oxides to the tungsten metal or oxides we’d normally carburise to make WC, after which we mixed, milled and carburised them together. This arrangement effectively costs less than nothing. The added oxides are so inexpensive that adding 0.5% chromium effectively reduces the manufacturing price by near enough that same 0.5% and simultaneously increases performance. Not surprisingly, powder manufacturers do not talk about this whilst pocketing the extra profit from selling WC/Co “with added grain-growth inhibitor” at a higher price. Similar considerations apply to the cobalt binder. Even today, commercial cobalt metal powder is typically about 1 Invented in 1945 by Andrew Szegvari, attriting was in its infancy in the 1950s and most milling processes in hardmetal manufacture depended on conventional rotary mills with carbide balls or ‘cylpebs’ (small cylinders with hemispherical ends). These mills were relatively inefficient and had the significant drawback that, at high speeds, centrifugal force caused the mill contents to rotate with the mill and no comminution took place. Moreover, because any size reduction was caused (as in attriting) by impact, the grain-size distribution, even if tightly controlled before milling, became a ‘bell-shape’ or ‘normal’ distribution curve after milling, with very fine particles at one end of the size spectrum and a significant number of retained coarser particles at the other, which nucleated grain growth during hardmetal sintering. Bela Beke described impact milling processes well in a Hungarian book translated into English as ‘ We did most things differently from other companies. It is generally thought that processing to WC via ammonium paratungstate gives coarse powder, but this is only true of hot-crystallised paratungstate with low water of crystallization and ‘blocky’ crystal shape. Cold-crystallised paratungstate with high water of crystallization has a needle-like crystal structure which forms much finer and more regular WC. As Dawihl explained, fine tungstic acid is also a good starting material. Carburization may be carried out in several stages, with brown WO Although simplistic equations imply that the hydrogen atmosphere does no more than reduce metallic oxides to metal plus water vapor, the reactions are far more complicated, involve transient catalytic hydrocarbons or hydroxycarbons and are still not completely understood. In order to minimize grain growth, we had to dry the hydrogen to at least a dewpoint of −40, could not recycle it because of the reactions taking place, and required a substantial flow rate to avoid any build-up of H Much the same applies to the cobalt binder. Even today, in the 21st century, some (most?) hardmetal companies are still happy to add cobalt metal powder of 1 How did we do it? Of course we didn’t purchase cobalt powder, because what we wanted was not available commercially. When I joined the company we were buying cobalt rondells, dissolving in nitric acid, precipitating as cobalt oxalate (a very specific operation for cobalt, leaving almost all impurities in solution), then heating to form cobalt oxide Co For our finest grades we did not use conventional ball mills or attritors based on impact-milling, where it is difficult or impossible to maintain a narrow grain-size distribution curve. Instead we used high-energy Siebtechnik mills copied from prototypes obtained as war reparations from the Krupp-Widia Essen plant. Large and small examples were illustrated in Kieffer and Schwarzkopf's classic ‘ I carried out many tests on micrograin WC incorporating both Cr and V carbides as GGI and found 0.5% close to optimal for tungsten carbide of about 0.8 Eventually I replaced all our conventional WC/Co machining grades (typically 1.0 Regretfully (to me), Teco was sold soon after I left, gave up processing its own raw materials, later moved from London to Tenbury Wells and eventually merged into what has now become Total Carbide of Princes Risborough. Now let's take a look at the paper that inspired these recollections, one of the more interesting contributions to MPIF's recent PM2015 conference in San Diego, USA. Titled ‘ A brief historical introduction consisted mainly of a list of books and other publications, including famous works by Richard Kieffer and Paul Schwarzkopf of Plansee. As I mentioned earlier, the Kieffer/Schwarzkopf book Utilization of these finer grain WC/Co powders presented new challenges and concerns in processing and consolidation. These concerns included powder uniformity, purity and the dispersion of grain growth inhibitors in the composite material. As WC grain size continued to decrease, the authors found – as we did some 60 years earlier – that special care was needed to ensure uniform dispersion of the cobalt binder phase and the small additions of grain growth inhibitors. Problems arising from inhomogeneous distribution of the various components included deviation from stoichiometric carbon balance, localized abnormal grain growth, cobalt segregation and sub-stoichiometric phases. GGI distribution was of special importance in avoiding abnormal grain growth during liquid phase sintering. Conventional milling (presumably attriting) tended to use excess inhibitor powders in order to ensure sufficient dispersion, which is a good reason to suggest avoiding it when possible. While higher levels of these grain growth inhibitors were effective in restricting grain growth, the disadvantage was that toughness was often decreased. As mentioned earlier, in the 1960s we had already found that excess large GGI particles acted as stress-raisers and diminished toughness, and therefore developed process and equipment to optimize and completely disperse the GGI. The authors’ answer to the dispersion problem was to develop a ‘new class’ of GGI alloys, essentially solid solutions of inhibitor carbides in a Co-rich master-alloy matrix; and the paper goes on to explain that, with this method, local irregularities in the liquid phase that could lead to abnormal grain growth tended to be eliminated, even with relatively small additions of inhibitor phase. When sintering hardmetals, at peak sintering temperature the metallic binder phase is in the liquid state. Liquid phase sintering allows the material to be rapidly consolidated to full density through a process of rearrangement and solution-reprecipitation. According to the paper discussed above, an ideal microstructure for a WC/Co based hardmetal should contain only two phases, angular and prismatic WC grains and cobalt-based binder phase that has taken some tungsten and carbon into solution by dissolving WC. A representative microstructure of a simple WC/10Co alloy is shown in The paper explains that, with WC/10Co, significant densification begins at about 1000 During the liquid phase sintering of WC/Co and accompanying densification, significant microstructural coarsening takes place via a solution-reprecipitation mechanism, in which smaller WC grains with higher solubility dissolve in the liquid and reprecipitate to form larger WC grains. This is fundamentally an entropy-led process. It is well known that residual porosity lowers the transverse rupture strength of WC/Co and, perhaps less widely understood because their effect is very similar to that of large pores, coarse grains also result in inferior overall properties. The author emphasized the importance of controlling the solution-reprecipitation stage so as to achieve a fully dense structure without significant grain growth. The paper describes how pronounced densification occurs even in the solid state during the heat-up to eutectic temperature and, in the case of ultrafine grades of powders, up to 90% densification occurs by solid state sintering. However, I have an unproven ‘armchair-type’ theory that all the additives and impurities concentrate at particle surfaces, lower the local liquidus temperature and permit liquid-phase sintering across a thin interfacial layer, a few nanometres or less in thickness. By contrast the authors of the paper assert that “it is known that WC grain growth occurs even below the temperature at which liquid is formed” and that it was therefore reasonable “that more effective control of grain growth can be obtained if the liquid phase is formed at lower temperatures.” Although, in my experience, very little is known of complex phase diagrams of hardmetals containing a multiplicity of constituents, especially under metastable or otherwise non-equilibrium conditions. The paper correctly explains that the availability of GGI at the WC/Co interface should therefore determine the degree of grain growth inhibition. Thus it was important to achieve a completely uniform dispersion of the inhibitor phases in the starting powder. However, having explained why vanadium and chromium carbides are the best growth inhibitors for WC/Co hardmetals, it states that “transport of the inhibitor takes place mainly by diffusion in the binder phase or at the WC/Co interface.” The second of these suggestions is undoubtedly correct, but the first is open to questions about process parameters. The invention discussed in the paper is described as: “A uniform dispersion of grain growth inhibitor is the key to attaining a more uniform fine grain carbide structure during consolidation. This has been accomplished by incorporating the inhibitors in a solid solution cobalt phase. In this study, the solid solution grain growth inhibitors form low melting point ternary liquid(s) at temperatures of 1200–1250 However, it isn’t clear (a) whether the “solid solution cobalt phase” or master alloy mentioned in the paper represents all the binder, or only part of it; (b) what is the average grain size and grain-size distribution before and after sintering; (c) whether the additive carbides are dissolved in the cobalt as carbides or as some other compounds; or perhaps (d) whether the inhibitors are added as soluble compounds to a solution of a cobalt salt, then dried, co-precipitated or otherwise processed to form the Co-based solid solution. The paper continues with useful comparisons of cemented carbides from a number of sources and with a variety of compositions, as shown for example, in Using solid solution grain growth inhibitors and an improved carbon balance procedure, fully dense samples with 150   In the summary of the paper discussed above, the authors conclude that considerable progress has been made in grain growth inhibition of cemented carbide, and that uniform dispersion of grain growth inhibitors is key to retaining finer grain materials. My own perspective is that little progress has been made in best practice of grain-growth inhibition in sintered WC/Co in the last 60 years and that uniform distribution of GGIs to all interfaces is the key to retaining finer grain structures. I hope that this look back at some important contributions in the context of recent work helps complement contemporary reviews and by adding my thoughts to the discussion, provides a more comprehensive picture of developments in grain growth inhibition.