The uncertainty evaluation in the measurement of pavement thickness using ground penetrating radar is depicted in this work for operating frequencies of 1GHz. Three areas of pavement with a number of different layers and thicknesses, the influence of two different human operators and the calibration/non-calibration of the radar signal were taken into account to evaluate the uncertainty contribution.
                  Results depict smaller corrections for the calibrated values (ranging from −1cm to 1.5cm), while in the case of tabulated values corrections range between −3cm and 3cm. On the contrary, uncertainties show similar trends in both cases (calibrated and non-calibrated) being the upper limit around 2.5cm.
                  There are important differences between the results obtained for each one of the interpreters and it seems that it is an important factor to take into account in the evaluation of the uncertainty. In this work, this contribution was included as a rectangular type B probability distribution.
                  The results do not depict differences between the type of material of the pavement and the thickness of the layer.Road inspection is very important to determine the exact time when rehabilitation must be performed in a road infrastructure. Surveying companies use a number of complementary sensors to the measuring of different road characteristics. Some examples are mobile LiDAR for geometric measurements GPR is a close-range remote sensing prospecting method based on the propagation of very short time domain electromagnetic pulses (1–20 Although most manufacturers of GPR systems display information about the accuracy of the systems (e.g. the MALÅ Geoscience and the GSSI companies have reported an accuracy of 3–5% and 4%, respectively), they do not provide any data about the uncertainty This work aims to develop a methodology for the calculation of uncertainties in GPR systems used for pavement thickness measurements, so that it can accurately determine whether the system can be used or not for the measurement of a pavement according to a tolerance previously predefined. Particularly, we analyzed the effectiveness of the 1 The manuscript is structured in the following form: Part 2 shows the materials and methods, including the area of study, the GPR instrumentation, the acquisition and processing techniques, and the uncertainty evaluation. Part 3 depicts the results and discussion for the different tests done and the validation of the method. Part 4 exhibits the conclusions. Different typologies of pavement layers were used in this work. First, an experimental zone was built in the neighborhood asphalt plant owned by the company Extraco S.A., in order to analyze the accuracy and precision of the GPR for obtaining the thickness of asphalt pavements under controlled conditions. For an exhaustive analysis, four types of asphalts, with different material composition, were evaluated. The entire experimental zone was divided in four grids 3 Field GPR tests were also conducted on in-service roads. These case studies correspond to measuring opportunities derived from the rehabilitation tasks developed by local construction companies. Two different sections of in-service roads were analyzed, and the pavement layers under study also correspond to different pavement typologies in agreement with the experimental zone. The reason for this decision is the interest in studying the possible effect of such material on the uncertainty measurement taking into account the forms most commonly used in pavements. In addition, each section contains a number of control points with known thicknesses in order to calibrate the radar-wave velocity. Core drilling was used in these case studies to provide an excellent accurate estimation of the pavement thickness. The Section The Section We conducted the GPR surveys with a RAMAC/GPR CU-II system from MALÅ Geoscience. The 1 Data acquisition was carried out in both static and dynamic modes for a better understanding of the GPR signal. The dynamic data acquisition was conducted using the common-offset mode (CO) with the antenna polarization perpendicular to the data collection direction. Using the CO mode, one or two antennas (shielded or unshielded antennas, respectively) are moved over the surface along a specific direction while keeping a constant distance between the transmitter and receiver. The acquisition parameters selected were total time windows of 17 We processed the GPR data collected with the ReflexW v.5.6 software To evaluate the accuracy of the 1 First, the radar-wave velocity was determined from the knowledge of the real thicknesses obtained by coring, which were constant thicknesses in the case of the experimental zone and the thicknesses of the first control point for the sections on in-service roads ( Once the radar-wave velocity was calibrated, we determined the pavement thicknesses in the remaining control points by considering the respectively velocity previously obtained. Then, we compared the thickness values thus estimated with the real values obtained from the core measurements. For the uncertainty analysis, we considered more variables as explained in the next Section To calculate the radar-wave velocities, we use the manual difference pick application  The time and the amplitude are two variables of interest in a GPR signal. We determined the difference pick in time application to be optimal for the estimation of the wave travel-time distance (Δ The velocity values obtained for the individual layers of asphalts ranged from 10.1 to 12.2 We used the remaining control points to estimate the pavement thickness by following the inverse procedure explained to determine the velocity. Knowing the velocity of propagation for each asphalt or combination of different asphalts ( Measurement uncertainty is a non-negative parameter characterizing the dispersion of the values attributed to a measured quantity. The uncertainty has a probabilistic basis and reflects incomplete knowledge of the quantity. All measurements are subject to uncertainty and a measured value is only complete if is accompanied by a statement of the associated uncertainty The Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement Knowledge about an input quantity The model function for the uncertainty evaluation in pavement measurements using GPR contains two main terms. The first one, type A evaluation, is related with the standard deviation of the measurements. The standard deviation indicates the repeatability, the variation in the measurements taken by a single person or instrument on the same item and under the same conditions. The second one, type B evaluation, indicates the reproducibility and resolution of the GPR antenna. Reproducibility is the degree of agreement between measurements or observations conducted on replicate specimens in different locations by different people. This fact appears very important in GPR metrology because this instrument is very influenced by the interpretation of the operator. Resolution is related with the level of information obtained for a certain device. In GPR technology resolution is related with the wavelength of the instrument and the radar-wave velocity of propagation. Antennas with higher frequency depict higher spatial resolution. The expanded uncertainty Accuracy of a measurement system is the degree of closeness of measurements of a quantity to that quantity’s true value There is a relation between correction and error     A metrology evaluation of the pavement thickness measurement using ground penetrating radar is performed in terms of correction and uncertainty for three different cases of study. Expanded uncertainty is evaluated using type Correction in the measurements is obtained as the difference between the data provided from the study and the ground truth provided from coring. The results show as the correction is very influenced by the calibration or non-calibration of the GPR data. Calibrated results are closer to the real data. On the other hand, calibration or non-calibration do not affect to the expanded uncertainty calculation. The correction and expanded uncertainty are evaluated for different types of pavement and there is not any dependence with the thickness or the type of layer. Authors want to give thanks to the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, the Spanish Centre for Technological and Industrial Development and Xunta de Galicia for the financial support given; Grant IPP055-EXP44 and projects (BIA2009-08012 and IDI-20101770).