This work describes the effect of some organic impurities on the quality of zinc deposits and on the efficiency of the electrowinning process. The presence of some organics (i.e., flotation collectors, flocculant and lubricating oil) in the sulfate electrolyte was shown to significantly decrease current efficiency, thereby increasing energy consumption. Microscopic and texture analyses revealed that the individual addition of these organics to the electrolyte leads to the formation of pores on the deposits, variations in their grain size, and orientation changes resulting in crystallographic randomization with a trend to reorient the crystals from a “perpendicular to the plane” to an “in plane” random distribution. The Zn electrodeposit's features are expected to affect mechanical properties and, in turn, the effectiveness of the stripping operation.It is well-known that residual amounts of organic compounds may contaminate the feed solution of electrowinning tankhouses. The presence of organic impurities in the sulfate electrolyte during the electrowinning of zinc may significantly affect the current efficiency and the quality of the metal electrodeposited on the aluminum cathodes. Previous works, which focused on the effect of organic compounds, such as acid mist suppressants ( Previous works ( The present investigation is then motivated by the recognition that a better understanding of the effect of contaminants (organics or inorganics) on the electrowinning of metals should include an evaluation of the stripping behavior of the deposit, which allows a more detailed assessment of product quality. The effect of organic impurities on zinc electrowinning has been selected as a case study in this work. Previous work has indicated that the presence of some organic impurities ( The selected organic compounds are (a) a flocculant, Flonex® (Organic 1), which is added during thickening, (b) a flotation collector for zinc silicate (willemite – Zn The electrowinning experiments were conducted in a continuous three-electrode cell (0.42 Following electrowinning, the Zn deposits were manually stripped from the Al cathode, thoroughly rinsed with deionized water and dried in a furnace at 60 The morphology of the Zn deposits obtained from organic-free and organic-containing electrolytes was analyzed by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled to energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), using a JEOL (JSM 6360 LV) microscope equipped with a Thermo Noran (Quest) spectrometer. The micrographs were obtained using a 15 The textures of the Zn deposits were analyzed by X-ray diffraction using a Panalytical MPD diffractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation, X-ray lens, Euler cradle, graphite monochromator in the diffracted beam and He gas detector. The Schulz reflection method was used and after collection of the main reflection peaks ([001], [100], [101] and [102]) the initial data was corrected for defocusing and further analyzed by WXpopLA, current W7 implementation of popLA software ( Previous works ( The effect of the organic compounds on the average values of CE is shown in The solubilities of the selected organic compounds are not provided by the manufacturers. In general, the experimental results confirmed that organic molecules with affinity for water may cause strong inhibition of zinc deposition under practical conditions, such as those exhibited by the collector for zinc (Organic 2) and the flocculant (Organic 1). These effects are larger than those observed for the hydrophobic lubricating oil (Organic 4) and the collector for impurities (Organic 3), which is a mixture of fatty acids with relatively low solubility in the electrolyte. The results obtained with the flocculant (Organic 1) and the collector for impurities (Organic 3) was magnified in the continuous set-up, in comparison with the effects observed by using the mini cell that operates under batch conditions (  The electron images of Zn deposits obtained from solutions containing the collector for zinc revealed significant changes in the morphology ( The images of deposits obtained from solutions containing the collector for impurities (Organic 3) show drastic changes in the morphology ( The morphological differences observed between Zn deposits produced under batch conditions ( It is well-established that the hydrogen bubbles attached to the cathode surface lead to the formation and growth of pores, as the metal deposit is formed around the bubbles within the interval they remain attached to the electrode ( The addition of the organic compounds to the electrolyte caused grain refinement as well. Zn crystallites with smaller sizes were observed by SEM at higher magnifications ( It is well-known that the grain size of metal deposits is affected by the number of grain-producing dislocations during the electrocrystallization ( The SEM/EDS analysis indicated residual amounts of organics and ZnSO Direct pole figures for the Zn deposits obtained from organic-free electrolyte and solutions containing 50 The texture analysis also revealed the growth of slightly larger grain size for the Zn deposit obtained in the presence of 50 The texture results were also found to be compatible with the images obtained by SEM, that is: The deposition of platelets with hexagonal symmetry and with the 〈c〉 axes almost perpendicular to the sample plane can be observed (as shown in The platelets are oriented approximately perpendicularly to the deposition plane, confirming the partial reorientation of the 〈c〉 axes from “perpendicular to the plane” to “in plane” orientation (as shown in  The above-mentioned modifications in the growth pattern of the Zn deposits support the hypothesis that the adsorbed organic molecules affect the electrocrystallization of the metal ion. These molecules prevent the growth of platelets in one specific direction possibly by hindering the diffusion of ad-atoms, thus inducing different growth rates for different crystal planes. There might be even a tendency to facilitate the growing of crystals in such way that the orientation switches to an “in plane” 〈c〉 axes preferential distribution. These changes, coupled with the formation of pores on the Zn deposits, led to significant changes of the mechanical properties of this material.  The role of some organic compounds in the porosity, grain size and texture of Zn electrodeposits and on the efficiency of the electrowinning process is discussed in this paper. The individual additions of flocculant, collector for zinc, collector for impurities to the electrolyte, which may be present at residual amounts when zinc silicate ores are treated, caused significant reductions in the current efficiency of the electrowinning process, thereby increasing energy consumption. The addition of the organics to the electrolyte also changed the features of the metal deposit. Microscopy analysis showed that the addition of organics to the electrolyte may leads to the formation of pores on the deposit surface and variations in the grain size. Orientation changes ending up in randomization, with a trend to reorient the crystals from a “perpendicular to the plane” to an “in plane” random distribution, were determined by texture analysis. These changes affected the mechanical behavior of the material, as confirmed by means of bending tests using a customized device ( The authors would like to thank Votorantim Metais – Zinc for providing organic samples and technical support; Centre of Microscopy/UFMG (Breno B. Moreira), Laboratory of Ceramic Materials/UFMG (Prof. Eduardo H.M. Nunes and Prof. Wander L. Vasconcelos) and Laboratory of X-rays/IFIR-CCT Rosario for the analyses. D. Majuste and V.S.T. Ciminelli thank the sponsoring companies of the AMIRA P705B Project (Improved anode and cathode processes in the electrowinning of base metals) for their financial support and permission to publish this paper. The partial financial support from the Brazilian agencies (