The geochemistry of rutile (TiO2) has recently found its use in mineral exploration with some studies reporting anomalous concentrations of Fe, W, V, Sn and Sb in rutile associated with mineralized ore systems. However, the use of rutile as a prospecting tool is likely to be complicated by the systematic changes in trace element composition with TiO2 polymorph type (anatase, brookite and rutile).
                  Here we present TiO2 trace element and U–Pb geochronological data from the mineralized and barren portions of the Palaeoproterozoic Moorarie Supersuite and (Capricorn Orogen, Western Australia), with a focus on the Minnie Creek Molybdenum Prospect in the northern part of the Gascoyne Province. The barren samples contain all three TiO2 polymorphs (anatase, brookite and rutile). Textures suggest anatase and brookite may have formed during low-T metamorphism, either through replacement of previous rutile grains or titaniferous minerals. Rutile grains from barren samples yield variable U–Pb ages (ca. 3.0–2.2Ga) as well as variable textures and chemical compositions suggesting detrital origins, thus most likely representing metasedimentary units intruded by the Moorarie Supersuite. Rutile grains from the Minnie Creek prospect yield Palaeoproterozoic (ca. 1.77–1.75Ga) U–Pb cooling ages and Nb+Ta concentrations of up to 17wt% that along with inclusions of manganocolumbite, oscillatory and patchy zonation of Nb and Fe, suggest a magmatic origin.
                  The commonly used pathfinder elements for gold and base-metal mineralisation (Fe, Cr, V, W, Sn and Sb) are shown to be systematically lower in anatase and brookite, thus yielding false negatives if polymorph type is not identified during reconnaissance studies. For this reason, a ternary diagram was constructed based on the systematic changes in chemistry of TiO2 polymorphs to provide a relatively fast and easy chemical discrimination of polymorphs in large volumes of reconnaissance data. Furthermore, it is shown that high Al concentrations are characteristic of brookite and, to a lesser degree, anatase but not rutile. In addition, Sn, Nb, Ta and W concentrations in rutile may be more sensitive to igneous processes and may be used to track processes occurring in strongly fractionated granitic magmas such as pegmatites and associated deposits.Titanium dioxide (TiO The ability of TiO Anomalous rutile compositions (enrichment in V, W, Sn and Sb) have been reported from various orogenic, porphyry gold and base-metal deposits ( In this contribution, we investigate the trace element geochemistry of the three TiO The Palaeoproterozoic Capricorn Orogen formed during a two-stage collision between the Archaean Pilbara and Yilgarn Cratons in Western Australia (inset Following amalgamation, punctuated intracontinental reworking affected the Capricorn Orogen at various times with accompanying sedimentation, deformation and metamorphism, and (in some cases) magmatism. The two earliest intracontinental tectonothermal events, the Capricorn (ca. 1820–1780 Within the Gascoyne Province, voluminous granitic suites intruded during the two main magmatic events in the Palaeoproterozoic (the Moorarie Supersuite, ca. 1820–1780 Within the Limejuice Zone ( A total of five representative samples of the Moorarie Supersuite were chosen for analysis based on the occurrence of all three TiO Heavy mineral separates and thin sections for samples 185950 and 188975 were obtained from the Geological Survey of Western Australia (GSWA). TiO TiO Data acquisition and processing was carried out using Oxford Instruments Aztec 2.4 and CHANNEL 5.12 software (detailed analytical methods are described by Data are presented as a series of maps showing TiO Trace element compositions and U–Pb isotopic measurements of TiO The Nu Instruments Plasma multicollector (MC-ICP-MS) consists of 12 Faraday cups equipped with 10 The Nu Instruments Plasma multicollector (MC-ICP-MS) consists of 12 Faraday cups equipped with 10 Trace-element concentrations were determined using the BHVO glass as a calibration standard, to correct for any instrumental drift, mass bias and elemental fractionation. Trace elements were monitored for all rutile standards analysed. Measured trace elements include Trace-element concentrations were determined using the BHVO glass as a calibration standard, to correct for any instrumental drift, mass bias and elemental fractionation. Trace elements were monitored for all rutile standards analysed. Measured trace elements include The precision on individual analyses is dependent on the concentration of analyte element in the sample. Typical precision on individual analyses obtained during the analytical session are > The precision on individual analyses is dependent on the concentration of analyte element in the sample. Typical precision on individual analyses obtained during the analytical session are > Temperature calculations were carried out using the Zr-in-rutile thermometer of Temperature calculations were carried out using the Zr-in-rutile thermometer of The barren samples 188975 and 185950 yield all three TiO Rutile grains in the barren samples yield variable textures that can be subdivided into three main groups: Anatase grains in sample 188975 are commonly intergrown with, or surround, rutile ( Rutile grains from all mineralized samples are typically euhedral to anhedral, between 50 and 500 EDS mapping of the grains shows that BSE-bright zones are enriched in Nb (and Fe, The TiO Extreme enrichments of Nb, Ta and Fe in mineralized rutile grains equate to combined concentrations of up to 17.5 When compared to rutile (from both mineralized and barren samples), anatase and brookite have lower concentrations of V, Cr, Zr, Hf, Mo, Sn, Sb and W, and comparable Fe, Nb, Al and Ta ( On the Nb vs. Cr discrimination plot of A comparison of Nb and Fe concentrations yields a strong positive correlation for barren rutile grains (Group 1) and mineralized rutile grains ( Based on the calibration of To visually inspect rutile associated with gold and base-metal deposits, A majority of the reticulated rutile grains ( A majority of the reticulated rutile grains ( A total of 25 analyses were obtained from sample GP05. Of those, a number of analyses (n A total of 53 analyses were collected from 12 grains from sample GP06. Some analyses (n A total of 50 analyses from sample GP07 were obtained from 15 grains. Of those, a majority of the analyses contained high concentrations of A total of 50 analyses from sample GP07 were obtained from 15 grains. Of those, a majority of the analyses contained high concentrations of Barren samples 185950 (containing only euhedral anatase and brookite) and 188975 (containing variable textured anatase and rutile) are located in the Mutherbukin and Mooloo Zones respectively ( In contrast to the Mooloo Zone, Mutherbukin Zone (sample 185950, Additional controls on the stability of anatase and brookite in granite sample 185950 are provided by the bulk composition of the magma. Recent studies have suggested certain impurities can inhibit the anatase-rutile transition (e.g. AlOOH, Ce, Si, Ba, Sr Nb and Zr Twinned and W-zoned (Group 1 and 2) rutile grains from barren sample 188975 within the Mooloo Zone ( Twinned and W-zoned (Group 1 and 2) rutile grains from barren sample 188975 within the Mooloo Zone ( Fine-grained prismatic rutile aggregates typical of reticulated grains (Group 3) yield three different crystallographic orientations that have 60° misorientation angles ( Rutile grains in the mineralized samples yield complex zonation profiles (oscillatory, undulose and patchy zonation) all representing variable (and high) concentrations of Nb and Fe ( Bright undulose zones (sample GP06) are commonly found in grains showing ragged grain margins surrounded by a matrix of microgranular Nb-Ta-rich rutile, zircon and REE phosphates (xenotime and monazite). They do not conform to any crystallographic orientation and closely resemble irregularly shaped domains in zircon formed during late-stage to post-magmatic recrystallization of precursor oscillatory zoned grains ( Rutile grains from the three mineralized samples GP05, GP06 and GP07 yielded similar ages of 1768 Mutual inclusion relations of pyrite and rutile suggest that rutile formation was linked to sulphide formation. Re-Os age of ca. 1773 The mineralized and barren samples come from spatially disparate tectonic domains (Mooloo and Mutherbukin Zones — barren samples; Limejuice Zone — mineralized samples, The greatest variation in trace element composition between rutile grains from mineralized and barren samples is observed for Nb, Ta, Sn, W, Fe and U, all of which are enriched in rutile from mineralized samples. The extreme enrichment in Nb and Ta (up to 17.7 Similarly, concentrations of SnO Rutile grains from the mineralized samples plot solely in the metapelitic field on the Nb-Cr discrimination ( The strong positive correlation between Nb and Fe ( The lower-temperature polymorphs (anatase and brookite) from the barren Moorarie Supersuite granitoid (sample 185950) yield, on average, much lower concentrations for all the elements analysed when compared to rutile ( Despite a large variation in trace element concentrations in anatase from sample 188975, there is a significant overlap in the concentrations of Fe, Zr and Hf, and to a lesser degree, Mo, Sb, W and U between anatase and rutile in the same sample ( In order to develop a method of discriminating between the TiO The reason for the misclassification of anatase as brookite is unclear. For this reason, a comparison of the anatase and brookite concentration means (for elements V, Cr, Nb, Sn, Fe and Zr) used in the LDA study of The reason for the misclassification of anatase as brookite is unclear. For this reason, a comparison of the anatase and brookite concentration means (for elements V, Cr, Nb, Sn, Fe and Zr) used in the LDA study of Classification of polymorphs using LDA analysis of Rutile grains from the barren and mineralized samples have different origins (detrital vs. igneous-hydrothermal). Detrital rutile, and low-T metamorphic/hydrothermal anatase and brookite in the Moorarie Supersuite and Leake Spring Metamorphics represent the ‘background’ signatures and must be well characterized in order to detect ‘anomalous’ signatures associated with mineralized systems. In addition, a barren sample of the Moorarie Supersuite (sample 185850) contained only the lower temperature TiO Furthermore, W is highly variable within, and between, the individual (detrital) rutile grains from the barren samples, thus yielding false positives ( On the contrary, Sn appears to be enriched in magmatic rutile, with high concentrations of Sn also commonly characteristic of highly fractionated felsic intrusions and magmatic hydrothermal processes ( Though association of Sb with orogenic gold has long been recognized ( Due to large ambiguities associated with TiO This study establishes the importance of characterizing different types of TiO The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at We would like to thank Simon Johnson from the Geological Survey of Western Australia (GSWA) for invaluable assistance and advice in the field. We would also like to thank Tanya Ewing and the anonymous reviewer for their very detailed and thorough reviews that have significantly improved this manuscript. This work was funded by the