In many parts of the world today smartphone ownership has become a ubiquitous and seemingly necessary marker of young adulthood, acting as a potent symbol of connection and social participation. Furthermore, a growing body of evidence suggests that smartphones and other mobile devices are increasingly important in the lives of young and very young children too ( Boundaries between everyday life and school are already beginning to blur, and the distinctions between life on- or off-screen, and on- or off-line seem to have become largely irrelevant ( The papers in this collection tend to focus on the later stages of schooling and are mostly located in upper secondary classrooms, and this is unsurprising given current patterns of ownership. A consistent theme, even when it is not the researchers' explicit focus, is the way in which these digital devices are implicated in mediating identity performances of various kinds, whether these relate to expressions of the freedom of young adulthood (Paakkari et al., this issue), the maintenance of ambient sociability (Olin-Scheller et al., this issue) or enactments of multilingualism (Rusk, this issue). In other papers, smartphones feature like totems, markers of territory, or as vehicles for exploring other territories (Sahlstrom et al., this issue) – mutable but invariably tethered to the individual. It would be interesting to know the extent to which this is an age-related phenomenon, exclusive to young adulthood, and if it is, what its antecedents might look like. But in a more immediate and practical sense, how seriously should educators take this identity work? For instance, are the multilingual practices described in detail by Rusk, an educational opportunity or simply a description of how things are in the late modern world? The ubiquity of social media comes as no surprise, as time and again these researchers refer to WhatsApp, Snapchat, Instagram and Tumblr. These apps require little description, we're all familiar with them - they work well on mobile devices and they have insinuated themselves into students' everyday lives as well as into the lives of the scholars and academics that research them (although there is little mention of this in the Special Issue). Where, I wonder, is the reflexivity and criticality that we need as we discover more about digital labour and the attention economy and their potent relationship to consumerism, political manipulation and the rise of populism? Alongside all this two key issues present themselves as one reads across these papers. Firstly, new practices and new habits of mind are reconfiguring what it means to know and what it means to find out, and this of course has profound implications for how we think about learning and teaching – or on a grander scale, the overall purpose of public education. And secondly, since so much of what occurs in the digital world is hidden from view, both from those who are co-present (Sahlstrom et al.) and from the user (Paakkari et al.), new kinds of critical literacy are required ( An undoubted strength of all these papers is the way in which they situate smartphones in their contexts of use, by deploying a variety of innovative approaches to data collection. Nearly all depend on video recording, sometimes combining two points of view with smartphone screen capture. In some of the studies these methods are complimented by student interviews and observational notes. Gilje uses media diaries and ‘screenographies’ as a way of looking at different kinds of screen use, whereas Paakkari et al. use a video-facilitated interview technique to include participants' perspectives on their own practices. In this sense, all these researchers are looking for approaches that are appropriate to a new context and an emerging field of research and they should be applauded for that. This task of course also involves adapting existing frameworks such as conversational analysis (Rusk), interactional analysis (Gilje) and visual ethnography (Stahl & Kaihovirta) – and we desperately need empirical work like this, work that is based on authentic uses, rather than popular belief, if only to add texture and depth to the discussion of the fundamentally important educational debates alluded to above. Qualitative work with an ethnographic sensitivity has a key role to play in this respect. These classroom studies are conducted with an ethnographic gaze, motivated by a desire to gain an insider view of students' interactions with digital media through smartphones. Occasionally we are given glimpses of how these social, material and semiotic resources variously entangle with the ongoing lives of the participants as young people, complex and mobile across multiple, heterogeneous and hybrid contexts. We do, however, need a deeper analysis to understand the digital lives of our students better, but we also need to translate the more contained findings of small scale research into something that is accessible to educators. The next challenge then for researchers is to address the needs and concerns of classroom teachers. In