Tetrathionate is one of the principal products of thiosulfate degradation during gold leaching with ammoniacal thiosulfate solution. Its presence in the leach solution may interfere with the recovery of gold using ion exchange. It is therefore desirable to examine the kinetics of tetrathionate decomposition. The kinetics of tetrathionate decomposition in strong alkaline solutions deaerated with nitrogen has been investigated by means of ion chromatography. The effect of pH and temperature on the reaction rate was studied. It was found that the reaction was first order with respect to both tetrathionate and hydroxide. With constant hydroxide concentration, the pseudo-first order rate constants have been determined at various pH and temperatures. The activation energy of the reaction in the temperature range 22–40 °C was found to be 98.5 kJ mol−1. The reaction pathways and stoichiometry of the reaction have also been discussed.The leaching of gold with thiosulfate (S In this laboratory, work has been done to investigate the possibility of using strong base ion exchange resins to recover gold from thiosulfate solutions, and promising results have been obtained. However, it was found that tetrathionate (S The decomposition of polythionates in alkaline solutions has been studied since the beginning of this century and most of the work was done between the 1930s and the 1950s More recently, It was realized, however, that previous works The decomposition of tetrathionate was carried out in buffered solutions made from 0.5 M NaHCO  The changes in tetrathionate and thiosulfate concentrations with time under various experimental conditions are illustrated in The general form of the rate equation for  From In order to study the effect of temperature on tetrathionate decomposition, further experiments were conducted at pH 10.5 and various temperatures. Again, the ln( The activation energy obtained is reasonably close to those reported by In There is a possibility that the reaction products, S  From a comparison of the kinetic data in this work and those reported The kinetics of the decomposition of tetrathionate in strong alkaline solutions deaerated with nitrogen has been investigated by means of ion chromatography. The reaction conforms to first order kinetics with respect to both tetrathionate and hydroxide. With constant hydroxide concentration, the pseudo-first order rate constants have been determined at various pH and temperatures. The activation energy of the reaction at pH 10.5 was found to be 98.5 kJ mol The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Berend Wassink for the useful discussions in sulfur chemistry and the following companies for financially supporting this project: Anglogold, Barrick Gold, Kinross Gold, Newcrest Mining, Normandy Mining, Placer Dome, Cominco Teck and Tessenderlo Kerley.