The discrete element method (DEM) has been used extensively in simulating multiple interacting bodies undergoing relative motion and breakage. The key to the success of this method lies in correctly establishing the interaction rules and the associated contact parameters. In this paper, this is done by analyzing the impact behavior of a steel ball. Experimental data using an ultra fast load cell (UFLC) allowed the material response at the contact to be adequately modeled by a nonlinear differential equation. In turn, the contact parameters to be used in the DEM were directly extracted from the model.
                  The nonlinear contact behavior led to values of contact parameters that limit the critical time step in the numerical integration. This is unsuitable for any large simulation involving thousands of interacting balls as in the case of a ball mill. This disadvantage is overcome by using the equivalent linearization technique to transform the nonlinear contact model to an analogous linear model. Not only did the linearized parameters allow a larger time step but also the use of a linear spring–dashpot model significantly reduced the overall computational effort, which is illustrated by simulating a 54.5-cm diameter ball mill.One of the successful applications of the discrete element method (DEM) as applied to mineral engineering research includes prediction of charge motion and estimation of power draft of tumbling mills that are used in all mining operations for size reduction operations. Since its inception The main objective of simulation is to correctly predict the dynamic profile of the ball charge and the power draft. For an industrial mill of 13-ft diameter, it is done essentially by tracking the motion of approximately 100,000 balls. Monitoring the position of all these balls at any instant is not a trivial task and it is due to the availability of the DEM technique that it has only become possible. In the DEM technique where the calculation is done in a discrete fashion by monitoring the forces at each contact, the total number of contacts to be handled, assuming a maximum of 10 contacts per ball is 10 The computational limitations restricted the early DEM applications to two-dimensional (2D) assemblies of discs. DEM was used as a qualitative tool for the computation of planar motion of the charge as a function of linear geometry. Following the development of three-dimensional (3D) simulation codes, it became possible to directly obtain quantitative information such as axial flow of material, frequency spectrum of the intensity of collisions, power draft, etc. However, the success in this approach lies in correctly determining the parameters involved in the model for two reasons: first, these parameters influence the critical time step used in the simulation procedure, and second, the accuracy of the quantitative results of the simulation is solely dictated by the accuracy of these parameters. Even a slight variation in the values of contact parameters is likely to give a large variation in the simulation results. These parameters essentially embody the contact properties of the system: stiffness, damping, and friction. Estimation of correct parameters for realistic simulation is not addressed adequately in the literature. In this paper, a formal procedure is presented to determine the contact parameters using the experimental data in such a way that a compromise is maintained between numerical accuracy and computational expense. In the DEM, the trajectory of each distinct element (particle or ball) is tracked incrementally by Newton's laws of motion. Forces are computed at the contacts between particles by suitably describing the contact behavior by means of a force–displacement law. It is assumed that the time step may be so small that no new contacts are generated in the course of the motion of the particle in that time step. Hence, the resultant force acting on any particle over one time step is composed of the forces arising exclusively from contacts that the particle shared in a given time step. In calculating the contact forces, the particles are allowed to overlap; every such overlapping contact is modeled by a pair of spring and dashpot in both the normal and shear directions. The shear spring–dashpot combination generates, at most, the maximum static frictional force for the materials involved in contact. A schematic representation of the contact is given in Literature reveals that the contact models that describe the force–displacement relationships exhibit purely linear to highly nonlinear contact response. Dobry and Ng For the discrete particle simulation of a 2D fluidized bed, Tsuji et al. The nonlinear impact phenomenon was extensively studied by Hertz It was experimentally proved by Velusami The nonlinear impact theory of Hertz is limited to metal–metal impact only. However, realizing its implication, researchers in the field of DEM have applied nonlinear force theory to obtain a more realistic model for the contact force. Tsuji et al. The theory of compressive strain wave propagation was used by Goldsmith For the simulation of tumbling mills, a detailed study of the parameters involved in the model representing the contact is necessary. The most important parameters from the point of view of power requirement are stiffness and damping. These parameters control the evolution of the contact forces and, hence, the overall dynamics of the process. In the present work, instead of using the contact parameters on theoretical grounds, a procedure is established to extract the relevant contact parameters by experimental means. By doing this, certain assumptions pertaining to material characteristics, e.g. smooth surface and no prior deformation, are done away with. Moreover, the nonlinear contact model is implemented in such a way that the unrealistically high initial force is suppressed. Finally, average values of contact parameters derived from the contact model that matched the experimental data are selected for simulation of power-draw of a laboratory-size ball mill. A series of drop ball tests were carried out by using the ultra fast load cell (UFLC) at the Comminution Center of the University of Utah The contact parameters were determined from the experimental data in two steps by solving the model equation of the following nonlinear form Similar analyses were done for all the three ball masses. In each case, the predicted result matched the experimental data for In the foregoing, it was demonstrated that the force–time history during the collision could be correctly predicted by the nonlinear model. However, it was also observed that the model parameters that determine the contact response were numerically large. For example, as seen from The nonlinear equation of motion for a periodically responding system can be written in its most general form as This method of equivalent linearization is primarily intended for mildly nonlinear systems with periodic behavior. Even though the ball mill system is far from being periodic or mildly nonlinear, the technique is being explored. Using the equivalent linearization technique, the stiffness and damping parameters were recalculated. These data along with predicted energy loss for the case of metal–metal impact are presented in A 3D DEM code is developed to compare the relative performance of various contact models. This computer code has the option of employing either a linear or a nonlinear contact model. The particle interaction rules are based on the contact mechanics theories, which relate the contact force to the relative approach of particles. For example, in the nonlinear model, the Hertzian theory The tangential interaction for the nonlinear model is considered according to the theory developed by Mindlin In order to assess the accuracy of prediction of individual contact models in terms of power draw, a 54.5×30.4 cm ball mill is simulated and the results of the simulation are compared with the available experimental data of Liddell and Moys Numerical simulations were carried out by employing three contact models: linear, equivalent linear, and nonlinear. The simulation results provided the dynamic profile of the ball charge. The charge profiles obtained corresponding to the three different contact models are shown in The total energy expenditure of the mill was accounted for by keeping track of the amount of energy dissipated due to contact damping and friction. This way, the variation in the power draw of the mill with the mill speed was computed. A comparison of the numerical data with that of the experiments of Liddel and Moys It would appear from the data presented in Examination of the results of simulation leads to the following two important observations with regard to computational efficiency. First, the use of the linearized model for the description of contact behavior allowed a reduced time step of integration without any loss of accuracy, and second, retaining the linear spring–dashpot type DEM model for the simulation of the mill reduced the overall computational expense. This is a point worth noting particularly when DEM is used for the simulation of large mills. Several other factors affect the contact parameters that may have overriding importance with regard to computational efficiency, particularly during simulation of industrial mills. These are ball size, impact velocity, amount and the type of material caught between colliding balls, etc. A typical variation in the contact parameters with number of layers captured between the colliding balls is shown in The DEM has become a powerful design and diagnostic tool for systematic analysis of the charge behavior in ball mills. However, the accuracy of the method relies heavily on the model parameters that describe the contact response to impact. This research work was undertaken to establish a procedure to correctly determine the parameters viz., contact stiffness, damping, etc., while keeping the numerical and computational expense manageable. Analysis of the experimental data on drop ball tests using an UFLC indicated that the deformation behavior of the contact is nonlinear. Using a nonlinear contact model, the associated model parameters were extracted after matching the model response with the experimental data. The energy dissipated during the collision was very accurately predicted by the nonlinear model. While the model predicted the contact response quite accurately, the associated contact stiffness parameter turned out to be of the order 10 A 0.545-m diameter ball mill is simulated to assess the performance of the three different contact models: linear, equivalent linear, and nonlinear. The material stiffness was the only parameter that was varied in all these simulations. It was observed that all the three models predicted the peak power within 5%. However, it is misleading to assume that any arbitrary value of the contact stiffness is appropriate for ball mill simulation as it was shown that a “soft” contact exhibited excessive amount of deformation and did not predict the peak force. Therefore, the numerical data may prove erroneous in determining the frequency spectrum of the intensity of collisions, abrasion wear of balls, and breakage of particles.