The phytoextraction of gold is an exciting new area of research involving the use of plants to extract gold from a low grade ore and waste products. The aim of this study was to screen some Australian native plant species and exotic agricultural species for their potential use in cyanide-induced phytoextraction of gold from a crushed ore body. Plants were grown in an ore body with a gold grade of 1.75g/ton gold and treated with 0.1g/kg and 1g/kg cyanide as aqueous NaCN. The above-ground biomass was harvested one week after treatment and the gold concentration determined. Mean gold concentrations of up to 27g/ton (d.w.) were found in the plant tissue of Trifolium repens cv. Prestige. Higher gold concentrations were generally found in the stems and older leaves with the lowest gold concentrations in the young leaves. Plants grown in the 1g/kg cyanide treatment generally had higher concentrations of gold in the plant tissue than plants grown in the 0.1g/kg cyanide treatment. This study demonstrates the potential use of plants to extract and concentrate gold from a low grade ore and waste products.Phytomining involves extracting a metal from a substrate by harvesting metal hyperaccumulating plants ( Induced hyperaccumulation of gold has been achieved with Very little is known about the effects the application of these adjuvants may have on the soil geochemistry and ecology. Modeling suggests that a crop of 10 Material was collected from the Davis stockpile at Stawell Gold Mine, Victoria, Australia. The oxide ore collected for this study had a mean gold grade of 1.75 The following native and exotic pasture plants were tested: All plants were grown in pots with 500 The pH of the crushed ore was determined by collecting three random samples of 4 The above-ground biomass (divided into stems, old and young leaves where specified) was harvested one week after treatment with cyanide and dried for 48 As expected, the batch tests showed that water and the dilute sodium hydroxide solution solubilized only trace amounts of gold ( Gold hyperaccumulation was induced in all plant species tested. Weeping grass, Wallaby grass, sorghum and black wattle were the only species still alive a week after treatment. However, plants that were still alive appeared unhealthy and would have died in the next few days. Despite the death of some species, it was still possible to recover the entire plant biomass. Of the exotic pasture species White clover cv. Prestige accumulated the largest amounts of gold, with 26.87 There was a general trend towards higher concentrations of gold in the plant tissue grown in ore treated with 1 The results for the concentration of other metals in the tissue of Wallaby grass are shown in The results of this study indicate that gold hyperaccumulation may be induced in a large variety of Australian native plants and exotic agricultural species. Despite the variation the data does indicate a few important trends. Generally a higher concentration of cyanide applied to ore body will result in a higher concentration of gold in the plant. This is a trend that has been shown in cyanide and other adjuvants such as ammonium thiocyanate before ( The presence of aluminium , copper and zinc in the concentrations found in the tissue of the Wallaby grass are all above typical concentrations for these metals in plants ( While half the species were dead a week after treatment it is important to note that dead plants, particularly grasses, may be harvested as easily as live plants provided no biomass is lost. In the case of gold phytomining this may even be advantageous as it would be known that maximum gold uptake had occurred and would eliminate the need to dry the tissue prior to recovery of the gold. These results indicate the potential of the phytoextraction of gold as a viable technology for the future. The concentration of gold found in some plants was up to twenty times that in the ore body. The study also demonstrates that native plant species are capable of extracting economically-relevant amounts of gold from a gold bearing substrate. Future work is investigating the use of different lixiviants, such as thiocyanate and thiosulfate, on other ore types and tailings. We wish to thank Perseverance Corporation Ltd. for the provision of crushed ore materials from Stawell Gold Mine, Victoria, Australia.