Plastic is one of the most widely used materials in our daily life and industry. Recycling is an important activity in the minimization of waste that results from human activities. Depending on plastics surface characteristics, they can be separated from each other by flotation method which is useful mineral processing technique with its low cost and simplicity. To succeed in a separation of mixed polymers based on polymer type using selective flotation, it is necessary to render one surface more hydrophilic while the others are still in a hydrophobic state. The separation could be achieved with the help of appropriate plasticizer.
                  In this paper, the characteristics of plastics particles and flotation behaviors of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) were studied. The contact angle, liquid surface tension, zeta potential measurements and FITR analysis were performed in order to investigate the effect of plasticizer reagents and the success of froth flotation at plastic recycling. It was observed that contact angle values of PVC were smaller than PET in the presence of lignin alkali (LA) and diethylene glycol dibenzoate (DIB). Both plasticizer render PVC more hydrophilic and cause higher wettability. Therefore, PVC remains in the floatation cell while air bubbles are attaching to PET. At the end of the selective flotation experiments, PET was separated from the mixture of PET and PVC with 97% content and more than 99% recovery when using 25g/t LA as a plasticizer at pH 8. To succeed in a separation of PET from PVC by selective flotation, 250g/t DIB was added into the solution at pH 5 and PET particles were separated from the mixture at 90% content and 95% recovery.Plastics are used in a wide variety of products and have displaced other materials, such as wood, metal, and glass. It can be formed into polyesters for use in fabrics and textiles, polyvinylidene chloride for food packaging, and polycarbonates for eyeglasses and compact disks, among thousands of other uses. The production of plastic requires four basic steps: the acquirement of raw material, synthesizing a basic polymer, compounding the polymer into a usable fraction, and lastly, molding or shaping the plastic. In 2013, global production of plastics reached nearly 300 In recycling of plastics material, it is often necessary to separate mixtures of plastics into individual plastics in order to get a useful recycling plastic product because some plastics are not compatible during re-melting A number of promising technologies for the separation of mixed thermoplastics are under investigation and include air classification, hydrocycloning, flotation/sedimentation, depolymerization/purification/repolymerization, selective dissolution, sorting based on infrared analysis or laser scanning of polymers, and incorporation of chemical markers into different polymers The idea to apply flotation to separate plastics was a logical step as ore flotation research has demonstrated that the surface properties of different materials can be altered selectively by surfactant adsorption As well documented in literature, NaOH and lignosulfonates have been shown to be effective for PVC/PET separation In this contribution, the selective separation of PET and PVC particles with plasticizer conditioning process followed by selective froth flotation were investigated. The mechanism of plasticizer type and amount on modification of plastic surfaces and the performance of selective flotation were examined through contact angle, surface tension, electro kinetic potential measurements and FT-IR (Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy) analysis. Samples of virgin PET and PVC ( The samples of post-consumer plastics, PET and PVC, were obtained from Fuxing-Usas, Plastic Company in Turkey. PET samples were chosen from soft drink bottles and PVC samples were selected from waste window frames ( Chemicals used for the flotation tests were NaOH and HCl as pH adjuster; methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) as a frother; diethylene glycol dibenzoate (DIB) and lignin alkali (LA) (Aldrich, Munich, Germany) as plasticizers ( The sessile-drop contact angle technique was used in this study as well described in following publication The liquid surface tension was measured using DuNouy ring method. In this method, platinum ring with standard perimeter at 60 The zeta potential of plastic samples was determined using an Electro Kinetic Zeta meter 3.0 Analyzer. The plastic samples were crushed into very fine particles using a file and then mixed with the solutions of electrolytes at various plasticizers concentrations and pH values. The conditioning time was fixed to 15 FT-IR analysis was carried out using a Perkin Elmer Spectrometer in order to determine the adsorption characteristics of PET and PVC particles in the presence of DIB and LA. The conditioning of post-consumer plastics with the plasticizer solution was accomplished in a 0.5 The flotation experiments were carried out in a short column flotation cell with a volume of 5 PET and PVC plastic strips cut from beverage bottles and window frames were rinsed with deionized water and contact angle measurements were conducted in order to investigate the effects of various concentrations of DIB and LA. The results of contact angle measurement tests are shown in It can be observed from According to Zisman Lignin’s is one of the several cellulose derivatives which are commonly used as an organic depressants and dispersants. They are used as depressants in both sulfide and non-metallic mineral flotation. When they are used in plastic flotation adsorbed depressant molecules selectively influence the affinity of bubbles for different types of plastic under appropriate conditions The zeta potential of both PVC and PET was measured over the pH range 3–11. Adsorption theories predict that using a flotation liquid of considerable ionic strength, e.g. tap water, would result in a stronger depressant effect of all types of ionic surfactant. The cations have a profound influence on the adsorption of polyelectrolytes, mainly because they reduce the repulsion between the charged segments, which facilitates adsorption From this point of view, the electro kinetic measurements of PET and PVC were performed against pH in the presence of monovalent (K According to Zeta potential tests in the presence various CaCl The change of electro kinetic properties of PET and PVC were investigated against pH in the presence of plasticizer solutions with various concentrations of LA and DIB and the results are shown in Alkali ions make the zeta potential of solution negative. It is clear from Domination of lateral groups in polymer chain of plastics, which contains non-polar carbon and hydrogen, leads to a physical adsorption between the plasticizer and plastic surfaces. Interaction forces herein include dispenser Van der Waals bonds as in hydrogen bonding. Chemical adsorption is extremely rare between the molecules of the plasticizer and polymer surface. The underlying reason could be related to the low surface energy of plastics. FTIR measurements in To success a selective flotation separation of mixed plastic, it is necessary to render one more hydrophilic while the other is still in a hydrophobic state. It is well known that PET and PVC are naturally floatable (hydrophobic). Therefore, it is necessary to use an appropriate agent to achieve selective separation. On this basis, a technology involving treatment of post-consumer plastic particles with plasticizer followed by froth flotation at various pH levels has been tested in laboratory scale. Previous studies showed that pH has an important role for changing surface characteristics of polymers The electrostatic charge of particles and the ionic character of reagents play an important role for selectivity in flotation. As seen in To investigate the effect of plasticizers concentration on plastic separation, LA and DIB have been tested with selected conditions: particle size of −3.36 It is clear from The flotation performance of plastics was found to be in good agreement with measurements of contact angle and surface tension. At lower concentrations the surface tension of solution decreases and the frothing effect dominates. Conversely, at higher concentrations, the presence of plasticizers increases the wettability, which leads to insufficient flotation recovery. It was observed from tests that both DIB and LA were able to make the surface of PET particles hydrophobic whereas PVC particles were affected differently. Contact angle measurements ( A series of experiments were carried out to investigate the effect of pH and plasticizer type on selective separation of PET and PVC. The polymer mixture was subjected to plasticizers treatment with different pH values (4–12) for 15  In the frame of this study, the separation of mixed post-consumer plastics was enhanced with the help of appropriate plasticizers and by adjusting experimental conditions. The mechanism of plasticizer type and amount on modification of plastic surfaces and the performance of selective flotation were investigated through contact angle, surface tension, electro kinetic potential measurements and FT-IR (Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy) analysis. According to the flotation results, PET was separated from the mixture of PET and PVC with 97% content and 99% recovery when using 25