The present study investigates the synthesis of alumina fibres of 5–15 µm dia. by sol-gel process through centrifugal spinning. Among various spinning parameters such as rpm, viscosity, humidity, chamber temperature etc., effect of rpm and viscosity on quality of spun fibres was examined in order to spin less defective (less shots) fibres. From the rpm vs viscosity experiments, it was concluded that viscosity between 13 and 42 Pa.s with 3000 rpm was favourable for obtaining fibres containing less shots. It was shown that besides viscosity, refractive index and percent weight loss of the aged sol can be used as indicator for determining spinnability of alumina precursor sols. Influence of only preheating and continuous heating of the chamber during spinning were also investigated and it was found that only preheating did not help in producing fibres. Besides this, influence of hot air blower (HAB) aligned in different directions with respect to the spinnerette, on fibre quality was tested. It was observed that the quality of fibres did not change due to change in HAB direction.High temperature insulation (> 1000 °C) requires use of ceramics in various forms such as refractory bricks, fibres and foams Ceramic fibres can be synthesized by melt spinning, template method, extrusion, electrospinning and centrifugal spinning etc Various defects such as sticking of fibres, shots, cracked fibres, curly fibres, core and sheath fibres, rough fibres are generally produced during spinning, drying and calcination of the fibres In the present work, synthesis of alumina fibres using sol-gel technique with centrifugal spinning has been reported. The principal objective of the present work is to investigate the influence of spinning parameters like rpm and viscosity etc. on fibre quality. Besides this, effect of preheating of the spinning chamber during fibre spinning and direction of hot air blown with respect to the spinnerette has also been explored. Aluminium nitrate nonahydrate (Al (NO In order to understand the influence of spinning parameters (viscosity and rpm), sols with different viscosities obtained by aging, as mentioned above, were spun at three different rpms (500, 2000 and 3000 as 3000 is the maximum possible rpm for the present set up) in a self fabricated centrifugal spinning machine which had a spinnerette of 600 mm dia. Apart from this, few experiments were conducted to understand whether only preheating of the chamber to 150 °C and spinning helps in producing fibres at least for a batch process (~ 50 ml spinnable sol) and also to see whether hot air blower (HAB) direction influences the quality of the fibres synthesized. HAB was either kept tangential with respect to the spinnerette (in its direction of rotation) ( The spun fibres were calcined at 1200 °C for 4 h. at a heating rate of 5 °C/min., sieved first by a 120 µm sieve and second by 90 µm sieve. Sieved fibres were sintered at 1600 °C for 3 h. The flow chart of the whole process is shown in Phase studies of the fibres at various stages were done by XRD (X′Pert Pro XRD Panalytical). Morphology of the fibres was imaged by SEM (Hitachi-S-3400N) and FESEM (JSM-7600F). Grain size of the fibres was measured by Image J software on the respective SEM / FESEM images. The overall reactions happen as per the Eqs. Addition of aluminium increases the aluminium ion concentration as well as it enhances the hydrolysis and condensation by forming network of aluminium cations The as-spun or hand drawn fibre length is one of the parameters to evaluate spinnability of the sols  In centrifugal spinning, there is a competition between surface tension of the sol and centrifugal force. When the centrifugal force is sufficient enough to overcome the surface tension, it pulls the sol to form fibres. The fibre length and diameter is dependent on the sol viscosity and the magnitude of the centrifugal force. There should be a balance between viscosity and rpm. In the present work, when the sol was less viscous (0.4 Pa.s), irrespective of the rpm, sol was not converted into fibres due to the poor network formation. Hence droplets were formed ( SEM images of as dried fibres ( It was observed that only preheating the chamber to 150 °C did not help in producing fibres even for a single batch of 50 ml of the sol whereas continuous heating during spinning resulted in producing fibre mat ( Influence of hot air blower direction on fibre quality study confirmed that the direction of HAB did not play any role in deciding the fibre quality (   Alumina fibres suited for high temperature thermal insulation applications (eg. industrial furnace insulation lining, fire protection, heat shielding, reinforcement for composites) were synthesized by a low temperature process i.e. sol gel with centrifugal spinning. Shots are the major defects produced in centrifugal spinning and these shots increase the thermal conductivity of fibres which will decrease the thermal insulation properties. In the current work, shots were eliminated to a great extent by optimizing rpm of the spinnerette and sol viscosity. It was found that sol viscosity in the range of 13 − 42 Pa s and spinnerette rpm of 3000 was most suited for obtaining fibre mats with less shots. It was shown that besides viscosity, refractive index and percent weight loss of the aged sol can be used as indicator for determining spinnability of alumina precursor sols. For continuous fibre formation constant elimination of moisture was needed during spinning. Hence, continuous heating of the chamber was essential to produce defect free fibres while avoiding sticking of fibres. The orientation of hot air blower did not play any role in affecting the quality of the fibres. The authors thank Mrs. Pritee, MEMS department, IIT Bombay for her assistance with SEM images; SAIF, IIT Bombay for allowing usage of FESEM; Chemical Engg. dept, IIT Bombay for allowing usage of refractometer.