In this study, zeolite Na-P1 synthesis from the fly ashes (FA) taken from dust catcher in Sugözü thermic power plant was researched. The structural and magnetic characteristics of the synthesized materials were studied by using the XRD, SEM, EDS, CEC, TGA, DTA, DSC and M−H techniques. High intensity wet magnetic separation was applied to the ashes at different magnetic field intensities. 61% of the iron oxide impurity (Fe2O3) was removed by single-stage high intensity wet magnetic separation at 1.5 T. Non-magnetic phase was accumulated in order to leach in alkali medium. 2 M NaOH was used as the synthesizing solution. Solid-liquid ratio was 0.3 kg:1 L. It was determined that the zeolitization degrees of the products depend on the reaction time. Zeolite Na-P1 (Na6Al6Si10O32·12H2O) which is the member of the group P zeolites was the dominant species after 10 h reaction time. Additionally, gismondine (Ca2Al4Si4O16·9H2O) presence was observed in the products. It was found out that the ferromagnetisms of the products were weakened by elapsed time. The CEC values of the synthesized products were the superior grades ranging from 269.63 meq/100 g to 388.85 meq/100 g.Zeolites are crystalline, microporous and hydrated alumina silicates built on three dimensional complexes of XO FA is a fine sized material which is a by-product from burning pulverized coal in electricity generation processes. Also, FA is a pozzolan, a substance containing aluminous and siliceous material. There are known common two zeolite synthesis route: alkaline-fusion and hydrothermal. Among them, the hydrothermal method appears as the most significant. The hydrothermal term is used in a wide-ranging and includes zeolite crystallization from aqueous systems comprising the necessary chemical components [ The FA sample was taken from Sugözü thermic power plant located in Adana, Turkey. Chemical analysis of the samples was determined by Minipal four Panalytical x-ray fluorescence (XRF) device ( Loss on ignition (LOI) value was calculated from the mass loss after heating 1 g of the sample at 1000 °C. The FA was categorized as class F according to ASTM C 618 because the total amount of SiO Characterizations of the samples were confirmed by Rigaku Minflex II X-ray diffractometer. The XRD patterns of the materials were interpreted by using PDXL XRD analysis software with current database. From the XRD pattern of the FA presented in Besides, the peaks between 10° and 40° indicated the amorphous silica contents in the FA. SEM and the energy dispersive x-ray analysis (EDS) of the samples were performed to determine microporous structure. BT-9300HT laser particle size analyser machine was used to reveal the particle size distributions of the materials. Approximate 50% of the FA was under 10 μm size ( Mettler Toledo thermogravimetric analyser was used for TGA (Thermogravimetric analysis), DTA (Differential thermal analysis) and DSC (Differential scanning calorimetry) tests. The sized grids (2, 5–10 mm) were attached in the device. In the iron removal tests, magnetic field intensity was selected as variable and the other factors of the magnetic separation were kept constant. The solid/liquid ratio (by weight) and the stirring speed were 25% and 200 rpm, respectively. After 2 min of stirring in a beaker which have 500 ml volume, the pulp was fed into the magnetic separator. Five different magnetic field intensities were applied as; 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5 and 1.75 T. Then, magnetic and non-magnetic products were dried at 105 °C in oven, and then analysed. Distilled water was used in all experiments. Magnetic hysteresis ( In the hydrothermal synthesis experiments of zeolites from the non-magnetic product, 2 M NaOH solutions were used. Solid-liquid ratio was 0.3 kg/L. The experiments were conduct at 85 °C in a beaker on hot plate equipped with magnetic stirrer and thermometer. Stirring speed was 300 rpm under atmospheric pressure. Leaching times were selected as 7, 8, 9 and 10 h. After the tests ended, the pulps were filtrated, washed three times with pure water and dried at 60 °C (24 h). The experiments plotted in Accumulated non-magnetic product was used in the later tests. The SiO Magnetization as a function of magnetic field ( Both samples obviously exhibit a well-defined magnetization hysteresis implying ferromagnetic (FM) behaviour. From Acicular crystalline structures characterizing the porous zeolite Na-P1 morphology were detected in the micrographs of products for 10 h in TGA, DTA and DSC test results were revealed in Cumulative passing curves (%) are given in Sodium doping was obviously seen and the sodium percentages of the synthesized materials increased 6.22 for 7 h and to 8.61 for 10 h. Especially in The present study demonstrates that zeolite Na-P1 and Gismondine could be synthesized from the FAs of Sugözü thermic power plant by agitational hydrothermal leaching route after magnetic purification. With one stage magnetic separation, the iron impurity was reduced by 61%. 1.5 T was chosen as the vital magnetic separation condition since there was no significant iron removal over this magnetic field intensity. Non-magnetic material was used for synthesizing by NaOH leaching. The optimal alkaline leach conditions were revealed as following: stirring speed: 300 rpm; stirring time: 10 h; temperature: 85 °C; NaOH concentration: 2 M; solid/liquid ratio; 0.3 kg/1 L. The products were characterized by XRF, SEM, XRD, EDS, CEC, TGA, DTA, DSC and This work has financially supported by