The ultrasonic extraction (UE) of oil from the seeds of a semi-oriental tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) plant strain by using n-hexane and petroleum ether was studied at different temperatures and seeds-to-solvent ratios. The oil yield depended on the seed comminution, the extraction temperature, the seeds-to-solvent ratio and the type of solvent. The oil yield was much higher if the seeds were ground before extraction. The oil yield increased with increasing the extraction temperature and with decreasing the seeds-to-solvent ratio. n-Hexane was somewhat more efficient in the oil extraction than petroleum ether. In recovering the tobacco seed oil (TSO), the UE was less efficient than the Soxhlet extraction. The advantage of the UE was a relatively high oil yield at 25°C in a shorter time. The kinetics of UE of TSO was described using the model of unsteady diffusion through plant material.Tobacco ( There is little usage of TS so far such as in soap production and as a solvent in paint and varnish industries. At present days researchers make an effort to develop alternative uses of TSO, like in medicine or biodiesel production So far UE has not been used for extracting the oil from TS. Also, no comparative study on the effect of ultrasound on the extraction efficiency from the native and ground seeds under different operating conditions was found in the literature. This technique has already been applied for extracting the oil from some other seeds such as fennel ( There is also no available information on the kinetics of oil extraction from TS. The kinetics of UE of an oil from seeds has only been studied in the case of ground woad ( The present work deals with the UE of oil from seeds of a semi-oriental tobacco ( The seeds of a semi-oriental tobacco ( The native or ground TS (10 The native or ground TS (5 The oil extracted from the ground TS by the UE (solvent: By using The effect of seed particle size on the oil yield was studied by UE of the three classes of ground TS using The kinetics of UE of oil from the TS using It has been shown recently that three two-parameter kinetics models, namely the unsteady diffusion through plant material, the film theory and the empirical equation of Ponomaryov, can successfully be used for mathematical modelling of the UE of extractive substances from garden ( Parameters of the kinetic model were calculated from Eq. The kinetic parameters of the UE (all extraction conditions applied) and the CE (solvent: The kinetic parameters of the UE depended on the comminution of the seeds, the type of solvent, the seeds-to-solvent ratio and the extraction temperature. The washing coefficient was higher for the ground seeds than for the native ones. Not only the protective seed coat but also many cells from the interior of seeds were destroyed by the seed comminution thus enabling more oil to come into the direct contact with the solvent and to dissolve. The washing coefficient increased with increasing the extraction temperature due to the increase of the oil solubility. The washing coefficient also increased with decreasing the seeds-to-solvent ratio from 1:3 to 1:10 As can be seen in By comparison of the oil yields recovered by the UE and the CE at the seeds-to-solvent ratio of 1:3 In recovering the TSO the UE was less efficient than the SE. In the case of the ground TS, In order to increase the extraction efficiency, successive UEs of TSO were performed. The UE at every stage was carried out at 25 As can be seen in Like the UE of extractive substances from some other plant materials In recovering the TSO the UE was more efficient than the CE but less efficient than the SE. The advantage of the UE, compared to the SE, was relatively high yields of TSO obtained at 25 The TSO obtained from the semi-oriental tobacco plant had several drawbacks with respect to its potential use as a substitute for diesel fuel or as feedstock for biodiesel production, such as the high density and viscosity as well as the high percentage of free FA. Recently, the acid pretreatment of the TSO has successfully been applied to reduce the content of free FA thus enabling the subsequent alkali-catalyzed transesterification reaction for biodiesel production This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Ecology of the Republic of Serbia projects MNT 6742B.