This paper presents a multivariate data fusion procedure for design of dynamic soft sensors where suitably selected image features are combined with traditional process measurements to enhance the performance of data-driven soft sensors. A key issue of fusing multiple sensor data, i.e. to determine the weight of each regressor, is achieved through multivariate regression. The framework is described and illustrated with applications to cement kiln systems that are characterized by off-line quality measurements and on-line analyzers with limited reliability. Image features are extracted with a multivariate analysis technique from RGB pictures. The color information is also transformed to hue, saturation and intensity components. Both sets of image features are combined with traditional process measurements to obtain an inferential model by partial least squares (PLS) regression. A dynamic PLS model is obtained by filtering the original data block augmented with time lagged variables such that improved predictive performance of the quality variable results. Key issues regarding data preprocessing and extraction of suitable image features are discussed with a case study, the on-line estimation of nitrogen oxides (NOx) emission of cement kilns. On-site tests demonstrate improved performance over soft sensors based on conventional process measurements only.Conventional process measurements of physical properties are readily available for most industrial processes, such as the flow-rate, temperature and pressure. However, the lack of sufficiently accurate and reliable on-line measurements of, e.g. chemical compositions and related properties, poses difficulties for effective monitoring, fault diagnosis or predictive control of many chemical processes. For example, measurements related to the type and movement of flotation froth are based on visual inspection of human operators in most plants. In the cement industry, operators usually judge the operating conditions using a video signal from the camera looking into the cement kiln. Advances in digital image processing techniques enable the quantification of the video signal, thereafter extraction of features of interest such as color and brightness A soft sensor is an inferential model developed from process knowledge and observations. Soft sensors have been reported as supplement to online instrument measurements for process monitoring and product quality control, which can be classified into two categories: model-based and data-driven. A model-based soft sensor often suffers from computational intensity for real time applications. Modern measurement techniques enable a large amount of operating data to be collected, stored and analyzed, thereby rendering data-driven soft sensor development a viable alternative. The high dimensional data often show strong collinearity. Multivariate analysis is, therefore, necessary to extract process information that is statistically significant. Development of soft sensors has been recently reviewed by Kadlec et al. Multisensor data fusion refers to the acquisition, processing and synergistic combination of information gathered by various sources and sensors to provide an improved representation of the phenomenon under consideration Process data originates from different sensor types and in different formats. Moreover, process measurements are usually contaminated with outlying observations that might significantly spoil the regression model. Therefore, effective data preprocessing is a prerequisite step for soft sensor design with the multivariate data-fusion approach. In designing a multisensor data fusion system for a specific application, the following fundamental issues need to be considered: the nature of signals, compatibility, preprocessing algorithms as well as system structure. These topics will be addressed in the paper with illustrative examples of NOx soft sensors for cement kiln processes while also incorporating process dynamics. The paper first reviews a multivariate image analysis (MIA) methodology using principal component analysis (PCA) based on RGB image data. These data are further transformed nonlinearly to the hue, saturation and intensity space. A procedure for multivariate statistical data fusion of the combined image features with traditional measurement data is presented in Section Digital image processing is being used increasingly as a complimentary sensing tool in various industrial fields, such as food processing  The MIA procedure consists of the following steps. The first step transforms the original RGB triplet For kiln image analysis, it is known that color features are especially useful, since many experienced kiln operators estimate the burning zone temperature according to the color. However, in this work, it turned out that color features linearly related to the RGB components were insufficient to significantly improve the information obtained from conventional measurements. Therefore, the nonlinear transformation from the RGB components to hue ( The individual pixel values of the H, S and I components are plotted in The first-, second-, third- and fourth-order moments are used to characterize each of the HSI components: The procedure of calculating images features used in this study is summarized in The normal RGB image suffers from saturation (255 for 8 bits channel). For example, in case of high flame temperature, all pixels in the center of the flame have the intensity value of 255. Therefore, these features might not exactly reflect changes of the actual temperature. However, the variation of kiln temperature can still be captured during the normal operating conditions through non-saturated pixels. A camera with a larger color depth may provide additional valuable information. Another issue with image data from a cement kiln system is the dust, which often appears due to the varying chemistry of the feed. As seen in A data-driven soft sensor is an inferential model developed from process observations that are readily available. Multivariate regression techniques have been extensively employed to develop empirical models. The combined image features and process measurements commonly result in a high-dimensional input matrix that is strongly collinear. Multivariate linear regression (MLR) suffers from numerical problems as well as degraded models when applied to a collinear data set. Partial least squares (PLS) resolves this issue by projecting the original process variables into a smaller number of orthogonal latent variables (LVs). PLS is a multivariate statistical approach for relating the input data matrix, Predictive significance is the critical test for choosing the number of LVs. It is determined by the minimum PRESS (one-step-ahead prediction residual sum of squared errors), which evaluates the difference between the PLS model and the process measurement on validation data: Online process measurements are commonly contaminated with data points that deviate significantly from the real values due to instrument failure. Since outlying observations degrade the estimation of a regression model, data preprocessing proves to be a prerequisite step. Robust statistical approaches have been developed to provide reliable results in the presence of abnormal observations A general framework for multivariate data fusion is shown in The proposed framework for soft sensor design is implemented on a cement kiln process, which as illustrated in a cement kiln process equipped with a camera; the process control system; a PC with a frame grabber to perform image analysis, data preprocessing and regression modelling. Data exchange is achieved through the process control system. The video signal from a cement kiln camera is digitized with a frame grabber. Then the developed MATLAB software for multivariate image analysis extracts and pre-processes the features, which are combined with process measurements to derive a regression model for soft sensors. The resulting regression model is then stored in the process control system database. The soft sensors can be used for process monitoring as well as for control. The rotary kiln is the most operationally complex and energy consuming equipment in the cement industry. One indicator variable related to environmental quality is the NOx, which is formed in the cement kiln system at high temperature. The traditional way of continuous emission monitoring is to use analytical sensors, which are expensive and difficult to maintain The image frames of kiln flame as well as measurements are all taken under normal operational condition to minimize disturbances to the process. A block of process data and flame pictures with sufficient variations are selected for modelling with the expectation that these data provide a statistically significant dependence between flame frames and process variables as indicators of the NOx. One minute averaged values of twenty-one process measurements from the log system of a cement kiln control system are used in the study, including kiln drive current, kiln feed, fuels rates to calciner and kiln, plus several temperature measurements. Kiln images are also digitized and stored once every minute considering the storage requirement and CPU load for analysis. Two data blocks of totally 5800 samples and an equal number of images are selected in this study: 4000 samples are used to develop the model and 1800 samples for validation. The data could potentially be divided into smaller segments such that the derived soft sensor can be evaluated with an independent validation data block. However, it is desirable to perform the validation with a data block over a sufficiently long period considering the effects of variations in the feed chemistry and the fuel property. When shifting stock piles or the fuel supply, those factors could disturb the operation for many hours. The modelling and validation of the developed soft sensor with data over a short period are of limited interest from the standpoint of industrial practices. Thus, the modelling and validation data sets are not divided into smaller segments. Soft sensors based on traditional measurements are presented first, then follows soft sensors based on multivariate fusion of traditional measurement and image data. Grid search regarding to the number of lagged terms and the number of LV is performed to derive the optimal DPLS model. The number of lagged items is evaluated between 0 and 70 with an increment of 5, the number of LV between 1 and 20. The resulting response surface for PRESS is shown in  The performance of the NOx soft sensor based on traditional measurements during modelling and validation periods is shown in A second NOx soft sensor is developed by fusing traditional process measurements with the combined RGB and HSI image features filtered over a window length of 60 samples. The same study as shown in As shown in As shown in This paper presents the development of soft sensors based on a multivariable data fusion of standard process measurements with suitably selected image features where a dynamic PLS method is used to derive the regression model. The developed soft sensor estimates NOx with satisfactory accuracy to be used for process control. Since the high order of the soft sensor increases the load for the online application, pre-filtering of regressors might be helpful. The case study reveals that suitable extraction of image features can significantly enhance the performance of soft sensors for cement kiln system. This finding validates industrial experiences that image features capture significant variations in the burning zone. This study also corroborates the findings of Yu and MacGregor The presented framework is especially useful for processes with complicated kinetics and flow patterns, such as pyroprocessing. Data-driven soft sensors through multivariate data fusion based on robust statistics can provide reasonably accurate estimation in real-time for measurements that are difficult or impossible to obtain otherwise on-line. Additionally, the presented dynamic PLS based soft sensor seems especially suitable in model predictive control design, where the predictive performance of the soft sensor is important.