The study of contamination effect during cryogenic grinding of pure cellulose was carried out. The optimisation of important parameters of the grinding process (pre-cooling time, grinding time, cooling time and number of cycles) was performed and the different sources of a possible contamination of samples (earlier processed sample, metal parts of grinding tool) were evaluated. The results of ICP-oa-TOF MS analysis after microwave digestion of cellulose samples were used in this study. Significant contamination of cellulose samples by Fe at the level 130μgkg−1 caused by wearing of steel stoppers and an impact bar was detected. Cross-contamination by Fe, Cr, Mn and Cu at the level 400, 200, 200 and 2100μgkg−1, respectively was caused by previous grinding of electro-waste sample. This cross-contamination was possible to be avoided by changing of a polycarbonate part of a grinding vessel.During the process of the cryogenic grinding, a material is deeply frozen in order to be more fragile and easier to grind. Chilling leads to an increase in hardness of a ground matter, an insertion of failures in its structure and consequently a reduction of time and energy vital to favourable sample pulverization. This technique is favourable and used when a sample with the highly homogeneous particle size distribution and a diameter below 100 A hazard of sample contamination in the process of the cryogenic grinding strongly depends on a design of a mill used and conditions selected for its operation. A type of ground matter and desired limits of detection of applied analytical method are another very important parameters usually mentioned in this context. Potential sources of the sample contamination in the process of cryogenic grinding of plant materials were examined by Engelsen and Wibetoe The aim of this work was to evaluate main sources of contamination in the process of the cryogenic grinding. The fibre cellulose was chosen as a convenient material for this study because of its physical character (elastic fibres) and chemical composition (poor organic matrix with minimum trace elements). Contamination caused by metal parts of grinding vessel was studied as well as cross-contamination by previously ground sample. The cryogenic impact grinder with a self-contained liquid nitrogen bath (4-5l) Model 6750 Freezer Mill (Spex, Certiprep, USA) operated at the liquid nitrogen temperature was used in order to comminute samples. The pulverization of frozen samples was carried out by a magnetically shuttling steel impact bar back-and-forth against two stationary end plugs closing a cylindrical polycarbonate vial. Model 6751C20 grinding vials (volume 25 The evacuable KBr die set with an inner diameter 16 The measurement of the cellulose fibres length for the optimisation of grinding parameters was carried out using electron microscopy (SEM Jeol 5600 LV, Japan), the sputter tool (MED 010, Balzers union, Germany) and the software for image analysis (ACC Version 6.0, Sofo, Czech Republic). The qualitative and semi-quantitative analysis of possible sources of contamination (pre-grinded sample of electro-waste, impact bar and stoppers of grinding set) was performed using energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer Elva-X (Elvatech, Kiev, Ukraine). The elemental analysis of ground cellulose samples was carried out with the ICP- Trying to grind cellulose in the original form of fibrous clots (provided by Department of Wood, Pulp and Paper University of Pardubice, The operating program used for the grinding equipment included following parameters: the pre-cooling time (a period before grinding, when a vial was immersed in the liquid nitrogen for purpose of sample freezing), the grinding time (a period of an impact bar motion in each working cycle), the re-cooling time (a period between two working cycles, when the oscillation of an impact bar was interrupted to avoid heating due to an attrition of a magnetic bar with a sample and a sampling vial), the number of working cycles (one cycle consists of a period of grinding time followed by a period of cooling time), the impact bar frequency (the number of back-and-forth movements of an impact bar per second). Samples of fibrous cellulose were submitted to different grinding procedures to optimise working parameters. The pre-cooling time was set in the range 3–15 A friction of an impact bar beating against an end stoppers in the process of cryogenic grinding was considered as a possible source of contamination. Working parts of the grinding tool were analysed by ED XRF spectrometry to find out probable contaminants derivable from that source. Levels of elements detected as components of the impact bar and the end stoppers were analysed in ground cellulose by ICP- To simulate the worst possible case of the cross-contamination danger, electronic waste (parts of printed circuit board) was ground just before cellulose samples using the same grinding set. After processing of an electronic sample, the vial, stoppers and impact bar used were washed in distilled water, dried and then cellulose pellets were inserted. Three cellulose samples were ground subsequently and careful washing of the grinding set was performed at the end of each grinding program. Thereafter, the polycarbonate part of vial was replaced by a new un-used one and next three grindings of the cellulose were carried out. Elements found out at ED XRF spectrum of electro-waste were consequently analysed in all cryogenically ground samples of cellulose with using ICP- The single component standards of Fe, Cr, Mn, Cu, Pb, Ag and Mo (1000 Approximately 0.2 The operating conditions of ICP- With the respect to the fibrous character of the cellulose matrix we decided to monitor the fibres length distribution as the parameter, which could describe the quality of a sample des-integration in the best way. Three-electron microscopy shots (100× magnification) of each cellulose sample were treated by the software for the image analysis. The length of each visible fibre was measured as the main axis of a circumscribed ellipse. The minimum number of evaluated objects at each microscopy shot was 100 and the total number of evaluated objects for each particular sample always exceeded 400 units. The main statistical characteristics of the fibre length distribution (arithmetical mean, median and 99th percentile) for cellulose samples ground under different conditions are summarised in The ED XRF spectrum of steel components of the cryogenic mill is depicted in The possible contaminants Fe, Cr, Mn, Cu, Pb and Ag were chosen on the basis of ED XRF qualitative analysis of electro-waste sample. The corresponding ED XRF spectrum is depicted in Two main sources of sample contamination in the process of cryogenic grinding were studied—the contamination caused by friction of a grinding set and cross-contamination caused by previously ground sample. In the first case, the significant contamination by Fe on the level of hundreds of microgram per gram was observed. Wearing of steel stoppers and an impact bar was not only one source of contamination by Fe. This element was an important part of cross-contamination by previous ground electro-waste sample as well. In contrast to other cross-contaminants (Cu, Cr and Mn), the replacing of a polycarbonate part of grinding set did not solve the cross-contamination by Fe. Financial support from the projects GAČR203/06/0134 and MSM 0021627502 used in this work is greatly appreciated.