Objectives
                  Ipsilateral concomitant fractures of proximal extracapsular and distal femur are rare injuries and pose a great challenge for orthopaedics. In this study, we reviewed and examined the approaches and outcomes of this complex injury.
               
                  Methods
                  From August 2002 to January 2010, seven patients (six males and one female) with a mean age of 39 years (range, 20–48 years) were involved in the study. They had suffered from ipsilateral concomitant fractures of proximal extracapsular and distal femur, with two cases of unstable intertrochanteric fractures, three cases of subtrochanteric fractures and two cases of extracapsular femoral neck fractures. The distal femoral fractures were categorised based on the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthes (AO) classification: 2, A3; 2, C1; 2, C2 and 1, C3, and the proximal femoral fractures were stabilised via nailing, whilst the distal ones via less-invasive stabilisation system-distal femur (LISS-DF) plating in all six patients. In the one with the ‘floating knee’ injury, the subtrochanteric fracture was stabilised by reversed LISS-DF, and the distal one, by retrograde nailing. The healing of each femoral fracture was evaluated radiologically and clinically with follow-up. The functional outcomes were assessed through the Friedman and Wyman system.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up interval was 2 years (range, 1.5–3 years). Six femoral fractures healed uneventfully, whilst the one with the ‘floating knee’ injury developed a delayed union postoperatively due to metal failure in 6 months, and, eventually, a malunion with coxa vara deformity 1.5 years later. The clinical functions at the final follow-up were found to be good in five cases, and fair and poor in one case each.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The nailing of a proximal femoral fracture and an LISS-DF fixation of a distal one could be a reliable and effective approach to handle ipsilateral concomitant fractures of a proximal extracapsular and distal femur.The ipsilateral concomitant fractures of proximal extracapsular and distal femur are rare injuries, posing a great challenge to orthopaedic surgeons, as their separate entities require a comprehensive and demanding approach. There has been little previous literature on the epidemiology and treatment of these rare injuries. In this study, we made a review of the surgical results to evaluate the optimal treatment, based on seven cases. Between August 2002 and January 2010, seven patients with ipsilateral concomitant fractures of a proximal extracapsular and distal femur were managed in our trauma centre, with the final surgical procedures being performed by one senior surgeon. As a non-randomised retrospective analysis, the study gathered seven subjects (six males and one female) with an average age of 39 years (range, 20–48 years). The mechanism of the injury was traffic accidents for six patients and a fall from a height for one patient. The proximal femoral fractures were classified as three injury patterns: two with unstable intertrochanteric fractures, three with subtrochanteric fractures and the remaining two with extracapsular femoral neck fractures. The distal femoral fractures were categorised according to the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthes (AO) classification      The restoration of the articular anatomy and correction of the varus/valgus knee deformity were the two main goals in treating the distal femoral fractures, and the success of the fracture reduction and position of the plate had to be fluoroscopically verified. The plate was long enough to overlap as much of the nail as possible.  All the patients received perioperative antibiotics and prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis. On the second postoperative day, a range of movements (ROMs) was initiated. Continuous passive movement (CPM) was prescribed for those with 33-C fractures. For the first 6 weeks, they were allowed to practice non-weight-bearing, if tolerable, and then to use a cane, if possible. Radiographs were made postoperatively, and then at the 6-weeks’ and 3-months’ follow-up; and if union failed to occur, they were kneaded when necessary. The patients were instructed to discard the cane once a good bridging callus developed at both the proximal and distal femoral fractures. The outcomes were assessed based on the fracture union as seen in the radiographs and the clinical functions as estimated by the Friedman and Wyman system. All patients were followed up with an average duration of 2 years (range, 1.5–3 years). All the distal femoral fractures united within an average period of 4 months (range, 3–6 months), and the six proximal femoral fractures healed uneventfully within an average duration of 5 months (range, 4–7 months). The patient with the ‘floating knee’ injury developed a delayed union in the subtrochanteric area 6 months later due to a metal failure: the plate and screws backed out ( The overall clinical functions of the patients showed that five presented a good rating, one a fair rating and one a poor rating. According to the AO classification, on the whole, a femur can be divided into three anatomic regions: proximal, diaphyseal and distal. Previous studies have been conducted on ipsilateral intracapsular neck and shaft fractures. The type of neck and shaft factures occurs mainly in high-velocity injuries due to road traffic accidents or falls from a height, and they are commonly associated with other skeletal, thoracic and abdominal injuries. It is well recognised that the span of the fracture sites between the proximal and distal femur is wider than that between the neck and the shaft, which makes it impossible to stabilise the former two fractures with a single implant. There has been an influx of implants into the market due to recent advances, mainly plating and nailing systems for proximal and distal femoral fractures. Consequently, there are numerous reports of successful surgical outcomes using plating or nailing systems. However, in the current study, the investigation made into the type of combined implants was an optimal approach to the complex injury in question, and the findings are justified below. There has been a lack of evidence of the most biomechanically stable configuration of two implants, with some reports stating that a femur with uninstrumented intervals between two implants tends to fracture with a stress riser, and that overlapping instrumentation may be effective in distributing forces and avoiding stress risers at the end of an implant. As indicated, generally, a locked plate has an advantage over a conventional one in providing stable unicortical screw fixation in the zone of the intramedullary nailing. As previously verified, the LISS is an effective device for stabilising A1–C3 distal femoral fractures, In our study, one subtrochanteric fracture with some degree of comminution on the medial side, stabilised by a reversed LISS, failed to unite due to the pullout of the screws. From the biomechanical point of view, this was a failure to recognise the complex forces in that particular area. In an unstable hip fracture, especially with comminuted medial cortex, the implant near the fracture site resists greater loads. In such cases, an intramedullary device is biomechanically superior to a plate because of its load-sharing capacity. In addition, it was preferable that the surgery in question should be performed on a traction table so that the alignment and length of the lower extremity could be partially restored and maintained. Another advantage was that the traction table could facilitate an intra-operative C-arm fluoroscopy, and the free and slightly flexed small leg released the tension of gastrocnemius, and reduced the deformity that muscular forces exerted on the femoral condyle fragments. In terms of limitations, the study was of a retrospective design: a case series without controls. Because of the limited incidence of the complex injury pattern, the conclusion was drawn based on the preliminary surgical results of seven patients. Although a general consensus on the optimal treatment for ipsilateral concomitant fractures of proximal extracapsular and distal femur has not been reached, the overall satisfactory outcomes suggest that our treatment protocol of the nailing of proximal fracture and plating distal fracture may be of significant clinical value in the effective treatment of the uncommon complex injuries. None declared.