Many industrial units apply wanted or unwanted impact loads to particles. Such units include comminution units as ball-mill, pin-mill or jet-mill, as well as conveying systems such as pneumatic conveying pipelines and chutes. Regardless of whether the impact load is wanted or unwanted, it causes damage to the particles. The number of collisions also has a major effect on the damage caused to the particles. Since systems commonly used in industry are similar in many ways (differing only by the range of impact velocities and number of impacts) their effect on the damage caused to the particles could be commonly evaluated based on the impact velocity and the number of collisions.
                  In this paper, the fatigue behavior of the same material tested in four impact comminution and attrition units is compared for the first time. Fatigue curves common to the four impact units are presented. The ability to plot a single fatigue curve for various impact systems enables to predict the expected size reduction in any new impact system based on past experience with other impact systems, as will be demonstrated in the paper.In the chemical processing industry, breakage can strongly influence the operation and economics of a manufacturing process In most practical comminution systems, as well as handling and conveying systems, involving attrition, each particle experiences more than one event of loading. Any mode of damage to the particles can occur immediately or after repeated loadings below a critical value, a phenomenon known as fatigue Vogel and Peukert In this paper, we present experimental results of damage and breakage caused to particles by four units applying mainly impact loads: rotating drum, pneumatic conveying, impact (pin) mill, and air-gun. First we show the effect of the number of passes through the system and the impact velocity on the damage caused to the particles. Then we correlated these four systems to present a common fatigue curve. In this way and method of comparison, experience gained with a material in industrial units can assist with designing and analyzing a new impact unit operating with the same material. An approximate estimation of the rate of damage of any industrial impact unit can be determined based on other industrial units without the need to define the material functions and to simulate the impact unit operation. This can lead to a significant improvement of size reduction consideration in industrial applications. In this section, four impact systems (rotating drum, pneumatic conveying, impact mill, and an air-gun) are presented and tested with the same material (potash). Typical results emphasizing the effect of multiple impacts are shown. All tests are conducted in a very low controlled feeding rate of particles, so that collision of particles against each other can be neglected. Ball mills have been studied extensively owing to their wide use in industry. Ball mills use hard balls to ground the particles. The grinding mechanism includes applying of compressive, abrasive and shear stresses to the particles, which enables the production of very fine particles  The main parameters affecting breakage and chipping of particles in pneumatic conveying include air and particle velocities, loading ratio and particle properties such as size distribution, shape and material. Since it has been long accepted that the main attrition occurs at the bends, most studies have been dedicated to flow and attrition mechanisms at various bends. We conducted a new set of experiments with the same potash that was tested in the rotating drum with the horizontal pneumatic conveying pipeline described in  A laboratory impact mill manufactured by Fritsch was used for the experiments. Twelve pins in a triangular cross-section of 8 mm for each side and 25 mm in height were placed in a circular rotor 90 mm in diameter. The material was inserted by a vibratory feeder at a very low mass flow rate in the center of the mill. The particles were accelerated radially due to the centrifugal forces and then collided with the pins. The ground material was collected in a circular container having an external diameter of 200 mm. At the external part of the pins in a very small clearance, a circular sieve of different sizes could be installed. The mill can operate with various sieves or without any sieve at all. When the mill is operating without a sieve, the particles are broken mainly due to impact loads. However, by using a sieve, the size reduction mechanism becomes more complex. The mill can operate with different rotation velocities from 6000 to 20,000 rpm. An extensive analysis of the performance of this mill was presented by Grant and Kalman Even when using the mill without any sieve the milling process is complicated and therefore a visualization study was performed to learn more about the mill's behavior. New milling results conducted with the same potash as described above are shown in Since the two systems discussed in the previous sections (pneumatic conveying and impact mill) involve complex behavior of particles and multi-collisions in one cycle, a reference system has to be used. A vertical air-gun, similar to the one used by Ghadiri and Papadopoulos  New experimental results of breakage of the same potash tested before (rotating drum, pneumatic conveying and impact mill) is presented in Goder et al. Calculating the real load applied to a particle due to impact is not a simple task. The load depends on the impact velocity, the properties of the colliding particles (shape, size and strength) and the nature of the collision (collision time, coefficient of restitution, angle of collision and rigidity of the target). Since we used the same material in the four systems with rigid targets, we may assume that the impact velocity is the main factor describing the impact load. The number of collisions is also a complicated property to define for operating units. When using an air-gun, each particle experiences one perpendicular impact with the rigid target at each cycle, and in the case of the rotating drum, each rotation also causes a single collision with the drum wall, but the angle of collision is not certain. The dynamics of particles is more complicated for pneumatic conveying. First, particles experience collisions while traveling in straight pipes. Then, even if a blinded tee is used, the size of the particles affects the angle of collision. Bigger and heavier particles with larger inertia forces might collide in 90° with the bend wall, but smaller and lighter particles might be swept by the air stream to collide with other angles or even not to collide at all. Moreover, secondary collisions might occur after the particles rebound from the first collision. Visualization study of particle collisions in the impact mill clearly shows that some of the particles have a few impacts at each pass through the mill. It is impossible at this stage to define precisely how many impacts each particle has in each cycle and this should be investigated in further studies. At this stage of the research, a damage equivalence factor,  Using the above equivalencies, The fatigue curves for impact loading of particles are presented in this paper for the first time. They can be compared to the well-known fatigue curves of metals; only in the case of impact of particles, the impact velocity was used as representing the failure strength (applied cyclic stress) of the test specimen. In the case of the well-known fatigue curve for metals, a single line is plotted since the entire tested specimen have the same properties. However, in the case of particulate materials, multiple breakage ratio lines have to be plotted, since the particles initially have a strength distribution (they are not identical in terms of their structure and strength).  Such fatigue curves as presented in The results shown in this work ( Four impact units (rotary drum, pneumatic conveying pipe line, impact mill and air-gun) for attrition and comminution were investigated. The four units provide impact loads at velocities between 2.5 m/s for rotating drum and 71 m/s for the air-gun. The effect of the impact velocity and the number of cycles on the damage rate was investigated for each unit. We showed that increasing both the impact velocities and the number of cycles (fatigue) increases the damage caused to the particles. Moreover, by defining a damage equivalent factor all the units can be evaluated in one fatigue curve. In this figure damage rate lines can be plotted with quite high accuracy. The ability to analyze various systems by one fatigue curve enables to predict the performance of any system even at the designing stages. The same approach was demonstrated for three materials (potash, NaCl and GMP). This research 23/00 was supported by The Israel Science Foundation.