Muscular atrophy occurs as a consequence of trauma and immobilisation. This cohort comparison study was conducted to evaluate the limb function after healed tibial shaft fractures, which were treated by casting versus nailing. Balance (as centre of pressure) and muscle strength (as torque of the knee joint during knee extension) have been measured in 27 patients with tibial shaft fractures with a mean age of 39 (19–73) years, 1 year after fracture healing. Fourteen patients were treated by intramedullary nailing ‘nailed group’ and 13 by plaster cast with or without minimal internal fixation ‘casted group’. Centre of pressure was measured on a force platform. Knee extension torque was measured during isometric and concentric muscle actions by an isokinetic dynamometer. Centre of pressure tended to be more towards the uninjured leg in patients who had been treated by plaster cast (P<0.05). Side-to-side differences for isometric torque were significantly higher within the casted group (P<0.05). Patients with tibial shaft fractures treated by intramedullary nailing showed better postural control, one-leg standing test, and side-to-side differences for isometric muscle strength compared with patients treated by cast. Therefore, we recommend intramedullary nailing as a better method of treatment for tibial shaft fractures, with regard to recovery of muscle function.Excellent results have been reported from both conservative The aim of this study was to compare treatment by closed intramedullary nailing with cast in patients with displaced fractures of the tibial shaft, regarding bilateral limb function after union. The present study is a cohort comparison of a selected subset of patients from a pre-existing prospective randomised study. During the period February 1994 to June 1997, 53 patients with a displaced, unilateral tibial shaft fracture who were treated at SU/Sahlgrenska Hospital, and SU/Östra Hospital entered into a prospective randomised study (main study) Inclusion criteria were closed or grade I open fractures according to the Gustilo classification system The severity of the closed and open injury was determined with use of the classification of Oestern and Tscherne In the casted group, redisplacement of the fractures was seen in 12 patients during primary reduction under anaesthesia, and in two patients at 1-week follow-up. These fractures were assessed to be unstable for treatment with plaster cast alone. Therefore, adequate alignment was obtained by minimal internal fixation using two to three lag-screws, which was a prerequisite of continuing cast treatment. All the patients in this group were treated by cast according to the same protocol. Based on practical difficulties, and patient convenience only those patients (38 of 53) who were treated at Sahlgrenska hospital were entered into the present study. The patients were asked by letter and 27 of these patients, 14 from the nailed group and 13 from the casted group, agreed to participate in the present study, assessing centre of pressure (CoP) and muscular strength. Twenty-four fractures were caused by low-energy trauma while three by high-energy trauma. Eighteen fractures involved right and nine left leg. The mean age of the 16 male and 11 female patients was 39 (19–73) years. The mean time to test from the injury was 14 months (S.D.=5.2) for the nailed group, and 17 months (S.D.=5.8) for the casted group. All the patients were rehabilitated according to the same regime by a physiotherapist, considering the healing stage. At the time of the test all the patients could walk without aid. All the patients were tested on a force platform (AMTI, Advanced Mechanical Technology Incorporation, model OR 6-5-1, Newton, MA, USA). The force platform measures vertical force ( The following parameters were selected for the tests: mean sway amplitude (mm) from the mean position in the anterior–posterior and medio-lateral directions, respectively, length (mm) of the sway path, mean velocity (mm/s) along the sway path and area (mm/s The patients stood with arms hanging by the side of the body and without shoes, on both the legs with an angle of 30° between the medial lines of their feet for 30 s. In the first test looking at a black dot 3 m away and in the second test, the eyes were closed. The third test included ‘one-leg standing test’ for injured and uninjured leg, for 10 s. A kinetic communicator (Kin-Com) (Chattanooga Group Inc., Hixson, TN, USA) isokinetic dynamometer was used for torque measurements. The subject was placed in a sitting position with the hip angle of 110° in the test chair. The axis of the lever arm of the Kin-Com was carefully adjusted to the axis of rotation of the knee joint. The lower leg was secured to the Kin-Com shin pad at approximately 10 cm distal to the tibial tuberosity. The trunk, hip and thigh were strapped down to avoid unwanted movements. After submaximal knee extensions for further warm-up and familiarisation, three maximal isometric knee extension trials were made at a knee angle of 60° with approximately 1 min of rest between trials. The trial with the highest peak torque value was stored for further analysis. The patients then performed three maximal trials of concentric knee extensions at an angular velocity of 60°/s, with 1 min rest between each trial. The trial with the highest peak torque value was recorded for analysis. Statistical analyses were performed using the Mann–Whitney test to assess differences of torque. The result of one-leg standing was presented by relative risk and it was calculated with 95% confidence intervals. Results are also given as mean values and one standard deviation (S.D.). The SPSS program was used to perform the statistical analyses. Significance was set at The groups were well matched for sex distribution, time to union, the level of energy of trauma, injured side, severity of soft-tissue damage, degrees of comminution of the fractures, and the mean time from the injury to the test ( The centre of pressure tended to be more towards the uninjured leg in the patients who had been treated by plaster cast compared with the nailed group ( There were no significant differences between the groups regarding mean sway amplitude, length of the sway path, mean velocity along the sway path, and area, either with open eyes or blindfolded. There were significant differences for isometric torque values between injured and uninjured legs only within the casted group. Patients in the nailed group demonstrated significantly higher torque values during isometric actions for the injured leg compared with their counterparts in the casted group ( Experimental studies support the general conclusion that immobilisation of ankle joint for 6 or more weeks will affect cartilage The post-operative treatment methods comprised the most striking differences between the two groups, which are decisive factors for how much and how fast patients would recover from their injuries. Cast treatment of tibial shaft fractures signifies immobilisation of the ankle joint and absence of full weight-bearing for several months. It reduces patient's mobility and general function Isometric testing, using standardised angles, can reliably quantify knee flexion/extension strength We also found significant differences regarding isometric torque value between the groups. However, because of the risk of existing confounding factors we refrained from making any conclusion based on this result. There were no significant differences regarding isokinetic muscle strength between the two groups. Anterior knee pain has been noticed as a common complication in patients with tibial shaft fractures treated by intramedullary nailing Patients with tibial shaft fractures treated by intramedullary nailing showed better postural control, one-leg standing test and side-to-side differences regarding isometric torque value compared with the patients treated by cast. Therefore, we recommend intramedullary nailing as a better method of treatment for tibial shaft fractures, with regard to recovery of muscle function. However, anterior knee pain is a well-known complication after intramedullary nailing and patients should be informed about this complication before the surgery.