In order to produce high-quality pellets with good reducibility and superior softening and melting properties, certain additives are important. One of the most common fluxing materials for iron ore pellet production is limestone, which is mainly calcium oxide (CaO). In this study, the effect of adding limestone on the metallurgical properties (reducibility, swelling, cracking, softening temperature, Low-Temperature Disintegration, Cold Crushing Strength) of acid iron ore pellets was investigated using a comprehensive set of metallurgical laboratory tests.
                  The dynamic reducibility test under unconstrained conditions showed a higher final degree of reduction in limestone-fluxed pellets compared to non-fluxed ones. Also in the reduction–softening test under load, the fluxed pellets reduced to a higher final degree of reduction, although they started to soften at a somewhat lower temperature. Swelling and cracking of the pellets during dynamic reduction were slightly increased by the addition of limestone, but not remarkably. Adding limestone slightly decreased the Cold Crushing Strength and increased the formation of fines in the hematite to magnetite reduction stage in the LTD test. However, all four parameters (CCS, LTD, swelling, and cracking) are within the acceptable range for blast furnace use.In general, the main types of pellets for the purposes of making iron are acid, basic and fluxed. In order to produce high-quality pellets, certain additives are important. The most common fluxing materials for iron ore pellet production are limestone (CaCO Some researchers have already studied the effect of basicity on the properties of iron ore pellets. One example is There are a variety of standard tests for characterizing the metallurgical properties of iron ore materials for blast furnace use. Swelling of the pellets occurs simultaneously with reduction and is common in the operation of the blast furnace. Due to the increased porosity of pellets, normal swelling can be advantageous for the reduction process (  It is generally known that in shaft furnaces iron-bearing materials are exposed to increasing temperature and mechanical load under reducing conditions. Due to mechanical stress caused by upper layers, iron-bearing material layers contract and finally collapse during melting. The behaviour of iron-bearing materials during contraction and melting is dependent on the chemistry and structure of the burden material and on reducing conditions, i.e. temperature, mechanical load, and reducing gas composition ( In shaft furnaces, it is desirable that the burden holds a lumpy packed structure to as high a temperature as possible, and that the temperature range of the start of softening to melting (known as the cohesive zone) is as narrow as possible (  Acid iron ore pellets with 4.6 The photomicrographs showing the internal structure of the pellet core in the fired non-fluxed and the fluxed iron ore pellets are shown in The reducibility of the pellets under free conditions was tested with a high-temperature furnace named BFS (Blast Furnace gas phase Simulator). The operational description of the BFS is presented in an earlier paper ( In the reducibility test, a loose-packed layer of 26 pellets having no magnetite nucleus or only a small one and a total weight of 120 Three reduction swelling tests were carried out with the pellets. Magnetically classified pellets having no magnetite nucleus or only a small one, in a size range of 12.5–16 The softening behaviour of the pellets was studied with a high-temperature furnace named ARUL (Advanced Reduction under Load) shown in The reduction–softening test was carried out with the MASSIM programme in CO–CO For characterization of the softening behaviour of the iron ore pellets, the following indices have been derived: The TDP20, TDP50 and TDP70 values state the temperature at pressure differences of 20 After the reduction–softening experiments, the test sample was sliced and polished (see The amount of size degradation of iron ores in the low-temperature reduction zone of a blast furnace was evaluated according to the The amount of pellet breakage during storage and handling and charging the blast furnace was evaluated according to the CCS test. In the test, 50 pellets (10–12.5 A series of metallurgical tests were carried out on the pellets in order to find out the effect of adding limestone on the metallurgical properties of acid iron ore pellets. In the “No additives” reducibility test carried out for a 120 Pellet images after the swelling experiments are shown in The average reduction swelling indices and average degrees of reduction for the non-fluxed and fluxed pellet grades in each dynamic reduction swelling experiment are presented in Images of the pellet samples after the reduction–softening test can be seen in The cross-sections of the samples after the reduction–softening test for the non-fluxed and fluxed pellets are shown in The numerical results of the reduction–softening tests are presented in The pressure difference and compression curves in the reduction–softening test are shown in The non-fluxed and fluxed pellets were tested according to the The principal effect of CaO is to form low melting calcium silicate compounds which act as a bonding agent for the iron oxides during sintering ( A higher reducibility indicates more indirect reduction in the blast furnace, resulting in a lower coke rate and higher productivity. The reducibility test in CO–CO Limestone fluxed pellets are highly porous and therefore very reducible but physically weaker than non-fluxed ones. The CCS distribution (see The LTD test showed that more fines are generated in the hematite to magnetite reduction stage in the fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed pellets. The swelling tests showed somewhat increased cracking for the limestone fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed ones, which is in accordance with the results of the LTD test. One possible reason for increased cracking and fines formation is the higher divalent iron content in the fluxed pellets, because the earlier study by The volume change of the pellets was larger with the fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed ones in reduction. The liquid onset in the iron oxide core is one of the mechanisms that lead to the loss of mechanical strength in ferrous burden materials. The increase in pressure difference across the sample in the ARUL test is an indicator of the formation of liquid phases. The TDP20 value is an indicator of the temperature, at which the cohesive zone begins in a blast furnace and is an essential factor for process control. A high temperature, at which the gas-impermeable layer is formed, is favourable in the blast furnace process, as it provides more space for gaseous reduction ( Lower TDP values were measured for the fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed ones. Additionally, the pressure difference curve for the fluxed pellets was not as sharp as for the non-fluxed ones. Thus, when only one type of pellet is used in the blast furnace burden, the cohesive zone is higher in the vertical direction and is broader for the fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed ones. However, the degree of reduction in the area of the cohesive zone is higher for the fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed ones because of the positive effect of CaO on the reducibility under unconstrained conditions. Borinder and Torssell (1986) state that a high melting point of slag and wüstite is more important than high reducibility, unless the melting of the metallic iron phase can be delayed. In order to clarify the difference in softening behaviour between the two types of iron ore pellets studied, the polished sections of the samples after the reduction–softening test were studied with LOM and FESEM-EDS. The composition of the slag phase between wüstite grains was the major area of interest. The internal structure of the pellets after the reduction–softening test is shown in In the FESEM-EDS analyses of the pellets after the reduction–softening test, detectable phases were metallic iron, wüstite and inter-granular slag of olivine composition in both pellet grades. Wüstite and metallic iron had no impurities in either the non-fluxed or fluxed pellet samples. CaO is able to dissolve in the wüstite, which would decrease the solidus and liquidus temperatures, as can be seen in the CaO–FeO The reason for the formation of the gas-impermeable structure is apparently linked to the increase of inter-particle melt with olivine composition, allowing wüstite particles to move in relation to each other under mechanical stress. This can be seen clearly in In the non-fluxed pellets, approximately 2.1 The average composition of the Ca–Fe olivines verified in the sample of the fluxed pellets after the reduction–softening test was 40.2 The liquid onset occurred at somewhat lower temperatures than expected based on examining the phase stability diagram. This is due to the fluxing effect of alkaline components (Na The ARUL test was found to be an appropriate method to study the softening behaviour of iron ore pellets. It is a reduction and softening type, and should not be confused with the Naturally, there are also some limitations in the ARUL test. In a real blast furnace, other slag-forming elements are also captured by pellets, such as alkalis, sulphur and ash particles from metallurgical coke and alternative reducing agents. The effect of alkalis, sulphur and ash particles on inter-granular melt formation was not studied here, but problems may arise from the high sulphur load leading to partial melt formation of FeO–FeS at 915 Additionally, in the reduction–softening test the gas-to-solid ratio was lower than in a real blast furnace due to experimental limitations. Another aspect to take into account is that both gases and solids were heated externally in the reduction–softening test, although heat transfer and oxygen transfer reactions in the blast furnace are interrelated ( In this study, the effect of adding limestone on the metallurgical properties (reducibility, swelling, cracking, softening temperature, Low-Temperature Disintegration, Cold Crushing Strength) of acid iron ore pellets was investigated. The main implications drawn from the comprehensive set of metallurgical tests can be summarized as follows: Adding limestone increased the reducibility of the pellets by increasing the porosity of the pellets as the limestone decomposed in the sintering. Swelling and cracking of the pellets during dynamic reduction slightly increased when limestone was added. The final degree of reduction was higher in the reduction–softening test with the fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed ones, although softening began at a lower temperature with the fluxed pellets compared to the non-fluxed ones. The softening zone was broader with the fluxed pellets, indicating a broader cohesive zone in the blast furnace. In a blast furnace process, this means a cohesive zone located higher in the vertical direction when using fluxed pellets; this leads to a lower amount of direct reduction occurring in the blast furnace hearth, and thus decreased consumption of reducing agents. The reason for forming a gas-impermeable structure in the reduction–softening test is apparently linked to the increase of inter-particle melt allowing wüstite particles to move in relation to each other under mechanical stress. The inter-granular slag was composed of fayalite in the non-fluxed pellets and Ca–Fe olivines in the fluxed pellets. CaO dissolved in fayalite decreases the solidus and liquidus temperature of the fluxed pellets because a low-melting eutectic liquid can form. Adding limestone slightly decreased the Cold Crushing Strength of the acid pellets and increased the formation of fines in the hematite to magnetite reduction stage in the LTD test. However, the CCS and LTD values for the fluxed pellets are within the acceptable range for blast furnace use. The ARUL reduction–softening test was found to be appropriate for a comparative study between different iron ore pellet grades when reduction–softening behaviour is investigated. Additionally, it is an appropriate method to study the formation of slag phases under simulated blast furnace conditions. The ARUL test should not be confused with the  Advanced Reduction under Load Blast Furnace gas phase Simulator Cold Crushing Strength Experimental blast furnace Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy Flame Atomic Absorption Spectrometry Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope International Organization for Standardization Light Optical Microscope Low-Temperature Disintegration Reduction Degree at the end of the reduction–softening test Reduction Degradation Index Reduction Swelling Index Reduction under Load Temperature at 20 Temperature at 50 Temperature at 70 Tumble Index X-ray Fluorescence This research is part of the Systems Integrated Metal Processes (SIMP) research programme coordinated by the Finnish Metals and Engineering Competence Cluster (FIMECC).