This paper describes the extraction of uranium from aqueous phosphoric acid medium using (2-Ethyl hexyl) Phosphonic acid, mono (2-ethyl hexyl) ester (PC88A) and tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) individually as well as their synergistic mixture in different diluents. The various experimental parameters are investigated to optimize optimise the suitable extraction conditions. Results indicate that a synergistic mixture of 0.90 M PC88A+0.15 M TBP in xylene, can be used for the extraction of uranium from low phosphoric acid medium. Back extraction studies reveals that among all the common strippants used, 0.50 M solution of (NH4)2CO3 was most suitable. The synergistic mixture of 0.90 M PC88A+0.15 M TBP as extractant system and 0.5 M (NH4)2CO3 as strippant is used to recover uranium from a conditioned wet process phosphoric acid and from actual radioanalytical waste generated during uranium analysis by modified Davies–Gray method. The recovery is found to be around 80% from conditioned WPA whereas better than 90% from modified Davies–Gray waste.Uranium plays an important role in the generation of nuclear power but has limited resources position. Efforts are being made worldwide to investigate the newer resources of uranium to meet the required demands. Among the secondary resources of uranium, natural phosphates are found to contain several tens to hundreds parts per million of uranium depending upon the origin of phosphate rocks ( Commercial grade (2-Ethyl hexyl) Phosphonic acid, mono (2-ethyl hexyl) ester (PC88A) (purity Uranium-233 in aqueous/organic phase was assayed by α-scintillation counter using Ag activated ZnS detector. The efficiency of the detector as standardized using All the experiments were carried out at room temperature 25 Required suitable aliquots from the stock solution of uranium were used to prepare feed solutions during the batch extraction studies. In these studies, a fixed volume of the aqueous phase (generally, 2 mL to 20 mL) at desired concentration of H The selection of a reagent for uranium stripping from the organic phase was carried out using commonly used stripping agents. After assaying the uranium in the phases by radiometry, the distribution of uranium was expressed in percentage or distribution ratio using standard method. Synergistic coefficients were calculated using Eq. The extraction of uranium from WPA sample was carried out under different experimental conditions. In one case, extraction was carried out as such without feed conditioning whereas in other experiments the acidity of aqueous feed was reduced to 0.5 M with respect to wet process phosphoric acid either by partial neutralization with 10 M NaOH or by diluting it with water. The extraction of uranium from actual radioanalytical waste generated in phosphoric acid medium was also carried out without any conditioning. Extraction behaviour of uranium by PC88A and TBP and their mixture as a function of time are studied and the results are given in  Extraction behaviour of uranium as carried out as a function of feed acidity in the range of 0.5 to 4.5 M of phosphoric acid using a arbitrarily chosen concentration of extractants individually as well as using their mixture and the results are given in The role of diluents during extraction of uranium was investigated and the results are given in In an attempt to optimise the solvent composition, the extraction of uranium was studied from 1.0 M phosphoric acid using varying concentration of the extractants and the results are given in  In a separate test run, the effect of aqueous feed acidity (H Results show a decrease in Mathematically, in turn, effective extractant concentration can be calculated using Eq. Where [H  Encouraged by the above extraction results the optimised synergistic mixture was used to recover uranium from a conditioned WPA and from actual radioanalytical waste generated during uranium by modified Davies–Gray method. The results presented in The studies carried out in this paper clearly indicate that synergistic mixture of 0.90 M PC88A and 0.15 M TBP in xylene can be employed for the extraction of uranium from its secondary resources like conditioned WPA as well as from actual radioanalytical waste generated in phosphoric acid medium during uranium analysis by modified Davies–Gray method. The extraction of uranium is found to be better when the concentration of H Thanks are due to Sri S.D. Mishra, Director, Nuclear Recycle Group, Sri P.K. Dey, Head, Reprocessing Division and Sri S.K. Munshi, Chief Supdt., Reprocessing Facilities, Trombay, Bhabha Atomic Research centre, Trombay, Mumbai for taking keen interest in carrying out this work.