The point of zero charge (PZC) of electrokinetically anisotropic minerals (chlorite and serpentine) was determined using the Mular–Roberts (M–R) titration technique, and compared to isoelectric point (IEP) obtained from electrophoretic mobility measurements. To validate the M–R technique, the point of zero charge and isoelectric point of two isotropic minerals (alumina and silica) were shown to be comparable. For serpentine and chlorite, respectively, the PZC was found at pH 4.3 and 4.7, while the IEP occurred at pH 4 and <3.Silicates are significant constituents of the gangue associated with nickel minerals in mafic and ultramafic The minerals are separated by froth flotation and a principal mechanism by which silicate minerals interfere with the process is believed to be via slime coating ( The bulk of available data regarding the surface chemistry of silicate minerals is related to their electrokinetic properties (i.e., measurement of zeta potential) ( The zeta potential is measured at the slipping plane as the particle moves relative to the liquid (aqueous solution), which can be assumed equal to the potential at the outer Helmholtz plane. A characteristic is the pH at which the zeta potential is zero, the isoelectric point (IEP). The surface charge, on the other hand, is that at the particle surface; the pH at which the charge is zero is the point of zero charge (PZC) ( For the class of silicates known as phyllosilicates, which includes chlorite, talc and serpentine ( Potentiometric titration is one technique for measuring the point of zero charge ( In the Mular–Roberts (M–R) method (also referred as batch equilibration ( The aim of the present work is, after validating, to use the M–R technique to determine the point of zero charge of some phyllosilicate minerals relevant to processing nickel-bearing ultramafic ore (namely, serpentine and chlorite); and compare the values to the isoelectric point determined from conventional zeta potential measurements. Establishing the validity of the M–R technique is both approached theoretically, showing it is equivalent to potentiometric titration, and experimentally by comparing IEP and PZC for alumina and silica. From their structure (electro kinetically isotropic), in the absence of specific adsorption, IEP and PZC must coincide. The effect of ionic strength and solids concentration were also explored. In the M–R technique, the underlying principle is that the point of zero charge, PZC, is based on the calculation of the net surface charge density, Indifferent electrolyte strongly influences the surface charge when surface potential is different from zero. According to the following equation ( In the M–R technique, the ionic strength (given by an indifferent electrolyte) is increased, and consequently, High purity alumina (Sigma–Aldrich) and silica (Fisher) were used in the validation tests. The anisotropic minerals were serpentine, chlorite and talc (Ward’s Natural Science Establishment). These samples were crushed, pulverized and wet sieved to isolate the −25 Mineralogical analysis was performed on the silicates using X-ray diffraction (XRD) on powdered samples. The detection limit is about 5%. An electrophoretic method (ZetaPlus from Brookhaven Instruments) which uses the Smoluchowski approximation was used to calculate the zeta potential from electrokinetic mobility of the samples. Unless otherwise noted, suspensions were prepared using 0.1 Suspensions were prepared at 10 Magnesium ions are possible pdi released into solution (see ‘dissolution’ below); these experiments test whether the M–R titration technique is applicable. Three concentration were used: 10 In the case of silica and alumina, a known amount (normally 3 According to XRD analysis, serpentine was identified as lizardite, chlorite as clinochlore with traces of serpentine–chlorite, and talc as steatite ( The isoelectric point of alumina was found at pH 7.9 ( In the case of alumina, the effect of ionic strength change on the PZC was explored (  The effect of aging is shown in The effect of solid/liquid ratio was also explored. Results for chlorite are shown in Species released from minerals and later chemisorbed may change their IEP. Magnesium, iron and aluminum were chosen as likely candidates: the former is a constituent of these silicates, and iron and aluminum are constituents of chlorite. Also, isomorphic substitution of Mg and Si cations by Al and Fe It is established that the titration technique for PZC determination is only valid provided there are no pdi other than H For chlorite and serpentine ( Accordingly, we conclude that Mg  The IEP and PZC results for all samples successfully tested are summarized in The difference between the PZC and IEP, which can occur with certain anisotropic minerals such as the phyllosilicates examined here, can be assessed by comparing results from the M–R and electrophoretic techniques. The M–R technique exploits the change in solution pH when ionic strength is adjusted; when the ΔpH is zero this gives the PZC. In the case of some phyllosilicates where the charge on one crystal plane is pH dependent (i.e., the edge) while the other is not (basal plane) the M–R technique responds only to the former. Electrophoresis, on the other hand, reflects the average behavior of both planes. The M–R technique proved reliable (repeatable) and was verified by (a) showing that for alumina and silica, being isotropic, that the PZC and the IEP were equal within experimental tolerance, and (b) showing that the range in ionic strength and mass of sample were not factors. The technique was then used on the three phyllosilicate samples. For serpentine and chlorite, the PZC proved to be higher than the IEP which corresponds to the IEP value reflecting an averaging which includes a plane with close to zero charge independent of pH. The M–R technique relies on there being no other potential pdi except H The results from the M–R technique are easy to interpret if there is only one plane exhibiting charge. There is no independent proof that this is the case here and we know that vacancies and substitution in the basal plane can create some charging. Atomic force microscopy, by making measurements on isolated planes, is one way to delve further into that aspect. Rather, at this juncture a practical question is more pressing: which parameter, PZC or IEP, will be the factor controlling system properties that may influence flotation. One approach will involve aggregation tests using turbidity or settling rate measurements to determine response as a function of pH ( The Mular–Roberts titration technique was used to determine the point of zero charge for electrokinetically anisotropic minerals. The following were found. M–R technique was reliable (repeatable). The technique was verified testing alumina and silica where the point of zero charge (PZC) was shown equal to the isoelectric point (IEP). For two anisotropic minerals, serpentine and chlorite, PZC For the talc sample Mg The authors wish to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the industrial sponsors of the Chair in Mineral Processing, Vale-Inco, Teck-Cominco, Xstrata Process Support, Agnico-Eagle, Barrick Gold, Corem, SGS Minerals Service and Flottec for funding under the NSERC University-Industry Collaborative Research and Development Program.