Accurate estimation of the shear strength of rock discontinuities is of great importance in many rock engineering practices, especially for the stability assessment of dam foundations and rock slopes. This study was conducted through both in-situ and laboratory direct shear tests on rock discontinuities, under the constant normal load (CNL) boundary condition, focusing on the influence of the length of discontinuities on the shear strength. The results of more than 109 direct shear tests carried out on rock discontinuities at the Bakhtiary dam site were analyzed to consider the size effect on rock discontinuities strength. The surface roughness of discontinuities was described by fractal dimension using a modified divider method. Moreover, numerical simulations of direct shear tests were carried out on discontinuities with different lengths in order to establish an empirical relationship that can link the shear strength of discontinuities of laboratory scale to in-situ scale. From the experimental and numerical results, it was confirmed that the peak shear strength of the discontinuity decreases as a function of the discontinuity length.The most commonly used method for shear testing of discontinuities in rocks is the direct shear test. This type of test is commonly carried out in the laboratory, but it may also be carried out in the field. Direct shear tests are usually carried out at constant normal load (CNL) or in constant normal stiffness (CNS) boundary conditions. In the field of rock engineering, underground construction, dam foundation, and slope stability are some examples that require direct shear testing. It is widely accepted that the mechanical behavior of rock discontinuities is scale dependent. Therefore, understanding the scale effect on the mechanical behavior of a single rock discontinuity is still very important in rock engineering. Description of the mechanical properties of rock discontinuities is provided by two approaches: (a) the theoretical approach, which adopts some well-known theories (e.g. plasticity, contact theory, etc.) to simulate the observed behavior of a discontinuity; and (b) the empirical approach, in which experimental data are analyzed to derive correlations between influential variables, and models are formulated according to the observed behavior. To date, several empirical and theoretical models have been developed to predict the shear strength of discontinuities in rock masses, such as Patton A number of researchers have investigated the applicability of various conventional statistical parameters in quantifying roughness. They have pointed out that the values obtained for conventional statistical parameters vary with the measurement scale. Therefore, the surface roughness of rock joints needs to be characterized using scale invariant parameters such as fractal parameters. Several researchers have suggested using the fractal dimension to quantify rock joint roughness. A number of methods have been suggested in the literature to estimate fractal dimension of roughness profiles of a rock joint surface. The methods include the divider Considering the above discussions, the aim of this work is the development of a new empirical relationship for estimating peak shear strength of discontinuities in sedimentary rock masses based on direct shear tests under the CNL boundary condition. The shear strength of rock discontinuities, involving both bedding planes and joints at the Bakhtiary dam site located in Lorestan Province, in the southwest of Iran, was measured through 106 laboratory and 3 in-situ direct shear tests. The mechanical properties related to the laboratory scale were obtained in the laboratory through specific mechanical tests and morphological measurements. Next, based on the research presented by Fardin et al. The site of Bakhtiary dam and hydroelectric power project is located in Lorestan Province, southwest of Iran, at the coordinates of 48.780°E longitude and 32.961°N latitude. The hydroelectric power plant project includes the design and construction of a 315 Limestone layers of Sarvak formation, which are Mid-Cretaceous marine sediments, form the foundation of the dam, powerhouse and other appurtenant structures ( Based on laboratory tests on core samples of the six Sarvak formation units, namely Sv2–Sv7 (162 unconfined compression tests, 125 triaxial compression tests, and 47 Brazilian tests), the mechanical characteristics of the intact rocks were measured. In this study, the orientation (dip direction/dip) of rock discontinuities was measured by surface outcrop mapping and the measurements were done by a geological compass. In order to obtain the characterization of discontinuities, the geotechnical site investigations, including borehole drilling, extension of exploration galleries, surface and gallery mapping, geophysics and in-situ rock mechanics tests as well as laboratory tests were performed. The rock mass of the project area is intersected by four main discontinuity types, which affect its stability and the bearing capacity. Systematic discontinuities at the dam site consist of bedding surfaces and two joint sets ( Bedding surfaces are characterized as planar and persistent with average spacing of 6–60 A large number of discontinuities whose orientations were measured at a particular field site are used to facilitate regional structural analysis. For this purpose, we analyzed the data for the individual discontinuities involved: 344 measurements for bedding, 577 for joint set The most commonly used method for the shear testing of discontinuities in rocks is the direct shear test. Direct shear tests (DST) on core specimens containing both bedding planes and joint surfaces were performed using the instrumented SBEL direct shear machine (DR-44). The purpose of this test was to measure peak and residual direct shear strengths as a function of stress normal to the sheared plane. For conducting a shear test on joint surfaces, at first the lower half and then the upper half were encapsulated in separate molds. Two sides of the specimen were fixed inside the shear box using a cement mortar. The shear tests were conducted by applying manually operated, normal, and shear loads. Methods of preparing samples and carrying out these various tests are discussed by the ISRM Commission The laboratory test samples range from 5.4 to 14.8 For each test specimen, graphs of shear stress versus shear displacement were plotted. Values of the peak and residual shear strength, normal stress, and shear displacement were abstracted from these graphs. Graphs of the peak and residual shear strengths versus normal stress were plotted from the combined results for all the test specimens. Also, distribution of cohesion, residual friction angle, and peak friction angle were abstracted from these graphs as shown in The in-situ direct shear test is the established method for determining the peak and residual shear strength along the rock discontinuity. In this study, three in-situ direct shear tests on bedding planes with the dimensions of 70×70×35 First, shear strength of rock discontinuities, i.e. bedding planes and rock joints at the Bakhtiary dam site, were measured through 109 direct shear tests. Second, the surface characteristics of rock joints including roughness coefficient, joint compressive strength, cohesion, residual friction angle, and peak friction angle were determined. Detailed results of direct shear tests are derived from the plots of peak and residual shear strength values versus applied normal stresses on bedding planes. Then based on Mohr–Coulomb failure criterion, peak and residual shear strength parameters were calculated and compared with the values estimated by Barton criterion. Finally, using statistical analyses the most appropriate empirical criterion for estimating the shear strength at the Bakhtiary dam was decided to be Barton criterion. Barton The joint roughness coefficient is a number estimated by comparing the appearance of a discontinuity surface with standard profiles published by Barton and Choubey In this study, the fractal dimension method was used because of its accuracy in measuring The parameters (1-D) and log Moreover, the fractal dimension was determined by a new code, written in Microsoft Visual Studio C# language. This new code used the modified divider method to determine the fractal dimension. In fact, this method requests a lot of divider spans ranging from least to most from roughness profiles order to come up with a suitable answer. Therefore, the fractal dimension of standard roughness profiles of Barton with 10 The values of fractal dimension ( Using statistical analyses, the new empirical relationship for estimating the value of The values of The suggested methods for estimating The usual test procedure adopted for performing direct shear tests calls for a constant normal load to be applied with the shear force being gradually increased until sliding takes place. As illustrated in Diagram of peak In this study, for all 109 specimens of rock discontinuities at both laboratory and in-situ scales at the Bakhtiary dam site, the diagram of peak The numerical simulation was conducted by using the Universal Distinct Element Code (UDEC) For numerical modeling of the direct shear test, the model geometry was built according to the laboratory and in-situ direct shear tests. The rock material and condition of the joint were assigned, initial boundary conditions were applied, and a stepwise procedure was followed for the model to reach the equilibrium condition. The analysis was carried out in two steps. In the first step, only normal stress was applied on the top surface of the model and in the second step, shear stress was also applied. All of the analyses were performed using normal stresses ranging from 0.51 to 2.09 In this study, more than 109, 2D distinct element analyses were conducted to simulate the large-scale direct shear tests using UDEC and predict the shear strength of the rock discontinuities with different lengths under constant normal load (CNL) boundary conditions. The geometry of each model was the same as the size of direct shear test on rock specimens. Therefore, the constant normal stress applied ranged from 0.47 to 3.2 In this study, the roughness surface parameters were optimized for evaluation of the shear strength of rock discontinuities in numerical modeling. Also, the effects of the rock discontinuities with different lengths under constant normal load (CNL) were evaluated by using experimental data and numerical modeling. Then, the results of 36 direct shear tests as the representative of discontinuities both in bedding planes and rock joints were selected for further analyses. Based on the research conducted by Fardin et al. In order to take care of a large number of shear test data sets, all the data can be summarized in the mean values. Then, the mean values as a representative of all the data can be used to obtain the relation between Estimation of shear strength of discontinuities in rock masses is a very difficult task in the field of geotechnical engineering due to the problems associated with the in-situ scale and also technical limitations. In this study, however, a new empirical relationship for linking the shear strength of discontinuities of laboratory scale to in-situ scale using the results both from direct shear tests and numerical modeling at the Bakhtiary dam site has been proposed. As illustrated in Using the statistical analyses of all the data, the correction coefficient The closer the value of In this study, the lengths of laboratory samples were in the range of 5.4–14.8 In order to validate the new Eq. In this particular case (Karun IV dam), the same processes as those for Bakhtiary dam discussed above were used and the shear strength along the length Input data for prediction of shear strength and the measured values of shear strength along the discontinuity length ( In this study, the shear strength of discontinuities with different lengths has been investigated. Based on the experimental test results, a new empirical relationship for estimating the shear strength of discontinuities in sedimentary rock masses was developed and validated by another identical case study. The input data for numerical modeling was obtained from laboratory and in-situ direct shear tests. The following points have been considered in this study: First, the shear strength of rock discontinuities from more than 109 laboratory and in-situ direct shear tests under the constant normal load (CNL) at the Bakhtiary dam site was measured. Then, the roughness surface parameters were optimized for evaluation of the shear strength of rock discontinuities in numerical modeling. Also, the effect of the rock discontinuities with different lengths under constant normal load (CNL) was evaluated using experimental data and 324 numerical modeling data sets. In this study, capability of UDEC in predicting the shear strength of rock discontinuities with different roughness values under constant normal load (CNL) boundary conditions was evaluated. The predicted shear strength was compared with the experimental results, indicating that the predicted peak shear stress based on UDEC is in a close agreement with the experimental results. From numerical simulations, it can concluded that by increasing the discontinuity lengths the values of shear strength gradually decrease until they reach a constant value, which is taken as the representative of shear strength of discontinuity in rock masses. Further, based on the experimental data and numerical simulations it can be concluded that the size of in-situ direct shear test (70×70×35 The authors express their thanks to the