Determining the geophysical properties of rocks and geological formations is of high importance in many fields such as geotechnical engineering. In this study, we investigate the second-order dependence structure of spatial (two-dimensional) processes through the statistical perspective of variance vs. scale (else known as the climacogram) instead of covariance vs. lag (e.g. autocovariance, variogram etc.) or power vs. frequency (e.g. power spectrum, scaleogram, wavelet transform etc.) which traditionally are applied. In particular, we implement a two-dimensional (visual) estimator, adjusted for bias and for unknown process mean, through the (plot of) variance of the space-averaged process vs. the spatial scale. Additionally, we attempt to link the climacogram to the type of rocks and provide evidence on stochastic similarities in certain of their characteristics, such as mineralogical composition and resolution. To this end, we investigate two-dimensional spatial images of rocks in terms of their stochastic microstructure as estimated by the climacogram. The analysis is based both on microscale and macroscale data extracted from greyscale images of rocks. Interestingly, a power-law drop of variance vs. scale (or else known as long-term persistence) is detected in all scales presenting a similar power-exponent. Furthermore, the strengths and limitations of the climacogram as a stochastic tool are discussed and compared with the traditional tool in spatial statistics, the variogram. We show that the former has considerable strengths for detecting the long-range dependence in spatial statistics.Extracting information from image analysis is very important in many fields of science. Diagnostic images are used for stochastic analysis of diseases in the field of medicine, e.g. X-ray images are used in bone disease ( The typical tool that is used for the stochastic analysis of geostatistical fields is the variogram which is defined to be the half of the variance of the field difference at two points, as a function of the distance between these points. A comprehensive presentation of the variogram in geostatistics can be found in Here, we develop our model based on the climacogram at different spatial scales to detect such behaviours and to combine all scales to a single model, so as to easily analyze environmental issues occured in different scales ( The climacogram, that we use to investigate the stochastic properties of two-dimensional (2D) images of rock samples, has been extensively used in one-dimensional (1D) stochastic processes (for a review see, e.g., In our applications, we examine several images of rocks extracted from a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), from a polarizing microscope and from field samples. Also, we compare the use of the climacogram for the LTP identification to that of the variogram through benchmark examples. Finally, we discuss the influence of the scale length and type of rock on the statistical estimation and we propose a stochastic process that adequately preserves the observed LTP behaviour in the examined 2D images of rocks.  We use characteristic images of rocks in different scales obtained through open internet data bases, which are shown in  (a) Sample images from different rocks but in the same rock category are selected. In (b) For a second application, we select images of rocks with similar mineral composition but from a different rock category. For example, in (c) Moreover, we select sample images from an igneous rock, i.e. rhyolite at moderate (mm) and meso (cm) scales ( (d) Finally, we compare sample images of a sandstone rock in four different scales ( In Assuming that The climacogram is shown to have smaller statistical bias and variability (i.e. smaller standardized mean-square-error), zero discretization error as well as other properties more useful in stochastic model identification, building and generation than other stochastic tools such as (auto) covariance (or correlation) and power spectrum ( Assuming that our sample is an area A variety of processes exhibit LTP behaviour (e.g. The HK behaviour can be easily identified through the log–log slope (e.g. An important remark is that our analysis depends only on the investigation of the second-order statistics (i.e. variance of the averaged process vs. scale with an unknown mean of the process) and therefore, since it is generic, it can be applied to any type of marginal distribution. For example, here we assume an isotropic The variogram is one of the basic tools in the field of geostatistics since it describes the spatiotemporal correlation of a process. The original term semi-variogram is coined by Modelling and estimation of the variogram is one of the most crucial steps for the kriging interpolation method ( In 2D discrete space the variogram is similarly defined as: It can be shown that for a stationary process the 2D variogram is directly linked to the 2D autocovariance function: Despite the extensive use of the variogram in many fields several of its limitations are often disregarded. As shown above the variogram is directly linked to the autocovariance function and therefore it carries along some of the autocovariance strengths, such as providing estimations for a large range of lags, as well as limitations, such as discretization error ( As explained in previous sections, the variogram, i.e. Here, we compare the climacogram and the variogram estimators in terms of identification of LTP processes. For comparison between additional methods and benchmark investigations of LTP processes see also As explained above, the LTP behaviour cannot be easily estimated from the variogram. For illustration, we estimate the climacogram and variogram and assess the difference in estimation uncertainty for LTP processes through the variance of the estimator. Particularly, we apply a Monte-Carlo analysis for a HK process with various Hurst parameters by generating 10 For a 1D HK process with The employment of an uncertainty analysis in this task of spatial model identification and building is rather important ( In  In this section, we estimate the climacogram and the variogram for each rock sample. For the current analysis we estimate solely the isotropic stochastic properties of each rock and we do not take into consideration any anisotropic and/or inhomogeneous characteristics. For this latter type, investigations should apply the climacogram (or the autocovariance, variogram etc.) by testing different rotation angles into the anisotropic sample/image or by identifying several homogeneous regions in the inhomogeneous sample/image (  We compare the climacograms of two rocks which comprised of the same minerals but from different category ( A comparison of climacograms for rocks of the same category, namely a limestone and a sandstone (  We analyse sample images from an igneous rock, i.e. rhyolite ( In Note that the quick drop of each climacogram at large scales is due to low statistical sampling at large scales (observe that on average the estimated Hurst parameter increases with sample length.) This can be roughly removed by following the rule of thumb of fitting the climacogram to a stochastic model up to the 10% of the extent of available scales ( It is interesting to see that all examined rock formations exhibit LTP behaviour, with Hurst parameters ranging from 0.6 to 0.85 (not adjusted for bias) and an overall 0.85 (adjusted for bias as explained above). Therefore, the uncertainty/variability of these rocks seems to be much larger than that emerging from a white noise or a Markov process.  The aim of this study is to examine the stochastic similarities of rocks in terms of second-order dependence structure expressed through the climacogram and in particular, whether they exhibit long-term persistence for a wide range of scales and rock formations. The presented analysis may be useful for gaining insight and making inference at scales in which data acquisition is difficult or costly. A common characteristic drawn from the current research and the analysis in all the rock formations and scales is the power-law decay of climacogram, i.e. variance of the scaled averaged process. This structure signifies a long-term-persistent, or else known as Hurst–Kolmogorov (HK) behaviour, as the Hurst parameter ranges within 0.5 and 1, signifying a difference from a white noise process (i.e. absence of autocorrelation) or Markov behaviour (i.e. exponential decay of autocorrelation). This result can be useful towards a more realistic reconstruction of rock images through appropriate stochastic models that take into account the long-term-persistence, such as the proposed 2D HK one (Eq. An additional result is that images of the same rock type at different scales, from micro to macro, suggest similar type of clustering, i.e. with a similar scaling parameter. In particular, the Hurst parameter is estimated (on average) around 0.75 ( A final remark is that while the variogram seems to be more appropriate for investigating the local behaviour in small-scale structures of a process, the climacogram is shown to perform more robustly in estimating large-scale properties, especially when a possible HK behaviour is of interest. This result is based on the variability quantification of both in several benchmark tests on HK processes using Monte-Carlo techniques. The Authors are grateful to the Editor A. Stein, the anonymous Guest Editor and the three anonymous Reviewers for the effort put in handling the review and for their fruitful comments and suggestions that helped us improve the paper.  The calculations for the 2D climacogram and 2D variogram estimators are implemented in Matlab and the corresponding scripts are available upon contact with the corresponding author.