Arundo donax L. has received much attention from researchers as biomass crop because of its vigorous growth, high productivity and low agronomic inputs requirements. Once harvested, the chopped biomass of A. donax L. may be stored for a variable period according to energy demand or logistic reasons. As consequence of storage, the chopped biomass may undergo processes of degradation that can compromise the energy yield of the product and the economic convenience of the cultivation.
                  In the view of preserving the A. donax L. biomass for producing different kind of energy, such as bio-ethanol, biogas, and fuel for combustion, the aim of this study was to investigate, in small-scale, different storage systems assessing the dynamics of storage and their effects on energy losses and fuel quality. The work has included different studies, such as (i) the monitoring of heat development, moisture content and dry matter losses, (ii) the analysis of polymeric compounds and combustion performances. Results indicate that according to the storage method adopted, the conservation of the product can be significantly influenced, with clear impacts on its energy potential. Polymeric composition changed after storage according to the method used, while energetic characteristics were not remarkably affected.The widespread commercialization of biofuels and biochemicals deriving from lignocellulosic biomass is strictly linked to the feedstock availability and production costs. Among perennial grasses, Since the 80s, in Europe, several studies regarding the According to the climatic conditions and geographical location, the potential dry matter yields are between 29 and 46 The bioethanol production from  The use of Interestingly, Bearing in mind the multi-purposing of Till now, few experiences on storage of To evaluate the changes in fuel quality and dry matter losses that occur during time, However, specific and comprehensive studies focused on The plants of The storage tests began on 13th of June and ended on 13th of July. Climatic data were recorded using a weather cab “SIAP-MICROS DA9000” certified by SIAN (National Informative System for Agriculture). The collected data were recorded during the entire storage period. These included parameters concerning precipitations, external temperature, and air humidity. Three different storage methods were tested outdoor ( In treatment A, the airflow was generated by two electrical engines manufactured by EuroMotors Italia Mod. 800CFM ( In the treatment B, the perforations were applied by drilling the walls of the bins in order to permit the air circulation. The holes had a diameter of 1 In treatment C, the open piles (conventional storage system) were built on two plastic platforms laid on two wood pallets of the same dimension. The pallets were utilized in order to isolate the material from the ground and facilitate the lifting and weighing of the biomass. The temperature inside all treatments was continuously monitored during the storage through two thermocouples “pt100” placed respectively at 15 and 30 After placing the green material, the setting of the entire systems took about twelve hours, so the temperature recording was delayed of this time frame. The moisture content of the material was measured according to the Two samples of biomass (about 200 In particular 0.5 The cellulose content in the starting material was calculated using the following equation as previously reported by In order to determine the combustion efficiency of this product and to evaluate the effects of storage on fuel quality, the principal reference parameters, such as ash content, heating value, elemental analysis, and ash fusion temperatures were determined before and after storage. Heating values (HHV and LHV on dry basis) were measured with isoperibolic calorimeter (Anton Paar 6400). All operations were carried out respecting the European standard ( In order to check differences with statistical significance among treatments, the values of dry matter losses and cellulose/lignin content were analyzed with the software PAST by using one-way Anova and Tukey’s tests The experiment started in the middle of June and ended in the middle of July. During the storage period, the mean daily temperatures were between 19.7 The inner temperature of the biomass is a reliable indicator of storage performance, since degradation reaction are exothermic and generate a marked temperature rise. The most noticeable difference among treatments was observed during the initial 10 days of storage ( The temperatures at the end of the cycle reached 30 The moisture content of the fresh biomass was about 59% ( Dry matter losses were consistently higher in open-air piles and unventilated bins than in ventilated one ( Effect of different storage systems was evaluated on the principal polymeric component of In particular, starting from 33%, the fraction of cellulose (dry matter basis) decreased in all the storage system tested, reaching 22% in the ventilated bin, 18% in unventilated bins, and only 12% in the open-air piles. However, the percentage variation of lignin and cellulose content can be misleading, because these values must be proportioned to the dry matter losses occurred during storage.  The temperature rise in stored green biomass is a reliable symptom of microbial activity. Indeed, the initial high temperature recorded in treatments B and C is a clear sign that bio-degradation processes were rapidly established. The thermocouples started to record twelve hours after the setting of the monitoring system, so this time frame was sufficient to reach 60 The use of ventilation in treatment A was applied with the scope to decrease the moisture content of the biomass. Probably, in this initial part of the test, the ventilation worked also as cooling systems, because the temperatures remained slightly above 20 Regarding moisture content, the initial value of the fresh biomass was about 58–59%. This value decreased significantly after 10 days in treatment A, while it slightly decreased in treatments B and C. This implies that the ventilation was very effective, even if the air was pumped in at intervals of 20 The persistence of moisture in the feedstock of unventilated bins and open-air piles has probably promoted a strong microbial degradation. In fact, the study of dry matter losses confirmed that degradation was much more evident in these treatments. On the other hand, in ventilated bins, the instantaneous evaporation of water lowered in short time the water content to values that did not meet the needs of micro-organisms, thus inhibiting the potential fermentation of biomass. Similar lab experiences were performed in Sweden on willow chips ( The study of the principal polymeric components showed that lignin content was little affected by storage respect cellulose in all treatments. However, taking into account the dry matter losses, we observed that also the lignin was in part affected by degradation. This fact was probably due to the presence of ligninolitic fungi, especially in treatments B and C. Considering the potential use of In the case of energy produced from combustion, the study of moisture content and dry matter losses showed that ventilation has remarkably influenced the energy potential of the biomass stored, allowing efficient drying and limiting degradation. The study of fuel quality revealed very low changes in energy characteristics of the biomass, but at the same time confirmed what is indicated in the available literature ( Finally, the last observation regards the relation between C and lignin/cellulose content. The study showed that the changes occurred in lignin and cellulose composition at The aim of this study was to investigate different storage systems and their effects on energy losses and fuel quality. The work showed that dry matter losses of the biomass can be partially controlled by the conservation system used in the post harvesting phase. Indeed, ventilation and climatic factors have respectively influenced in a positive and in a negative way the storage performance of the biomass. The study demonstrated also that cellulose is the polymeric component that suffered much more the storage, reducing significantly, according to the system used, the bio-energy potential of the product (bio-ethanol and biogas production). Finally, about combustion, the storage system can significantly influence the energy yield without changing important fuel quality parameters such as heating value and ash content. This work was made possible thanks to OPTIMA and FIBRA European projects, financed by