Purpose
                  Fractures of the tibial eminence can be treated arthroscopically. Numerous ways to attach an anterior cruciate ligament avulsion from the tibial eminence have been designed. This report describes a new physis-sparing reduction and fixation technique using an anchor passing nonabsorbable braided sutures through the substance of the anterior cruciate ligament, holding the avulsed bone fragment by tying a locking knot. This study was performed to evaluate a consecutive group of patients who underwent reduction and fixation of tibial avulsion fractures fixed with an anchor with sutures.
               
                  Methods
                  The evaluation was performed by use of objective and subjective International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) scores, KT-1000 measurement (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA), Lachman and pivot-shift tests, and Lysholm score.
               
                  Results
                  The global IKDC objective score was normal (A) in 4 knees and nearly normal (B) in 3, without extension or flexion limitations. The mean IKDC subjective score was 92 out of 100 (range, 86 to 98). The results of the anterior drawer, Lachman, and pivot-shift tests were negative. The mean Lysholm score improved from 29 to 94. The mean side-to-side difference in anterior tibial translation was 2 mm (range, 1 to 3 mm).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Arthroscopic stabilization by use of an anchor with sutures was possible in all cases of tibial spine fracture. We were able to obtain excellent results in this series using this fixation method.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic case series.Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) avulsion from the tibial eminence or fracture of the tibial eminence has been well described in the literature and is more common in children and adolescents. Immediate anatomic reduction and fixation of the fragments are widely recommended for type III and type IV displaced fractures as classified by Meyers and McKeever The purpose of this study was to evaluate a consecutive group of 7 patients who underwent reduction and fixation of tibial avulsion fractures fixed with an anchor with sutures. Seven consecutive patients underwent arthroscopic treatment of displaced tibial spine fractures at the orthopaedic department of our institution between June 2004 and January 2007. There were 5 male and 2 female patients with ages ranging from 7 to 20 years (mean, 11.8 years). The left knee was involved in 4 cases and the right in 3. All patients but 1 had open physes. The patient characteristics are outlined in Diagnostic routine anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the knees showed the avulsion fracture ( All patients underwent the described surgical arthroscopic technique within 12 days after trauma. A leg holder is used to allow free hanging of the leg at about 90째 of flexion. The lower limb is exsanguinated, and a pneumatic tourniquet is inflated. A standard anterolateral visual portal and anteromedial working portal are established, and complete examination of the joint is performed. Joint visualization is enhanced by adequate debridement and shaving of blood clots. Hematoma debridement and exposure of the fracture site with a shaver comprise the first step. The anatomic condition and integrity of the ACL are carefully confirmed. Interposed tissue, such as fat pad, fracture debris, or clots, and the posterior part of the transverse ligament are removed so that the avulsed bone fragment can be easily reduced in its bony bed. Reduction of the tibial fragment with a probe is performed, and optional fragment fixation with a 1.2- to 1.4-mm K-wire can be done. This step is performed through a patellar tendon or medial parapatellar tendon approach under direct arthroscopic vision. For the definitive fixation, we use a titanium or bioabsorbable anchor (Corkscrew or Bio-Corkscrew; Arthrex, Naples, FL) loaded with 2 strands of No. 2 braided polyester suture (Ethibond [Ethicon, Somerville, NJ] or FiberWire [Arthrex]). After introduction of a clear cannula through the anteromedial portal, the anchor is placed 2 to 3 mm in front of the fracture rim, not through the bony fragment. The best alignment of the anchor is 45째 in the frontal plane, avoiding introducing the implant too vertically. Angulation of the anchor reduces the risk of suture pullout and growth plate damage. The anchor does not go through the physes when this angulation is used. A straight or curved suture hook or suture retriever is loaded with one of the suture strands. The instrument is pushed through the more anterior part of the ACL just above its tibial insertion, from the medial direction, leaving the suture on the lateral surface of the ACL. With a suture grasper, the suture is retrieved through the cannula. At this point, the knee is flexed between 20째 and 45째 to relax the more anterior fibers of the ACL, and a sliding knot is made externally and slid inside toward the cannula with a knot pusher. An additional 2 or 3 half-hitch knots with alternating posts on reverse throws are made ( We only included patients with at least 6 months' follow-up (range, 6 to 24 months). Two patients with less than 6 months' follow-up were excluded. Subjective outcome was obtained by use of the Lysholm score and International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) subjective questionnaire. The patients were clinically evaluated by use of the IKDC objective form. For evaluation of anterior tibial translation, measurement of the side-to-side difference at maximum manual force was performed with the KT-1000 arthrometer (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA). The mean Lysholm score improved from 29 to 94. The global IKDC objective score was normal (A) in 4 knees and nearly normal (B) in 3, without extension or flexion limitations. The mean IKDC subjective score was 92 out of 100 (range, 86 to 98). At last follow-up, the results of the anterior drawer, Lachman, and pivot-shift tests were negative. The mean side-to-side difference in anterior tibial translation was 2 mm (range, 1 to 3 mm). All of the patients subsequently returned to their preinjury activity levels. Avulsion fractures of the ACL are less frequent than tears of the ACL ligament and are more common in children than in adults. Most of the published techniques violate the growth plate in children. The described technique avoids damage to the open physes, so it can be used safely in pediatric and adult populations. The sutures are used to reduce and also dynamically pull down the avulsed fragment, tightening the ACL during motion of the knee as a result of its tension-band behavior. Our study had some limitations, including a short follow-up. Moreover, the sample size was small, and there are no prospective data regarding this type of treatment in the literature. On the other hand, the study has some strengths. A single surgeon used a standardized surgical technique in a consecutive series of patients with tibial eminence avulsion fractures with the same fixation method. Arthroscopic stabilization was possible in all cases of tibial spine fracture. We were able to obtain excellent results in this series using this method. The described technique appears to yield satisfactory results compared with the reports of other techniques and has the potential advantage of not violating the growth plate. Our experience in 7 patients indicates that our arthroscopic technique using an anchor with sutures is another way to provide secure fixation of fracture fragments and can be applied in both skeletally immature patients and skeletally mature patients.