Background
                  Extensive femoral bone loss poses a challenge in revision total hip arthroplasty (rTHA). Many techniques have been developed to address this problem including fully porous cylindrical stems, impaction bone grafting, and cementation of long stems, which have had varied success. Modular tapered fluted femoral stems (MTFS) show favorable results. We sought to determine the minimum 2-year radiographic and clinical performance of MTFS in rTHA in a population with extensive proximal femoral bone loss.
               
                  Methods
                  Our clinical database was queried retrospectively for all patients who underwent rTHA with an MTFS. We included patients with Paprosky 3 and 4 femoral bone loss and patients with Vancouver B2 and B3 periprosthetic femur fractures. Patients without 2-year follow-up were invited to return to clinic for X-ray evaluation and to complete clinical questionnaires. We assessed distance of stem subsidence and presence of stem fixation on final X-ray. We recorded all-cause revision and survival of the stem at final follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  One hundred twenty-nine patients were available for follow-up. Average follow-up time was 3.75 years. One hundred twenty-two stems (95%) remained in place at final follow-up. Median subsidence was 1.4 mm (range 0-21). All-cause revision rate was 16.3% (21 patients). Of the hips revised, 10 were for instability, 6 for infection, 1 for aseptic loosening, and 1 for periprosthetic femur fracture. Three were revised for other reasons. The stem was revised in 7 patients (5.4%), and the most common reason for stem revision was infection (5 patients). The other 2 stems were revised for aseptic loosening in a Paprosky 4 femur and periprosthetic femur fracture. Survival of tapered modular fluted stems with aseptic failure as an endpoint was 98.4%. The mean Hip disability and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score, Joint Replacement score at final follow-up was 73, and mean Veterans Rand 12 item health survey physical and mental scores were 32.8 and 52.2, respectively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In patients with Paprosky 3, 4 femoral defects or Vancouver type B2, B3 fractures, modular tapered fluted stems for femoral revision show excellent outcomes at minimum 2-year follow-up.Proximal femoral bone loss in the setting of femoral revision poses a significant challenge for clinicians [ Several solutions for femoral revision have been proposed over the last 3 decades with mixed results. Cemented revision stems [ Modular tapered fluted femoral stems (MTFS) have gained popularity recently. MTFS has the ability to bypass proximal femoral defects allowing for distal fixation in the setting of proximal femoral osteolysis and periprosthetic femur fracture [ After obtaining Institutional Review Board approval, we performed a retrospective case series study to assess radiographic and clinical outcomes of MTFS for femoral revision in the setting of extensive proximal femoral bone loss or Vancouver type B2, B3 fractures. Patients were identified in our institutional database based on revision femoral stem design utilized during revision THA. We reviewed the records of 370 femoral revisions using a tapered modular fluted femoral stem in our institutional database between the years 2003 and 2015. Patients were included in the study if they were 18 years of age or older, underwent revision THA of at least 1 component utilizing an MTFS, and had at least 2 years of follow-up. Patients must have had at least Paprosky 3 femoral bone loss, or a Vancouver B2 or B3 periprosthetic femur fracture. Patients without 2-year follow-up were contacted by telephone for a clinical survey and for an invitation to return to clinic for X-rays. Patients were excluded from the study for whom follow-up was less than 2 years (115 patients), who declined participation in the study (8 patients), were confirmed deceased prior to minimum follow-up (29 patients), had active infection at the time of revision (2 patients), and had Paprosky 2 or lower femoral bone loss (87 patients). Patients in the study had revision with one of the following systems: DePuy ReClaim (Warsaw, IN), Stryker Restoration Modular (Kalamazoo, MI), Link MP (Rockaway, NJ), and Smith and Nephew RedApt (London, UK). For periprosthetic fractures, the existing stem was removed. If necessary, an osteotomy was performed proximally to aid in exposure of the stem. If cement was present, it was removed with Moreland cement removal instruments prior to preparation for the revision stem. For aseptic stem revisions, an extended trochanteric osteotomy was utilized if the existing stem was not able to be removed safely from above. A prophylactic Luque wire was placed around the distal diaphysis. The distal diaphysis was then reamed on power or by hand according to the surgeon’s preference to an appropriate fit. Distal stem length was chosen to maximize distal diaphyseal fixation. The reamer or trial was left in place to prepare for and choose the appropriate body segment length, offset, and rotation. Trial reduction allowed fine-tuning of these parameters. The acetabular component and liner were not revised unless necessary. Upon insertion of final components, the proximal femoral fracture or osteotomy segment was reduced around the stem and body with Luque wires. Cancellous and strut allograft was not routinely utilized. Qualifying patients were entered into REDCap ( The primary outcome analyzed was retention of the stem at final follow-up. We recorded stem revisions, revision of any component, and the primary indication for the revision. We reviewed radiographs of all patients with minimum 2-year follow-up. Two observers reviewed all radiographs. All surgeries were evaluated with an immediate postoperative X-ray, which served as the baseline for comparison. Serial X-rays taken in clinic were evaluated for subsidence and loosening. We measured distance of subsidence using the head ball size to calculate the magnification factor. Femoral migration was assessed on digital radiographs using a femoral bone reference point and a prosthesis reference point in initial and final images, as described by Malchau et al [ Standard descriptive statistics were calculated. Categorical data were described with frequency and percentages, and chi-squared or Fisher’s exact tests were used to determine statistical significance. Age and BMI were not normally distributed. Therefore they were described using median and range, and Wilcoxon or Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to determine statistical significance. A significant level of 0.05 was established a priori. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS version 9.4 (Carey, NC). One hundred twenty-nine patients were available for follow-up. Average age at the time of surgery was 71 (20-92) years. In the cohort, 71 (55%) were female and 58 (45%) were male. Average BMI of the patients in the cohort was 27.4 kg/m Median subsidence was 1.4 mm (range 0-21) ( One hundred twenty-two stems (94.6%) remained in place at final follow-up. All-cause revision rate was 16% (21 patients). Of the hips revised, 10 were for instability, 6 for infection, 1 for aseptic loosening, and 1 for periprosthetic femur fracture. Three were revised for other reasons. The stem was revised in 7 patients (5.4%), and the most common reason for stem revision was infection (5 patients) ( This study aimed to determine the re-revision rate of MTFS for femoral revision in Paprosky 3, 4 defects and Vancouver B2, B3 fractures at minimum 2-year follow-up. Second, we aimed to measure subsidence and osseointegration after revision. Femoral revision in THA is becoming increasingly common, owing to the aging population, the increasing number of THA performed annually, and the trend toward consideration of a younger population for THA [ Severe femoral bone loss poses a formidable challenge for orthopedic surgeons in revision THA [ The use of MTFS has gained popularity in femoral revision over the last 2 decades, with multiple studies showing greater than 93% survival at mid-term follow-up [ The versatility of the MTFS design is notable, with a wide range of problems for which this stem has demonstrated excellent outcomes. Periprosthetic femoral fracture treatment is challenging because of compromised proximal femoral bone. The MTFS has demonstrated greater than 95% survivorship in Vancouver B2 and B3 periprosthetic femur fractures, with infrequent subsidence [ Perhaps the most important feature of the MTFS design is its proven track record in the presence of significant proximal femoral bone loss. Amanatullah et al followed 92 femoral revisions with stringent inclusion criteria evaluating only Paprosky III and IV femoral bone defects and Vancouver B3 fractures at an average of 6.4 years of follow-up. Stem retention at final follow-up was 97%, with only 4 stem revisions (3 infections, 1 subsidence). Stem survival with aseptic failure as an endpoint was 99%. Our study included 129 patients with Paprosky 3 or 4 femurs or Vancouver B2 or B3 periprosthetic femur fractures who were analyzed at 2-12 years of follow-up. Consistent with previous studies, stem retention was 95% at final follow-up, and the most common cause of stem revision was infection (5%), and stem retention with aseptic failure as the endpoint was 98.4%. Also similar to the findings reported by Amanatullah et al in which the most common postoperative complication was instability, the most frequent indication for reoperation in our study was instability (7.6%). Finally, clinical scores in our cohort were also very good with an average HOOS JR score at final follow-up of 73.2 and mean VR-12 physical score 32.8 and mental score 52.2. Although the present study represents one of the largest to date on the use of MTFS for femoral revision in the setting of severe bone loss, it is not without limitations. These included the retrospective nature of this study, which has potential to introduce bias. With regard to radiographic analysis, radiostereometric analysis was not performed to calculate precise subsidence. Finally, the advanced age and poor health of patients who present with significant bone loss limits complete follow-up. In conclusion, femoral revision in the setting of Paprosky 3 and 4 femoral bone loss and Vancouver B2 and B3 periprosthetic fractures represents a challenging clinical scenario in which proximal femoral bone is not available for revision stem fixation. Our results provide further support in a large population with extensive proximal femoral bone loss that modular tapered fluted stems for femoral revision show favorable outcomes at minimum 2-year follow-up. 