Recovery of manganese from electric arc furnace dust (EAFD) of a ferromanganese production unit was investigated using reductive leaching in sulfuric acid (H2SO4). Three different reducing reagents, oxalic acid, hydrogen peroxide and glucose, were tested. Effect of different leaching parameters on the leaching and separation selectivity of manganese from iron was investigated. Iron concentration in solution was also determined, since iron was the major contaminant in the leach liquor. From the results complete leaching of manganese was achieved at 0.31mol/L oxalic acid concentration, 2mol/L H2SO4, a liquid/solid ratio of 30/1 at 70°C and with 90min leaching time.Manganese is a strategic metal in many fields such as steel production, preparation of dietary additives, non-ferrous alloys, fertilizers and carbon–zinc batteries. Electric arc furnace dust of ferromanganese production units is formed from volatiles and fines collected during wet scrubbing of the off-gas from manganese alloy smelting furnaces. Storage of EAFD presents a long-term environmental concern. Recently, studies have been done to develop a commercial hydrometallurgical process to recover manganese from low-grade manganese ore and secondary sources, such as spent alkaline batteries ( Sulfuric acid (98% pure), Eirochrom black T, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), hydrogen peroxide (30% pure, 1.1 A homogenized sample of EAFD was obtained from Navid Manganese Company, Iran. Chemical analysis was carried out using a Perkin–Elmer 2100 atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS) for Zn, Pb, Cu, Ni, Ca, and Mg. The elements of Si, Fe, Al, Ti and Mn were analyzed by a UV-3100S Shimadzu ultra violet spectroscopy (UV). The phases in the sample were determined using X-ray diffraction (XRD), a Philips appliance model PW 1730, using Co The chemical composition of the sample was 24.64% Mn, 10.08% Fe, 6.47% Si, 5.87% Ca, 2.83% Al, 0.34% Mg, 0.16% Ti, 0.05% Pb, 0.04% Zn, 0.01% Cu and >0.01% Ni. Based on the XRD analysis, the major phases in the sample were manganese dioxide (MnO Before acid leaching, samples were washed with distilled water at room temperature for 30 Leaching experiments were carried out in a 1000 Both the leach residues produced from acid leaching by 2  In order to obtain a higher recovery of manganese, reductant reagents were added to the solution.   As it is shown in The effect of leaching time was also studied. At above ca. 4  Recovery of manganese and iron increased with an increase in the sulfuric acid concentration. Leaching of manganese is not complete in the absence of reducing reagents. Leaching recovery of manganese increased in the presence of oxalic acid. In this system, oxalic acid and hydrogen peroxide act almost similar; however, glucose has a lower effect. Leaching time has no effect on Mn recovery at above ca. 4 Complete leaching of manganese was achieved at 0.31