In this work, selective surface magnetization technology was employed to separate pentlandite from serpentine by adding fine magnetite coating on pentlandite surfaces, which was different from the conventional flotation. EDLVO (Extended Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek) theory calculations indicate that under a weak external magnetic field of 4.77kAm−1. Interactions between magnetite and pentlandite were obviously stronger than that between magnetite and serpentine. Therefore, fine magnetite fractions selectively adhered to pentlandite surfaces and enhanced its surfaces' magnetism. The above predication was well confirmed by the magnetic coating and magnetic separation tests with adding 3% magnetite fines, at a magnetic field intensity of 200kAm−1. SEM-EDS analyses show that magnetite particles were preferentially adsorbed onto pentlandite instead of serpentine. VSM (vibrating sample magnetometer) measurements further confirm that the magnetism of magnetic products (pentlandite) was strongly enhanced.In nature, sulphide ores and laterites are the major sources of Ni metal. Although about 70% of nickel resources are contained in laterites, only 40% of the world's nickel production comes from these ores. This is because nickel in laterites is often finely disseminated in various minerals (goethite, garnierite, serpentine, cronstedtite, limonite, harzburgite, and dunite and so on) in very fine size (about − In the past 10 At present, the magnetic coating technology has been used widely in many fields of the treatment of effluent, the separation of biological cells, coal desulphurization, and mineral processing The selective adsorption of fine magnetic fractions on surfaces of minerals are controlled by the total interaction energy between the particles of the suspension. In case of a net repulsive interaction, the particles will tend to be prevented from absorbing and hence no magnetic coating occurs. In contrast, a net attractive interaction between minerals and magnetite will favor conglutination and produce a coating of the magnetite on the mineral surface. The dominating interactions between particles are mainly determined by the Van-Der-Waals interactions ( The magnitude of the above interactions (  The interaction between spherical mineral particles is calculated according to the following expression. The critical parameter determining the value of the Van-Der-Waals interaction is the Hamaker constant. For mineral particles in the deionized water, the calculation formula is as follows: The interaction between a spherical particle and a layered particle is usually determined by the following equation: It is must be noted that the particle size of magnetite mineral is extremely fine (less than 10  The interaction between two different spherical particles has been described by Hogg et al. as follows: The interaction between a spherical particle and a platelike particle is usually determined by the following equation: The above Eqs.  Wang et al. proposed the following equation for the magnetic interaction between magnetite and weakly magnetic minerals (such as hematite, pentlandite) due to the remanent magnetization of magnetite, which is originated by the ambient geomagnetic field, when there is no external magnetic field The interaction between two magnetic mineral particles was deduced by Song The pentlandite, serpentine, and magnetite samples were obtained from Jinchuan, Xiuyan, and Nanfen in China, respectively. The detailed preparation methods and properties of each pure minerals were described in another literature The XRD patterns and chemical multi-element analyses of serpentine are demonstrated in The XRD patterns and chemical multi-element analyses of magnetite are listed in Magnetic coating tests were carried out in a 200 The coated suspension was subjected to the wet high intensity magnetic separator (XCSQ-50 Magnetite fractions were added to the pentlandite and serpentine suspensions, respectively, to coat the minerals surfaces and then separated by the magnetic separator. Both the concentrates obtained and the non-magnetic products were observed by SEM using a Zeiss Ultra Plus scanning electron microscope. For magnetic properties, the magnetic measurement was carried out by vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, JDAW-2000D) at room temperature with an applied magnetic field of 1225 In this study, extremely fine magnetite fractions were chosen as the magnetic seed. So it was assumed to be a small sphere. Because serpentine is a phyllosilicate mineral, the interaction between them was calculated by Eqs. As seen in Other than the Van-der-Waals interaction As shown in Recoveries of single minerals (pentlandite and serpentine) are summarized in From It is well known that pH mainly affects the solubility of minerals or reagents and further affects the washability of minerals. Therefore, the appropriate pH is necessary for the mineral processing, which has been confirmed by different magnetic coating tests. Karapinar It can be seen that the recovery of pentlandite tended to increase with increasing pH in the acidic conditions. Especially, the recovery of pentlandite was more than 90% at pH On the basis of the above results, the magnetic coating tests were carried out with the mixed minerals. Serpentine and pentlandite were mixed by 2:1 (mass ratio, the total mass was 15 It can be evidently seen from Results from calculations of DLVO theory and magnetic coating tests have shown that pentlandite obtained a much stronger magnetic coating, and hence enhanced its magnetic property, and then was separated from serpentine minerals by magnetic separation. Therefore, the SEM study was undertaken to verify the selective coating of magnetite between pentlandite and serpentine minerals. Results are presented in The images in  The specific magnetization and susceptibility of pentlandite, serpentine, magnetic and non-magnetic products were further measured using the vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) and magnetization curves were obtained as shown in  From In this study, surface magnetization of pentlandite and serpentine mixtures was discussed by adding magnetite fines. The samples and products were characterized by XRD, SEM-EDS, and VSM and interactions between minerals and magnetite were calculated by EDLVO theory. SEM-EDS and VSM results proved small quantities of magnetite fines selectively absorbed on the surfaces of pentlandite and the concentrate of pentlandite from magnetic separation exhibited the typical magnetism increase. Calculations of DLVO theory demonstrate that the interaction of pentlandtie-magnetite was stronger than that of serpentine-magnetite due to the existing the magnetic interaction between them. Therefore, this present study provides an alternative separation technology for pentlandite and serpentine minerals with the magnetic separation through adding the magnetite fines under the applied magnetic field of 4.77 This study was financially supported by the