Extractive metallurgy covers a huge range of mechanical and chemical processes, some of which date back several thousand years. In the broadest sense, coordination chemistry is involved in the majority of steps prior to the isolation of a pure metal because the physical properties and relative stabilities of metal compounds relate to the nature and disposition of ligands in the metal coordination spheres. This applies both to This review will focus on processes which depend on the selection or design of ligands to enhance the effectiveness of the four unit operations listed above. In general, the application of such ligands relates to equilibria involving distribution of a metal between two phases. Liquid–liquid distributions form the basis of solvent extraction and related processes, and smelting processes. Liquid–solid distributions are involved in ion-exchange and other adsorption-based separation processes, separation processes based on crystallization or precipitation, flotation processes for ore dressing, and smelting processes. Examples of the formation of volatile metal compounds or complexes leading to separations based on gas–liquid and gas–solid distribution are much rarer. Since the last review in Another factor which has increased the applications of coordination chemistry to extractive metallurgy since the mid-1980s is the emergence of hydrometallurgy as an alternative to pyrometallurgy in the recovery of base metals. The proven robustness of the hydrometallurgical process involving solvent extraction in the nuclear industries One of the most important roles of coordination chemistry in hydrometallurgical processes is to effect the separation and concentration of the target metal. The design of metal complexing agents with the appropriate “strength” and selectivity to meet the requirements of the front-end of the flowsheet, leaching, and the back-end, reduction to generate pure metal ( In the sections which follow processes based on metal complex formation are described in the order they occur in the flowsheets in mineral processing, leaching, separation and concentration, and reduction. The application of these methods is described in some detail for recovery of base metals and platinum group metals in Natural mineral deposits are usually heterogeneous mixtures of solid materials that require crushing and grinding to liberate the minerals containing the metal values. Such operations often represents a sizeable fraction of the total capital and energy costs of metal recovery. One of the potential advantages of hydrometallurgical routes for metal recovery is that it is sometimes possible to carry out heap leaching on ores which have not had to be milled, for example in the recovery of copper from oxidic or transition ores (see Separation of milled solid materials is usually based on differences in their physical properties. Of the various techniques to obtain ore “concentrates,” those of froth flotation and agglomeration exploit differences in surface activities, which in many cases appear to involve the formation of complexes at the surface of the mineral particles. Separation by froth flotation ( Some of the more commonly used types of collector are listed in Details of the structures of complexes formed at the surface of the ore particles are difficult to obtain, Several reviews on ore processing by flotation are available. Depressants are used to make materials less floatable, and again have been used for some time. Several of the ligating functions in the collectors shown in Leaching is the primary process in hydrometallurgy whereby the metal values of a solid metal-bearing material are transferred into an aqueous solution by the action of a lixiviant. Typically, leaching is applied to ores, spent catalysts, pyrometallurgically derived intermediates, metal scraps, and by-products from metal refining. Processes generally fall into two categories, those in which the formal oxidation state of the metal remains unchanged and those where dissolution is accompanied by a redox process. In addition to water molecules the coordination chemistry of leaching generally involves simple inorganic anionic ligands, ammonia, or acetonitrile. Many of the well-established processes (see Bioleaching, particularly of sulfidic ores, has received much attention since the early 1980s. The conditions needed and mechanisms for such processes have been reviewed. Microbial processes involve complete oxidation of sulfide to sulfate, e.g., There are some examples of commercially successful bioleaching operations for copper, uranium, and gold, In both bio- and “inorganic”-leaching processes, metal complex formation at the surface of mineral particles being leached is often accompanied by catalytic redox reactions which labilize the metal ions, leading to complicated reaction sequences. An understanding of these is important for the design and operation of processes which minimize the formation of toxic by-products, are selective and achieve a high recovery of the desired metal, operate at a reasonable rate and produce pregnant leach solutions suitable for downstream processing. In the sections which follow the chemistry of leaching processes is described where the efficacy of the process is dependent on strong, selective, and rapid complex formation and where a knowledge of the composition of streams is important for understanding the downstream “separation and concentration” steps which involve coordination chemistry ( It has been more than a hundred years since MacArthur and Forrest developed a process for the leaching of gold based upon the use of an alkaline cyanide solution. The dissolution of gold in its native form by cyanidation involves oxidation to Au Species, including cyanide, that bind strongly to the surfaces of gold-bearing materials result in passivation and, when high-purity cyanide solutions are used, gold dissolution is neglible, Sulfide is a well-known passivating species, and recently Jeffrey The toxicity of cyanide has led to the development of alternative lixiviants for gold and silver; see also Dissolution is depressed by the build-up of sulfur-containing coatings on the ore particles. The coordination chemistry of such an ammonia–thiosulfate–copper–gold system is complicated. Its interpretation must take into account the influence of ligands on the Cu It is believed that copper acts as the oxidant in these systems, effecting the dissolution of gold as an ammine complex, The ammonia stabilizes Cu Reagent losses of this type need to be minimized if the technology is to achieve wide application. Sulfidic matrices often require an oxidative pre-treatment prior to leaching the gold (see above). Bio-oxidative processes to achieve this usually generate acidic aqueous phases which must be neutralized prior to cyanidation. To avoid this neutralization step, lixiviants such as thiourea have been considered, which can be used in acidic media. Stable cationic complexes of Au Oxidation of thiourea occurs fairly rapidly with H Leaching with chlorine in acidic media proceeds via a Au A review of processes for leaching of base metals from their ores has appeared recently. Sulfate process streams are commonly used in metal recovery because they are readily derived by leaching with sulfuric acid or by oxidation of sulfidic ores. Metal recovery from such streams rarely involves the formation of metal sulfate complexes because the sulfate ion is a weak ligand for base metal cations and consequently acidic ion exchange extractants are commonly employed (see Following the success of the Moa Bay plant in Cuba where commercial acid pressure leaching of limonitic ores has been practiced since the 1950s, Oxidative pressure acid leaching is also applied to copper–nickel mattes. Nickel recoveries of >99% are obtained when leaching is carried out at 135–160 Heap leaching of copper oxides and transition ores and acid/neutral leaching of zinc calcine are well-established processes to generate the feed solutions for the hydrometallurgical recovery of these metals. Different approaches are needed for the dissolution of oxides, silicates, and sulfides. Ammoniacal leaching is typically applied to oxidic nickel-bearing materials that have been subjected to a “reductive roast,” which converts the cobalt and nickel present to their metallic form (or as ferro-alloys) and most of the iron to Fe Ammoniacal leaching of chalcocite ores Some of the types of equilibria involved in the unit operations Selective crystallization, e.g., removal of PbCl Selective precipitation, e.g., the sequential separation of CuS and ZnS, followed by co-precipitation of CoS and NiS is achieved in the Outokumpu process by the generation of H Selective reduction, e.g., cementation of copper by addition of scrap iron to aqueous solutions of Cu Selective adsorption of ions or complexes onto solid materials, e.g., cyanogold(I) complexes onto activated carbon (see Selective transfer of ions or complexes into water-immiscible phases, e.g., the solvent extraction of uranyl nitrate into tri-butyl phosphate. This technology lends itself to continuous, rather than batch, processing and has been proven robust since first applied for the extraction of uranium in the early 1940s.   Often, the cationic component of the ion pair is generated by the protonation of an organic base, e.g.,   Whilst this classification is useful in giving an indication of the types of chemical changes which occur at the metal centers, it oversimplifies the situation in many cases. For example, changes in the solvation spheres of anionic species in both (ii) and (iii) are also very important in defining the free energies of extraction. Recently, reagents have been used which operate as both cation and anion exchangers, providing binding sites in organic solvents for both components of a metal salt, either by mixing extractants (binary systems) The sections below review the coordination chemistry of the most important classes of extractants used commercially. Particular attention is paid to the importance of secondary bonding between extractant components. This facilitates the assembly of ligating packages which match the coordination requirements of particular metal cations or their complexes and enhances both the selectivity and “strength” of extraction. Hydrogen bonding between ligands—e.g., esters of phosphorus(V) acids (see The history and chemistry of the hydroxy-oxime extractants which were originally developed for Cu recovery has been extensively reviewed. All commercial activity is currently based on the phenolic-oximes. A convenient Mg-catalyzed process for the manufacture of parent salicylaldehydes has been developed. Extraction equilibria based on the “pH-swing” process In the solid state, H-bonding between the oxime OH groups and phenolate oxygen atoms Interactions of the monomeric, dimeric, or other forms of the extractant with a modifier (Y) are also important in interpreting extraction equilibria, All the commonly used extractants of this type are phosphorus(V) acid derivatives containing at least one P–OH or P–SH group ( The bite angle defined by such eight-membered For divalent metals which readily form tetrahedral complexes and for trivalent metals which show a preference for octahedral donor sets, neutral D2EHPA complexes are formed with 4:1 and 6:1 ligand:metal stoichiometries respectively, Although the lanthanide cations most commonly give complexes with coordination numbers of 8 or 9, the [ML Whilst carboxylic acids are readily available and inexpensive, they are relatively weak extractants and have not found much use in the recovery of base metals until recently when Versatic 10 has been piloted for the separation of Ni from Mn and Mg (Section 9.17.5.4). As with the phosphorus(V) acid extractants, the propensity for association leads to substantial levels of solvation of caboxylato complexes by neutral carboxylic acid molecules and to the formation of polynuclear complexes. Extraction can be represented by the general equation: The applications of hydrophobic amine salts (see An understanding of the interactions in ion-pairs, e.g., a combination of electrostatic and hydrogen bonding in species such as [R A diverse range of neutral organic molecules has been used to stabilize or to enhance the solubilities of neutral metal-containing entities in an organic phase. Some examples of commercial significance are listed in The application of solvent extraction to copper recovery has been a major growth area since the last review of this series. The commercial success of this technology is based on the very good materials balance which applies when processing oxidic ores, using the phenolic oxime “pH-swing” extractants ( The reagent suppliers provide loading and stripping isotherm data, which allow metallurgists to select appropriate reagents and to design circuits with the appropriate numbers and configurations of extraction and stripping stages. The key separation achieved by the phenolic oxime reagents is copper from iron, which is often present in comparable or higher concentrations in pregnant leach solutions. The intrinsic selectivity for Cu over Fe shown by both the aldoxime and ketoxime extractants is high, Commissioning new oxime extraction plants has been driven by major developments in leaching technologies— An alternative strategy to treat feed solutions from leaching processes which do not consume acid is to use extractants which transport metal Oxidative leaching of sulfidic ores with ferric chloride generates elemental sulfur, avoiding the liberation of SO The extraction equilibrium in the CUPREX process is dependent on the activity of Cl Systematic studies As Cu The low activity of water in these feed solutions ensures that activity of proton is high in acidic solutions. In addition to the problem this creates with regard to the corrosiveness, there is a tendency for even the very weakly basic pyridine nitrogen in CLX50 ( The phenolic oxime reagents ( There has been much development of processes to electrowin Cu from chloride media, Ammoniacal leaching of chalcocite ores The pH of the lixiviant and the leach conditions are such that very little of the iron present in the ores and only small quantities of other transition metals are transferred to the pregnant leach solution, which typically has a composition of ca. 280 Acylpyrazolones ( Ni and Cu in ammoniacal feeds can be effectively separated by quantitative co-extraction with the phenolic oxime LIX 84 ( The diverse range of applications of copper in different alloys and products presents challenging problems for recycling. Approximately 80% of Zn production involves hydrometallurgy, in which roasted sulfide concentrates are dissolved in sulfuric acid. The use of D2EHPA to purify and concentrate ZnSO Anglo America's Skorpion project As a consequence of D2EHPA's high affinity for Fe The soft S Selective extraction of zinc from chloride solutions is required for recovery from primary sources via new sulfide ore leaching technology ( The increased use of galvanized steel has required the development of technology to separate and recycle zinc and iron. The use or safe disposal of the iron residues from zinc production (see As in primary recovery the slow introduction of new technology to recover zinc, which nearly always requires a separation from iron, appears to be related to the relatively low market value of this metal. The decade 1990–2000 has seen a large volume of research on the application of solvent extraction of nickel, Apart from bringing pressure technology into the mainstream, these plants have produced a pool of engineering and equipment designing expertise, which can be applied to laterites projects. More than 90% of the nickel and cobalt in laterite ores (1.0–1.6% nickel) can readily be leached by sulfuric acid at ≥240 The most extensively investigated reagents for the recovery of nickel and cobalt from acidic media have been the organophosphorus acids. The use of di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) to separate Co from Ni and other metals has been the subject of many fundamental investigations and was reviewed in D2EHPA is thus a poor extractant for nickel as this shows a preference for a For cobalt it is proposed that both tetrahedral and octahedral forms exist in equilibrium. The entropy contribution arising from the dissociation of the octahedral cobalt complex to give the tetrahedral form has been exploited industrially to enhance the separation of cobalt from nickel by performing the separation at elevated temperatures. More recently, reagents containing phosphonic acid, phosphinic acid, and thio-phosphinic acids have been the subjects of considerable attention. The phosphinic acid reagent Cyanex 272 exhibits even greater selectivity for cobalt. It is currently used in several commercial operations and has been the subject of much fundamental research. Replacing alkoxy with alkyl groups results in an increase in the R–P–R′, bond angle. This larger bond angle in the phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) will lead to greater steric hindrance between the equatorial and axial ligands in an octahedral complex, but is assumed to have less effect upon a tetrahedral complex and is thus consistent with the observed increased selectivity for cobalt over nickel along the sequence D2EHPA, PC-88A, Cyanex 272. The electron density of the oxygen atoms of the reagents also plays a role in determining their strength/selectivity ( Phosphorus acids containing P Like Cyanex 272 they exhibit a preference for Co Because the organophosphorus reagents DE2HPA, PC-88A, and Cyanex 272 are selective for Ca The stoichiometry of Versatic 10 Ni extraction has been the subject of much investigation. Distribution data for the extraction of nickel from aqueous solution is consistent with the generalized equilibrium. The H Effective protocols have also been developed for the extraction of nickel and cobalt from chloride and ammoniacal process streams derived from leaching sulfidic ores or mattes. The greater thermodynamic stability of the Co The anionic exchange reagents commonly employed in these processes are tris-alkyl ammonium cations, generally dissolved in an aromatic diluent such as xylene. Tris-isooctylamine has been used at Falconbridge Nikkelverk in Kristiandsand, Norway for the purification of solutions derived from HCl leaching of Ni It is essential in processes which employ such reagents to effect Co/Ni separation that metals such as Fe Hydrochloric acid is a very effective lixiviant for nickel/cobalt laterites. Ammoniacal leaching has been used for some time to process nickel- and cobalt-containing materials from a wide range of sources under oxidative conditions, This use of phenolic oximes to achieve the separation of Ni A problem encountered with the use of the phenolic oximes in Ni recovery from ammoniacal solution is the co-extraction of ammonia that must be removed prior to generating the electrolyte for reduction to the metal. Scrubbing of ammonia may be achieved by contacting the ammonia-loaded reagent with a dilute acid solution ( The β-diketone LIX-54 ( Very good extraction of Co The greatly increased use of the precious metals (Pt, Pd, Rh, Ir, Ru, Os), Ag, and Au in applications from jewellery to electronic devices, exhaust control catalysts to dental materials has stimulated considerable research into their recovery. Most modern hydrometallurgical installations rely heavily on solvent-extraction technologies, especially in refining high-grade metals. The commercial extractants currently used fall into the following categories: Many of the reagents developed initially for the recovery of base or radioactive metals have also been investigated as potential PGM extractants, e.g., phosphine oxides, Gold is conventionally recovered by leaching ores or recycled materials with alkaline cyanide solutions in the presence of oxygen. The gold, as [Au(CN) Quaternary ammonium salts were first used as extractants from alkaline solutions. The affinity of [Au(CN) Caravaca In the late 1980s Henkel Coporation Hydroxide transfer was reduced to undetectable levels by varying the composition of the organic phase, The development of more benign alternatives to cyanide for gold-leaching (see Oxidative leaching with ammonium thiosulfate ( There has been a renewed interest in recovery of gold from chloride media containing both Au Chloroform solutions of calixarenes ( Extraction of gold from acidic chloride media by Relatively little has been reported on solvating extractants for recovery from chloride media The extractive metallurgy of silver involves a wide range of processes reflecting the diverse sources of this element. It is recovered in significant quantities from sulfidic ores or as a high-value by-product from zinc/lead, copper, nickel, tin, and gold production, mainly by pyrometallurgy. Both the mono- and tri-nucleating ligands ( The refining of platinum is technically more challenging than gold or silver due to the lack of easily implemented electrorefining steps. The separation from other PGMs is most commonly approached by dissolution of concentrates into HCl solutions ( Quantitative extraction of Pt An inner-sphere complex ( The kinetic inertness of [PtCl König, Schuster, and others have demonstrated that by controlling the pH of the aqueous phase, The development of new technology for extraction and recycling of palladium has been stimulated by its increasing use in automobile catalysts, which now consume ca. 55% of world production. A range of options for extraction from acidic media and for separation from other PGMs is possible because Pd Alkylammonium reagents have also been shown to act as phase transfer catalysts when used in conjunction with cation exchange reagents such as Kelex 100 or solvating extractants such as di-octylsulfide. It has been suggested A number of chelating cation exchangers have been used as extractants. The modes of complex formation by acylthioureas ( The quadridentate ligand ( The dialkylaminomethyl phosphonates, ( Whilst many solvating ligands have been studied, the dialkyl sulfide reagents (see Since the publication of the Supplementary Files (Related CCC Chapter 64 Geochemical and Prebiotic Systems) can be found online at 