This study assesses the changes in physical properties (particle size, shape, density) of Austrian pine (softwood) and European beech (hardwood), as they are mechanically processed from wood chips to pellets and then to milled pellets. A series of semi-industrial hammer mills and a semi-industrial pellet mill were used. The specific pelletizing and grinding energy, as well as the pellet mill and hammer mill capacity, were determined. Size, shape, and bulk density of the wood particles obtained at each processing step were studied. The pellet quality was analyzed according to international standards. Results show that the pelletization modifies the internal pellet particle shape and length due to the breakage of particles across their longest dimension, leading to more circular and less elongated particles. However, the particle width was nearly unaffected, indicating a directional fracture behavior for wood particles during pelletization. The particle breaking effect was more dominant for beech particles. Beech contained a lower amount of extractives than pine that led to higher specific pelletizing energy. In addition, beech pellets had a lower quality concerning durability and density. Relationships between specific grinding energies and characteristic product particle sizes were also determined. E.g., the specific energy for grinding pine pellets was about 10 kWh/t oven-dry wood for a characteristic product size of 0.8 mm, while grinding beech pellets required about 7 kWh/t oven-dry wood for a characteristic product size of 0.6 mm. The study concludes that less energy is needed to pelletize pine than beech under the same processing conditions, but more energy is needed to mill pine than beech.Denmark has a long history of encouraging the use of biomass in heat and power production. In 1993, a binding biomass agreement led to the use of biomass in several combined heat and power plants [ In the field of biomass pelletization, size reduction of woody feedstock is an important processing step, as it changes the physical properties (e.g., particle size, shape, flowability, bulk density) of biomass. Generally, the energy consumption for biomass grinding depends on particle feed size, moisture content, fiber length, density, biomass type, material feed rate, and milling equipment [ It has also been well-documented that the chemical structure of biomass influences its pelletizing performance and pellet quality. Softwoods with greater extractive amounts require less power for pelletizing than hardwoods due to the lubricating effect of extractives that reduces the friction in the pellet die channels [ For large-scale biomass suspension-firing, wood pellets need to be milled before firing in the boiler. It is often believed that wood pellets, after comminution in the existing coal mills, will be broken down to the original particle size distribution (PSD) of the feedstock before pelletizing [ The literature shows that the size reduction and pelletization of wood is a complicated process affected by the chemical, physical, mechanical, and fracture properties of wood and the equipment used. Most of the studies available only focus on one or two steps of the whole pelletization process. They mainly try to determine the pelletability of different biomass materials, optimize the operation of the pellet mill, or evaluate the resulting pellet quality and milling properties. However, to the best of the authors' knowledge, there are no studies that follow the complete mechanical processing pathway of wood. Considering that the internal PSD of wood pellets plays an essential role in determining the wood pellet quality, it is important to know how the PSD and particle shape is obtained and, furthermore, which steps are crucial in determining the particle size and shape of material within pellets. Thus, it is essential to assess the effect of each processing step on the wood particle size and shape. To achieve this objective, the present study follows the complete mechanical processing pathway of European beech (hardwood) and Austrian pine (softwood). All processing steps are included and carefully examined to provide knowledge of how pelletization and comminution operations alter the physical properties of wood particles. The results of this study will be relevant to pellet producers, who want to produce pellets of desirable quality for use in suspension-fired power plant boilers. Furthermore, studies focusing on pellet comminution usually lack the process history of pellets. Milling studies commonly lack information about the initial feed material characteristics. This study hence includes a thorough characterization of the chemical and physical properties of the wood chips utilized. About 50-year-old European beech ( The process flow for pelletizing wood at the pellet plant is the same as shown in Before pelletizing, the fine grinds were transported to a cascade mixer, where they were conditioned by hot steam to soften the lignin in the wood. The lignin softening enables fine grinds pelletization without adding binders, as the lignin serves as a natural binder to form solid interparticle bridges due to thermoplastic flow [ Pine and beech pellets were then characterized in triplicate according to international standardized methods, and their quality was assessed by ISO 17225-2:2014 [ Finally, pellets were comminuted in the hammer mill using a 4 mm screen that was also used for fine milling. The feeder motor frequency was lowered from 55 Hz to 20 Hz, which had the effect of reducing the feed rate to 64% of the previous value in order to avoid overloading the mill. The milling and pelletizing equipment include a wattmeter to measure the instantaneous power consumption (W). The operating time (h), current (A) and feeding amount (kg) were recorded. A balance under the screw feeder measured the wood feed amount. From these parameters, the capacity in kg/h and total specific energy consumption (SEC) in kWh/t for grinding and pelletizing operations were calculated. The SEC was expressed as follows: Where All moisture contents reported in this study were determined in triplicate by drying the samples up to 16 h in a drying oven at 105 ± 2 °C according to ISO 18134-1:2015 [ The loose-packed bulk density was determined by pouring the sample into a funnel located at the top of a calibrated vessel of 5 l. A known sample mass was added to the vessel, and the sample volume measured. This procedure was done in triplicate. A vibrating sieve shaker (AS 200 control, Retsch Technology GmbH, Germany) was used to analyze the PSD of the different wood samples. The characteristic sieve size ( The wood chips were categorized into eight size classes according to the sieve stack used. Several runs of sieve analysis were performed to get a representative number of particles in each size class. Owing to the various shapes of wood chips, all chip dimensions were reported as means of at least a hundred measurements. Assuming that wood chips can be represented by flat cuboids ( To complement the sieve analysis, the size and shape of fine grinds, disintegrated pellets, and milled pellets were also analyzed using a Camsizer® X2 (Retsch Technology GmbH, Germany) operated in X-Jet mode for air pressure dispersion. Measurements were performed in triplicate. The PSD is presented as a cumulative (undersize) volume distribution versus dc,min. dc,min represents the narrowest maximum chord length of a 2D particle projection measured from all measurement directions. Recent studies [ Where dFe, max refers to the maximum Feret diameter or maximum caliper diameter that is close to the true particle length [ Where A The Rosin-Rammler-Bennet-Sperling (RRBS) model is used to describe the PSD of wood. It is a two-parameter distribution function expressed as a cumulative percent (undersize) distribution, which was found to be suitable to describe the PSD of wood pellet feedstock [ Where R(d) is the cumulative percent (undersize) distribution of material finer than the particle size d, d Von Rittinger's comminution law is used to predict the energy consumption for grinding wood. Although Von Rittinger's law was developed for the mineral industry, recent studies [ Where SGEC is the specific grinding energy consumption (in kWh/t), d The chemical analysis shows, as it is typical for softwoods [ The wood chips produced are presented in The elongation and flatness of wood chips are shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. Smaller chips were a little more elongated than coarser wood chips, which was also observed by Lanning et al. [ The wood chips went through a two-stage milling process, including coarse and fine milling in a series of hammer mills. Before fine milling, the fresh coarse grinds were dried. The moisture contents and the PSD of milled beech and pine products are shown in Supplementary Fig. S3. As expected, fine milling produced smaller particles and a narrower size distribution span than coarse milling. The two-stage milling process resulted in a higher size reduction and a greater portion of fines for beech than for pine. For instance, the amount of particles below 1 mm increased from 27 to 87% for beech and from 4 to 60% for pine, from the first to the second milling stage. Drying the coarse grinds can be expected to favor the production of fines for the fine milling stage [  The specific energy consumption for coarse milling was higher for pine (12.6 kWh/t DW) than for beech chips (8.1 kWh/t DW), as shown in  After pelletizing, beech pellets had a lower moisture content than pine pellets. This could be explained by higher friction in the pellet die during pelletization of beech due to its lower extractive content [ The bulk density for pine and beech pellets falls within the range of previously reported values (i.e., 498–649 kg/m Pine pellets showed higher specific pellet densities than beech pellets, probably due to the higher die aspect ratio used during their production which caused a higher compaction and pressure build-up in the press channels. Thus, pelletizing increased the specific density compared to beech and pine wood chips by about 190% and 400%, respectively. The specific pellet density as a pellet property is not included in ISO 17225-2:2014 [ Regarding the durability, pine pellets are more durable than beech pellets, indicating a higher ability to resist abrasion during handling and transportation and thus a lower risk of fires and explosions during handling and shipping [ The capacity and energy demand for pelletizing wood are important measures of the pellet production costs. On average, the pellet mill showed higher capacity and significantly lower energy requirement for pelletizing fine pine grinds than for fine beech grinds (  Similar to fine milling, a lower K The different qualities of beech and pine pellets seemed not to affect the hammer mill capacity, as a grinding capacity of ca. 3 t DW/h was obtained in both cases. Interestingly, the comminution of the pellets led to a similar size reduction ratio of about 0.2, regardless of the differences in the feed material. During hammer milling of the pellets, a drying effect was observed (cf. The PSDs of milled pellets, disintegrated pellets, and fine grinds versus the particle width (d The 2D derived shape factors are presented in Regarding the effect of the pellet mill on the particles, it was observed that it does not alter the particle width, as differences between the characteristic particle size of fine grinds and disintegrated pellets are negligible (  For pellet producers and power plant operators, the energy for mechanical processes (i.e., size reduction and pelletization) has to be minimized to achieve optimal process efficiencies. To assess how much energy of the actual energy value of the wood is used for milling and pelletizing operations, the ratio of the specific energy consumption for milling (or pelletizing) to the net calorific value of the oven dry matter (NCV This study investigated the physical changes occurring during the mechanical processing of beech and pine trees into chips, pellets, and milled pellets. The experimental data provide valuable new knowledge of how pelletizing and hammer-milling operations modify the physical properties (size, shape, density) of beech and pine. The following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental study: The pelletizing process alters the shape and length of the wood particles. There is a reduction in the particle length during pelletizing, which results in higher particle circularity and elongation (width-to-length) ratio values. The average elongation ratio for beech particles increased from 0.38 (fine grinds) to 0.51 (disintegrated pellets) to 0.52 (milled pellets). In comparison, pine particles increased in elongation from 0.42 (fine grinds) to 0.48 (disintegrated pellets) to 0.49 (milled pellets). Milling beech produced more fines than pine in all milling steps. For practical milling operations, beech wood requires less energy for milling than pine. The relationship between specific grinding energy for grinding wood and the size reduction ratio of Von Rittinger's comminution law followed a power law. Von Rittinger's law can thus be applied to predict the energy required to grind wood chips, coarse grinds, and wood pellets. Sieve analysis represents well the width of wood particles, but not the particle length. Digital image analysis allows direct size and shape measurements and provides more detailed data than traditional sieve analysis. Rosin-Rammler-Bennet-Sperling characteristic particle sizes of the milled wood chips, milled coarse grinds, and milled wood pellets are smaller than the hammer mill screen opening. Pelletizing beech requires more energy than pine. This behavior is attributed to a lower extractives content in beech. Beech pellets are more difficult to disintegrate in water following the standard procedure ISO 17830:2016. In that case, it is recommended to perform the disintegration procedure twice. The wood bulk densities are sensitive to the particle size, shape, and moisture content. Bulk densities for milled beech pellets featuring finer, more circular, and less elongated particles were higher than those of coarser, less circular, and more elongated milled pine pellets.  Particle projection area (mm Amount of wood pellets (t) Particle perimeter (mm) As received Circularity (dimensionless) Particle size (mm) Pellet diameter (mm) RRBS Characteristic particle size (mm) Particle size at 90th percentile of the cumulative undersize distribution (mm) Shortest maximum chord (mm) RRBS Characteristic particle size (mm) of the feed Maximum Feret diameter (mm) RRBS Characteristic particle size (mm) of the product Dry wood basis Particle elongation ratio (dimensionless) Von Rittinger's material characteristic parameter (kWh mm t Pellet length (mm) RRBS Uniformity constant (dimensionless) Absorbed mill power (kW) Particle size distribution Cumulative undersize distribution (%) Rosin-Rammler-Bennet-Sperling Specific energy consumption (kWh/t) Weight percent The authors thank  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at