The infectious agents causing transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs), sometimes called prions, are notoriously difficult to completely inactivate or destroy. Here we tested a thermal hydrolysis system which combines saturated steam heating to 180°C (10bar), with stirring. The 301V-TSE strain, which has been derived by passage of BSE in mice, was used since it is the most thermostable TSE strain tested so far. All detectable TSE infectivity was destroyed, with a clearance factor of greater than 105 ID50. The use of this technology for the decontamination of TSE infected tissue waste and the potential uses of the end-products are discussed.The high resistance to destruction and in particular the high thermostability of the infectious agents causing transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) (sometimes known as prions) has been a major scientific and practical challenge resulting from the BSE epidemic. Indeed cattle BSE and derived strains are now known to be more thermostable than any other TSE strain tested In many circumstances the difficulty of reducing BSE infectivity titres to safe levels has caused concerns in the sterilisation of reusable medical devices and the production of bovine derived products. For example in the case of the production of gelatine, the manufacturing method has been experimentally examined and sources of raw materials controlled. A quantitative risk assessment has provided the basis for determining where the manufacturing process can be most effectively altered to ensure that there is little opportunity for BSE infectivity to enter or survive modern gelatine manufacturing processes BSE is thought to have spread via the consumption of BSE infected tissue in which the BSE agent had survived any cooking or other post-mortem processing. Meat and bone meal (MBM) produced from BSE infected cattle is thought to be the main route of spread Meat and bone meal is produced from carcass materials not destined for human consumption by processes that involve comminution, heating, and then removal of the tallow fraction TSE agent inactivation can be achieved through the denaturing effect of high temperatures on biological macromolecules, which can be assisted by raising the pH or introducing other alterations to the chemical milieu. There can be limitations to the degree of thermal inactivation due to conversion to more thermostable forms arising from dehydration and other chemical modifications to TSE agent structure Biosphere Technologies Inc. supplied a small scale machine to perform the biorefinement reaction on 100 The 301V infected brain macerate used for spiking each experiment was titrated intracerebrally in VM mice using 10-fold serial dilutions in saline between 10 Output samples were initially injected directly into mice, at an equivalent dilution of the spike of 1 After preliminary runs with uninfected tissue to establish methods for addition and removal of substrate and product, and also to ensure there was no contamination of orifices; three runs were performed with spiked tissue. The heating curves for all three runs are shown in The output from the machine was a slightly viscous, brown fluid with some soft solid tissue material remaining. In the full scale machine tissue would be subjected to greater physical forces and therefore would be disrupted to a greater extent (unpublished observations). Groups of 16 mice were injected with the product after dilution to the equivalent of 1% concentration of the 301V brain spike and observed for signs of TSE disease. Surviving mice were culled at 427 days post-injection and subjected to pathological diagnosis for TSE disease. The spike material had a titre of 2.6 None of the mice injected with Biosphere-treated samples developed clinical TSE disease. Specifically in group A of 16 mice injected 12 survived till 427 days, at which point they were culled. The other four died intercurrently at 188, 317, 351 and 352 days post-injection (dpi); in group B of 16 mice injected 15 survived till 427 days, at which point they were culled and one died intercurrently at 390 These results allow us to estimate clearance of TSE infectivity based on estimates of the maximum amount of TSE infectivity that could be present in lower dilutions. Estimates based on the Kärber Titre estimates can also be based directly on the proportion of animals diagnosed positive in the injected group, and then adjusted using the Poisson distribution The estimate based on the proportion of animals succumbing (with the Poisson correction) has been used recently to calculate TSE titres when very small amounts of infectivity are present The experiments to test the ability of the Biosphere thermal hydrolysis technology to inactivate TSE infectivity have been successfully performed using a scaled down machine through which 100 This process is relatively speedy, taking only about 2 The expertise of the NPU animal facility is gratefully acknowledged. Defra and Biosphere Technologies Inc. are thanked for their funding contributions.