This work focuses on the evaluation of a type of piezoelectric lithotripter with similar dimensions of a commercial lithotripter and composed of either 3 or 4 large lens focused piezoelectric transducers set either in a confocal coplanar C-shape or a confocal spherical shape. Each transducer is made with a 92 mm diameter 220 kHz flat piezoelectric ceramic disc and a 3D printed acoustic lens. Both confocal setups pressure field were measured with a fiber optic hydrophone, and in vitro fragmentations of 13 mm diameter and 14 mm length cylindrical model stones were done in a 2 mm mesh basket. The acoustic characterization of the three transducers confocal setup revealed a disc shaped focal volume, with a 2.2 mm width on one axis and a 9.6 mm width on the other, and a peak positive pressure of 40.9 MPa and a peak negative pressure of −16.9 MPa, while the focus of the four transducers confocal setup was similar to a traditional narrow focus high pressure lithotripter with a focus width of 2.1 mm, and a peak positive pressure of 71.9 MPa and peak negative pressure of −24.3 MPa. Both confocal setups showed in vitro fragmentation efficiency close to a commercial electroconductive lithotripter.Urinary tract stones can be found in the kidney, the ureter, or in the bladder, and affect about 1 in 11 people at least once in a lifetime in the US Various progresses toward a more efficient lithotripsy treatment were made in the last decade, with the treatment PRF determined as 1 Hz maximum to avoid prefocal cavitation resulting in bubble cloud shielding of the kidney stone Most of the current piezoelectric lithotripters are made by placing multiple small piezoelectric elements inside a spherical receptacle, usually yielding very high peak pressure in a very narrow focal zone at the geometric center of the sphere. In this paper, we present two lithotripters consisting of large lens focused piezoelectric transducers: one lithotripter is composed of three confocal transducers set in a C-shape and the other is composed of four confocal transducers set in a spherical shape. Their acoustic pressure field is measured and their model stone fragmentation effectiveness is evaluated and compared to those of a commercial electroconductive lithotripter. The confocal lithotripters are composed of multiple independently focused transducer, where their focusing is obtained by using plastic lenses combined with a 220 kHz, 92 mm diameter flat piezoelectric discs. The focal distance was set to 200 mm under linear acoustic regime, allowing realistic treatment penetration depth for lithotripsy. As the objective was to try multiple confocal setup, the lens focused transducers were designed to be easily mounted and dismounted from the larger confocal lithotripsy transducer, and as such their design was inspired by a previous work by The distance between the lens and the flat ceramic emitting side is chosen as half a wavelength of epoxy, in order to reduce the pressure after the first pulse with out-of-phase reflections. The backing was also filled with the same epoxy in order to lower the reflection, and therefore the stress, inside the ceramic. The lens have a thread on its side so it can be maintained in position on the transducer scaffold using a corresponding 3D printed nut. Finally, as the whole confocal setup will be immersed in water during the experimental phases, the wires exit the transducer inside a hose connector to allow a silicone tube to be fitted, protecting the high voltage wires from the surrounding water. Photos of the manufactured transducers are shown in Two different confocal setups were studied: one with three independent transducers where their axis of propagation are in the same plane, thus forming a C-shape, and one with four independent transducers set up in a semi-spherical shape. The three transducers confocal scaffold was 3D printed in three separate supports for each transducer that can then be joined together. The transducer supports for the side transducers had the possibility to adjust the angle of incidence, while the center one was threaded to adjust the height of the transducer, allowing different focal distances and adjustments for the non-linear acoustic effect. The four transducers confocal support was machined in aluminum and has an aperture of 160 mm and a radius of 180 mm. The treatment depth penetration (the maximum distance between the highest point of the confocal setup and its focal point) for the four transducers confocal was 134 mm, same range of most commercial lithotripters The electrical driving circuit for the transducers is shown in In the following sections, all pressure measurements were made with a fiber optic hydrophone (FOPH 2000, RP-acoustics, Leutenbach, Germany) with a 100 MHz bandwidth in degassed water ( In order to compare the efficiency of each setup, in vitro artificial stone fragmentation tests were made. The artificial stones were made of BegoStone plaster powder (BEGO, Bremen, Germany) with a ratio plaster/degassed water of 5:1 by weight The confocal setups were then immersed in a tank of degassed water ( The same fragmentation tests were made with a commercial lithotripters, the Sonolith i-Move from EDAP-TMS (Vaulx-en-Velin, France), for comparison purpose. The i-Move is an electroconductive lithotripter, where a spark is generated at one focus of an ellipsoid with a focus of 16 cm and an aperture of 12.5 cm. Its acoustic characterization is detailed in Measurements of the pressure field around the focus of the lens focused transducer are presented in The non-linear acoustic effects for the lens focused transducer are important, presenting a steep shock front with a rise time of The objective of this confocal setup was to obtain a large focal width, close to the dimensions of renal calculi. Therefore the beams of the lens focused transducers were adjusted such as they cross before their individual focal depth, at around 5 mm. In order to ensure that the pulse of each transducer reach the focal point at the same time, measurements and consequent calibrations for each transducer were made by adjusting the angle of incidence for the lateral transducers and the height of the central transducer. In this section, the three transducers confocal setup z-axis was the same as the z-axis of the middle transducer, while the x-axis was perpendicular to the plane formed by the z-axis of the individual transducers and finally the y-axis was chosen to form a Cartesian coordinate system (i.e. perpendicular to both z and x), as shown earlier in Since the acoustic beam of each lens focused transducers crosses each other slightly before their focal point, the maximum pressure is lower than the sum of the maximum pressure of each transducer, however the resulting beam width on the x-axis is larger. Another observation is that the wavefront of the confocal setup in The focused beam of positive pressure formed by the three transducers confocal could therefore be described as a thin disc perpendicular to the plane formed by the transducers acoustic axis. The geometrical focus of the bowl was 180 mm, thus the focal beam of the transducers crosses 8 mm before their individual focal point, and the z-axis was chosen as the axisymmetric axis of the bowl. The resulting focused beam was found to be almost axisymmetric as presented in As expected, this setup presents a very narrow focal width, very similar to the y-axis width of the three transducers setup. As for the three transducers setup, the wavefront is less steep than the wavefront of an individual transducer, with a rise time equals to The fragmentation tests were made for 3 different pressure levels, 80%, 90% and 100% of the maximum voltage input (or +1.5/−12.2 kV, +1.5/14.1 kV and +1.5/−16 kV), for both confocal setups. In each case, the fragmentation was done on four stones (n = 4). The number of pulses before complete fragmentation in relation to the maximum positive pressure is shown in One observable difference in fragmentation between the narrow focal lithotripters (four transducers confocal setup and i-Move) and the three transducers confocal setup is, while the first kind mostly fragment the stones small piece by piece, often leaving large sized pieces in the basket during more than half the treatment time, the second one divides the stones in almost equal sized fragments until they are small enough to pass the 2 mm mesh. No significant differences were found in the fragments size after the treatments between the different lithotripters: a large proportion of the fragments were between 1 mm and 2 mm. As seen in The shock waves of both confocal setups have a lower rise time compared to the shock wave at the focus of a single transducer. This phenomenon is characteristic of confocal setups, where the waveform of each transducer are summed almost linearly While the three transducers confocal setup has a large focal width on one axis, it is still too small to trigger the dynamic squeezing phenomenon The first observation that can be made about the Meanwhile, the four transducers confocal setup yields results very close to those of a commercial lithotripter. While the low ratio of active surface by the total lithotripsy transducer surface seems like a waste at first, this space could be easily used to place an inline ultrasound imaging probe, and, for example, low pressure transducers to clear the bubble cloud between each shock wave in order to avoid prefocal cavitation while treating stones with high PRF ( Confocal lithotripters using three and four independently focused transducers were characterized and their The authors have no conflict of interest to report.