Geostatistics basically concerns with the description of a characteristic that varies in space and is originally developed to deal with mineral resource estimation problem in mining. Due to the spatial feature of the characteristic, geostatistical applications are now extended to many fields in the earth sciences other than mining, including the subsurface, the land, the atmosphere, and the oceans. A recent study made by The first edition of The book begins with an introductory chapter defining types of problems considered in each chapter and presenting a striking example demonstrating that geostatistical methods are rather descriptive. Chapter 1 defines basic mathematical, statistical and philosophical properties of random functions that are useful models for regionalized variables. These are needed for the subsequent chapters. In particular, shaking jar example illustrating a notion of random functions is very instructive and memorable. Throughout the book it is easy to find such kind of interesting examples. Chapter 2, one of the most voluminous chapters, is devoted to structural analysis of a regionalized variable. The variogram is the fundamental tool. To characterize the spatial variability the authors introduce exploratory data analysis tools such as the h-scattergram, the variogram cloud and the sample variogram. The chapter proceeds with theoretical and practical details of a variogram analysis, including variogram models, model fitting, variography in the presence of a drift. In this chapter we see addition of new material such as spatial declustering, non-Euclidean coordinate system and removal of a simple example of variography in the presence of a drift. I feel myself oriented towards practice and found the removal of the introductory example incorrect. Chapter 3 deals with linear kriging. Types of kriging that are covered include simple kriging, ordinary kriging, universal kriging and kriging with external drift. The topics with little of interest such as kriging of a spatial average and kriging under inequality constraints are also treated explicitly and in detail. Beside the theoretical issues the practical application of geostatistics to the design of the channel tunnel is extensively discussed. This edition contains a more complete treatment of ordinary kriging and a number of additions such as three elegant solutions to problem of neighborhood selection in kriging, a new truncation model in the presence of outliers and a new form of kriging, Poisson kriging. Kriging can be extended to broader forms of nonstationarity than the Universal Kriging model. Chapter 4 deals with this extension, namely intrinsic model of order k (IM-k). In keeping with their background in the Center for Geostatistics at Fontainebleau, the authors devote to considerable space to IM-k. Illuminating examples of processes with apparent drift but no genetic drift are provided to explain the motivation behind the concept of generalized increment of order The last chapter, approximately one quarter of the book, is on conditional simulation. It starts with an introductory example illustrating the need for conditional simulation. The authors classify simulation methods into three categories: continuous variable simulation, categorical variable simulation and object-based simulation and for each category present a variety of methods. Continuous variable simulation includes sequential simulation, covariance matrix decomposition and probability-field simulation. This section also covers various methods of nonconditional simulation. Categorical variable simulation handles with sequential indicator simulation, iterative methods based on Markov chains and truncated Gaussian simulation. Object-based simulation contains Boolean models. The authors go beyond standard conditioning and deal with multipoint simulation, simulated annealing, gradual deformation and Bayesian approach as well. The chapter concludes with two case studies, one from a nickel deposit, and other from an oil reservoir. An Appendix (13p.) contains some classic definitions and results used in the book, as well as simulation formulas for a few covariance models. The book concludes with author and subject indexes (57p.). The book includes few exercises and in addition the authors make few references to software tools that one might apply the theory to actual data sets. On the other hand it is well written, clearly organized, and generally free of typos and other errors. Summarizing, Chilès and Delfiner's book certainly deserves recommendation to anyone who is interested in geostatistics, either as a geostatistician or as a researcher in modeling spatial uncertainty.