The drawdown of actinides is an important unit operation to enable the recycling of electrorefiner salt and minimization of waste. A new method for the drawdown of actinide chlorides from LiCl-KCl molten salt has been demonstrated here. Using the galvanic interaction between the Gd/Gd(III) and U/U(III) redox reactions, it is shown that 
                        
                           
                              
                                 UCl
                              
                              3
                           
                        
                      concentration in eutectic LiCl-KCl can be reduced from 8.06 wt.% (1.39 mol %) to 0.72 wt.% (0.12 mol %) in about an hour via plating U metal onto a steel basket. This is a simple process for returning actinides to the electrorefiner and minimizing their loss to the salt waste stream.Pyrochemical processing is currently under development in several countries for potential application to recycle actinides from spent nuclear fuel. To minimize the amount of waste from this process that requires permanent deep geologic disposal, a sequence of two drawdown steps have been proposed and included in reference flowsheets While most of these studies have investigated electrochemical reduction of actinides and/or lanthanides on a cathode, Simpson et al. Two problems were encountered with this approach–lack of selectivity and inability to easily collect the metal products. The selectivity issue is understandable given that the The alternative drawdown process proposed here is to employ a galvanic couple for plating of uranium and transuranic species. The key feature of this process is to create galvanic coupling between a rare earth metal and a steel basket-both of which are submerged in the salt. The oxidation of the rare earth metal to form ions in the salt will occur at potentials slightly less negative than the equilibrium redox potential for the metal in contact with the salt. The steel basket will have close to the same potential, low enough to drive reduction of actinide chlorides to metals. Effectively, the basket becomes a cathode, and the rare earth metal rod becomes a reactive anode. But the entire reaction is thermodynamically driven. Actinides are deposited from the salt without use of an electrical power supply and should preferably plate as metals onto the relatively high surface area of the steel basket. Rare earths, such as Gd, have standard reduction potentials slightly more negative than that of the actinides. They can essentially act as reducing agents, albeit less powerful than lithium metal. They also remain in the solid phase, while lithium melts at a temperature below the liquidus of the LiCl-KCl. While this process would effectively add to the concentration of rare earth fission products in the salt, it is anticipated that they could be easily removed in a subsequent rare earth drawdown operation. Or they could be left in the salt and disposed after being stabilized in a mineral/glass waste form. This communication presents the results of the first experiment in which this galvanic process was used to draw down All the experiments were performed inside a glove box (Innovative Technologies) with an argon atmosphere ( The drawdown experiment was performed for a total of three hours. After the initial insertion of the basket into the molten salt bath and start of rotation, the system was left unperturbed for an hour. At the end of an hour, the rotator was stopped and a salt sample was taken using a stainless steel all-thread. Then the experiment was continued. This process was repeated an additional two times at intervals of an hour each for a total test time of three hours. ICP-MS analysis was performed on the samples taken at the hour long intervals to determine the concentrations of Gd, U and Mg in the salt. The activity of gadolinium chloride was previously measured experimentally as a function of concentration (mole fraction) in LiCl-KCl at 773 K using electrochemical methods The standard potential of the pure supercooled liquid The In the literature, the activity coefficient of UCl The results are shown in At the end of the test, the salt was allowed to cool to room temperature, and the alumina crucible was broken to recover the salt. It was observed that the bottom of the crucible was lined with black precipitate. After dissolving the salt in water, filtering to recover the particulate, and air drying the recovered solid, it was determined via x-ray diffraction to be The findings reported here demonstrate the uranium drawdown can be effectively performed using a galvanic couple with a electrochemically less noble species like Gd metal. This has very important implications for the standpoint of pyroprocessing of spent fuel. If such a galvanic reduction process were to deployed rather than the other options like electrowinning, there would be some significant advantages. First, the process equipment and operations cost would be reduced by employing a passive process that does not require active electrical control. Second, operation at very close to the equilibrium reduction potential for This communication documents a new method for the drawdown of actinide chlorides from electrorefiner salt. Starting with an initial concentration of 8.06 wt.% (1.39 mol %)