The kinetics of the cementation of copper ions from copper sulfate solution onto a horizontal single screen and an array of closely packed iron screens were investigated in a bubble column. Variables studied were physical properties of the solution, superficial gas velocity and number of screens per array. The rate of cementation was found to increase with increasing superficial gas velocity to a certain limit and then remains constant and increases with increasing the number of screens per array. The rate of cementation was expressed in terms of the liquid–solid mass transfer coefficient (k). The data were correlated by the equation:
                        
                           
                              
                                 j
                                 =
                                 3.99
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Re
                                          .
                                          Fr
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       −
                                       0.078
                                    
                                 
                                 .
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The high rates of mass transfer obtained in this work and the high area per unit volume of gas sparged fixed bed of horizontal screens to qualify them for building high space time reactors suitable for purification of hydrometallurgical leach liquors and removal of heavy metal from waste water by cementation.Electrochemical cementation is one of the oldest and simplest processes used to remove noble or toxic metallic ions from solutions because of its simplicity, and the feasible recovery of valuable metals ( The aim of the present work is to study the effect of gas sparging on the rate of cementation of copper from copper sulfate solution at a horizontal single iron screen and an array of closely packed iron screens. The gas sparging is known to be more economic than mechanical stirring ( All chemical reagents [CuSO  Before each run 2.5 The rate of cementation of Cu     It would be worthwhile to compare Eq. The discrepancy between the present equation and Eq. The present results show that the gas sparged fixed bed of screens offers a low cost high space time yield cementation reactor suitable for waste water treatment and purification of hydrometallurgical leach liquors thanks to the high specific area and the high turbulence promoting ability of screens and gas bubbles. The present dimensionless equation can be used in the rational design and operation of the reactor.  screen surface area, cm screen surface area per unit volume, cm concentration of Cu initial concentration of Cu diffusivity of Cu screen wire diameter, m mass transfer coefficient, cm/s defined by Eq. mesh number (wire/cm) solution volume, cm time, s Gas superficial velocity, cm/s Froude number Reynolds number Schmidt number mass transfer j factor solution viscosity, g/cm solution density, g/cm diffusion layer thickness, cm screen thickness, cm gas hold up The authors express their gratitude to the Prof. Dr. Gomaa Sedahmed (professor of chemical engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University) for his advice in conducting the present work.