Heparins are broadly used for the prevention and treatment of thrombosis and embolism. Yet, osteoporosis is considered to be a severe side effect in up to one third of all patients on long-term treatment. However, the mechanisms underlying this clinical problem are only partially understood. To investigate if heparin affects differentiation of skeletal precursors, we examined the effects of heparin on the osteogenic and adipogenic lineage commitment and differentiation of primary human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSCs). Due to the known inverse relationship between adipogenesis and osteogenesis and the capacity of pre-differentiated cells to convert into the respective other lineage, we also determined heparin effects on osteogenic conversion and adipogenic differentiation/conversion. Interestingly, heparin did not only significantly increase mRNA expression and enzyme activity of the osteogenic marker alkaline phosphatase (ALP), but it also promoted mineralization during osteogenic differentiation and conversion. Furthermore, the mRNA expression of the osteogenic marker bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4) was enhanced. In addition, heparin administration partly prevented adipogenic differentiation and conversion demonstrated by reduced lipid droplet formation along with a decreased expression of adipogenic markers. Moreover, luciferase reporter assays, inhibitor experiments and gene expression analyses revealed that heparin had putative permissive effects on osteogenic signaling via the BMP pathway and reduced the mRNA expression of the Wnt pathway inhibitors dickkopf 1 (DKK1) and sclerostin (SOST). Taken together, our data show a rather supportive than inhibitory effect of heparin on osteogenic hBMSC differentiation and conversion in vitro. Further studies will have to investigate the net effects of heparin administration on bone formation versus bone resorption in vivo to unravel the molecular mechanisms of heparin-associated osteoporosis and reconcile conflicting experimental data with clinical observations.Heparins are best known as effective anticoagulants commonly used for the inhibition of blood clotting and in the prevention and treatment of a broad spectrum of thrombosis and embolism. The major anticoagulant effect results from interaction with antithrombin III, thereby enhancing its inactivating effect on several enzymes involved in blood coagulation Besides its beneficial effects regarding anticoagulant and antithrombotic treatment, the long-term use of heparin has been widely associated with the development of osteopenia and even osteoporosis due to decreased bone mineral density (BMD) in up to one third of treated patients. Additionally, fracture rates in those patients were increased up to 15% (reviewed in Additionally, there have been several in vitro and animal studies on the effects of heparin on osteogenesis, showing controversial results concerning osteogenic outcome depending on the animal species or cell culture system as well as on the concentrations, durations, and types of heparin fractions used. According to Turan et al., injections of 1000 To date, there have been only very few studies on human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSCs), examining the effects of heparin with regard to differentiation. Honda and colleagues identified an osteogenic cocktail containing BMP2 in combination with heparin to accelerate in vitro mineralization of human and murine mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) by using a feedback system control and a differential evolution algorithm As multipotential hBMSCs are the progenitor cells of osteoblasts as well as other mesenchymal lineages like adipocytes, they could provide a more reliable in vitro system compared to the use of immortalized cell lines and thereby aid in understanding the mechanisms of heparin action on the cellular and molecular level. Meanwhile, exploring the effect of heparin on hBMSC lineage decision and possible lineage switches after commitment (termed ‘conversion’ in the current study) is of high interest for two main reasons. Firstly, evidence suggests that osteoporosis is at least in part caused by increased adipogenic differentiation at the expense of osteogenesis leading to the common clinical observation of fat accumulation in bone marrow referred to as fatty degeneration In summary, the mechanisms underlying the heparin-induced development of osteopenia and osteoporosis are still a matter of scientific debate. To date, literature on primary hBMSCs, the precursors of osteoblastic cells in the bone marrow, and on the effects of heparin on hBMSC lineage decisions towards osteogenesis and adipogenesis are scarce. Therefore, the aim of our study was to explore the impact of heparin on both osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation and conversion of primary human BMSC. For this purpose, we used classical in vitro multipotency testing followed by a set of quantifying assays, marker gene expression analyses, and reporter assays. Our study clearly depicts that heparin treatment results in a significant increase in osteogenic differentiation and conversion as well as a significant reduction in adipogenic outcome. Interestingly, this suggests that, at least in vitro, osteogenic commitment and differentiation of skeletal precursors are not compromised by heparin treatment. Future studies will have to focus on whether key players in bone formation and remodeling, e.g. endothelial cells, or bone resorption by osteoclasts are altered in vivo, in order to explain the clinical phenomenon of heparin-induced osteoporosis. Cell culture reagents were purchased from Life Technologies (Darmstadt, Germany). Fetal calf serum (FCS) and heparin were obtained from Biochrom GmbH (Berlin, Germany). Unless otherwise stated, chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Schnelldorf, Germany). Isobutylmethylxanthine was obtained from Applichem (Darmstadt, Germany). For alkaline phosphatase detection, CSPD (Disodium 3-(4-methoxyspiro {1,2-dioxetane-3,2′-(5′-chloro)tricyclo [3.3.1.1 Human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSCs) were isolated from the trabecular bone of femoral heads as described previously The immortalized cell line hMSC-TERT Differentiation and conversion were induced according to Schilling and colleagues Osteogenic samples were harvested on day 7 for differentiation and on day 21 for conversion (14 To quantify the calcium deposition of osteogenic samples, cells were harvested on day 14 for differentiation and on day 28 for conversion (14 To quantify lipid droplet formation, adipogenically differentiated and converted hBMSCs were stained with Oil Red O as described by Pittenger and colleagues Total RNA was isolated using the NucleoSpin® RNA II Purification Kit from Macherey-Nagel (Düren, Germany) including DNase digestion according to the manufacturer's protocol. 1 To monitor and quantify if heparin affects BMP signaling, luciferase reporter assays were performed. For assays targeting the BMP responsive element (BRE) or the Smad binding element (SBE), hMSC-TERT cells were stably transfected with empty vector or vector containing the BRE or SBE sequence (BRE-MLP-pGL3 vector and SBE-pGL3ti vector, respectively). The BRE responds selectively to BMP, but not TGF-β stimulation To examine the signaling pathway responsible for the observed heparin effect, inhibitor experiments in hBMSCs were performed. Specific inhibitors for the following targets were deployed: 100 For experiments deploying hBMSCs, four biological replicates/donors (n The reporter assays were performed in four independent set-ups (n For all statistical analyses GraphPad Prism version 6.04 for Windows (GraphPad Software, La Jolla California, USA, To examine the effect of heparin on hBMSC osteogenesis, we analyzed alkaline phosphatase (ALP) mRNA expression and enzyme activity throughout osteogenic differentiation and conversion. ALP mRNA expression and enzyme activity were strongly increased during osteogenic differentiation compared to undifferentiated hBMSCs. This was further enhanced by heparin treatment. ALPL mRNA was increased by 3.6 and 4.5 fold on days 7 and 14 and heparin further stimulated mRNA expression 1.8 and 2.3-fold respectively. ALPL enzyme activity showed a similar pattern of increase both during osteogenic differentiation and upon the addition of heparin (5.6-fold and 1.6-fold respectively, During osteogenic conversion, ALP activity rose 3-fold compared to adipogenically pre-differentiated cells and heparin administration augmented the activity 1.4-fold ( Taken together, heparin further enhances ALPL mRNA and enzyme activity during osteogenic differentiation and following osteogenic conversion of adipogenically pre-differentiated cells. Having found a supportive effect on ALP expression and activity, we examined whether heparin could also increase the mineralization process of the extracellular matrix during osteogenic differentiation and conversion using mineralization assays. On days 14 and 28, osteogenically differentiated hBMSCs had formed significant amounts of calcified matrix compared to the virtually non-calcified undifferentiated hBMSCs ( These findings further support the notion that heparin enhances osteogenic outcome during differentiation of primary hBMSCs. Moreover, heparin aids in lineage switching during the osteogenic conversion of adipogenically pre-differentiated hBMSCs. Considering the promoting effects on ALP outcome and calcification, we were prompted to gain deeper insight into the mRNA expression of early and late osteogenic markers possibly influenced by heparin supplementation in the process of osteogenic differentiation and conversion. During osteogenic differentiation, bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) mRNA was increased significantly to 2.1-fold expression by the addition of heparin on day 7 ( Results for osteogenic conversion displayed the same pattern: BMP4 expression was boosted by heparin to 2.4-fold, whereas the expression of RUNX2 was not changed on day 21 ( These results suggest that the pro-osteogenic effect of heparin is at least in part mediated via BMP signaling in the early stages of differentiation and conversion, respectively. Since heparin showed a positive effect on osteogenic outcome, we further investigated the impact on adipogenic differentiation and conversion, thereby taking into account the inverse relationship between these two lineages regarding the fate decision of hBMSCs. Therefore, lipid droplet staining with subsequent quantification as well as qPCR for adipogenic marker genes was performed. After 14 After adipogenic conversion, consisting of 14 Heparin did not only affect lipid droplet formation in adipogenically differentiated and converted cells, but also altered mRNA expression of the adipogenic marker genes peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2 (PPARγ2), fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4), and lipoprotein lipase (LPL). All three markers were highly upregulated in adipogenic differentiation by approx. 1200-fold (PPARγ2), 90,000-fold (FABP4), and 26,000-fold (LPL) compared to undifferentiated hBMSCs ( Likewise, adipogenic conversion was accompanied by an increase in marker gene expression compared to osteogenically pre-differentiated cells by approx. 510-fold (PPARγ2), 28,500-fold (FABP4), and 5500-fold (LPL) ( Taken together, these data clearly reveal that heparin partly prevents adipogenic differentiation of hBMSCs regarding lipid droplet formation and marker gene expression. A similar effect is observed when osteogenically pre-differentiated hBMSCs are subjected to conversion into the adipogenic fate, where heparin impedes the adipogenic lineage switch. In view of the supportive effect of heparin on hBMSC osteogenic differentiation and conversion, further investigations into the involved signaling mechanisms were carried out. Since Wnt signaling is known to play a crucial role in the onset of osteogenesis, we examined whether the addition of heparin affects the gene expression of Wnt pathway members using qPCR. After 7 Given that two Wnt inhibitors were downregulated and BMP4 mRNA expression was upregulated by heparin, we were prompted to gain deeper insight into the BMP signaling by performing luciferase reporter assays covering the BMP responsive element (BRE) and the mothers against decapentaplegic homolog (Smad) binding element (SBE). We also asked if this effect could be reverted by adding the BMP type 1 receptor (BMPR) inhibitor Dorsomorphin. Interestingly, heparin significantly increased the relative luciferase activity of the BRE transfected cells to 1.76 when compared to the non-stimulated control ( In SBE transfected cells, heparin did not significantly alter luciferase activity ( To examine which signaling pathway is responsible for the observed heparin effect, differentiation experiments under inhibitor addition were performed. The fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) inhibitor PD166866 and the vascular growth factor receptor (VEGFR) inhibitor KRN633 partly rescued the supporting effect of heparin on ALP activity on day 7 of osteogenic differentiation (suppl. To examine which signaling pathway is responsible for the observed heparin effect, differentiation experiments under inhibitor addition were performed. The fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) inhibitor PD166866 and the vascular growth factor receptor (VEGFR) inhibitor KRN633 partly rescued the supporting effect of heparin on ALP activity on day 7 of osteogenic differentiation (suppl. Fig. S1). Yet, the reverting effect did not reach significance. When the BMPR inhibitor Dorsomorphin was added throughout the course of osteogenic differentiation, the positive effect of heparin on ALP activity was completely reverted ( These results provide further evidence to the transcriptional analysis that pointed at an involvement of BMP signaling in the observed pro-osteogenic effect of heparin. Apart from upregulating BMP4 expression, heparin also clearly activates BMP promoter activity, which is reverted by chemically inhibiting the BMP receptor. Provided that heparin supports osteoblast differentiation in vitro, we asked how heparin would affect receptor activator of nuclear factor κ B ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG) mRNA expression in the skeletal precursor population. Interestingly, there was no promoting effect of heparin on RANKL, a key factor for osteoclast differentiation and activation ( Furthermore, interleukins like IL1β, IL6, and IL8 are known to support osteoblast differentiation at an early and short-termed pro-inflammatory stage, so we asked whether heparin affects this very early stage of osteogenesis. Indeed, all three interleukins displayed an upregulation at the mRNA level upon heparin addition ( To sum up, apart from affecting the BMP pathway and Wnt inhibitors, heparin additionally supports OPG over RANKL mRNA expression, while pro-inflammatory interleukins are upregulated. Bone formation and remodeling are the result of the osteogenic commitment and maturation of mesenchymal precursors and their interaction with endothelial cells and the monocyte/macrophage lineage that gives rise to osteoclasts. Clearly the osteogenic lineage commitment, osteocytic maturation and mineralization of the extracellular matrix are key events in bone formation and remodeling. However, recent results also highlight the importance of so called H-type endothelial cells in orchestrating bone formation and remodeling Long-term heparin treatment causes osteopenia/osteoporosis, but the mechanisms behind this clinical problem are only partially understood. Scarce scientific results discuss an enhanced bone loss due to osteoclast stimulation and the pathophysiological evidence of altered angiogenesis. There are however discrepancies concerning the question whether osteoblastic differentiation is also impaired. We demonstrate here that heparin influences osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation and conversion in vitro by promoting the osteogenic and reducing the adipogenic outcome in primary hBMSCs. To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the effects of heparin on adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation as well as conversion conducted with primary hBMSCs. The conversion set-up serves as an additional test of the heparin effect under more strict and crucial conditions. Since heparin promotes the osteogenic and reduces the adipogenic differentiation of hBMSCs, we wondered whether these findings could be repeated in adipogenically pre-differentiated hBMSCs. Our findings display that the osteogenic direction is promoted by heparin even in the case of an adipogenic pre-commitment; further adipogenic differentiation/maturation is reduced although cells have already taken the path towards adipogenesis. These results provide more reliability for our key findings. Moreover, the human bone marrow is likely to contain not only BMSC in a state prior to commitment, but also hBMSCs in a pre-committed and pre-differentiated state. That is why performing our experiments with a conversion set-up involving pre-differentiated cells proved more applicable and the results represent the physiological appearance of human bone marrow more appropriately. Heparin enhances classical osteogenic readouts such as ALP mRNA transcription and enzyme activity as well as in vitro mineralization. These effects cannot be explained by increased cell proliferation, since cell number, relative to total DNA or to protein content, was not altered by heparin supplementation. The effects of heparin can be observed early on during commitment, are then sustained throughout the whole differentiation/conversion period, and are both associated with the expression of marker genes and osteoblast function. It is remarkable that there are no changes in the relative level of transcription of the mineralization inhibitors OC and OPN, which are usually associated with in vitro osteoblast maturation. The expression level of RUNX2, the basal osteoblast transcription factor, is also maintained. Nevertheless, it has to be taken into account that post-translational modifications play an important role in the regulation of RUNX2 function. Therefore, the lack of RUNX2 mRNA expression changes is not necessarily linked to a lack of RUNX2 signaling adjustments. The mRNA expression of interleukins, which represent the early and short-termed pro-inflammatory phase of osteoblast differentiation, is distinctly upregulated. Moreover, heparin selectively increases BMP4 mRNA expression during osteogenic differentiation ( Some of the effects of heparin on osteogenic and adipogenic outcome might be temporally and mechanistically independent between both lineages, i.e. different stages of each differentiation/conversion pathway and not only the hBMSCs as common precursor cells seem to be addressed by heparin. Nevertheless, starting from multipotent hBMSCs, the enhancement of BMP4 expression by heparin during early osteogenic lineage development is known to counteract adipogenic outcome Long-term heparin treatment of primary hBMSC-derived adipogenic and osteogenic progenitors rather surprisingly increased the osteogenic and reduced the adipogenic differentiation and conversion significantly, and thereby our results strikingly contrast earlier differentiation studies. In the presence of heparin, the inhibition of osteogenic differentiation had been reported in a rat model as well as in the immortalized osteoblast cell line Saos-2 Interestingly however, our results are well in agreement with other studies reporting an enhanced BMP and ALP activity by long-term heparin treatment and/or describing a positive influence on osteogenesis for hBMSCs, immortalized murine mesenchymal cell lines, and for in vivo mouse and rat models As members of the transforming growth factor (TGF) β superfamily, BMPs play crucial roles in skeletal development and bone regeneration The crucial role of BMP signaling in mediating the observed heparin effect is additionally underlined by the finding that the BMPR inhibitor Dorsomorphin completely prevents the supportive effect on osteogenesis in hBMSCs ( Although BMP signaling was dispensable for ALP activation in another study using MC3T3-E1 cells, there the authors correlated the increase of mineralization by recombinant BMP2 to the induction of canonical Wnt signaling, which is one of the major pathways governing osteogenesis In addition to the promoting effect on osteogenesis, our results demonstrate an inhibiting effect of heparin on adipogenesis most obvious in late differentiation and conversion stages. Such an inverse effect is already known for other differentiation factors like RUNX2 Interestingly, Peysselon and Ricard-Blum (2013) pointed out that angiogenic proteins have a higher, yet statistically non-significant affinity for heparin on average Apart from potential secondary effects on bone formation in vivo, another reason for the heparin-induced osteoporosis might be an eventual stimulation of osteoclastogenesis. As Irie et al. reported for co-cultures of osteoblast and osteoclast progenitors, heparin specifically binds to OPG, which is secreted from osteoblasts, and thereby inhibits the binding of OPG to RANKL on the surface of osteoblasts In summary, we clearly showed here that heparin, when added to skeletal precursors in vitro, rather fosters and stimulates than inhibits osteogenic commitment and differentiation. It stimulates BMP signaling and possibly facilitates both canonical and non-canonical Wnt signaling, which results in enhanced mineralization in vitro. This holds true even in a setting of conversion of adipogenically pre-differentiated cells towards the osteogenic pathway, suggesting that heparin also fosters osteogenic lineage switching and does not favor adipogenesis at the cost of osteogenic differentiation. While we were able to show that on the mRNA level the OPG/RANKL ratio is not supportive of enhanced osteoclast stimulation, the previously published protein data on the decoy effects of heparin on OPG binding to RANKL suggests that it may override those effects and as a result stimulates osteoclastogenesis The following are the supplementary related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at We thank Drs. Peter ten Dijke and Petra Knaus for the generous gift of the SBE and BRE reporter constructs and for the fruitful discussions, respectively. We also highly acknowledge Prof. Moustapha Kassem for providing the immortalized cell line hMSC-TERT. We thank Sylvia Hondke and Claudia Semprich very much for the proof reading. This work was supported by the