Kaolin is a unique mineral whose properties are adequate for its use as a functional ingredient in many industrial applications ( Leaching is used to extract iron from kaolin ore. The presence of reducing and complexing agents can significantly increase the dissolution rate ( As may be observed, most of the literature deals with the dissolution of iron from homogeneous particles. However, the description of iron dissolution kinetics from within a siliceous matrix, where the impurity is located, is especially relevant from the perspective of mineral beneficiation ( The sample used for the kinetic study was the − The dissolution experiments were carried out in a thermostated glass reactor (1 A complete mineral characterization is necessary since the different iron-containing mineral phases have distinct leaching behaviors in aqueous solutions, depending on each of their oxidation states, complex formation ability and solubility ( Citric acid has a high solubility in acidic solutions, forming different species ( Iron dissolution at low temperature is a slow process. Thiosulfate's effectiveness as a dissolution accelerator is strongly influenced by the temperature, which attributed to the fact that the increase in temperature will enhance both the reactions and the diffusion rate of reactants and products (  The effect of the citric acid concentration is shown in The chemical complexation reactions, that occur in solution during the leaching of iron and citric acid, are shown in the following Eqs. Due to the pH dependence of citrate dissociation ( The aforementioned behavior may be related, on one hand, to the degree of dissociation of citric acid at the different pH values, and on the other, to the thiosulfate disproportionation rate, which increases with acidity. The species distribution diagram presented in  Iron dissolution from different oxide species has been described by several models. Different studies of iron dissolution from kaolin have shown that the kinetic behavior is significantly dependent on the iron species present.  In the present study, the three distinct iron phases [greigite (Fe Greigite and magnetite should react according to the shrinking particle concept because all of the reaction products are soluble species. On the other hand, ilmenite more closely adheres to the shrinking core model since the reaction leaves solid material in its wake (TiO The total iron extracted into the solution originates from the combined leaching of all three phases. Therefore, the model can be initiated by establishing this fact in the following equation: Total iron moles extracted If n Kaolin is itself very porous (characteristically between 40 and 60%) and the iron phases are very small particles within this matrix. The concept of this model assumes that the fluid reactants penetrate and react simultaneously throughout the solid particle. Despite the small diffusion resistance, the extraction of iron in this system was observed to be quite slow, probably due to unfavorable reaction kinetics. For this reason, a reaction controlled shrinking particle or core (in the case of ilmenite) concept will be used to describe the leaching process ( Since the molar density of iron in phase j (ρ Therefore, Eq. Each of the individual kinetic expressions can be solved for X This leads to distinct functions for three different intervals: t To study the effect of the sodium thiosulfate concentration on the iron dissolution rate, experiments were performed using 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5 When the logarithm of the slopes of each phase are plotted against the logarithm of the thiosulfate concentration (not shown), the kinetics were shown to be approximately zero order with respect to thiosulfate. This fact is not at all surprising for ilmenite since its extraction does not require a reducing agent, which in this case originates from the decomposition of thiosulfate in acid solution (SO In other experiments, the citrate concentration was varied (0.5, 0.7 and 0.9 In independent experiments, the iron extraction with only one reagent (citrate or thiosulfate) was determined at pH It is possible to use the data shown in The solution pH was found to have a significant effect on the iron extraction rate. Experiments were performed varying this parameter (pH The effect of temperature was studied in another series of experiments at 60, 75 and 90 An Arrhenius plot showing the variation of the logarithm of the slopes from As additional evidence for the correctness of the reaction-control assumption of the model developed in this study, the Damkohler number ( Iron dissolution from a kaolin using sodium thiosulfate and citric acid was studied. The results of atomic absorption, XRD and EDS show a kaolinitic mineral with 0.77% of iron, occurring predominantly as ilmenite, greigite and magnetite. The initial whiteness index of the kaolin was 87.6%. Temperature had the most significant effect on iron dissolution. Bisulfite formation from thiosulfate decomposition was accelerated with the temperature, increasing the reducing power of the leaching solution. The best dissolution was at 90 A shrinking particle/core model was developed to describe the kinetics of iron extraction using sodium thiosulfate and citric acid from a kaolinitic clay, considering that the iron was contained in discrete particles within the porous kaolin matrix. XRD and EDS analyses showed a kaolinitic mineral with 0.77% of iron, occurring predominantly as ilmenite, greigite and magnetite. The results of different experiments, varying temperature, pH, thiosulfate and citric acid concentrations adjusted well to the resulting model equation. Three distinct behaviors were observed, which were attributed to the reactions rates of the ilmenite, magnetite and greigite phases. Iron extraction was found to be controlled by chemical reaction kinetics. The calculated activation energies confirmed this limiting step. The log-log plots of the calculated slopes for each phase versus the thiosulfate and citrate concentrations indicated that the kinetics with respect to thiosulfate was approximately zero order for all three phases and first order with respect to citrate for magnetite and greigite and closer to second order for ilmenite. On the other hand, citrate alone and thiosulfate alone had the power to leach the iron, although at a much slower rate and not completely. The citrate ion at 90 The authors would like to thank Dr. Shirley Bromberg from the Mathematics Department of the Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana – Iztapalapa for the important discussions concerning the model development. Patricia Olvera-Venegas is grateful to CONACyT (Consejo Nacional de Ciencias y Tecnología) for her postgraduate scholarship. The dissolution as a function of time for each mineral phase (greigite, magnetite and ilmenite) can be represented by Eq.  Substituting these in the relation for the average iron dissolution, Eq. In this manner, three distinct regions and their corresponding slopes can be identified with the kinetic behavior of the three different species.