Paleostress variations and microstructural imprints of a subducted carbonate slab record changes in mechanical strength during its exhumation. The slab studied here forms part of the high-P Samaná Terrane located on the north-eastern margin of the Hispaniola Island. Cold-cathodoluminescence images reveal relict cataclastic fabrics within the highest-pressure marbles of the Punta Balandra and Santa Bárbara Schists structural units, formed in the early stages of exhumation at P-T conditions ca. 2.0GPa −500°C. Cataclastic flow was triggered after a moderate increase of water content (1.2%<
                     w.t. H2O<1.8%). Accordingly, grain sizes larger than equivalent radius r
                     
                        i
                     
                     =40μm preserve distribution of power law type with fractal dimensions D
                     2
                     =2.43 in Punta Balandra unit and D
                     2
                     =2.72 in Santa Bárbara unit. After cataclastic flow, the stress dropped and grain comminution conducted the marbles to the dissolution-precipitation domain. Then, as exhumation progressed, the effective stress increased and calcite intracrystalline plasticity process dominated. Calcite-twinning incidence and recrystallized grain-size indicate maximum paleostress ca. 350MPa and mean flow paleostress≈130MPa. SEM-EBSD analyses show similar weak type-c calcite fabrics in all high-P carbonate units, even though they record different metamorphic P peak. Therefore, intracrystalline plasticity was probably dominant during the development of the final tectonic fabric. Finer grain-size distributions are out of fractal range, with D
                     1
                     <1, because of the further superposed deformation. Most of the data are consistent with an initial forced exhumation model of the carbonate slab in a brittle-ductile rheology of the confined plate interface.Deformation during convergence of lithospheric plates is mainly localized at the interface between plates, above the seismic zone of Wadati-Benioff ( Despite the increasing number of HP/LT terrains, found in different orogens (e.g., In this contribution, we study the tectonic fabric developed in marbles and calc-schists of the Samaná Complex on the north-eastern margin of the Hispaniola Island during its exhumation from high-P peak conditions. Taking into account the complexity of the superimposed progressive deformation along the stages of intra-oceanic subduction, arc accretion and arc-continent collision ( The study area is a part of the northern Caribbean subduction-accretionary complex composed of a tectonic mélange of fragments of ophiolites, volcanic-arcs and metasedimentary complexes derived from the subducted southern North America margin ( Coarse-grained siliciclastic rocks of Miocene age and late Miocene to Pleistocene subhorizontal reef limestones unconformably overlie the metamorphic complex along the south and north coasts, respectively. Late deformations are located along two main fault zones: the left-lateral, strike-slip Septentrional fault and the Hispaniola-Puerto Rico Trench ( The metamorphic basement of the Samaná Terrane is allochthonous and consists of a nappe stacking of five structural units emplaced towards the NE/ENE during the accretion ( In the Samaná Terrane, the three main coherent structural units with marbles and calc-schists that recorded high-P metamorphism (M1) are: Punta Balandra (PB), Santa Bárbara Schists (SBS) and Rincón Marbles (RM). The PB is the uppermost structural unit and includes, in a thin upper serpentinite-matrix mélange zone, mafic eclogite blocks of MORB-BABB geochemical signature that suggests an exotic provenance ( The D2 tectonometamorphic event records the exhumation of the Samaná Terrane and is the subject of this study. D2 structures and microstructures are well preserved in the three high-P metacarbonate units ( The S2-foliation is the main and regional foliation in the whole nappe stack of the Samaná Terrane. In the PB and SBS units, this S2 foliation is mylonitic and defined by the elongation of calcite/dolomite, albite, biotite, quartz, glaucophane, phengite, paragonite, rutile and titanite. In the RM unit, the S2 is granoblastic to mylonitic and defined by recrystallized calcite grains and by the shape of the calcite host grains, as well as by the presence of albite, phengite, chlorite, lawsonite, quartz, titanite and rutile. In addition, quartz-ribbons with carpholite or phengite-epidote pseudomorphs are interlayered in occasions. The evolution of mineral assemblages during D2 deformation indicates a retrograde evolution from eclogite and garnet blueschists to greenschists facies for the PB unit and from the blueschists to greenschists-facies for the SBS and RM units ( Calcite fabrics developed during the D2 exhumation of the high-P metacarbonates of the Samaná Terrane were studied. Twenty-three samples of calc-schists and marbles were collected in the PB, SBS and RM units. In the samples, the S2 fabric is well-developed and was formed at P-T conditions ranging between 2 Geo-referenced thin-sections were cut parallel to the L2 mineral lineation and perpendicular to the S2 foliation. All of these thin-sections were analysed by conventional optical microscopy (OM), where shape-fabrics were characterized in collages composed of numerous OM-images. Cathodoluminescence images (CL-images) were obtained using a Technosyn Cold Cathodoluminescence CL8200 MK5 detector, specially suitable for carbonate rocks. However, only the thin-sections from the samples collected in the PB and SBS units show enough luminescence for the study. OM-images were compared with CL-images captured in the same area and differences were quantified in terms of grain-size and shape. Calcite and quartz preferred orientation was also determined by SEM Philips XL30 using an EBSD detector and beam energy of 20 Grain-area ( In addition, fractal dimension ( Most of the foliated marbles and calc-schists have an L-S tectonic fabric characterized by mantle microstructures and rotational phenoblasts bounded by recrystallized grains of calcite and quartz. > Some of the S2-foliations show evidence of a later superposed dissolution, such as an increase in irregularity of the foliation surface with interpenetrated boundary grains of calcite and the concentration of insoluble opaque material ( The microstructures superposed during progressive development of the main D2-tectonic fabric indicate a sequence of dominant mechanisms of deformation. After cataclastic flow, dissolution-precipitation creep was activated and, then, blastomylonitic S2-foliation was developed by intracrystalline plasticity. Late deformation could imprint locally brittle deformation and/or reworked the S2-foliation by dissolution-precipitation. Dissolution-precipitation creep operates under very low differential stresses (i.e. The calcite crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) of ten deformed marbles and calc-schists, representative of the three HP/LT units, were analysed by SEM-EBSD. In an inverse-pole figure (IPF), the orientation of L2-lineation ( All fabrics have the same pattern with a single The grain size distribution (GSD) of twenty-three calcite tectonic fabrics was analysed. In addition, GSD obtained from OM-images was compared with CL-images taken from the same framework in six relict cataclastic fabrics ( The grain size in PB and SBS fabrics have normal distribution within the same range. However, grain size has bimodal distribution and lower refinement in RM fabrics ( The grain size of the cataclastic microstructures observed in CL-images has a similar distribution but with a slope break at log ( OM- and CL calcite fabrics present four grain fractions, well-differentiated in the grain-size diagrams ( Twinning incidence ( The microstructures of the marbles and calc-schists show dynamical recrystallization by grain boundary migration during the development of the blastomylonitic D2-fabric ( A quartz-ribbon boudined into a calc-schists (JE9059, SBS unit) during D2-deformation gives a paleostress of 30 This work analyses the S2 tectonic fabric imposed on the calc-schists and marbles of the HP/LT-carbonate units of the Samaná Terrane, during its exhumation. The Samaná Terrane was accreted on the NE border of the Caribbean plate as a consequence of the North-American plate subduction towards the SW ( The retrograde M2-metamorphism re-equilibrated the PB unit at the P-T conditions of the peak reached in SBS unit during the prograde M1-metamorphism. Then, both units exhumed by thrusting over the RM unit. Similarly, the rest of the stacked thrust sheets of the Samaná Terrane emplaced progressively at lower metamorphic conditions. Finally, the wedge accreted onto the NE margin of the Caribbean plate and re-equilibrated below the greenschist facies ( A tectonic model based on the structure and metamorphism of the Northern Caribbean margin ( CL-images show unambiguously relict cataclastic fabrics preserved in the marbles and calc-schists with dissolution-precipitation microstructures and intra crystalline calcite plasticity superposed during the development of the S2-foliation ( In addition, evidences of high-fluid pressure are also found in the subduction channel, because metasomatism controlled eclogitization during at least 25 On the other hand, pressure-solution microstructures could explain why inclusions are rarely found in marbles and calc-schists. They could help the initiation and development of S2-foliation, as recently has been experimentally demonstrated ( Stress-drop after cataclasis and progressive grain size reduction could lead to HP/LT pressure-dissolution (i.e. In addition, if strength increased with depth during exhumation of the HP/LT-carbonate-units, frictional rheology of the plate interface (i.e. Taking in account the temperature recorded during M2-metamorphism and assuming a high-fluid pressure, the maxima paleostresses (> CL-images of the calcite-fabrics show relicts of cataclastic microstructures in marbles and calc-schists of PB and SBS units. Pressure-dissolution S2-foliation is observed in both CL- and OM-images. OM-images show basically blastomylonite fabrics formed by intracrystalline plasticity accommodated by grain boundary migration-recrystallization ( Changes in the GSD of the tectonic fabric outlined in CL-images are determined by comparison to outlined fabrics captured in OM-images of the same area. These differences are related to the changes in the dominant mechanism of deformation observed in the tectonic-fabric during the development of the D2-microstructures. GSD-diagrams show patterns defined by five grain populations. The grain size range in each fraction ( Fractal analyses carried out in carbonate cataclasites involved rock-faults deformed in low P-T conditions, where fractal dimension Pressure-dissolution and intracrystalline plasticity were dominant in marbles and calc-schists after cataclasis. Both mechanisms of deformation are scale-dependent and tend to homogenise the grain size during recrystallization and dissolution. Therefore, the slope of the finer grain distributions ( The high-pressure marbles and calc-schists of the Samaná Terrane preserve relict cataclastic microstructures observed in CL-images, partially obliterated by the superposition of pressure-dissolution and intracrystalline plasticity during the final development of the tectonic fabric. These tectonic fabrics were developed during the exhumation of the HP/LT carbonate slab. Grain size distributions display two distinct power-law type fits: Most of the data are consistent with a combined exhumation model of the carbonate slab in a brittle-ductile rheology of the plate interface. The initial overpressure mode of exhumation is followed by the nappe stacking of the accretion prism, indicating that a thrust-and-fold lithostatic pressure mode operated a shallower depths. We thank D. Prior, E. Mariani and the Department of Earth Science of Liverpool University for their assistance and contribution to calcite-CPOs analysis. This contribution was funded by the research projects