Room temperature granulation of fly-ash generated from incineration of municipal solid wastes (MSW) was achieved by mixing the ash with lime, water and three polyaminophenolic additives in a rotating drum. The presence of the additives favours the carbonation of lime, thus accelerating and enhancing the development of short-term compressive strength of the granules; this ensures there is no need to cure the pastes in CO2-enriched or heated atmospheres. After curing in air for 30, 45, 60 and 90 days, the granules were evaluated by unconfined compressive strength tests. The strengths achieved shortly after granulation allow safe transportation and storage of the granules and are similar to the strengths of the light granulates used for building purposes.According to the latest EU directives on wastes and hazardous wastes, the main effort in the next few years will be devoted to the disposal in controlled landfills of only inertized or incinerated wastes. This will increase the amount of municipal solid wastes (MSW) destined for incineration reducing the volume and the weight up to 90 and 60%, respectively Two kinds of ashes are produced from incineration: bottom ash and fly-ash (FA). The latter amounts to 2–3% of the original waste; it contains the heavy metals that vaporize during the process. FA is generally trapped by electrostatic filters located downstream of the burners before the combustion gases are released into the atmosphere with the finest particulates. FA is disposed of in controlled landfills after inertization with binding agents. Nevertheless this practice leads to an increase in the volume of the original waste, so it is necessary to develop new techniques for recycling and reusing fly-ash. MSW-FA has been studied as a replacement for cement in concrete Binding agents used are cement and lime. In the case of coal fly-ash, these agents react with the pozzolanic components of the ash, achieving satisfactory long-term compressive strength for the solidified products At present, cement-based solidification/stabilization (S/S) seems to offer the best way to inertize hazardous wastes The aim of the work reported here was to convert FA, lime and a suitable additive, into granules with compressive strengths such as to allow safe transport and disposal of the ash in the final landfill, while also bearing in mind that suitable compressive strength values could permit the use of granules in light aggregates for building purposes. The FA used in this study comes from the municipal solid wastes incinerator serving the Forli' area in Emilia-Romagna, one of the most highly industrialized regions of Italy. The material was collected from the electrostatic precipitators during a 3-day sampling period to obtain a representative sample, smoothing out possible alterations in incinerator feed composition. Operating conditions were kept as constant as possible during sampling. The material was quartered to obtain homogeneous samples for characterization and for preparing samples for mechanical tests after mixing with lime and additives. The binder used for preparation of granules was calcium hydroxide (L) at high specific surface to increase reactivity with CO The additives used in the work are products of the reaction among tetraethylenepentamine (TEPA), formaldehyde (FD) and phenol (P). FD permits the polymerization of TEPA, thus favouring the successive addition of the phenol rings to the polymeric chain. Three additives (AB2, AB4 and AB6) were selected on the basis of CO The three additives were prepared using TP:FD:P molar ratios of 1:1:0.2 for additive AB2, 1:1:0.4 for additive AB4 and 1:1:0.6 for additive AB6. A mixture of TEPA and P was placed in a beaker and stirred to complete dissolution of the phenol. FD was then added dropwise with continuous stirring, keeping the temperature below 50°C. The mixture was heated for 4 h at 110°C to remove the water and then slowly brought to 160°C where it was held for 1 h. After cooling, the product exhibited high viscosity and was completely soluble in water. Chemical and physical properties of the additives are summarized in Two kinds of samples were prepared: cylinders and granules. For the cylindrical specimens a mix of FA (300 g) and L (60 g), at a constant ratio L/FA of 0.2, was dry blended for 2 min and the same volume of a solution of the additive in water (concentration range 0–0.4%) was added to the mix; the reference was made with tap water. The whole set of samples is shown in For granule production the dry mix L–FA was placed in a rotating drum ( The formation and accretion of granules took place within 2–5 min while the rotating drum was kept horizontal. When the granules reached the expected shape and dimension they were collected in a container and cured for 30, 45, 60 and 90 days. For cylinder production the solutions containing additives were added to the dry mixture L–FA at a constant ratio W/(L+FA) of 0.5. Twenty-eight cylindrical samples (   The compressive strengths developed by the granules and cylinders manufactured with different additives but at the same additive concentration (0.2%), are reported in The little difference of amorphous phase between 25 and As far as the cylinders are concerned, after 60 days curing the strength of the mixes ( Additive AB2 behaves better than the other ones in the first stage of curing (up to 60 days), because its alkalinity and molecular weight are at optimum levels; in fact the additive's molecule must be sufficiently alkaline to absorb the atmospheric CO Another requirement for the best performance of the additive is low molecular mass, because “migration” of the ABX–CO The results show that the tailored aminophenolic AB2 additive increases the mechanical strength of the lime–fly ash mixes in the early stage of curing: the action of the additive is attributable to enhancement of carbonation of the lime and to its fluidising action. The best additive in the ABX series is the AB2 product, owing to its chemical and physical structure. It has the right alkalinity to absorb and release atmospheric CO The maximum strength achieved with the AB2 additive derives from the highest specific gravity obtained in the lime–fly ash–AB2 additive mixes. The good mechanical characteristics of the granules facilitate their disposal and movement. The overall properties of the granules are such as to allow their safe transportation and storage, while their high mechanical strength encourages further experimentation in the field of granulation. Indeed, the final aim of such research would be the attainment of compressive strength values such as to permit the granules to be used for building purposes as lightweight aggregates, thus avoiding disposal in landfill. The authors want to thank Mr. Giampaolo Marruzzo of CNR's Mineral Processing Institute, for the deep analysis carried out on X-ray spectra which greatly assisted the understanding of the experimental results.