The application of collagen preparations as carriers of rosemary extract in the production of wiener-type and liver sausages has been evaluated. The rosemary extract was introduced into the meat products using one of two carriers (collagen hydrolyzate or collagen fibre preparation) or directly (i.e. using no carriers). The relationship between the methods of extract introduction and its antioxidative action was assessed on the basis of the lipid oxidation (i.e. determination of peroxide value and TBARS) during cold storage of sausages in air or in vacuum. The introduction of rosemary extract to the products via the collagen fibre preparation limited lipid oxidation greater than the direct addition of the antioxidant to both meat products, irrespective of storage. On the contrary, in the case of the application of collagen hydrolyzate as a carrier of extract, a masking effect was observed, diminishing the antioxidative impact on the tested products.Oxidation of meat lipids is an complex process and its dynamics depends on numerous factors, including chemical composition of the meat, light and oxygen access, as well as storage temperature ( One method to reduce lipid oxidation is the application of antioxidants. Recently, natural antioxidants have been gaining increasing popularity. These antioxidants include extracts obtained from plants belonging to the Obtaining optimum oxidative stability of products is closely correlated with the uniform distribution of the antioxidant, which is very often achieved by the application of carriers. The most frequently used carriers of extracts are edible oils and 1,2-propylene glycol ( Connective tissue proteins, especially collagen, have specific functional properties, which may be important for application as carriers of various substances to facilitate uniform distribution of the substances, as well as increase their stability. Moreover, collagen rarely causes allergic reactions and is well tolerated by humans. Because of these properties, collagen is commonly used in medicine and pharmacology as a carrier of biologically active substances e.g. vitamins, minerals and drugs ( The aim of the study was to determine whether collagen preparations might be used as carriers of rosemary extract in the production of processed meat products such as a finely comminuted wiener-type sausage and liver sausage. This was done by assessing the antioxidative effectiveness of rosemary extract introduced to meat products using collagen carriers and comparing the carriers with the effect of the extract added directly to the products. Rosemary extract (in the form of a powder), obtained as a result of maceration of crushed rosemary leaves in 96% ethanol ( Two types of connective tissue (collagen) preparations at present used most frequently in the production of processed meat products, i.e. collagen hydrolyzate and collagen fibre preparation, were used as carriers of rosemary extract. The collagen hydrolyzate used (Nativ-WB1/S, Prowico GmgH & Co, Nordhorn) was a high-molecular enzymatic hydrolyzate obtained from porcine subcutaneous connective tissue. The collagen fibre preparation was produced from the The impregnation process of collagen preparations consisted of soaking in a rosemary extract solution (0.250 Two types of popular processed meat products were prepared, i.e. wiener-type scalded sausage and liver sausage. Wiener-type sausage was produced from pork (meat from hock) and fine fat from ham. Meat and fat were ground using a 3 In the production of liver sausage cooked fat pork (class II – fat content from 16% to 45%) and scalded fine fat were used. Raw materials were ground using a 3 Each of these products was prepared in four variants, out of which one was left as a control sample, while to the others the following additives (g per 100 ethanol rosemary extract (0.02 collagen fibre preparation impregnated with rosemary extract (2 collagen hydrolyzate impregnated with rosemary extract (2 Connective tissue preparations impregnated with rosemary extract were added to the batter in the hydrated form (collagen preparation at the 1:4 ratio, collagen hydrolyzate at 1:10). Sausages were stored at 4 The chemical composition of wiener-type and liver sausages, i.e. contents of moisture (drying to constant mass according to standard During storage of sausages, lipid oxidative changes were periodically assessed by determination of peroxide and TBARS values. The assessment of peroxide value was conducted according to standard To compare mean values of the investigated parameters, analysis of variance was applied and differences between groups were evaluated using the Chemical composition of the tested sausages is presented in During the storage of the wiener-type sausage, a lower degree of lipid oxidation was observed than was found in the liver sausage ( During the storage of both products, an advantageous effect was found for the addition of rosemary extract on oxidative stability of lipids – statistically significant lower peroxide and TBARS values were observed immediately after the cooling of the products (the first 24 The effect of collagen fibre preparation and collagen hydrolyzate as rosemary extract carriers on the inhibition of lipid oxidation varied for the tested products. In the case of wiener-type sausage, the application of collagen fibre preparation as the rosemary extract carrier enhanced the effectiveness of this natural antioxidant, resulting in the limitation of peroxide formation during product storage ( In the liver sausage, the effect of rosemary extract introduction on lipid oxidation ( The investigations confirmed the inhibitory effect of rosemary extract on lipid oxidation in processed meat products. The effect of rosemary on the inhibition of lipid oxidation has been documented by numerous studies, which included sausages ( On the basis of the results presented in this study, it may be stated that the method in which rosemary extract is added to the tested meat products had an effect on its antioxidant action. The introduction of the extract to processed meat products using a collagen fibre preparation limited lipid oxidation to a greater degree than in the case of the direct addition of the antioxidant. This is in agreement with the results of studies, which examined the effect of connective tissue preparations on antioxidant actions of rosemary extract in meatballs during cold storage ( The better antioxidant action with the use of collagen fibres may result from a more uniform distribution of rosemary extract during the production of the sausages. In the course of the chopping process, it was easier to thoroughly distribute throughout the whole meat batter the 2% addition of the preparation impregnated with rosemary extract than it was for the slight amount (0.02%) of the extract introduced directly. The thorough distribution of the extract could also have been the effect of hydrothermal denaturation, to which collagen is subjected during thermal processing ( Some effects could be due to other properties of the applied carrier, e.g. its polar character. In processed meat products, which are multiphase systems, substances catalyzing lipid oxidation and reactive products formed as a result of this process are distributed both in the water and lipid phase. Thus, in such systems a considerable role is played by the location of antioxidants, which is dependent on solubility and polarity ( The greater effectiveness of the antioxidant introduced on collagen carriers could also have resulted from the presence of synergistic interactions between amino acids of the carriers and components of rosemary extract. Some amino acids, due to specific functional groups, are capable of regenerating primary antioxidants ( On the other hand, interactions between amino acids and substances such as phenolic compounds are complex and may be both synergistic and antagonistic in character. It was found that proline contained in the peptide structure might form complexes with phenolic compounds ( Collagen preparations have potential to be used as carriers of rosemary extract in the production of processed meat, but the application of the preparations are dependent on their form and properties. Collagen in fibre form was a better carrier of rosemary extract than collagen hydrolyzate in this study. The introduction of rosemary extract to meat products via a collagen fibre preparation improved its antioxidant action. However, for further application of protein preparations as carriers in practice, it is important to understand how their properties influence the effectiveness of antioxidants’ action.