Tin and its compounds have a variety of applications. It is recovered as cassiterite from ore deposit by flotation. Traditionally, the use of fattyacidsandtheir derivatives with limited selectivity of cassiterite over calcite (the main gangue mineral) has been replaced by benzohydroxamic acid (BHA). BHA shows poor collecting ability to cassiterite, even when lead nitrate (LN) is added as the activator. In this work, the flotation results show that cassiterite can be separated efficiently from cassiterite-calcite binary mixed minerals using a mixture of LN/BHA as collector and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) as depressant. The separation performance of the mixture of LN/BHA is much better compared with adding LN and BHA in sequence at the same dosage. Zeta potential measurements indicate that the mixture of LN/BHA exhibits much stronger ability to adsorb on cassiterite compared with adding LN and BHA in sequence even in the presence of CMC.Owing to low smelting point, excellent In the last two decades, benzohydroxamic acid (BHA) has been successfully applied as In this work, we prepared the collector mixture of LN/BHA and applied the mixture in cassiterite/calcite separation for the first time. Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), as Natural cassiterite and calcite crystals were obtained from Yunnan and Hunan province in China. Mineralogical and X-ray diffraction data confirmed the purity of cassiterite and calcite (100 and 99.32%, respectively). The mineral samples were ground in a pottery ball mill and the −75 Analytically pure BHA (above 98% purity) was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry. CMC and LN with 99% purity were purchased from Tianjin Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre. HCl and NaOH stock solutions were used for pH adjustments. Deionized (DI) water with a resistivity of over 18 The collector mixture of LN/BHA was freshly prepared in this study. BHA and LN at a given mass were added in a 50 Flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine with a 40 The zeta potential of minerals treated and untreated by flotation reagents was measured using a JS94H micro electrophoresis instrument (Shanghai Zhongchen Digital Technic Apparatus Co., China). The measurement was carried out at 25 LN The recoveries of cassiterite and calcite as Flotation experiments on mixed binary minerals of calcite (1.0 Zeta potentials of cassiterite and calcite minerals in the absence and presence of flotation reagents were measured. The results are shown in In the presence of CMC alone at pH 8–12, the zeta potential of cassiterite decreases slightly by around 5 At pH 8–9, the addition of LN/BHA mixture, leads to a greater increase of 25 At pH 8–9, adding LN/BHA mixture can produce an obvious increase in zeta potential by 20 The micro-flotation results indicate that the mixture of LN/BHA shows excellent collecting ability for cassiterite and improved selectivity in cassiterite-calcite mixed minerals in the presence of CMC. Zeta potential measurements indicate that the mixture of LN/BHA exhibits much stronger ability to adsorb on cassiterite compared with adding LN and BHA in sequence in the presence and absence of CMC. This work was supported financially by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 