Pulsed gas–solid fluidized beds can effectively separate fine coal, and bubbles play an important role in creating suitable separation conditions. The present study performed statistical and image analyses of the evolution of bubbles in a two-dimensional pulsed gas–solid fluidized bed using a high-speed dynamic camera. The effects of apparent gas velocity, pulsation frequency and particle size on bubble characteristics and bed expansion were analyzed. The results indicate that, when a fluctuation frequency is added, the expansion height of the bed increases, the effect of attachment to the bed wall decreases, the leading diameter and rising velocity of the bubbles both decrease and the degree of bubble deformation increases. These trends are also more obvious for fine particles. These findings demonstrate that a high density pulsed gas–solid fluidized bed can effectively combine gases and solids to produce a uniform, stable mixture. The bubble diameter and rising velocity were also simulated in the present work, and the relationship between the two was established using a fitting model with an error within 5%. This model provides an effective means of predicting bubble velocity as well as studying the distribution of the bubble phase and improving the stability of the bed density.Pulsed frequency, Hz Equivalent diameter of bubbles, cm Apparent gas velocity, m/s Minimum fluidization velocity, m/s Fluidization number Bed expansion height, mm Horizontal diameter of bubbles, mm Vertical diameter of bubbles, mm Total number of bubbles Left boundary of bubbles Right boundary of bubbles Probability that the Aspect ratio Transverse rising velocity of primitive bubbles, m/s Longitudinal rising velocity of primitive bubbles, m/s Abscissa position of a primitive bubble, m Ordinate position of a primitive bubble, m Abscissa position of a displaced bubble, m Ordinate position of a displaced bubble, m Although China has significant coal reserves, ultralow ash coal (having an ash content of less than 10%) only accounts for 15%–20% of the total reserves, while medium and high sulfur coal (with sulfur concentration of more than 1%) account for 33% of the total. Even so, coal is still the main driving force behind China’s economic development. According to a statistical review of world energy sources ( There have been many studies comparing the fluidization efficiencies of pulsating and traditional fluidized beds. The behavior of bubbles in a fluidized bed is an important indicator of fluidization quality because this factor affects the heat–mass transfer and the extent of mixing in the bed ( In recent years, the formation and motion of bubbles have been extensively studied. Digital image analysis technology can be used to remove noise from images as well as to enhance, restore, segment and extract features and therefore is widely used to analyze the shapes of bubbles in fluidized beds based on light transmission. The defoaming effect of a pulsed gas–solid fluidized bed has been thoroughly studied. However, the deformation of bubbles under pulsating conditions and the applicability of models that predict bubble rising velocities under pulsating conditions have not yet been examined. For these reasons, the present work employed a 2D fluidized bed to assess bed expansion as well as bubble diameters, deformation and rising velocity at various fluctuation frequencies and gas velocities. Rising velocity models were evaluated and a bubble rising velocity predictive relationship suitable for fluctuating conditions was developed. An ADMFB device employs fine particles as a heavy medium to form a suspension with a specific density such that minerals with different densities are sorted within the bed according to their density. Because of the particle concentration is so high that the interior of the 3D fluidized bed cannot be clearly observed and the difficulty in capturing bubbles in such units, a 2D bed with a length of 300 In this study, Geldart A and B magnetite powders were used as the bed materials. In response to the combination of air flow and pulsating energy, the gas–solid suspensions formed by these magnetite powders had densities suitable for the gravity-based separation of coal. Magnetite powder was used because it is highly magnetic and thus can be readily recycled. Prior to the main experiments, a series of trials was carried out to determine the minimum fluidization velocity at each frequency, and In the present research, a high-speed camera was used to acquire images of static and fluidized beds during the various trials. After fluidization, the system was allowed to equilibrate for 1 A high-speed digital camera was used to record the fluidization process under different operating conditions, with each image containing fixed number of rows and columns of pixels. Each pixel was an image element that represented the brightness of each point in the image, with a value between 0 and 255. In this study, the MATLAB program was used to process the extracted bubble information, with a threshold equal to the median of the maximum and minimum brightness values of all the pixels in a given image. Areas below this threshold were given a black coloration, while areas with higher brightness were colored white. Each image to be processed was first clipped and gray-scaled. Because the processed images contained noise, median filtering was applied, after which each filtered image was binarized to obtain a black and white version that highlighted the bubble contours. Bubble deformation was characterized by the aspect ratio, The bubble is spherical when The centroid coordinates of the bubbles were extracted using the MATLAB software package and the rising velocity values were calculated using the equations: Under the same operating conditions and bed parameters, the expansion of the central bed in a pulsed gas–solid fluidized bed will be higher than that in a conventional fluidized bed, and the expansion height of Geldart A particles will exceed that of B particles. As shown in  The shape of the bubbles in a fluidized bed is determined by the particles at the gas–solid interface. The forces acting on such particles are generally a combination of inertia, gravity, buoyancy, viscous, gas drag and particle collision forces. As a result of these forces, bubbles can adopt spherical, ellipsoid, strip-shaped, flat, spherical cap or more irregular morphologies. At a low Reynolds number, the particles will reache the force equilibrium state and the bubbles will maintain a spherical shape, while a higher Reynolds number increase, the particles around the bubbles give the bubbles a greater force, such that the bubbles begin to deform. With further increases in the Reynolds number, the bubbles will tend to have more irregular shapes. Simultaneously, a pressure gradient force is generated due to the different pressures on the particles surrounding the upper and lower surfaces of the bubbles, resulting in the formation of spherical cap bubbles. The bubble diameter is often used as an indicator of the fluidization effect. Large bubbles are prone to rupture, which disturbs the bed and increases the backmixing of particles. Although the main diameter of the bubbles will be different under different operating conditions, the absolute variation is relatively small (between 0.5 and 2 The aspect ratio of bubbles can reflect the bubble shape, and The rising velocity of bubbles reflects the residence time of the bubbles in the bed and is associated with the gas–solid contact efficiency. This velocity also depends on many other factors. As bubbles merge, the initial bubbles will move more slowly because of the drag force exerted by the bubbles behind them. However, as the latter bubbles accelerate, changes in bubble diameter and various external factors also change the rising velocity of bubbles. Based on the experimental data, the models for predicting bubble rising velocity proposed by Davidson and Shen were compared ( The ExpDec3P2 regression model was used to fit the bubble diameter and rising velocity data, taking The adjusted Compared with traditional fluidized beds, pulsed gas–solid fluidized beds can eliminate wall attachment because these devices impart forced vibrational energy under the same operating conditions. These beds provide increased expansion heights, improved gas–solid contact efficiency and better fluidization. Increasing the Reynolds number was found to change the bubble shape from regular to irregular. The incorporation of pulsation decreased the bubble diameter while increasing the aspect ratio such that the bubbles became flatter and their rising velocity decreased. The above phenomena were more evident in trials with Geldart A particles. In the absence of pulsation, the model proposed by Shen et al. accurately explained the experimental data, while the application of pulsation caused both the predictive models used in this work to significantly differ from the actual data. The relationship between bubble diameter and rising velocity was fitted and was found to be consistent with the ExpDec3P2 regression model such that the disagreement between the values obtained from regression using the model and the actual data was approximately 5%. Consequently, this model can be used to predict the bubble rising velocity from the bubble diameter. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the