Gold telluride ores, treated commercially in various regions in the world, most notably Kalgoorlie, Western Australia; Vatukoula, Fiji; Cripple Creek, Colorado, and Kirkland Lake, Ontario, exhibit slow leaching kinetics. There are many telluride mineral species and the most common gold bearing varieties include calaverite, krennerite, sylvanite and petzite. This chapter presents information on the composition and properties of gold telluride, the assay method, the processing methods and the latest developments. Roasting followed by cyanidation proved to be the preferred method to extract gold from telluride ores. Ultrafine milling of a flotation concentrate followed by cyanidation replaced roasting because of environmental issues. The first application of this approach, at KCGM (Kalgoorlie Consolidated Gold Mines), presented significant challenges in terms of high consumption of cyanide and losses of gold in leach residues. These issues were overcome by conducting cyanidation with a high concentration of lime and the addition of lead nitrate. The mechanisms involved in the dissolution of calaverite were identified by determination of the reaction products at the surface of leached grains.Gold–telluride ores have been treated commercially in only in a small number of regions in the world, most notably in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia; Vatukoula, Fiji; Cripple Creek, Colorado, and Kirkland Lake, Ontario. The leaching of telluride ores has always been problematical with a perceived mismatch of findings between researchers and operators as to the recoverability of gold by cyanide leaching of gold–telluride ores without some form of oxidative pre-treatment step. The question as to whether cyanide can successfully recover gold from gold–telluride ores has long been debated. The simplest and most common association of tellurium with gold is as the mineral calaverite [AuTe Many non–gold-associated telluride minerals also occur, most notably coloradoite [HgTe], altaite [PbTe], and hessite [Ag Tellurium is occasionally found uncombined in nature but is mostly produced as a by-product of the electrolytic refining of blister copper. It is used as an additive to steel and is often alloyed with aluminum, copper, lead, or tin. It is used in vulcanizing rubber, as a coloring agent in glass and ceramics and in catalysts for petroleum cracking. It is a semiconductor material and is slightly photosensitive. Commercial-grade tellurium retails for around US$110/kg ( Calaverite [AuTe Its physical characteristics are given in When heated in air to around 500 The mineral itself is remarkably gold rich, with the gold being found in a molecular association with the element tellurium. On a weight basis, ∼44% of the weight of the mineral is gold. Metallic tellurium and tellurium compounds should be considered toxic and need to be handled with care. Humans exposed to as little tellurium as 0.01 Telluride ores present unique challenges to the fire assayer. Tellurium can cause low values for both silver and gold during the cupelation process by reducing the surface tension of the precious metal prill, leading to losses into the cupel. It is thus important to ensure removal of the tellurium during the fire assay fusion. This is accomplished by ensuring that the fusion is carried out under strong oxidizing conditions so that the tellurium reports to the slag rather than to the lead phase. Should a sample not be initially identified as containing tellurium, a telltale It is generally helpful to reduce the sample weight for such ores in order to increase the flux/sample ratio. This increases the likelihood of a successful fusion resulting in a clean two-phase separation. Gold–telluride ores were not immediately recognized for their gold-bearing capacity. Visually, these ores did not contain the same dull brassy yellow typical of free gold. It was with some surprise that the returns from treatment plants greatly exceeded the miners' expectations. The identification of tellurides as a significant source of gold quickly led to miners identifying the mineral in its own right. A simple miner's test for gold tellurides consisted of spreading the mineral a few particles deep on a glass slide and heating it in a flame. The telluride fused, leaving a characteristic island of telltale gold surrounded by a pool of tellurium oxide. Gold-bearing tellurides are silvery to pyrite-yellow, commonly striated, unlike gold, which is a deeper yellow and rarely crystalline. Some mineral indicators of gold tellurides were observed that assisted in its detection. A distinctive green ore (green leader), taking its color from a vanadium-bearing mica, has sometimes accompanied telluride gold. The first modern treatment of gold–telluride ores was carried out in the Cripple Creek goldfield in the Rocky Mountains in Colorado, USA. Discovered in 1891, it was then one of the richest goldfields in the world. Because the deposits at Cripple Creek were close to the surface, little capital was required to start a mine, and most were initially owned and operated by groups of prospectors. The relatively high specific gravity of the mineral (9.2) allowed it to be concentrated by gravity techniques such as blanketing tables, which retained the heavier particles. The introduction of the Wilfley table in 1903 further improved gold recovery by utilizing longitudinal riffles that caught gold and mineral particles from material flowing diagonally across the table. The gravity concentrates so produced were smelted to yield the gold metal. Such techniques, while being suited to coarse particles, were inefficient in capturing the fine particles, resulting in significant gold losses. The problem was further compounded by the brittleness of the mineral, which when crushed or milled The second major goldfield where tellurides became an important source of gold was in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, where gold was first discovered in 1893. The presence of tellurides was soon recognized based on the experience of Cripple Creek miners, with specimen-quality telluride material being sent for exhibition in the 1900 Paris World Exposition. As reserves of oxidized ore were running out, very rich pockets of sulfo-telluride ores were discovered within the main lodes of several mines. Concentrating and smelting techniques were found to be able to successfully recover most of the telluride-associated gold, achieving around 95% recovery without a leach step; however, because no smelting facility was available locally, the ore had to be transported to suitable smelters in the eastern colonies (South Australia and New South Wales). The smelters operated as copper or silver lead smelters but were adapted to deal with shipments of gold ore. Eventually, in 1903, a local smelter was built on the coast at Fremantle, ∼600 Some of the sulfo-telluride ores mined between 1897 and 1900 were very rich indeed, grading around 500 The presence of up to 15% calcium and magnesium carbonate in the Kalgoorlie ore ruled out any possibility of using chlorination in place of smelting due to the very large chlorine consumption of these ores. Cyanide was introduced to leach the product of whole-ore roasting – a dry grinding process. Extractions were good, but costs were high because of the dry grinding and fuel required to roast an ore of relatively low sulfide content. Attempts to use direct cyanidation of the concentrates produced from a concentration step proved to be largely unsuccessful, with the preferred method being to roast the concentrate. However, many roasters of the time suffered from significant dust losses with inefficient dust capture resulting in the loss to atmosphere of high-grade gold material. This, and the need to leach the unsatisfactorily high-grade gold of the concentration tailings, spurred the development of an efficient leaching process that did not require the pretreatment step of roasting. As early as 1894, research in Britain had shown that the addition of bromocyanide to the normal cyanidation process improved its efficiency with certain problematic ores including tellurides. A company was formed to exploit the patent for the process (the Sulman Teed process) and was based in the Kalgoorlie goldfields. The process was refined by the company's chief chemist, Dr L. Diehl. The Diehl process, as it became known, was able to treat telluride ores by incorporating the use of bromocyanide from the Sulman Teed process, along with a new innovation, the tube mill. The tube mill allowed for the efficient fine grinding after the amalgamation and the removal of concentrates. It had become clear that fine crushing was essential for bromocyanide to be effective on the sulfo-telluride ores. The reagent is a volatile crystalline solid, soluble in water, and, when mixed with alkaline cyanide, forms a very powerful and rapid solvent for gold (see also The tube mill (the forerunner to the ball mill) consisted of a revolving steel cylinder supported on rollers at a slight angle to the horizontal so that the pulp moved continuously through the mill. The fine crushing was performed by the use of very hard Norwegian flints, which took up about half of the mill volume. The first commercial Diehl plant was commissioned in Kalgoorlie in March 1900. Gold-–telluride ore from the Wright-Hargreaves Mine at Kirkland Lake, Ontario, were also treated using bromocyanide. J.T. Willey in Other plants in the Kirkland Lake area, for example, Lake Shore Mines, used cyanide leaching of the ore to recover nonrefractory gold and floated a sulfide-telluride concentrate, which was then roasted. Gold and gold tellurides are also widely distributed in the Fijian Islands. In 1932, B. Borthwick and J. Sinclair discovered payable gold on Vunisina Creek. Further investigation of this prospect, associated with the Tertiary Vatukoula volcanic caldera, led to the development of a number of mines, of which the famous Emperor Gold Mine has been in continuous production since about 1935. Treatment of telluride ore began in Vanuwtu, Fiji, in 1934 using a conventional refractory treatment circuit using roasting followed by cyanide leach of the calcine. A hydrometallurgical treatment method for the leaching of gold telluride along with the production of tellurium metal was devised at Emperor Gold Mine ( The tellurium was precipitated from the chloride oxidation solution by the addition of Na The main gold telluride, calaverite [AuTe A search of published literature has revealed a scarcity of information on the flotation of telluride minerals. This appears to be a reflection of the rarity of tellurides in gold deposits around the world. From the time that flotation was introduced into the Kalgoorlie Goldfield – about the mid-1920s, it had been the aim of many metallurgists to produce a separate telluride concentrate from the bulk pyritic concentrate. They expected that by doing so, and treating each product separately, there would be improved gold recovery, reduced costs and perhaps the opportunity to recover tellurium as a by-product. It was not until 1961 that an actual plant test was carried out.  The cyanide leaching of tellurides has a history of controversy, with some researchers maintaining that successful gold extraction could be achieved provided that certain conditions were met. Operationally, plant leaching proved to be not as successful as in the laboratory and certainly was not as robust as the leaching of free gold.  The technique was further refined by   Work on leaching of calaverite in the absence of sulfides also showed precipitation of tellurium ( The dissolution mechanisms of calaverite are a combination of Reaction 1 ( In the presence of high concentrations of oxygen and with the addition of lead nitrate, XPS analysis of the leached surface showed the presence of a significant amount of Te(OH) Work conducted at KCGM by This finding conflicted with conventional leaching practice in that under normal circumstances a higher DO level promotes more rapid gold leaching kinetics, which often leads to a better gold recovery. To severely limit the DO and maintain or improve kinetics was counterintuitive.  It has been long known that other oxidative reagents could successfully release the gold from the tellurium bond, rendering it suitable for conventional cyanide leaching. Roasting is the simplest- such oxidative process, where the tellurides are decomposed, producing tellurium off-gas while leaving behind a gold residue. In roasting a considerable amount of gold deposition occurs on the internal walls and tuyères of the roaster resulting in a significant quantity of gold being locked up in the roaster. Such gold can only be accessed when the roaster is shut down and a lockup gold recovery program carried out. Such lockup can be significant depending on the quantity of gold present as the telluride and must be accounted for in any metallurgical balance activities. Usually a lockup factor is incorporated into such calculations to account for this gold and reconciled after roaster gold cleanout, usually a 6- to 12-month period. The amenability of gold tellurides to bio-oxidation was demonstrated by  The pressure-oxidation testwork covered a wide range of conditions and clearly showed that enhanced cyanide recoveries were possible by cyanidation of the treated concentrate after pressure oxidation. For example, after a concentrate sample was treated at 190