High voltage pulse (HVP) selective breakage followed by screen separation has been shown to have the potential to be used for ore pre-concentration. The effectiveness of HVP enhanced pre-concentration is determined by experimentation. It is important when performing these tests, that the minimum quantity of ore sample required to achieve a statistically consistent HVP pre-concentration result is used. In this study, multiple repeat HVP pre-concentration tests were carried out using three different Cu-Au samples and statistical analysis of datasets created by resampling of real data was then performed. The results demonstrate that the minimum sample size required to achieve a statistically consistent result is ore-dependent, and should be determined for every ore sample prior to HVP pre-concentration characterisation. To evaluate the sensitivity of HVP performance to the variation in sample size, a Sensitivity Index (
                        SI
                     ) has been introduced and a mathematical description of the Sensitivity Index is presented in this paper.The feasibility of high voltage pulse (HVP) techniques for ore disintegration in the mineral industry has been intensively studied in the past 50 years. However, it has been noticed that the literature often reports HVP testing results using a small number of ore samples, due to the difficulty to process a large number of particles in a batch testing mode using a laboratory scale HVP device. Questions may arise regarding the representativity of the reported HVP experimental results. A literature search indicates that it lacks detailed study of the minimum ore sample required to obtain consistent HVP testing results. Gy’s sampling theory is well accepted for determining the minimum amount of sample required to generate a representative product. For base metal or precious metal content determination such as Cu or Au grades, the required sample mass is amplified as the grade factor is also incorporated in the calculation ( In HVP breakage, however, obtaining a representative feed is not only dependent on particle size, sample mass and head grade but also dependent on mechanical breakage properties and dielectric properties of particles. It is an established fact that even for nominally identical, or very similar particles, there exist wide variations in their fracture strength due to the differences in flaws and mineral texture ( The effect of ore properties on HVP testing result is compounded by the ways to utilise HVP energy to break the ore sample. In the previous studies, ore samples were repeatedly subjected to HVP discharge loading using approximately 100 kWh/t HVP specific energy to liberate minerals along the boundaries of minerals with different permittivity values ( In the HVP pre-concentration experiment, the number of particles required for testing has been based purely on borrowed experimental procedures from mechanical rock breakage characterisation tests such as the Drop Weight Tester (DWT) and the Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT). For example, in a standard JKRBT test, 30 particles are customarily used per size-energy to determine In subsequent multiple-particle, multiple-pulse (MP) tests performed by A total of three different ores from three different mines were used in this study. It is known from previous research that coarse waste rejection is not feasible for ore samples with high head grades. As a result, all three samples selected were of relatively low head grades, the primary commodities being all gold and copper, with the Cu content varying between 0.1 and 0.3%, and Au grades no more than a few ppm. Moreover, it was considered that an extremely low Au grade is apt to result in a much wider variation in the performance indices related to grade. In this regard, Cu was used as the valuable metal in this study. All three samples received from the mines were assumed to be not homogeneous, and therefore the content of each individual drum was mixed, dried and screened using a Gilson screen. Each individual size fraction was then divided with an 8-segment rotary splitter to ensure homogenization of samples. Ore A and Ore B were collected from a Cu-Au mine operation in New South Wales, Australia. Ore A was SAG mill pebbles collected from a low-grade ore concentrator whereas Ore B was the SAG mill feed. The valuable minerals in both ore samples consisted of native gold, chalcopyrite and bornite, with some magnetite. These minerals were predominantly veined but were also disseminated. Ore C was a ROM sample collected from a Cu-Au operation located in New South Wales, Australia. The HVP breakage experiments were carried out using a selFrag Lab unit installed at the JKMRC. The machine configuration has been described elsewhere ( Feed particles from a selected size fraction were randomly chosen for each experiment. Electrical gap and pulse rate were kept constant at 40 mm and one On completion of a HVP test, the product was sized and the size fractions pulverised. Copper content in the sized products was measured using a portable XRF Analyser (Model Thermo Scientific Niton™ XL3t GOLDD+, The pulverised sample was placed in the XRF sample cup to perform the measurement. In order to compare and calibrate the hand-held XRF measurements, 36 samples were analysed using the hand-held XRF and then also submitted for chemical assays by a commercial laboratory, ALS. A comparison between the Cu grade measured by the hand-held XRF and that measured by ALS are given in Statistical analysis was performed using a paired However, the magnitude of the difference is noticed to be small which indicates the difference between both methods (0.341% vs 0.358% in mean Cu grade) may not be of practical significance in spite of their statistical significance. This is verified by inputting the hypothesised mean difference as 0.025 (the limit of practical importance that can be tolerated in this study) and re-performing the paired In this study, the HVP product was screened with the mass of material in each size fraction weighed, pulverised and then analysed for Cu using the hand-held XRF. A series of calculations were then performed to estimate the HVP product oversize and undersize characteristics for a designated screen cut size. This involved combining the size by size mass retained and assay data to calculate the screen undersize and oversize mass and assay content for a particular scenario. This information was used to determine the number of indices used to evaluate the expected outcome of HVP pre-concentration: mass recovery, metal recovery, undersize grade and oversize grade of the HVP products. There are different methods to select an appropriate screen cut size. To estimate the variation in pre-concentration performance using HVP, four repeated tests (Tests 1–4) were conducted under identical HVP conditions (applied voltage, number of pulses, electrical gap were kept constant), generating four groups of progeny particles. Detailed information about the feed particles used in each test is shown in Since 40 particles were not sufficient to produce statistically consistent pre-concentration results, Test 5 was carried out with two subsamples combined to form a feed with a total of 80 particles, treated by HVP using the identical conditions as in Tests 1–4. For comparison purposes, the pre-concentration response line and the progeny particle size distribution of Test This is further illustrated by a hypothetical scenario presented in As all samples are conducted under identical HVP conditions, the mean pre-concentration performance should be similar and should reflect the true pre-concentration performance provided sufficient samples are tested. However, higher uncertainties would be expected with regards to response lines (a) and (a′), compared to response lines (b) and (b′). This is represented in In order to determine the minimum quantity of particles required to achieve a consistent result for ore amenability characterisation, the traditional method is to conduct multiple tests using different quantities of particles and to analyse the standard deviation as a function of particle number. This is a time consuming and labour intensive procedure, particularly when one takes into account the limited number of particles that can be processed at any one time using the selFrag Lab unit. For example, for a hypothetical scenario where four repeats of 300 particles per test were conducted for a 22.4–26.6 mm size fraction, a total of 1200 particles would need to be processed. Since the laboratory scale HVP equipment can only test approximately 10 particles per batch at this size, 120 batches in total would need to be processed. This would only produce one set of statistical data. Many more tests would be required to establish the relationships between particle number and the variation in the test results so that the minimum quantity of particles required to achieve a reliable characterisation result can be determined. To reduce the amount of testing required, a new method was developed. This involved conducting multiple repeated tests of a relatively small number of particles. These data were then numerically combined to form a variety of groups containing larger numbers of particles. To test this method, four tests, each using 40 particles, were performed under identical HVP conditions with the products from each test screened and assayed. This information was then combined in different ways (as illustrated in This new method is similar to the bootstrapping method whereby the resampling of real data is used. This method is cost effective and saves a considerable amount of time, as it reduces the amount of testing required to investigate the relationship between the number of particles tested and the calculated HVP experimental results, information required to determine the minimum quantity of particles required in the HVP experiment to generate statistically consistent results. As an example, to perform six repeat tests with 80 particles per test, one would need to process 480 particles by HVP. Using this alternative method, six virtual particle datasets can be created of 80 particles by combining the results from 4 tests of 40 particles which only requires the processing of 160 particles. Once the repeat tests have been performed and these repeat tests have been numerically combined to create virtual datasets, a statistical criterion is required to assess the degree of variation in HVP performance in relation to the quantity of the particles tested. It is desirable to approximate the results with a universal criterion which is independent of the chosen performance indices to allow objective conclusions to be made. In this study, the  A similar method is applied in this study whereby the The minimum quantity of particles required to generate statistically consistent HVP pre-concentration results will be different for the various HVP performance indexes and will also be affected by ore type. This section presents the results, with respect to these two major factors.  All parameters exhibit the same general trend: as the number of particles increases, the All grade-related indices exhibited much more variation than the recovery related indices, with these parameters exhibiting variation above the acceptable threshold when testing a small number of particles. Regarding the reason why the grade-related indices have greater variation than the recovery related indices, it is hypothesised that this is caused by the difference in the constraining condition when calculating the two types of performance indices. The variation in the grade-related indices is unconstrained – any misplaced high-grade particles in any size fractions would cause significant variation in the overall results. In contrast, the variation in grade has been counted in the calculation of Cu recovery that is defined as the percentage of Cu content in size divided by the total Cu content of a given stream. Variation in the grade distribution in size has been mitigated by the constrained overall Cu content in the recovery calculation, resulting in reduced variation in the recovery related indices. Ore type was found to be a major factor affecting the minimum quantity of particles required to achieve statistically significant results. This is not unexpected since different ore types are likely to exhibit different mechanical strength, metal grade, mineral texture and mineral permittivity/conductivity. The variation in the HVP pre-concentration results for different ore types will be a consequence of the degree of variation in the particles tested. For ore types with finely disseminated metalliferous grains, discernible metal content will be found in the majority of the feed particles. That particle selectively broken by HVP will, therefore, have a similar grade to those which remain unbroken and little concentration of mineralisation into the fine sizes will occur and pre-concentration by size separation will not be feasible. For these types of ores, it is expected that there will be a low degree of variation between batches of sample processed in the selFrag unit and fewer particles will need to be processed to get a consistent result. By contrast, for ore types with intrusive vein-based mineral grains, the percentage of particles containing mineralisation will usually be small which makes it an ideal candidate for pre-concentration by HVP selective breakage. When processing these types of samples in batches in the selFrag Lab unit, the final pre-concentration result will be a compilation of the results of the different batches tested. Some batches will contain a greater amount of mineralisation and respond differently to the inputted spark energy. The variations between different batches will determine the minimum quantity of particles required to achieve consistent HVP pre-concentration results. When the variation is high, a larger quantity of particles will require testing to produce a representative and consistent product. Thus it is expected that the texture and lithotype of the ore will have a significant impact on the minimum quantity of particles required to achieve consistent results. As texture and lithotype vary significantly between ores types, the minimum number of particles that need to be tested for different ores will vary and needs to be determined by experimentation for every ore sample. The It was observed that the A Sensitivity Index ( The integral equation can be solved for The constant 0.01 is used when the The Secondly, the Lastly, the It is emphasised that the aims of this paper are to develop an experimental method to describe how sample size affects the HVP pre-concentration results and to create a mathematical description to evaluate ore sensitivity to the sample size. The paper does not intend to prematurely predict the sample size requirement based on lithotype and texture, which will require a larger database to establish. Having said that, though, it would be expected that the two parameters ( A new method has been developed to generate virtual datasets of HVP pre-concentration results in relation to the number of particles tested by numerically resampling and combining data collected from a small number of repeat tests using a small number of particles. Statistical analysis of the virtual datasets was performed to establish the minimum quantities of ore sample required in order to achieve consistent HVP pre-concentration results. This method has significantly reduced the time and cost of determining the experimental conditions required to produce meaningful ore amenability characterisation results via HVP treatment. A new method was presented to enable evaluation of the sensitivity of HVP performance to the number of particles tested. This method involved using a power equation to represent the CoV of the HVP performance results as a function of the number of particles tested. A Sensitivity Index ( It has been demonstrated that the number of particles required to achieve a consistent HVP pre-concentration result is ore-dependent, and should be determined for every ore sample prior to testing commencing. The financial support from the