The carbonaceous matter present in some gold ores adsorbs the gold cyanide complexes from the leached solution and transport them to tailings, resulting in loses and preventing the recovery of the metal – a phenomenon known as preg-robbing. The present work aims at evaluating the capacity of 8blinding additives to deactivate/passivate the carbonaceous matter present in mineral coals and in gold ores. Initially, adsorption experiments with 3 mineral coals at different levels of maturation (anthracite, bituminous and lignite) were carried out to simulate the complex carbonaceous matrix of the gold ores. The coal presenting the best adsorptive capacity was selected for the experiments with the blinding additives. Different concentrations of additives (562–28,125 g/tcoal) and conditioning times (5, 30 and 120 min) were investigated. The blinding additives presenting satisfactory results were used in the deactivation/passivation carbonaceous gold ore experiments. Adsorption experiments showed that the anthracite coal adsorbed gold cyanide while bituminous and lignite coal failed to do so. It is believed that the difference in the adsorptive capacity presented by the mineral coals owes to the structure of the carbonaceous material, and also that the anthracite coal structure is similar to what is found in the carbonaceous gold ores presenting preg-robbing activity. The deactivation/passivation experiments indicated that the additives A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 suppressed the adsorptive capacity of the anthracite by 60–85% in concentrations varying from 562 to 28,125 g/tcoal respectively. The additive presenting the best performance was A2. Experiments with a carbonaceous gold ore indicated that the use of 350 and 1000 g/tgold ore of additive A1 presented the best recoveries, 90.12 and 90.69%, resulting in the lowest presence of gold contents in the tailings, 1.17 and 1.25 g/t respectively. These values are very close to what was reported for CIL leaching (89.89% and 1.30 g/t) and considerably higher than values observed in the conventional leaching (83.79% and 2.10 g/t). Despite presenting the best deactivation/passivation performance when used with the anthracite coal, additive A2 did not reduce the preg-robbing activity of the carbonaceous matter of the ore, resulting in an increase in gold content in the tailing. The use of additives in the industrial process will demand a simpler and less expensive operational facility and the performance will be similar to the CIL technique.The carbonaceous matter present in some gold ores can adsorb dissolved gold from cyanide solutions resulting in a reduction in the recovery of the metal in what is called preg-robbing. The gold ore carbonaceous matter is composed mainly of: (i) an elemental carbon that acts as an active carbon and adsorbs gold cyanide complexes; (ii) a heavy hydrocarbon mixture of high molecular weight usually associated with elemental carbon which does not appear to adsorb gold and (iii) humic acids containing functional groups capable of complexing the soluble gold ( Elemental carbon is the most important component present in the pre-robbing activity of the carbonaceous matter. Its structure can be amorphous, pseudo-graphitic or well developed graphitic. Between amorphous and graphitic structures lies a maturity rank scale (lignite < sub-bituminous < bituminous < anthracite), which indicates the extent of metamorphism the carbonaceous matter has been through. As the organic material matures, the carbon content increases, the functional group content is reduced and the crystalline structure organizes itself. The degree of maturity presented by the graphitic elemental carbon is similar to that exhibited by anthracite coal, which is the most mature coal, whereas the amorphous elemental carbon may present maturity levels similar to what observed in the lower rank coals. The elemental carbon component may present a combination of amorphous and graphitic structures in the same carbonaceous ore deposit. The extent to which a carbonaceous matter preg-robs gold generally increases in tandem with maturity ( It has been a long time since deleterious effects of the carbonaceous matter in gold ores on cyanidation were detected by the mining industry and the academic community alike. Several techniques have been employed to counteract the effects of carbonaceous matter and the most common of them are: the use of gold adsorbents (activated carbon or resins) to compete with the carbonaceous matter; flotation of the gold ore carbonaceous matter; deactivation/passivation of the active matter by oxidation (roasting, chemical and biochemical oxidation), also by the use of surface blinding additives. So far, oxidative treatments have proven effective and viable, thus becoming a common industrial practice worldwide. However, following a decrease in the gold contents in the ores, the application of simpler and less expensive hydrometallurgical techniques (as the use of surface blinding additives) have been appointed as an attractive alternative for possible replacements for oxidative methods. The mineralogy of the ore, the specific characteristics of carbonaceous matter as well as the technical and economic feasibility of the method must be considered in the determination of the most appropriate technique for the treatment the ores ( Certain surface blinding additives are able to deactivate/passivate the carbonaceous matter by selective adsorption or through the wetting and coating of the elemental carbon component surface. Literature presents a number of reports addressing the use of additives as inhibitors of gold adsorption ( The present work aims at evaluating the ability of 8 blinding additives to deactivate/passivate the carbonaceous matter responsible for adsorbing solubilized gold in the cyanidation of carbonaceous gold ores. Initially, three mineral coals of different maturation levels (anthracite, bituminous and lignite) were used to simulate the complex carbonaceous matrix of the gold ores. Characterization of coals and adsorption experiments were carried out in order to evaluate the adsorptive capacity of each one of the coals and also to establish possible relationships between the structure of the carbonaceous matrix and adsorptive properties of these coals. The coal presenting the best adsorptive capacity was then used in adsorption experiments after previous conditioning with blinding additives (deactivation/passivation experiments). Finally, the additives and the experimental conditions presenting the best results were used in the deactivation/passivation experiments with a carbonaceous gold ore in order to verify if the additive was actually capable of minimizing the gold losses.  Mineral coals of different ranks of maturation (lignite, bituminous and anthracite) with particle size of minus 841 μm were obtained from the Coal Bank of the Energy Institute, College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University. The crystalline phases of the samples were identified by X-ray diffraction. The X-ray diffraction was performed through the powder method in a Rigaku D/Max Ultima Plus difratometer having a copper anode as the X-ray source (Cu K In an attempt to elucidate the adsorbent characteristics of the mineral coals, electrophoretic mobility studies were conducted in order to evaluate the electric surface charge (zeta potential) of the coals according to variations in pH. Powdered aliquots of 0.9 g of each coal were dispersed in 300 mL of solution containing 0.001 M NaCl for the ionic strength control. These slurries were then equilibrated by shaking them for 2 h before the adjustment of the pH to the desired values through the addition of HCl and NaOH, then the zeta potential was measured. The zeta potential displayed represents the arithmetic mean of 6 values determined by a Malvern Zetasizer Nano Series ZS apparatus. The blinding additives presenting the best results in the deactivation/passivation experiments were used at concentrations of 28,125 g/t Triplicate samples of coals in different masses (0.1 g – 1 g) were exposed to 50 mL of a 10 mg/L gold solution (50.8 µM) and 100 mg/L of NaCN (2.0 mM) at pH between 10.5 and 11.5 and then agitated for 150 min The mineral coal presenting the best adsorptive capacity was chosen for the deactivation/passivation experiments. In these experiments, masses of 0.8 g of coal were added to 45 mL of solution containing an additive in different concentrations ranging from 10 mg/L (562 g/t The carbonaceous gold ore sample was a flotation concentrate (FC) with particle size 100% minus 75 µm supplied by Paracatu Mineral Processing Plant – Brazil. The sample was disaggregated, homogenized and quartered according to the incremental division method. The gold content was determined by the fire assay method and the total sulfur content assessed by the volumetric combustion technique using a LECO combustion unit. The determination of the phases carbonate, organic and elemental was carried out according to the successive elimination of the carbon phases. Carbonates were eliminated with hydrochloric acid (HCl). The organic carbon was converted into carbon dioxide (CO Standard rolling bottle cyanidation experiments were carried out with the carbonaceous gold ores by adding 200 g of ore to 300 mL of deionized water (40% pulp density) to a 4 L glass bottle. The pH of the slurry was adjusted with NaOH to values between 10.5 and 11.5 and then the blinding additives in different concentrations (150 g/t For comparison purposes, conventional leaching and CIL leaching (carbon in leach) were also carried out under the same conditions described above, however blinding additives were not added in the conditioning stage. Furthermore, in the CIL leaching experiment, the ore was leached in the presence of 25 g of granulated activated carbon. After the leaching period, the activated carbon was separated from the slurry with a 250 µm mesh sieve, washed with deionized water and oven dried at 80 °C for 24 h. The gold content in the activated carbon was also determined by the fire assay method.   In regard to the inorganic portion, X-ray diffraction patterns indicated the predominance of muscovite (KAl The zeta potential of the mineral coals is presented as a function of pH in As the degree of maturation of the coal falls (anthracite > bituminous > lignite), the relation of the zeta potential and pH tends to become more negative, as the coals with the lowest degrees of maturation present a larger fraction of oxygenated functional groups, which are responsible for the negative sites on the coal surfaces. The results are consistent with those reported by Previous adsorption experiments (data not shown) revealed that anthracite coal was able to adsorb gold from a cyanide medium, whereas bituminous and lignite coal did not adsorb significant amounts of the metal. This trend was also observed by Thereby, a well developed graphitic structure and a well ordered crystalline lattice can be pointed out as preponderant factors contributing to a high gold cyanide adsorption on anthracite coal, compared to bituminous and lignite coals in the pH range 10.5–11.5. It is noticed that, in the aforementioned pH range, anthracite and bituminous coal present identical zeta potential profiles ( As anthracite was the only coal capable of adsorbing gold cyanide, it was used in the deactivation/passivation experiments employing blinding additives. In the deactivation/passivation experiments, before contact with the gold cyanide solution, 0.8 g of the anthracite coal was conditioned in 45 mL of a solution containing blinding additives in five different concentrations for 120 min. The results indicate that at low concentrations (562 g/t In order to evaluate the effect of the conditioning time on the suppression of the adsorptive capacity of the anthracite coal, experiments were performed with the 5 most effective additives (A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5), at concentrations 28,125 g/t Regardless the conditioning time, suppression was close to 70% for additives A1, A3 and A4 and greater than 85% for additive A2. Results pointed to better performance for additive A2, when compared to the other species. These suppression values are close to those reported in literature for different carbonaceous materials whose reductions in the adsorptive capacity varied from 75 to 90% ( The blinding additives presenting the best results in the deactivation/passivation experiments were used in the conditioning of the anthracite coal in the evaluation of the interference of the additive in the surface charge of the coal. Additive A1, responsible for the most negative surface charge in the coal particles has an organic aromatic structure functionalized by sulphated molecules (SO Unlike what occurred with the other additives, the use of additive A4 resulted in an increase in the zeta potential, initiating from pH values close to 5.5, making it less negative than the zeta potential of the unconditioned coal. At pH values below 5.5, the surface charge remained more negative than the charge observed in the unconditioned particles. It is noticeable that the structure of this additive is characterized by the presence of hydroxyl groups ( Since the surface of the anthracite coal is negatively charged in most pH ranges, there will be an electrostatic repulsion between the anionic polar groups of the additive molecules and the solid surface of the coal particles. Consequently, the adsorption of the additives on the negatively charged surface takes place at specific interactions (hydrophobic and chemical). According to In pH range (10.5–11.5) under which the deactivation/passivation experiments of the anthracite coal were conducted, additives A1 and A2 make the surface of the particles more negative. Thus, it is believed that the forces responsible for suppressing the gold adsorption by anthracite coal after conditioning with these additives emerge from the electrostatic repulsion between the anion dicyanoaurate (I) (Au(CN) The carbonaceous gold ore supplied by the mining industry was characterized by chemical analyses and X-ray diffraction before it was used in the deactivation/passivation experiments. The gold content, total sulfur and carbon phases are presented in The elemental (graphitic) carbon content is compatible with the content of a variety of carbonaceous gold ores with preg-robbing activity from different regions of the world, which varies from 0.20 to 8.31% ( The actual capacity of the blinding additives of A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 was investigated by using the carbonaceous gold ore. For additive A2 at concentrations 150 and 350 g/t For additive A3, the results indicate that at concentrations 150 and 350 g/t For additive A4 at concentration of 150 g/t For additive A5 at concentration of 350 and 550 g/t The results indicate that the utilization of additive A1 at concentrations 350 and 1000 g/t A high recovery of the metal and a low gold content in the tailings observed in CIL leaching (89.89% and 1.30 g/t) when compared to the conventional leaching (83.79% and 2.10 g/t) is an indication of the presence of preg-robbing activity in the ore. The use of gold adsorbent materials concomitantly to the leaching process is a technique commonly used in the reduction of preg-robbing activity of the carbonaceous matter. The gold complexes show greater affinity with the adsorbent than with the carbonaceous matter, and consequently, they are adsorbed preferentially. In general, the best results for additives A3, A4 and mainly A1 are very close to the results observed in the CIL experiment. However, when compared to the conventional leaching, it was observed that increments close to 7% were reached in the recovery of the metal, assigning reductions between 30 and 40% in the gold content in the tailings. Literature employs different methods to investigate the preg-robbing activities of gold ores, which makes the comparison between the studies rather difficult. In a study into the influence of four chemical additives on the adsorptive capacity of a carbonaceous gold ore through adsorption experiments, There are indications that the difference in the adsorptive capacity of the coals at different maturation levels (rank) is related to the structure of the carbonaceous material. Better developed graphite structures and the better ordered crystalline lattice make the anthracite coal a good sorbent for gold cyanide in the pH ranges 10.5–11.5. It is believed that the structure of the carbonaceous matter of gold ores with preg-robbing activities resemble the structure of mineral coals with maturation levels close to anthracite. Deactivation/passivation experiments with anthracite coal indicated that at low concentrations (562 g/t The leaching experiments with the carbonaceous gold ores showed that the utilization of additive A1 presented the highest percentages of recovery and the lowest gold contents in the tailings. These values are very close or even better than those reported for the CIL leaching. They were considerably better than values reported for conventional leaching. The use of additives A3 and A4 is also worth mentioning, despite being less effective than additive A1 and the CIL leaching. The use of additive A2 did not reduce the preg-robbing activity of the carbonaceous matter on the contrary; it impaired the course of the carbonaceous gold ore leaching. However, it is important to mention that additive A2 presented the best performance amongst all the additives used in the deactivation/passivation experiments carried out with anthracite coal. The use of additives A3, A4 and mainly A1 is promising, as it demands simpler and less expensive equipment, besides, incurring lower operational costs. In addition, the aforementioned additives present performances which are similar to those presented by activated coal in CIL leaching. High cost of the activated carbon and the repetitive cycles of elution can be pointed out as the main cause of the high costs of the CIL circuits. Ideally, blinding additives should be used in low concentrations, in order to minimize possible deleterious effects of their utilization on the subsequent steps of the process, which includes the leaching step. The authors gratefully appreciate the financial support of