Crosswind is a big challenge to the cooling performance of natural draft dry cooling towers (NDDCTs) and has attracted a lot of attention in previous research. This study proposed a new method to increase the performance of NDDCT under crosswind conditions by optimizing the hot water mass flow rate in the air-cooled heat exchangers. The 20m UQ Gatton NDDCT was selected as a case study to test and validate this method. The cooling performance of this cooling tower under crosswind condition was evaluated by the 3-D CFD model. The results show that the crosswind redistributes the air flow and result in a non-uniform heat exchanger performance. By optimizing the hot water mass flow rate among the heat exchanger bundles, the cold fluids and hot fluids of the air-cooled heat exchanger can be better matched. The cooling performance of the NDDCT is increased by 18% when the crosswind speed is 4m/s.area (m inertial resistance factor specific heat (J drag coefficient diameter (m) effectiveness of the air-cooled heat exchanger empirical heat transfer (W height, elevation (m) flow resistance length (m) mass flow rate (kg/s) number pressure (Pa) heat transfer rate (W) heat flux (W water/air mass flow ratio Reynolds number temperature (°C) velocity scalar (m/s) permeability turbulent kinetic energy dissipation (m efficiency turbulent kinetic energy (m density, mean density (kg viscosity (kg force velocity unit vectors of x-, y-, z-direction in Cartesian coordinate system air side, water side crosswind effective inside or inlet, outside or outlet with optimization tube reference For every thermal power plant, the cooling tower is an indispensable part and its performance will significantly influence the efficiency of the whole system This cooling technology could save a lot of water and has a lower maintenance cost but also faces two big challenges: hot ambient temperature and the crosswind Kröger Previous research has identified a number of methods to mitigate against negative crosswind effects. Du Preez and Kroger On the other hand, in wet cooling towers, non-uniform water distribution method was proposed to increase the performance of the wet cooling tower. As reported in Smreka’s experimental research According to the above literature review, most of the previous solutions to deal with the crosswind issue on NDDCTs were to increase the air mass flow rate through the cooling tower. The water side optimization was however ignored. Based on the working mechanism of the air-cooled heat exchanger, this paper proposed a new method to enhance the cooling performance of NDDCTs under crosswind conditions. A 3D CFD model of a 20 For renewable thermal power generation plants, the power rating is generally much smaller than the conventional large coal fired or nuclear thermal plants. The Queensland Geothermal Energy Centre of Excellence (QGECE) has been developing small NDDCTs for these renewable power plants The Gatton NDDCT is of hyperbolic shape and is 20 The air cooled heat exchanger is the core component of the NDDCT. In Gatton tower, a bank of 18 individual heat exchanger bundles was horizontally installed at the height of 5 In this study, the airflow momentum and turbulence are modelled by the realizable The physical properties of the air are calculated using the in-compressible ideal-gas model. The pressure-based segregated algorithms: SIMPLEIC is applied and the second order of upwind discretization method is applied to discretise the governing equations. The calculation results were obtained with the scaled residuals drop to the order of 10 As presented in No-slip and zero heat flux wall boundary condition is applied at the bottom face of the computation domain and the shell of the cooling tower. The top face of the computational domain is set as the pressure outlet and the velocity inlet boundary condition is used at the side face of the cylinder, with the inlet velocity profile defined as: The radiator model with porous media zone is used to calculated the performance of the air cooled heat exchanger of the cooling tower The pressure drop of the heat exchanger can be expressed by the following equation adopting in Fluent porous media model According to the data provided by the heat exchanger manufacture, the empirical heat transfer coefficient has the following values: In this study, the 3D CFD model was first validated by comparing the results with the 1D cooling tower model According to the previous research, crosswind adversely affects the cooling performance of the NDDCT by impairing the air flow and the heat transfer process in the cooling tower. The driving force of the air flow inside the cooling tower is the pressure difference between air inside and outside of the cooling tower. So the non-uniform distributed pressure makes the air mass flow rate different in each heat exchanger. For air-cooled heat exchangers, most of the heat transfer resistances are located at the air side For air-cooled heat exchanger, the heat rejection rate can be calculated by the following equations: The overall heat transfer coefficient of the air-cooled heat exchanger can be calculated by Eq. According to the Reynolds number of the water flow in this heat exchanger, the following equations are selected to calculate the water side heat transfer coefficient The effectiveness of a heat exchanger can be defined as the ratio of the actual rate of heat transfer to the maximum possible rate of heat transfer The heat transfer process of the air cooled heat exchanger can also be expressed as From Eq. By substituting Eq. Rewrite Eq. For this particular heat exchanger, Under the normal operation of the NDDCT, the hot water mass flow rate is the same in each heat exchanger. When there is no crosswind, the water/air flow ratio is almost uniform in each heat exchanger because of the homogeneous distribution of the air flow. However, with the occurrence of crosswind, the air mass flow rates of the windward part of the cooling tower are decreased, which caused higher water/air flow ratios in these heat exchangers. An opposite situation could be found in the leeward parts, where the water/air mass flow ratios decreased with the increase of the air mass flow rate. Under uniform distributed hot water operation condition, the hot water is not effectively used. In order to get a better cooling performance, the cold air and the hot water in the air cooled heat exchanger should be better matched. The hot water mass flow rate can be optimized by the following equation: By applying this method, the water mass flow rate distribution is dependent on air flow distribution in the cooling tower. For a single heat exchanger bundle, more cold air flow through the bundle, more hot water is distributed. Under a given crosswind condition, the air flow distribution and the total air flow in the cooling tower can be assumed to be constant. With the water mass flow optimization, the water/air mass flow ratio under crosswind is adjusted to be constant in all of the heat exchanger bundles. Eq.  Using the optimization method in Section    According to the previous research, the NDDCTs including both big towers and small towers suffered the uneven air flow distribution under the crosswind condition. So the technology can be applied on both big towers and small towers. For small cooling tower like the Gatton tower, the water mass flow rate in each heat exchanger bundle can be controlled by the proportional control valves and air mass flow rate can be monitored by installing the air flow anemometer in different places of the cooling tower. On the other hand, for big NDDCTs the heat exchanger bundles can be divided into several different sections. The water mass flow rate in each section can be controlled by using the variable speed water pump. Based on the working mechanism of the air-cooled heat exchanger and the crosswind effect on the NDDCT, this study proposed a new method to increase the cooling performance of NDDCT under crosswind conditions by optimizing the water mass flow rate in the air-cooled heat exchangers. According to the numerical result, the crosswind leads to a non-uniform air flow distribution inside the cooling tower and results in a non-optimal water/mass flow ratio. By applying the water distribution method proposed in this study, the water outlet temperature of each heat exchanger is more uniform and the total cooling tower performance is increased. The performance of the cooling tower can be improved by 1%, 3%, 12.9%, 18.5% and 17.3% when crosswind speed is 1 This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (