A site-specific study is carried out to assess the suitability of froth flotation for desulphurization of reactive mine tailings at the Musselwhite Mine, Northern Ontario, Canada, to prevent acid mine drainage (AMD). The results from pilot scale flotation tests on an Outokumpu flotation unit are presented, which confirm that froth flotation is effective to reduce sulphide contents of tailings. The factors affecting the treatment effectiveness, such as the froth depth, air flow rate, pulp density and impeller speed are studied. The sulphur recoveries after 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 12 min of flotation time are fitted to a second-order kinetic model. It is found that the second order rate constant, k
                     2 is negatively correlated with the froth depth and positively correlated with the air flow rate. Based on the data presented in this study; the maximum recovery of total sulphur was achieved when the operational parameters were set to the froth depth of 5 cm, air flow rate 125 L/min, impeller speed 1300 rpm and pulp density 35%.Mine tailings are solid wastes from mineral processing, which can be a source of environmental pollution such as generating acid mine drainage (AMD) ( Pyrrhotite (Fe The environmental impact of the AMD has been reported extensively in the literature (e.g. Mitigation of AMD generated from mine tailings containing sulphide-rich minerals has been a great challenge for the mining industry ( Froth flotation has been established as an alternative solution to control acid mine drainage ( This research investigates froth flotation of Musselwhite Mine Tailings (MT) to separate the non-acid generating and sulphide concentrate fractions, thus to reduce acid generating potential of mine tailings. The Musselwhite underground gold mine is located 500 km north of Thunder Bay, in North-western Ontario, Canada. The mine started commercial production in 1997 ( The recovery and selectivity of the flotation process are dependent on parameters such as the pulp pH, types and dosage of reagents, operation conditions (e.g. agitation, airflow and froth depth) and tailings properties (e.g. particle size and minerology). In previous studies (e.g. The flotation experiments were carried out using tailings samples recovered from the Musselwhite mine tailings (MT). The properties of the tailings slurry are shown in Reagents used in froth flotation are broadly categorized as the collector, activator and frother. In the present study, the technical specifications of the reagents used to achieve the flotation experiments are as follows: Collector: 2% PAX (Potassium amyl xanthate); Frother: 1% Dowfroth 250 (poly-propylene glycol ether); and Activator: 10% Copper sulphate. The pilot studies were carried out with an Outokumpu flotation unit, type OK0.05 at Musselwhite mine. The flotation cell was cylindrically shaped with a diameter of 0.40 m and total height of 0.60 m ( In commercial operations, the effectiveness of flotation separation is measured by the percentage recovery of desired material in the concentrate and by the grade analysis of the concentrate. However, In the first order rate equation: Upon integration Eq. In the second order rate equation: Upon integration Eq. The froth zone is where entrained materials are removed from the froth by drainage and/or washing (   The air flow rate is the volume of air (litre) that enters the flotation cell per unit time (minute). Effects of the airflow rate on the recovery of sulphur and sulphur grade versus time are shown in The sulphur grade was found to decrease with the increase in the air flow rate. This is because an increase in the airflow rate shortens the froth retention time. The pulp density in the experiments varied between 30% and 44% while the other conditions were kept constant. As seen from An impeller is a rotating component of the flotation cell used for maintaining solids in suspension. In this study, most experiments were done at an impeller speed of 1500 rpm. To investigate the effects of impeller speed on flotation kinetics, one experiment was conducted at a low impeller speed (1300 rpm) by keeping the other variable constant and another was done at 850 rpm at a low froth depth (4 cm). The effects of impeller speed on the recovery of sulphur (%) at different times are shown in The main objective of tailings desulphurization is to produce a sulphide concentrate and a non-acid generating fraction. The majority of researchers have proposed the first order flotation kinetics reaction for flotation of minerals ( The recovery of sulphur particles in the froth product at time By substituting Eq. Eq. A pilot program was designed and carried out to assess the suitability of froth flotation for desulphurization of reactive mine tailings on the Musselwhite mine site for prevention and control of acid mine drainage (AMD). The following summary can be made based on this research: The representative kinetics of the froth flotation process in MT is best described as a second order reaction with the average correlation coefficient The effects of operating conditions such as the froth depth, air flow rate, impeller speed, and pulp density on desulphurization of MT have been investigated. This study indicates that all of these parameters have effects on the flotation kinetics, recovery of sulphur and concentrate grade. The most important operating parameters are identified as the air flow rate and froth depth. This study demonstrates that environmental desulphurization is technically feasible for MT. Based on the data presented in this study; the maximum recovery of total sulphur was achieved when the operational parameters were set to the froth depth of 5 cm, air flow rate 125 L/min, impeller speed 1300 rpm and pulp density 35%. Under these conditions, the froth flotation produced satisfactory NP/AP ratio in MT within 12 min. The results of this research reveal that froth flotation can be applied for desulphurization of MT. However, it is recommended that the following should be studied in detail: Maintaining similar performance with similar pulp conditions in flotation cells of different size depends on many factors such as machine geometry, impeller peripheral speed, air flow rate, air residence time, power consumption, power intensity, cell volume and flow and turbulence. Present study is only focused on impeller speed, air flow rate and air residence time. Therefore, further studies should be directed towards the scale up details of flotation machines for desulphurization of MT. The pilot study was undertaken in the Musselwhite Mine to monitor the performance of froth flotation for only 1 min conditioning after addition of collector. Future study can be done to verify the effect of conditioning time on flotation. The current study focuses on the technical issue regarding desulphurization of MT. A cost-benefit analysis of the technology should be carried out to provide more practical information to the owner of the mine. The authors wish to acknowledge the support of Mr. Xinwei Chen during the pilot study. This research was made possible with the financial support provided by