Critical coalescence concentration (CCC) is commonly used to characterize frothers. The CCC is determined from a plot of Sauter mean bubble size (D
                     32) vs. frother concentration, referred to here as the ‘addition’ method. Industrial flotation systems can encounter a number of naturally occurring surfactants and salts that also influence bubble size. In effect there is a ‘system’ CCC. This paper introduces a dilution method to identify the system CCC. The study verifies the dilution technique using the commercial frother DF-250. It is shown that the system CCC can be expressed as an equivalent DF-250 concentration to provide context and a means of comparing water samples. The viability of using gas holdup to provide an estimate of process water D
                     32 is also explored. To illustrate the procedure three samples of process water from the Albian Sands bitumen processing plant were examined. They proved to be similar and yielded a system CCC equivalent to about 20ppm DF-250. It is concluded that the dilution and frother equivalent techniques can be used to help identify system hydrodynamic properties.In flotation the rate with which particles are recovered is driven by bubble size: the smaller the bubbles the more collisions with particles and the greater the bubble surface area for transport of the collected particles. In most mineral flotation systems, surfactants known as frothers are added to help produce bubbles of about 1 One method to characterize this bubble size reduction function of frothers is to plot the Sauter mean bubble diameter ( The A parameter related to bubble size, gas holdup ( In some flotation systems, frothers are not added, the natural surfactant or high salt content deriving from the ore or water supply producing a bubble size comparable to that with frother. An example of high salt content substituting for frother is Xstrata’s Raglan concentrator ( The natural surfactants deriving from bitumen ore are a complex mix, predominantly believed to be aliphatic carboxylates having hydrocarbon chains of at least five carbons, typically C The set-up was an air/liquid system in a 7.6 Gas holdup was calculated from differential pressure Δ There are a number of ways to measure bubble size distribution in flotation systems ( The procedure for bubble size determination starts by immersing the sampling tube closed with a rubber stopper, which is connected to a cable, to a depth midway between the gas holdup pressure tapping points. The sampling tube is attached to the viewing chamber and the MBSA assembly is filled with the solution being tested. With the viewing chamber nearly full, a ruler inside is used to focus the camera and a picture is taken to calculate the number of pixels/cm. The chamber lid is then put in place and the valve closed. Upon reaching steady state, judged by steady gas holdup signals, the stopper is removed by pulling the cable and bubbles rise through the sampling tube into the viewing chamber. Since the liquid level in the chamber decreases with time this imposes a limit on the number of images collected. Using manual settings (focus, shutter speed, aperture and ISO) and a remote controller, the camera is set to capture at least 100 successive images which are subsequently analysed off-line using Empix Northern Eclipse v8.0 coupled with in-house image analysis software. Sufficient images are collected per run to give at least 3000 bubbles which are analyzed to calculate The column was operated continuously; addition of frother (addition method) or dilution water was done with the system running with air flow turned off intermittently to allow adequate mixing as judged by steady gas holdup readings. The dilution experiments with DF-250 entailed starting with a concentration above the CCC and sequentially diluting back to 1 The data from the DF-250 addition (CCC) and dilution (CCC-D) tests are compared in After tracking the main source of experimental error due to water displaced from the MBSA, the mean difference (dilution–addition) was brought to 2.05 Having verified the dilution technique and using the same operating parameters (liquid flow rate, gas velocity), the dilution (CCC-D) curves were established for the three process water samples (  Combining the DF-250 trend from The images in  It is recognized that when evaluating a flotation system it is important to allow for water chemistry effects (  To transfer the dilution values to ones more familiar we introduced an equivalent DF-250 concentration. Once a CCC curve is developed for a known frother, any industrial process waters can be analyzed and assigned an equivalent frother concentration. Regardless of the choice of frother, the “frother potential” established using this method helps quantify the system’s ability to produce the hydrodynamic conditions for flotation. Compared to bubble size gas holdup is more readily measured in the two-phase system. It was modelled against The next stage is to transfer this CCC-D concept on site and test a range of fresh samples. A longer term ambition is to consider using gas holdup for on-line application to evaluate possible changes in process waters which may impact the hydrodynamic properties. The notion of a system critical coalescence concentration is introduced and a dilution technique is developed to determine it. The dilution technique was verified using DF-250 and its use illustrated with water samples from the Albian Sands bitumen processing plant. The method allowed the process waters to be assigned an equivalent DF-250 concentration. The frother equivalence quantifies the potential of the process waters to control hydrodynamic properties such as bubble size and gas holdup. Funding was through the Chair in Mineral Processing at McGill University, under the Collaborative Research and Development program of NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) with industrial sponsorship from Shell Canada, Vale, Teck, Barrick Gold, Xstrata Process Support, COREM, SGS Lakefield Research and Flottec. Special thanks go to Shell Canada Ltd. (Mr. Gavin Freeman and Mr. Jason Schaan) for the process water samples, the site visits and their support.