Cellulose grafted with soy protein isolate (SPI), sustainable and cost effective material, was investigated as a bioactive material for calcium phosphate mineralization. The formation of hydroxyapatite rod-like nanocrystals with ∼50nmdiameter was confirmed by different characterization tools. Cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid was evaluated as recyclable adsorbent for methylene blue (MB) from aqueous solutions using batch adsorption technique. The new sustainable material exhibited adsorption capacity up to 454mg/g. Adsorption data were examined using different kinetics and isotherms to investigate the adsorption mechanism. After four adsorption-desorption cycles, the efficiency of MB removal is ∼95%. These results present new sustainable, cost effective and reusable hybrid material as a promising adsorbent for organic dyes removal from waste water.Removing synthetic dyes from waste effluents has become a challenge area to prevent their environmental hazard in particular for aquatic bio-systems Polysaccharides, such as cellulose, are actually produced in great quantities with a low cost and promising alternatives in biomaterials SPI is composed of Glycinin (7S) and β-conglycinin (11S) which containing 20 different amino acids. This versatile structure provide various polar functional groups which can undergo further reactions to improve protein properties In the current study, cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite, as a sustainable hybrid material, was successfully achieved by calcium phosphate mineralization in the presence of cellulose grafted SPI. The new hybrid material was introduced as a new adsorbent and its effectiveness was examined for removing MB, as representative organic pollutant, from aqueous solutions. The effect of variation of pH, time and initial concentration on the MB adsorption was discussed. SPI was prepared as follow; 200 Cellulose (microcrystalline extra pure, from Acros) oxidation at the C2 Cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid was investigated as adsorbent for MB removal from waste water. Batch adsorption experiments were conducted in 50 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was done on a FTIR (Mattson 5000 FTIR spectrometer) using KBr discs in the range of 500–4000 The current study evaluates a new sustainable, available and cheap biomaterial as adsorbent for organic dyes removal from waste water. The current hybrid material was synthesized through hydroxyapatite nanocrystals mineralization in the presence of cellulose grafted with SPI blend. After subjecting to periodate oxidation, the aldehyde content of oxidized cellulose is 44% which is close to the results obtained by Kumari and Chauhan Oxidized cellulose grafted SPI blend before and after calcium phosphate mineralization were examined using SEM and TEM as shown in The internal shape of mineralized calcium phosphate in The XRD patterns of oxidized cellulose grafted SPI before and after calcium phosphate mineralization are displayed in Developing a new sustainable and efficient material for dye sequestration is necessary these days for water purification. Herein, the as-synthesized cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid was evaluated for the removal of MB from aqueous solutions. The current study investigates various parameters such as solution pH, equilibrium time and the initial concentration of the dye in order to evaluate the potential of the current hybrid as dye adsorbent. The pH value can affect the surface charge of the adsorbent and ionization degree of the dye In order to elucidate the rate of adsorption and the adsorption mechanism of MB onto cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid, the adsorption capacities were calculated at different times. The intra-particle diffusion model was applied to further investigate the adsorption of MB molecules onto cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid. The linear form of this model is described in Eq.  For better understanding the adsorption data, Langmuir and Freundlich Eqs. ( The Langmuir isotherm was expressed as: The plot of the experimental The Freundlich isotherm was expressed as: The importance of Langmuir isotherm can be expressed in terms of a dimensionless separation constant factor (R Desorption and reusability of adsorbents are crucial parameter if the material has to be applied in industrial applications. From the pH study, It is clear that desorption would be triggered in acidic solution. The adsorption-desorption cycles of cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid was repeated four times and the results are displayed in The current study demonstrated an environmentally friendly, efficient and cost effective dye adsorbent for waste water treatment. Cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid exhibited high removal capacity and high adsorption-desorption efficiency toward MB. Pseudo-second-order and Langmuir isotherm models interpret better fitness the MB adsorption onto cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid material. These results showed that cellulose grafted SPI/hydroxyapatite hybrid may be reported as a promising sustainable material for industrial and environmental applications especially pollutants removal from waste water. The authors acknowledge the financial support of