The trial and error method and engineers' experiences are used for drilling pattern design in most open pit mines. The burden parameter is one of the most important and critical variables of blast pattern design in open pit mines so that other blasting variables are associated with it. The purpose of this research is to formulate the burden parameter for the Chadormalu iron ore mine and generalize the obtained equation to other open pit mines in Iran. At first, the used burden parameter in main pit in Chadormalu iron ore is compared with the existing empirical relations. In this regard, a new relation has been obtained based on data from other open pit mines in Iran. The base of this equation is modification of the Konya relation and consideration for bench height. The resulting equation has been used in designing and optimizing the southern mass in Chadormalu iron ore mine, which has a different bench height with respect to the northern one. The results include reduction in excavation costs, backbreak, number of boulders in muck pile (respectively 27%, 56% and 67%), elimination of toe problems and increase in excavation rate (36%) in comparison to the primary pattern. Blasting pattern design is the first step in the open pit mining cycle. The minimum distance between the free face and the axis of the blasthole is called burden that is the most important and critical variable in blast designing of open pit mines Researchers have offered numerous relationships for calculating burden until now Chadormalu iron ore mine is located 165 Drilling operation and blasting in Chadormalu mine are executed with drilling machines having 165 In order to design the pattern of the southern mass, the empirical relations which were used for various blasting patterns in the main pit of Chadormalu iron mine (northern mass) were studied. Each empirical relation includes specific parameters. The empirical relations introduced by As the diagrams and table indicate, the empirical relation defined by Konya The above relation was selected for designing and optimizing the blasting pattern. In the used and designed pattern for the southern mass of iron ore mine and according to the Konya The relevant parameters for blast design are categorized into two groups: controllable and uncontrollable. One of the controllable parameters on blasting is bench height. The higher bench height leads to the higher rock column in front of the blasthole. By increasing the height of rock column, its strength decreases. Therefore, the rock column should be better broken in such condition. In order to demonstrate this matter, the ratio of bench height to the thickness of burden is named “stiffness ratio”. The greater this ratio is, the higher the height of bench is and the weaker the rock column is. In contrast, if the benches are short, the column rock is strong. If H/B=1, the blast will be highly confined, resulting in severe toe problem, and backbreak. On the contrary, if the H/B>∼4, there is little confinement and the explosive gases will be vented at the free face and will result in airblast and flyrock. It is found that a stiffness ratio of 3–4 produces good results The values of the coefficients were determined based on the data collected by using nonlinear regression. Nonlinear regression involves estimation of the coefficients in a nonlinear relationship between independent and dependent variables. In this study, SPSS V.16 software was used for statistical and regression analysis. The values of Using the new equation, the amount of burden obtained is 3 The excavation costs from the used patterns and the secondary blasting, including blasting costs (explosives, primer and detonator), drilling costs (depreciation, fuel, personnel, and maintenance) and bulldozer use, that are the main excavation costs in Chadormalu iron ore mine, were calculated. After calculating, the costs were divided by the volume of the block. The results show 36% decrease in excavation costs. The costs of both patterns together with secondary blasting are given in According to the table, the costs of excavation with the new pattern (Rial/m Applying blasting parameters such as burden, spacing of blastholes, powder factor, etc. by new pattern and using these parameters in the empirical relations, the obtained burdens from various empirical relations are compared with the burden calculated from the new equation. One of the obtained burdens is calculated by the relation introduced by Lambooy and Jones In order to investigate the validity of the rendered equation to other mines, the burdens used in Esphordi, Jalal Abad and Sungun mines (Iran) were compared with the new relation ( The calculated burden column mentioned in the above table is the burden obtained from the relation introduced in this research. The actually used burdens in Esphordi, Jalal Abad Iron and Sungun mines are close to the calculated ones. The variance values between the calculated burden by the new burden relation and the actual used burden in the three mentioned open pit mines are respectively 2.9% and 5%, which represent little difference. In this study, data from 6 open pit mines were used as reference to obtain the coefficients for the new burden relation and data from 3 other open pit mines are utilized for relation validation. The results indicate that the newly developed burden relation has a reasonable capability for burden design in nine open pit mines with different geological conditions in Iran. The study of empirical burden relations reveals that relations defined The blasting pattern based on the Konya empirical relation that was designed for the southern mass of the mine did not show good blasting results. This matter could relate to the difference between the bench height of the southern mass and the main pit of the mine. As the review of empirical relations demonstrates, benches with 15 In order to consider bench height effects in Konya relation, ( Other advantages of blast pattern design with the new relation in comparison with the primary pattern in use are appropriate displacement, elimination of interlocking of muck pile, elimination of toe problems, less secondary blasting, decreased use of bulldozers for helping loading machines, increased excavation rate, and a 27% decrease in excavation costs.