A froth model has been developed from first principles to predict bubble coarsening and to better understand the complex mechanisms involved in froth stability. The model is based on predicting the kinetics of film thinning and the critical rupture thickness using the Reynolds lubrication theory and the capillary wave model, respectively. The macroscopic capillary pressure that drives initial film thinning has been corrected for the local capillary pressures in the menisci around the particles adsorbed in lamella films. It has been found that the latter varies with contact angle (θ) and particle size. At θ < 90°, the local capillary pressure constitutes a resistance to film thinning, which in turn varies with particle loading. The model shows that a froth acquires a kinetic stability when film thinning slows down due to the presence of particles despite the negative disjoining pressures of the film segments that are free of particles. A series of flotation tests conducted with 35 μm glass spheres in the presence of 10−5 M MIBC show that bubble coarsening as measured by the ratio between the bubble sizes at the top and bottom of a froth phase is minimum at θ = 70°, which corresponds to the experimental data obtained in the present work and by others. The tests conducted with glass spheres with θ = 40° show that bubble coarsening increases with particle size due to the high probability of particle detachment. Thus, the model is capable of predicting bubble coarsening in froth phase as functions of different physical, chemical, and operational variables.Froth flotation is the best available separation technology for minerals and coal fines. In the pulp phase of a flotation cell, air bubbles selectively collect hydrophobic particles on the surface and rise to the froth phase. They grow in size while rising along the froth height due mainly to coalescence, forcing less hydrophobic particles to drop off due to limited bubble surface area. In this manner, bubble coarsening serves effectively as a built-in upgrading mechanism. On the other hand, excessive bubble coarsening can compromise the recovery and throughput. Thus, control of bubble coarsening in froth phase is an essential step toward optimizing flotation. Analysis of flotation data showed strong correlations between bubble surface area flux, air recovery, and flotation rate ( When air bubbles are in close proximity to each other, the liquid in between drains by gravity and/or capillary pressure ( Hydrophobic particles can also stabilize froth and Pickering emulsions ( Cilliers and his co-workers carried out extensive studies on froth stability using In the present work, a froth model that can predict bubble coarsening has been developed. It is based on the premise that bubble coalescence occurs in the TLFs of water that are free of particles in the same manner as foam films. The Reynolds lubrication theory has been used to predict the kinetics of film thinning from the capillary and disjoining pressures. The former has been determined from bubble size and local capillary pressures, while the latter has been determined by considering contributions from hydrophobic force. The model predictions have been validated against a series of carefully conducted flotation experiments while monitoring the changes in bubble size. In flotation froth, bubbles coalesce when the thin liquid film (TLF) formed between two neighboring bubbles thins and ruptures. The kinetics of film thinning can be described by the Reynolds lubrication theory ( During the initial stages of a film thinning process, liquid drainage is governed by the Laplace pressure ( In the presence of a spherical particle, Assuming that Eq. If more than one particle is adsorbed on a lamella film, its macroscopic capillary pressure ( In the present work, a model for predicting Horizontal foam films thin initially by the Laplace pressure ( Substituting the values of  The major driving force for film thinning is the macroscopic capillary pressure corrected for the local curvature changes around adsorbed particles. At  The authors determined Substituting Eq. At the time of developing the capillary wave model, no information was available on hydrophobic force. Therefore, Vrij and his co-workers used the classical DLVO theory (Eq.  For modeling bubble coalescence in froth phase, it is necessary to determine the effects of particles on As bubbles rise along the height of a froth phase, they become larger and less numerous due to coalescence. Assuming that bubbles at a given froth height are of the same size, one can readily derive a relationship between the size and number as follows, It is assumed in the present work that the number of bubbles at a distance ( When two bubbles of identical size rise from the base of a foam (or froth) phase, the liquid film between them will drain to reach a critical film thickness ( Consider the bubbles of diameter Bubble coarsening due to coalescence depends on the number of faces (or lamellae films) of a bubble bursting during coalescence. Assuming that From Eqs. Solving Eq. Eq. A series of flotation tests were conducted on glass (silica) spheres of different sizes and hydrophobicity, while monitoring the changes in bubble sizes in the froth phase by means of a high-speed video camera. Effect of hydrophobicity was studied with monodisperse silica spheres of The flotation tests were conducted using a Denver laboratory flotation machine equipped with a 1.5 L rectangular cell at 5% solids. The cell was made of Plexiglas plates to take images of the bubbles in froth phase using a side-view camera. All experiments were conducted in the presence of a 10 The froth generated in each experiment was allowed to overflow, collapse, and be recycled back to the flotation cell by means of a peristaltic pump to maintain a constant frother concentration during experiment. Once a steady state was reached, the side-view images of the bubbles were recorded, and analyzed offline using the BubbleSEdit image-analysis software to determine the Sauter mean diameters (  Also shown in The kinetics of film thinning should vary with particle loading ( We are assuming that bubble coalescence occurs in free films, i.e., parts of a lamella film that are not occupied by particles. This may be a reasonable assumption in a sense that the contact angles of the mineral particles recovered to froth phase are usually <90°. Only when  The values of The data presented in An alternative explanation may be given for the role of hydrophobic particles in froth stability. As      It turned out that the critical rupture times ( A froth stability model has been developed from first principles to predict bubble coarsening in forth phase. The model is based on calculating the macroscopic capillary pressure of the air bubbles in the presence of the spherical hydrophobic particles adsorbed in lamellar films. Appropriate correction have been made for the local capillary pressures due to the menisci formed around the particles in froth films. It has been found that the macroscopic capillary pressure varies with contact angle, particle loading, and local capillary pressure, which made it possible to predict the effects of contact angle and particle size on bubble coarsening. According to the model, the froth formed with silica spheres with a 35 μm diameter should be most stable at 70° contact angle, which has been found to be the case in experimental. The results obtained with particles of 40° contact angle show that bubble coarsening increases with increasing particle size due to corresponding increase in the probability of particle detachment. The model developed in the present work can predict bubble coarsening as functions of the various physical, chemical, and operating parameters. The authors would like to express appreciation to FLSmidth Inc. and the