In this paper, a new strategy based on a supported liquid membrane (SLM) system for the simultaneous and selective separation of copper, cobalt, and nickel in ammonia/ammonium chloride solutions, using a two-membrane-three-compartment cell (sandwich SLM) was proposed. This model used two polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes both loaded with 20vol.% Acorga M5640 in kerosene. The effects of H2SO4 concentrations in two stripping phases on the transport of copper, nickel, and cobalt were evaluated. Experimental results indicated that copper and nickel were transported through the first membrane into the central compartment which contained 5.0g/L H2SO4, while cobalt remained in the first feed compartment. Then copper continued to penetrate through the second membrane into the third compartment which contained 50.0g/L H2SO4, while nickel remained in the second compartment. More than 99.5% of cobalt, 98.0% of nickel, and 98.9% of copper were separated into the three different compartments from a mixed feed solution containing 100mg/L each of these three species with a transport time of 36h. A maximum copper flux of 1.59×10−6
                     mol/m2·s was obtained. The results establish that copper, nickel, and cobalt in ammonia solution can be efficiently separated by this novel type of sandwich SLM.The ammoniacal leaching method is recognized as an effective hydrometallurgical process for the recovery of copper, nickel, and cobalt from lean oxidized ores With the depletion of high-grade ores along with a growing demand for metals, the utilization of low-grade ore has gained interest in recent years. Despite state-of-the-art processes for metals separation, solvent extraction for processing low-concentration solutions is no longer economical because of the sizeable amount of equipment necessary and the large amount of solvent required In a solution containing an excess of ammonia, copper tends to form the tetraammine complex Cu(NH The ammine complexes of Cu(II), Co(II), and Ni(II) can be extracted using oxime-based extractants. However, the process becomes problematic when Co(II) is transferred into the organic phase, because Co(II) is oxidized to Co(III), which is not readily stripped On the other hand, it is noteworthy that Cu(II) in an acidic medium can also be extracted by M5640, while Ni(II) remains in the raffinate Inspired by the difference of M5640 extraction behaviors with respect to copper and nickel in ammoniacal and acidic media, a new strategy based on the SLM system for the simultaneous separation of copper, cobalt, and nickel in ammonia/ammonium chloride solutions, using a two-membrane-three-compartment cell (sandwich SLM) was proposed. In this model, two PVDF membranes, both impregnated with the chelating extractant M5640 in kerosene, were used. Different concentrations of sulfuric acid solutions were used as the stripping phases in the second and the third compartments. In the present work, this sandwich SLM was used to investigate the separation of copper, nickel, and cobalt in ammonia/ammonium chloride solution. The commercial extractant Acorga M5640 was supplied by Cognis Co., Ltd., and was used as received from the manufacturer. The active substance of M5640 is 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime Millipore Durapore GVHP 4700, a hydrophobic PVDF film, was used as the solid support for the liquid membrane. The membrane had a thickness of 125 In ammoniacal media, the aqueous solution was composed of 100 The sandwich SLM device consisted of three acrylic compartments in contact through two flat PVDF membranes (each with an effective membrane area of 11.34 The metal transport percentage (% T) of each metal in different compartments was calculated according to Eq. The flux (J, mol/m Solvent extraction experiments were conducted in order to determine the separability of copper, nickel, and cobalt in different aqueous solution systems containing ammoniacal and acidic media, as well as to verify the feasibility of the SLM system. The extraction of copper, nickel, and cobalt in ammoniacal solution was conducted with varying concentrations of M5640 ranging from 0.1 Copper and nickel can be stripped into the acidic aqueous solution from the loaded M5640 organic phase. Therefore, the extraction and separation of copper and nickel in 5.0 From these studies of solvent extraction, it is noteworthy that the separation of copper and nickel from cobalt in ammoniacal solution and the separation of copper from nickel in acidic solution were achieved by M5640 extraction. Thus, the sandwich SLM investigation goals for simultaneous separation of these three species were feasible. Experiments were conducted in which the H At the same time, the nickel and cobalt concentrations in the first and second compartments were also monitored. The changes of nickel concentrations are presented in The effect of varying the H In order to establish the optimal stirring rate in the three compartments, the transport of copper was studied by varying the stirring rate in the range of 400–1000 The variation of the mass fractions of the three metals in each compartment are plotted and shown in When the ammine complexes of Cu(II) and Ni(II) were present in the feed solution, they competed to form the extracted complexes with M5640 at the feed/membrane interface. The transport of copper and nickel from a feed containing a mixture of 100 Simultaneous separation of copper, cobalt, and nickel from ammonia/ammonium chloride solution using a sandwich SLM was investigated. Separation experiments indicated that more than 99.5% of cobalt, 98.0% of nickel, and 98.9% of copper were separated into three different compartments from a mixed feed solution containing 100 The authors gratefully acknowledge financial supports from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 