This study aims to investigate the shear and tensile impact behavior of ball grid arrays (BGAs) placed on Ni (P)/Au surface-finished substrates considering the microstructure and compositions of intermetallic compounds (IMCs) formed at the solder/substrate interfaces. Tests were conducted on as-reflowed and aged samples with four different compositions of solders such as Ni-doped and non-Ni-doped Sn–0.7wt.%Cu, Sn–37wt.%Pb and Sn–3.0wt.%Ag–0.5wt.%Cu, over a wide range of displacement rates from 10 to 4000mm/s in shear and from 1 to 400mm/s in tensile tests. In shear tests, there was almost no difference between as-reflowed and aged samples at low displacement rates in all the samples, while at high displacement rates the aged samples showed better properties than as-reflowed ones, in particular, in Ni-doped Sn–0.7wt%Cu samples. In tensile tests, the aging treatments had little effect on the strength for any compositions of solders at low and high displacement rates. Sn–3.0wt.%Ag–0.5wt.%Cu samples with any heat treatments showed the least resistance to both shear and tensile loadings at any displacement rates.Due to the recent health and environmental concerns on lead toxicity, much effort has been devoted to seek lead-free solder alloys with suitable soldering characteristics and mechanical properties Ball grid array (BGA) technology has been used in high-volume package productions for a last few years. BGA joints provide both mechanical strength and electrical conductivity, which play a significant role in the connection between electronic components and printed circuit boards The formation of intermetallic compounds (IMCs) at the interface between solders and substrates is essential in the manufacturing of reliable solder joints. The IMC layer provides a metallurgical bonding between the solder and the substrate. However, the IMCs are generally brittle to easily fail, and it is frequently observed that fracturing occurs at the IMC layers between the solder joint and the bonding pads Much concern has been made on the IMC layer due to interaction between lead-free solders and Ni surface-finished substrates. The studies of this interfacial reaction have been investigating the compositions of IMCs and mechanism of their growth processes. Zeng and Tu reported that Ni–Sn–P ternary phase IMCs had been found between Ni In the present study, shear and tensile impact tests were conducted on Sn–Cu, Sn–Cu–Ni, Sn–Ag–Cu and Sn–Pb solder BGA joints placed on Ni (P)/Au surface-finished substrates over a wide range of displacement rates. The effect of heat treatments such as reflowing and aging on the shear and tensile strength was investigated considering the thickness, morphology and compositions of the interface IMCs. The effect of displacement rates on such mechanical behavior was also investigated. The failure behavior of the BGAs joints was examined by analysing the force–displacement curves and fracture surfaces. The test samples include solder ball grid arrays (BGAs) placed on the Ni (P)/Au surface-finished FR-4 printed circuit boards (PCBs). The thickness of the gold layer was less than 1 A microstructure observation was conducted using an SEM (JSM-6460LA, JEOL, Japan) with an acceleration voltage of 20 The shear and tensile tests were conducted with the ball solders placed on the Ni (P)/Au surface-finished substrates using a high speed impact tester (Dage-4000HS Bond tester, Richardson Electronics Ltd.). The test speed (displacement rates) was controlled from 10 to 4000  In this study, the average thickness and morphology of the IMC layers were examined, in which all the compositions of IMCs were put together. The average thickness was calculated with the cross-section area of IMC layers divided by the length along the substrates. It can be seen in The details of the model were described in previous work      For SP solders, Ni Such phenomenon caused by aging treatments cannot be seen in BGA joints with Cu substrates Yoon et al.  In tensile tests, aged SC and SAC BGAs showed lower properties than as-reflowed samples over the range of the testing displacement rates. For the SCN BGAs, the aged samples showed slightly lower properties than as-reflowed ones, and for the SP BGAs, the aged samples showed slightly better properties than as-reflowed ones. Chin et al. In both shear and tensile tests, brittle fracture at the interface IMCs (CI) tended to occur at high displacement rates, particularly, in tensile tests. Whether CI or CS failure occurs is considered to depend on the mechanical characteristics of both IMCs and solder alloys. When we examine the mechanical behavior of as-reflowed and aged samples, the thickness and morphology of the IMC layers are considered to be important. However, it has been already described in Sections Finally we examine the meaning of the ball shear and tensile test methods. Failure modes of CI, CS and DD are considered to correspond to the different types of failure of the BGA joints in practical situations. The CI-failure can occur in the practical situation that the BGA joints are subjected to high speed impact loadings under drop conditions. Based on the examination of the deformation energy after the maximum force in the CI-failure, the energy consumption due to the brittle fracture with crack propagation in the IMC layer can be estimated, which will be applied to the estimation of the fracture criterion of the BGA joints as well as the packages subjected to high speed impact loadings. The CS-failure can occur in the case that some object bumps into the solder balls in the packages. The DD-failure can occur in the case that the large shear or tensile deformation of solder parts occurs under low displacement-rate conditions. The deformation energy estimated from the force–displacement curves is interpreted in terms of the failure modes, and can be used to establish a failure criterion of the BGA joints and their electronic packages subjected to various mechanical loadings. Consequently, the average thickness, morphology and compositions of the interface IMCs, voids generated in the IMCs, strength of the boundary between IMC layers or IMC layer and solders or IMC layer and substrates, and mechanical properties of solders are considered to affect such joint mechanical behavior. Generally, with increasing displacement rates, CI-failure becomes dominant in both shear and tensile tests. In the present tests, CI-failure occurring at high displacement rates is considered to be related to the board-level drop reliability estimated in previous work In the present study the shear and tensile behavior of the SC, SCN, SAC and SP BGAs placed on Ni (P)/Au surface-finished substrates subjected to different number of reflows and aging time was investigated. The summary is shown below. For Sn–Cu-based lead-free solders (SC, SCN and SAC), (Cu,Ni) The failure behavior of the BGA joints was classified into three types in shear and two types in tensile loadings in terms of crack initiating points. Three types of failure in shear loadings include a crack initiating in the IMC layers (C I), a crack initiating in solder balls (CS), and a failure occurring as a result of large ductile deformation of solder balls (DD). Two types of failure in tensile loadings include a crack initiating in the IMC layers (CI) and a ductile failure with necking in the solder balls (DD). In shear tests, as-reflowed samples showed more brittle failure (CI) than aged ones at high displacement rates. The shear resistance at high displacement rates for SCN BGAs was dramatically improved by aging treatments. Both as-reflowed and aged SP BGAs constantly showed good properties over the range of the displacement rates used in the tests. The deformation energy and maximum force of as-reflowed SAC BGAs drastically decrease with increasing displacement rates over 1000 In tensile tests, the deformation energy was not so much affected by aging treatments in all the samples. Both as-reflow and aged SP BGAs constantly showed better properties than other lead-free solder BGAs over the wide range of displacement rates. SAC BGAs showed the least resistance to the tensile loadings. Particularly, aged SAC BGAs show brittle (CI) failure at any displacement rates. This research was conducted under an international cooperative research program between the University of Queensland, Australia and Nihon Superior Co. Ltd., Japan. The authors thank Dr. S.D. McDonald and Mr. J. Read of The University of Queensland for useful discussions and sample preparations.