     Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative process involving all of the major joint tissues, including articular cartilage, synovium, and subchondral bone. OA is characterized by the progressive erosion of articular cartilage, including the loss of one of its major constituents, sulfated proteoglycans. Changes in cells and matrix lead to a softening, fibril-lation, ulceration and loss of articular cartilage, sclerosis, and eburnation of the subchondral bone, osteophytes, and subchondral cysts [ Osteoarthritis (OA) is a highly prevalent condition that will ultimately affect 8 out of 10 elderly individuals, both males and females, at some joint location [ It is estimated that there are more that 17 million cases of osteoarthritis in the United States, making OA a major cause of morbidity and disability [ Major risk factors for osteoarthritis include aging, obesity, and previous injury [ This unresolved debate was initially motivated by four observational studies from clinical and free-living populations. As early as 1925, Cecil and Archer consolidated the observations from a case series of women and suggested that the menopause appeared to be a risk factor for the development of osteoarthritis [ We will address this debate in the following manner. First, we will introduce mechanisms whereby estrogen might influence the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. These mechanisms can provide the backdrop against which investigations using animal models, clinical studies, and epidemiological studies can be evaluated. These studies will be organized into the following general areas: age- and gender-related studies, studies addressing the menopausal transition, studies evaluating measured hormone concentrations, and studies of hormone replacement therapy. Osteoarthritis is believed to be the result of biochemical changes occurring in cartilage that affect two matrix components, proteoglycans and type II collagen. There is a progressive depletion of cartilage proteoglycan over time. Additionally, there is an alteration in the degree of type II collagen hydration. Accompanying this are changes in ultrastructure properties of the collagen, changes that are marked by infiltration of type I collagen, the collagen associated with bone. These alterations in the proteoglycan content of cartilage matrix, accompanied by structural damage, make the cartilage less resistant to compression or mechanical stress. Repair mechanisms are needed to respond to these underlying changes in cartilage. In contrast to rheumatoid arthritis, in which the primary source of degradative enzymes is the synovium, the primary source of enzymatic activity in OA is probably in the chondrocytes. The enzyme families associated with the chondrodytes include the metalloproteases, the serine proteases, and the thiol proteases. There have been multiple mechanisms proposed to relate estrogens to the pathogenetic properties associated with OA (see Early observational studies reported that osteoporosis and osteoarthritis rarely coexisted with each other, suggesting that people with low bone density did not have OA. Based on that concept, Radin [ In tissue culture systems, estrogen is reported to stimulate collagen synthesis in the rat uterus and femur [ If estrogen were to have a direct role in osteoarthritis, then the demonstration of estrogen receptors in cartilage-related cells would be important. Work by Sheridan [ The role definition, and the attendant ambiguity, is not only a function of the species or system in which the experiment is being conducted. Natsazky summarizes that in chondrocytes, 17β-estradiol inhibits cell proliferation [ Estrogens may have an indirect role in OA expression through their influence on cytokine expression, when controlled cytokine action plays a role in normal tissue turnover and repair. Cytokines that have been extensively studied in relation to OA include the interleukins (IL-1, IL-6) and transforming growth factor-β, and tumor necrosis factor-a. It is recognized that uncontrolled or excessive cytokine action, apparently particularly that of IL-l, will result in excessive cartilage degradation, pathologic change in joints, and an inflammatory response in the synovium [ In summary, there are at least three major mechanisms through which estrogen may play a role in the processes associated with the development and/or progression of osteoarthritis. There may be direct roles either through proteoglycan or collagen synthesis, or conversely through the suppression of collagen synthesis. Estrogen action may also affect cartilage indirectly through the maintenance of bone stiffness or by modulating the excess expression of cytokines. In complex human systems, each of these actions may act in synchrony or in opposition to each other. The complexity and the multiplicity of potential mechanisms provide ample opportunity to observe conflicting outcomes. The end result is that at any one time in a particular process, estrogen may appear to have both a beneficial and a protective effect. In various geographic populations, osteoarthritis presents with an increasing in prevalence in women, beginning at the midlife. There is also a difference in joint presentation between males and females. For example, as early as the 1950s, observations by Kellgren and Lawrence in a British population suggested that the prevalence of osteoarthritis increased markedly after age 55, particularly in women [ The aforementioned gender differences and the pattern of increasing prevalence in persons between 50 and 60 years of age suggested that estrogen levels in premenopausal women might have a role in protecting women from OA. A second perspective was that the relative absence of estrogen as a result of the menopause might precipitate the presentation with OA. These possibilities led investigators to consider those conditions in which estrogen status had been modified, including menopause, hysterectomy/oophorectomy, and the provision of estrogen through hormone replacement therapy. Stecher In the 1950s, Kellgren and Moore [ Whereas Stecher, Kellgren, and Moore, as well as Ehr-lich, focused on the presentation of OA in the hands, the arthritis of the menopause defined by Cecil and Archer in their 1925 manuscript [ More contemporary studies have failed to link the menopausal transition with the presentation of OA. For example, Cicuttini [ It is noteworthy that, in humans, menopause has been associated with an increased production of IL-I by peripheral blood mononuclear cells, a condition that is apparently reversed by estrogen replacement [ Studies involving the menopausal transition involve several complexities that make it difficult to study in relation to OA. First, although there is ultimately diminution in estradiollevels, estradiol levels fluctuate substantially during the perimenopausal period. Thus, to better consider a menopausal effect, investigators should define when the menopausal transition began and whether any ‘effect in relation to OA or its attendant biological processes was related to changes in estradiol levels or to diminution of estradiol levels. Then, investigators would have to consider the amount of time that would be required before menopausal change could be temporally associated with either the development or progression of the OA. Another strategy to examine the role of estrogen in OA would be to evaluate the status of women who have experienced a hysterectomy or oophorectomy. Schouten The lack of association reported by Schouten These aforementioned studies demonstrate well the contradictory results from studies of the estrogen and OA relationship. There are difficulties in comparing information from human gynecologic surgery to that from animal models using ovarian oblation, because of interspecies differences and differences in why different women will have gynecologic surgery. There are inconsistencies in studies of different human population groups. It is critical that the studies define whether the gynecologic surgery included removal of both ovaries. It is also important to determine the reason for The literature about hormone replacement and OA, like that of hysterectomy and oophorectomy, is contradictory, with studies reporting increased risk of OA, protective associations for OA, and no association. Felson reported that among members of the Framingham Study (mean age of 77 years at radiographic examination), there was no association of estrogen use with radiographically defined OA of the knee [ Other studies have reported important associations of OA and ERT use. Two of the four groups in the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (a study of fractures in white women who were at least 65 years old) included radiographs of the hip in one of their examinations. They found that current users of ERT and HRT had 46% lower risk of moderate to severe radiographic OA findings compared with women who had never used replacement therapy. The risk of osteoarthritis of the hip was similar in past ERT users and never users of ERT [ In contrast, Holbrook These studies include a number of complexities. For example, these users of estrogen replacement used ERT for an extended time. Thus, study enrollees were typically well beyond the age of the transition and the studies did not adequately address the number of years since menopause. Furthermore, these studies do not identify the reasons for initiating replacement. Potentially, enrollees would include women with both surgical and natural menopause. There are also issues around the definition of OA. It is well recognized that there is only minimal overlap among women who self-report with OA as compared with the radiographically defined OA. More women are likely to selfreport OA than would be described using OA and common classification scales such as the Kellgren–Lawrence criteria. It also appears that hand and knee OA (even when both are radiographically defined) may have different factors associated with their development. In animal studies, Rosner [ Studies using the selective estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen have also been evaluated in relation to experimentally induced osteoarthritis in rabbits. Rosner In animal models, Silberberg There is a small body of literature developed to describe the role of estrogen concentrations in cartilage and its metabolism. Endogenous estrone and estradiol concentrations appear to be similar in women with varying degrees of prevalent OA [ Spector The hypothesized relationships between osteoarthritis and ovarian hormone levels usually involve estrogen, but the hypotheses that have emerged are bidirectional. A protective effect for estrogen was first suggested by observations of increased risk of OA during the menopausal transition. The investigators attributed the increased risk of OA to the decline in circulating estrogen levels. Studies, both There are several reasons that studies to date may be so contradictory. First, consistently defining OA has been difficult. It is unclear as to how much of any relationship is related to the initiation, progression, or severity of the osteoarthritis. It is equally unclear which of the subtypes of OA are being addressed in these studies. Because OA is a heterogeneous condition, it is quite possible that the estrogen relationship may be more important in hand OA, or in generalized osteoarthritis, which includes the hand, but is less applicable to the hip or knee. Estrogen may be related to OA only of specified etiologies—that is, whether there is a substantial inflammatory component or immune response as compared to a more mechanical modality. The use of animal models is not particularly informative in sorting out the heterogeneity of OA responses characterizing the human disease. It is well recognized that there are important substantial interspecies differences affecting the interpretation of studies in animal models. Studies in humans frequently have insufficient sample sizes to sort out whether the response is related to the initiation, progression, or severity of the disease(s). There are also difficulties in characterizing the exposures to hormones. In studies of hormone replacement therapies, responses have varied according to the dose and type of formulation, as well as the timing in the disease course. Studies have also tended to address issues related to estrogen, but failed to consider other important hormones such as androgen levels. In light of these limitations, well-defined and wellexecuted studies in this area are critical. Osteoarthritis is a major cause of functional limitation and results in substantial expenditure of dollars for health care. The female population is significantly affected by osteoarthritis and, on reaching age 60, women experience a major shift in their estrogen production and a shift in their estrogen: androgen ratio. A more complete understanding can have an important impact in the population and could provide an opportunity for needed therapeutic interventions.