Shrub lands could provide an almost unexplored biomass resource of increasing potential in the EU, particularly in Mediterranean countries. Its collection and transformation into solid biofuels will help to reduce the adverse effects associated with frequent shrub land fires. The objective of this study is to examine the pre-treatment and combustion of biomass obtained from broom plant clearings to assess the feasibility of utilising it as a fuel in commercial combustion applications.
                  Above ground broom biomass was collected with a harvester-baler machine. Afterwards, in a milling installation and a pilot pelletisation plant two fuels were obtained: 30 mm milled material and pellets, which were used in two commercial grate boilers (40 kWth and 500 kWth).
                  We conclude that biomass from broom clearings could be used to produce solid biofuels for commercial boilers. Milling and pelletisation did not entail difficulties and the pellets could be classified as B (ISO 17225-2:2014). During combustion, no operating problems related to the fuel were observed. However, due to its high potassium content, special attention should be paid to the tendency to produce deposits and to particle emission and it would be advisable to control the working temperature to avoid slag formation in the burner.EU climate and decarbonised energy targets rely on a significant increase in the demand for biomass resources. Considering the availability limitations of biomass residues and waste and the uncertainties of biomass production on agricultural land, research into new biomass resources is required and the potential of shrub land stands being an interesting option. Nowadays, this source of biomass is poorly known, since it is frequently considered as secondary natural vegetation when compared to natural or planted tree stands. Frequently, shrub lands constitute one of a series of stages of colonisation after the disappearance of tree cover, caused for example by forest fires. In general, shrub formations are mainly understorey vegetation although, in some cases, they may contain varying proportions of tree species, which makes their classification within the different land cover surveying systems even more difficult. The last Global Forest Resources Assessment (FRA 2015) coordinated by the FAO In the EU28, the data from FRA 2015 indicates that “forest land” covers 38% of the land surface (161 million hectares) and “other wooded land” occupies only 4,9% of the land (21 million hectares). However, according to the “Land Use and Cover Area Frame Survey” (LUCAS, 2012) Within the EU28, the Mediterranean countries support the greatest relative coverage of shrub land. Of the 46 million hectares of shrub land estimated according to LUCAS in the EU28, approximately 21 million (45%) are concentrated in the territories of Greece, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Cyprus and Croatia and about half of this (10.7 million hectares) is located in Spain. However, although the land surface covered by shrubs has been documented in the sources cited, only a few studies of the availability and chemical composition of shrub biomass in Portugal and Spain have been published At present, shrub lands usually suffer from lack of management which, together with the abandonment of traditional forestry uses, leads to a forest structure more prone to wildfires Shrub lands could provide an as yet almost unexplored biomass of increasing potential in the EU, particularly in Mediterranean countries, for the production of solid biofuels and this could be expected to contribute to reducing the adverse environmental effects associated with frequent shrub land fires. In this context, one of the goals of the ENERBIOSCRUB LIFE + project is the mobilisation of new biomass resources through the production of sustainable solid biofuels from the mechanised cleaning of shrub lands with high flammability risk. This paper describes the results obtained in the aforementioned project in the preparation of solid biofuels and their subsequent combustion using broom ( The raw material utilised in this study is broom ( In order to obtain broom ( The broom biomass was collected using a BIOBALER W55 harvester-baler machine. Two pictures of the clearing operations can be seen in The dry bales were reduced in size by means of a milling installation ( The facility used in the experiments was a pilot plant ( Two boilers were used for the combustion tests carried out. They were named MG40 and MG500 and they are described below. MG40 is a commercial boiler with thermal power between 25 and 40 kW, depending on the biomass fuel used. This boiler, which has been specially designed for agro-fuels has a lateral feeding burner based on a moving grate with a double forward-backward and upward-downward movement. The feed system has been adapted to feed pellets, chips and chopped biomass. Furthermore, the boiler has a fully automatic ash extraction system. The heat exchanger consists of vertical tubes with three smoke passes. Fumes are blown through by a fan which also draws in the primary and the secondary air. The boiler also has a lambda probe located at the flue gas stream which allows the oxygen concentration in the outlet gases to be monitored. This boiler does not have any equipment to remove the particles produced during combustion. The boiler is automatically controlled to ensure low gas emission levels, being classified by its manufacturer as class 3 according to the EN 303-5:1999 standard. MG500 is a commercial 500 kW In both the boilers described, operational variables, such as temperatures inside the burner, in the tubes of the heat exchanger and in the chimney, inlet and outlet water temperatures, and water volume flow, are registered on line. Mass fuel flow can be also calculated. Measurement of the gaseous composition of exhaust gases during the combustion tests is carried out with a portable Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy analyser and a zirconium oxide cell for determining the O Continuous monitoring of the particle content in exhaust gases is performed with a system which uses electrodynamic probe electrification technology. The electrical current produced by particles interacting with a grounded rod protruding across the stack is measured and correlated with dust concentration by comparison with the results of an iso-kinetic sample. An automatic iso-kinetic sampler is thus used to measure the particle content in flue gases in certain periods of time. Broom was received as bales and it was milled in two steps: Three batches of 10 bales (approximately 3000 kg/batch) were ground in the pre-shredder using a screen opening of 30 mm. Part of the material obtained was used directly in the combustion tests performed in the MG500 boiler. Three batches of 30 mm milled material (approximately 1500 kg/batch) were fed to the post-grinder, where a screen opening of 4 mm was used. This material was used to produce the pellets utilised in the combustion tests performed in the MG40 boiler. At the beginning of the pelletisation test, water and biomass flows fed to the pellet press were modified as the process went on, with the aim of optimising operation of the machine (i.e. stable power demand and low vibration) and obtaining high quality pellets (moisture content < 10% and fines content < 1.0%). When these conditions were reached, it was considered that steady state had been achieved and it was maintained for at least 2 h. Three tests were carried out, with a specific pelletisation surface of 5.6 cm Specific pelletisation surface: S N: number of die holes covered by the rollers. S P: drive power of the pellet press. Die compression: it is defined as the path between the beginning of the inlet cone and the end of the straight part of the die hole, calculated as l + L in The process variables recorded in the milling and pelletisation tests were the specific mass flow (in kg of dry matter per hour and per kW of drive power) and the specific energy (in kWh per t of dry matter). The specific mass flow is calculated as the mass of milled or pelletised material (in kg of dry matter) divided by the time utilised to mill or to pelletise it (in hours) and by the power of the mills (pre-shredder: 90 kW; post-grinder: 75 kW) or the pellet press (30 kW). The specific energy is calculated as the active electric energy demanded by the different items of equipment to mill or to pelletise the material, divided by the mass of material which has been milled or the mass of pellets obtained (in tonnes of dry matter). With the purpose of comparing the behaviour of broom fuels with other commonly used biomass fuels, commercial pellets A1 (according to the ISO 17225-2:2014 standard) and milled pine were used as reference in the combustion tests carried out. Preliminary combustion tests were performed in the MG40 and the MG500 boilers with the broom fuels in order to define and adjust the operating conditions with the aim of obtaining the lowest emissions. Therefore, adjustment of the boiler parameters was carried out: grate working cycle, O Afterwards, one combustion test was performed in each boiler with both broom and pine fuels. Each test had a steady state period of 6 h, working as close as possible to the nominal power of the boiler. The steady state was considered to start at the time in which flue gas temperature did not change more than ±5 °C in a period of 30 min. When the combustion tests finished, ash was gathered from different locations, depending on the boiler, and weighed: MG40: firstly, if slags were observed on the grate, a sample was collected manually and labelled “slag”. Afterwards, the rest of the ash in the grate was gathered and, together with the ash from between the furnace and the ash-container extracted with the ash extraction system, this formed the “grate” sample. Next, if sinters were observed inside the tubes of the heat exchanger, a sample was collected manually and labelled “sinter”. Lastly, the ash deposited inside the tubes of the heat exchanger was collected using a brush, separating the samples of the 1st and 2nd passes, which were labelled “1st pass tubes” and “2nd pass tubes”, respectively. MG500: firstly, if slags were observed on the grate, a sample was collected manually and labelled “slag”. The rest of the ash was extracted with the ash extraction system and, using the quartering method, a sample was collected and labelled “grate”. Afterwards, if sinters were observed inside the tubes of the heat exchanger, a sample was collected manually and labelled “sinter”. Next, the ash deposited inside the tubes of the heat exchanger was collected using a brush, separating the samples of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd passes, which were labelled “1st pass tubes”, “2nd pass tubes” and “3rd pass tubes” respectively. Lastly, all the ash separated from the flue gases with the multi-cyclone unit was collected, to produce the “cyclone” sample. The process variables studied in the combustion tests were: thermal power, thermal output, temperatures at different locations in the boiler, emissions (O The sampling of the milled biomass and the pellets was from moving material (at the outlet of the mill and at the outlet of the bagging bin of the pelletising pilot plant) and 5 samples of 1 dm Regarding the fuels used in the boilers, 10 samples of 1 dm The laboratory sample was prepared according to the UNE 14780:2011 standard, by means of homogenisation, division, drying and grinding. The analytical tests were performed in the Laboratory of Biomass Characterisation at CEDER-CIEMAT, following the standards shown in The study of the level of agglomeration of the ash collected inside the boilers after the combustion tests was based on its resistance to being separated by means of particle size distribution analysis. In this methodology, a representative sample of ash by quartering is selected. Its volume must be approximately 1/3 of the sieve volume, using 0.2 m or 0.4 m sieves. Then, a 15-min sieving process is carried out and samples, collected in the different sieves, are weighed.  As can be seen, the values of the specific mass flow and the specific energy demand are of the same order of magnitude in the three tests performed, both in the pre-shredder and the post-grinder. The differences observed between them could be associated with differences in the moisture content of the biomass milled and with the lack of homogeneity of the bale material. Comparing the values of specific energy obtained with some reference studies for wood logs, it can be seen that wood log chippings show an average specific energy demand between 6 and 7.2 kWh/t (d.b.) The results obtained in the pelletisation tests carried out with 4 mm milled broom can be seen in Two different broom fuels were obtained in the pre-treatment tests to be used in subsequent combustion tests: 30 mm milled material and pellets ( The physical and chemical characterisation of these fuels together with the characterisation of the fuels used as reference in the combustion tests (pine pellets classified as A1 according to the ISO 17225-2:2014 standard and 30 mm milled pine) can be seen in The broom pellets obtained comply with the limits established in the ISO 17225-2:2014 standard for class B pellets. Comparing the broom fuels to the reference fuels, it can be seen that the milled broom shows higher bulk density, ash content and fines content than the milled pine used. The calorific values, GCV and NCV, in dry basis, are similar in broom and pine fuels, in spite of their different ash contents. In the ultimate analysis, it can be seen that the nitrogen content in broom is higher than the value analysed in the reference fuels (more than 17 times higher in pellets and more than 10 times higher in milled material), as would be expected, since broom is a leguminous species and is therefore characterised by a high nitrogen ﬁxation capacity, accumulating nitrogen in ﬁne fractions such as leaves or twigs The fuels obtained in the pre-treatment step were tested and compared to reference fuels in each boiler, using a protocol based on the EN 303-5:2012 standard, as follows: MG40: one test with broom pellets and one test with commercial A1 pine pellets (used as reference material). MG500: one test with 30 mm milled broom and one test with 30 mm milled pine (used as reference material). During the combustion tests, the two boilers worked without mechanical problems related to the fuels used, each test lasting 6 h in steady state conditions. Heat input refers to the amount of heat per unit time supplied to the furnace by the fuel (based on its net calorific value). Boiler efficiency is the ratio between the heat transferred to the water per unit time and the heat input. The variable “T 1st pass tubes” is the temperature registered at the inlet of the 1st pass tubes of the heat exchanger. Although the heat input values are of the same order of magnitude with both fuels in each boiler, lower boiler efficiency was obtained with broom fuels, as a result of lower heat transfer to the water during those tests, and related to more severe fouling of the heat exchanger because of ash deposition (see figures in  Taking into account that the combustion tests followed a similar methodology to that used for rated heat output tests in the EN 303-5:2012 standard, the emissions obtained in the MG40 boiler (categorised as class 3 according to the EN 303-5:1999 standard) have been compared with the limits established to classify solid fuel heating boilers as class 3 according to this standard. These limits are: 3000 mg CO/Nm As mentioned above, broom fuels have high nitrogen content compared with pine fuels and consequently, higher NO With regard to SO The total sulphur contained in the biomass has been calculated considering the percentage of sulphur in the biomass ( The ash collected on the grate and inside the 1st pass tubes of the heat exchanger has been considered. The quantity of sulphur retained by the ash has been calculated considering the sulphur content in the collected ash calcined at 550 °C. The results obtained are shown in A physical description of the ash gathered from different locations in the boilers after the combustion tests can be seen in As shown in With the aim of comparing the degree of agglomeration of the ash collected on the grate, its particle size distribution was analysed (see section  In In order to obtain further information about the different fuels with regard to slagging and ash deposition, a characterisation of the composition of the ash coming from the fuel (at 550 °C) and the ash collected on the grate and inside the first pass tubes of the heat exchanger (calcined at 550 °C) was performed, using ICP-AES and XRD analysis. The results are shown in In the graphs corresponding to the ICP-AES analysis (in the upper part of the Figures), all the elements, with the exception of chlorine, are expressed as oxides and normalised at 100%. Furthermore, the ash composition has been expressed as iron-free, with the aim of avoiding the influence of contamination by metal coming from the tubes of the heat exchanger during the collection of the ash sample. The crystalline compounds detected and semi-quantified using XRD analysis are shown in the lower part of the Figures. These compounds have also been normalised at 100%. During the cleaning of the boilers after the combustion tests, the formation of small slags in the combustion of broom pellets was observed ( With regard to the ash collected inside the first pass tubes of the heat exchanger, it can be observed that, in general, the potassium, chlorine and sulphur content in this ash is higher than that of biomass calcined at 550 °C. This fact could be due to the deposition of alkaline compounds on the tubes following two mechanisms: direct condensation on the surface of tubes or condensation on particles and subsequent deposition on the surface of tubes by thermophoresis. Concerning the ash gathered on the grate, potassium silicates, which are usually compounds with a low melting point, are observed in the tests corresponding to the broom in both boilers and in the test with pine pellets ( On the other hand, no potassium compounds were detected in the ash sample collected on the grate of the MG500 boiler after the test with milled pine (see Biomass obtained from broom clearings can be used to produce solid biofuels to be utilised in domestic and industrial boilers. Broom bale milling to produce material to be used in boilers (30 mm milling) and to produce 4 mm milled material to make pellets does not entail operating problems. Continuous operation of the comminution equipment (slow rotating single-shaft pre-shredder and swinging hammer post-grinder) without blockages was observed. Pelletisation of broom biomass can be carried out without any difficulties, getting specific mass flow and specific energy demand similar to those obtained during pelletisation of pine sawdust in the pilot plant used in this study. The pellets obtained can be classified as B pellets according to the ISO 17225-2:2014 standard. Combustion of 30 mm milled broom and broom pellets did not cause fuel-related operating problems in the tests carried out in this study, although special attention must be paid to the tendency of this biomass to produce ash deposition inside the tubes of the heat exchanger and particle emission (because of its high potassium content). Consequently, particle abatement equipment and more frequent cleaning of the heat exchanger could be required when broom fuels are used. With regard to the slagging tendency of broom fuels, although the slags and agglomerated ash produced during the tests have not entailed blockages or unplanned shutdowns, it would be advisable to control the working temperature on the grate to avoid slagging and to study the behaviour of these fuels in the long term. Gaseous emissions during the combustion of broom fuels are lower than the limits defined by the standards referred to in this study. The main factor to be taken into account is NO The formation of small slags on the grate of the MG40 boiler is a consequence of the potassium and silicon content in the broom fuel and the high working temperature inside the boiler, which is inherent to its design. This work has been partially funded by the