There is a rich diversity in lava dome morphology, from blocky domes and lobes to imposing spine and whaleback structures. The latter extrude via seismically active, gouge-rich conduit-margin faults, a manifestation of a brittle failure mode. Brittle versus ductile behaviour in volcanic rocks is known to be porosity dependent, and therefore offers a tantalising link between the properties of the material near the conduit margin and the extrusion mechanism (dome or spine). We test this hypothesis by complementing published data on the mechanical behaviour of dacites from the 2004–2008 spine-forming eruption at Mount St. Helens (MSH) with new data on dacite lavas collected from the 1980 dome. The 1980 dacite samples were deformed at room temperature under a range of pressures (i.e., depths) to investigate their mechanical behaviour and failure mode (brittle or ductile). Low-porosity dacite (porosity ~0.19) is brittle up to an effective pressure of 30MPa (depth ~1km) and is ductile at 40MPa (depth ~1.5km). High-porosity dacite (porosity~0.32) is ductile above an effective pressure of 5MPa (depth ~200m). Samples deformed in the brittle regime show well-developed (~1mm) shear fracture zones comprising broken glass and crystal fragments. Samples deformed in the ductile regime feature anastomosing bands of collapsed pores. The combined dataset is used to explore the influence of strain rate, temperature, and porosity on the mechanical behaviour and failure mode of dacite. A decrease in strain rate does not influence the strength of dacite at low temperature, but reduces strength at high temperature (850°C). Due to the extremely low glass content of these materials, such weakening is attributed to the increased efficiency of subcritical crack growth at high temperature. However, when strain rate is kept constant, temperature does not significant impact strength reflecting the highly crystallised nature of dacite from MSH. Dacite from the 2004–2008 eruption is stronger than 1980 dome material and remains brittle even at high effective pressures, a consequence of their low preserved porosities. Only the porous (porosity~0.32) 1980 dome material deformed in a ductile manner (i.e., no macroscopic shear fracture) at effective pressures relevant for edifice deformation. Spine formation typically involves the extrusion of low-porosity material along faults that envelop the magma-filled conduit (i.e., brittle deformation), suggesting that the extrusion mechanism (dome or spine) may be a consequence of slow ascent rates and efficient pre-eruptive outgassing. Well-outgassed, low-porosity (slow ascent rate) materials favour a brittle mode of failure promoting spine extrusion, while poorly-outgassed, high-porosity (fast ascent rate) materials result in blocky domes or lobes. A crystal content-porosity map for brittle (spine) versus ductile (blocky dome) behaviour demonstrates that the window for brittle deformation is small and offers an explanation as to why spine and whaleback structures are relatively rare in nature.Lava dome morphology is richly diverse ( The ability of ascending magma to outgas exsolving volatiles, and the time available for such outgassing, likely play key roles in the porosity present in magma and preserved in volcanic rock (e.g., To explore the porosity dependence of the extrusion mechanism—dome or spine—we complement pre-existing data on the physical properties (e.g., porosity and permeability) and mechanical behaviour of dacites from the 2004–2008 spine-forming eruption at MSH ( Our principal goal is to present data that can inform on mechanisms of lava extrusion (spine versus blocky dome). We additionally consider our data on the mechanical and hydraulic properties of dacites relevant for models of outgassing and assessments of the structural stability of dacitic volcanoes worldwide. Eruptive activity at MSH, an active stratovolcano belonging to the Cascade volcanic arc of North America (located in Skamania County in Washington (USA); The eruptive history of MSH has been divided into nine distinct periods: Ape Canyon, Cougar, Swift Creek, Smith Creek, Pine Creek, Castle Creek, Sugar Bowl, Kalama, and Goat Rocks ( Our knowledge of the mechanical behaviour of sedimentary rocks, such as sandstone, is comprehensive ( Recently, studies have begun to explore the mechanical behaviour and failure modes of volcanic rocks. Triaxial deformation experiments have been performed on andesite ( The recent studies probing the mechanical behaviour and failure mode of volcanic rocks, listed above, are biased towards basalts and andesites. Relatively few triaxial deformation experiments have been performed on dacite ( Cylindrical core samples (20 The connected porosity of each core was determined using a helium pycnometer. Their permeabilities were then measured using a benchtop steady-state gas (nitrogen) permeameter at the Institut de Physique du Globe de Strasbourg (IPGS) ( The cylindrical samples were vacuum-saturated with distilled water prior to their deformation. The samples were deformed either uniaxially or triaxially. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) measurements were conducted on water-saturated samples in a uniaxial load frame (Schenk) at IPGS. Samples were deformed inside a water bath at a constant strain rate of 1 Triaxial experiments were performed on jacketed (nitrile) water-saturated samples using a triaxial deformation apparatus at IPGS. All triaxial deformation experiments were performed in compression. Experiments were performed at a constant pore fluid pressure We also performed a hydrostatic (σ Permeability as a function of porosity is presented as Our experiments were first assigned a failure mode. The failure mode of rock is often classified as either brittle or ductile ( Given the tenets described above, the experiments performed on MSH1 (porosity ~ The experiments performed on MSH1 (porosity ~ It is common in rock deformation studies to plot the effective mean stress ( The porosity-permeability data of this study are plotted alongside previously-published room-temperature data from Although the pumice data of  Macroscopic mechanical behaviour of material is ultimately an expression of the operative deformation micromechanisms. On this basis we present SEM images of samples of MSH1 deformed in the brittle regime ( Triaxial deformation data at different effective pressures permit the construction of failure envelopes that can be summarised graphically as differential stress ( The shape of the compactive yield envelope has been described as parabolic for porous sedimentary rocks ( If we plot the failure envelopes of this study alongside data from Porosity is known to influence the strength of volcanic rocks in the brittle regime ( To assess the influence of porosity on brittle strength, we restrict ourselves to room temperature uniaxial data at a constant strain rate of 10 Fracture toughness The influence of strain rate on the brittle strength of dacite from MSH is presented in At temperatures above the appropriate To assess the role of temperature on the mechanical behaviour of dacite, we will consider data from one block of MSH dacite (porosity The failure mode of dacite from MSH was staunchly brittle, even at temperatures between 800 and 900 Models of volcano outgassing ( Volcanic edifices are heterogeneous structures comprising rocks with diverse origins and disparate properties. Their growth is predicated by the progressive accumulation of the products of explosive and effusive eruptions ( The values of strength provided by this study and others ( Although many of the dacites at MSH preserve low porosities, and are therefore strong ( Catastrophic flank collapse is often thought to be triggered by increases in pore pressure caused by, for example, dyke intrusion ( Triaxial deformation experiments on representative rocks collected from the 2004–2008 spine-forming eruption and the 1980 dome-forming eruption at MSH highlight their disparate failure modes ( The extrusion of spines and whalebacks typically occurs along pronounced conduit-margin faults (i.e., brittle deformation). Indeed, spine extrusion at MSH was linked to co-seismic slip along small displacement (~ The compiled experimental data allow us to construct tentative crystal content-porosity maps for brittle (spine/whaleback) versus ductile (blocky dome/lobe) behaviour ( Triaxial deformation experiments on representative rocks collected from the 2004–2008 spine-forming eruption and the 1980 dome-forming eruption at MSH show that the dense 2004–2008 dacites are staunchly brittle in their failure mode, while the high-porosity 1980 dacites deform ductilely. We interpret this as a consequence of the time available for outgassing, cooling, and crystallisation, a function of the magma ascent rate. The dacites from the 1980 eruption ascended quickly (15–66 Funding was provided by an