Kashif Mairaj Deen is a post-doctoral research fellow in the Department of Materials Engineering at The University of British Columbia. He studied the use of CuFeS2 in hybrid battery configurations for both energy storage and Cu extraction during his PhD program under the supervision of Professor Edouard Asselin. His research focuses on electrochemistry including electrochemical energy storage, electrocatalysis, and corrosion. He is an author of more than 50 research articles and a book chapter.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Dr. Edouard Asselin is Professor and Canada Research Chair in Aqueous Processing of Metals in the Department of Materials Engineering, The University of British Columbia. Dr. Asselin teaches and conducts research in aqueous metal extraction, electro-metallurgy, corrosion, and coatings. Dr. Asselin has published over 90 peer-reviewed journal articles. Since 2012, he has filed or been granted 6 international patents for his research.Global energy demand is increasing due to economic growth and an ever-increasing population. A significant portion of energy requirements is met via the combustion of environmentally detrimental and rapidly depleting fossil fuels. For instance, in Canada, which has abundant hydroelectricity, approximately 19% of the total energy consumption (648 TWh) is still generated by the combustion of coal, diesel, and gas. There are many off-grid communities in Canada and elsewhere that are located near mining facilities and that rely on fossil fuels (typically diesel) to meet their energy needs. For example, there are over 200 communities and 32 mine sites (out of 1,000) in Canada that are located off grid, and approximately 96% of their energy requirement is met by the combustion of diesel. The off-grid power requirement for mining in Canada is approximately 660 MW, which is approximately 1/5 of the power consumed by the city of Boston in 2015. Mining, comminution, and metal extraction are energy-intensive processes. This is exacerbated by rapidly declining ore grades, worldwide, which make it harder—i.e., more energy-intensive—to separate wanted minerals from the unwanted minerals. The high cost of depleting fossil fuels, increases in water consumption, and serious concerns around waste disposal and CO Focusing on Cu and Zn production, chalcopyrite (CuFeS Zn, another commercially important metal, is mainly produced via acid leaching of oxidatively roasted sphalerite (ZnS) followed by rigorous purification of the resultant solution to remove more electrochemically noble metal impurities prior to electrowinning. Theoretically, 1.63 kWh energy is required to electrowin 1 kg of Zn in a conventional Zn electrowinning cell at a potential of ∼2.0 V. But due to large overpotentials at the electrodes, particularly on the anode for the H Metals production and energy use are thus inextricably related. In the future, we will see lower ore grades and a competing imperative to reduce both specific energy consumption and GHG emissions. A new paradigm in metal production is needed—one that combines the process of extraction with alternative energy technologies. The tri-functional battery (TFB) proposed here is a possible evolution toward this objective. The TFB device can be integrated with renewable energy sources, as a type of flow battery, and at remote mine sites and is capable of extracting metals (such as Cu) for economic benefit. Similarly, electrolytic metal production processes, such as that for Zn, can be combined into the TFB. Such a device could be used at locations where Cu and Zn minerals coexist, which are common. As an example, we describe the Cu-Zn TFB. Cu extraction from CuFeS Zn deposition occurs at very negative potential compared to H During the charging process, Cu dissolution by the oxidation of CuFeS The schematic of the TFB is shown in A specific example of how a TFB could be applied at a British Columbia mine is now given. This mine has total mineral reserves of 424 Mt and has a production capacity of 45,000 t of MC/day. The annual nominal power requirement for this mine has been estimated to be 81.5 MW. It is assumed that if the total amount of energy required per annum by this mine is 713,940 MWh and is met by diesel generators, the calculated CO A specific example of a TFB that uses naturally sourced CuFeS