A sample of Tabas coal from Iran was oxidized using air, peroxyacetic acid (PAA), and PAA+air as a pretreatment for desulfurization with sodium butoxide in a batch reactor. The effects of air oxidation temperature, PAA oxidation time, sodium butoxide reaction time and temperature, solvent concentration and particle size on the reduction of sulfur were investigated. The PAA+air oxidation pretreatment was the most effective method for enhancing sulfur removal. This procedure increased pyritic sulfur removal by approximately 15% and organic sulfur removal by 20% in leaching with sodium butoxide. Increasing the temperature from 25 (unoxidized) to 100 °C on air oxidized samples, increased sulfur reduction for organic and inorganic sulfur by 7% and 11%, respectively. Further increases in temperature decreased the sulfur removal. For PAA oxidized samples that dried at room temperature, penetration of PAA into the coal pores blocked them, leading to a reduction in the diffusion of sodium butoxide. For oxidized/desulfurized samples, depending on the desulfurization conditions, the reduction in pyritic, organic and total sulfur ranged from 28% to 84%, 8% to 49% and 19% to 67%, respectively. The particle size reduction had a positive effect on the efficiency of the leaching process. For particle sizes <300 μm, after oxidation and desulfurization at 150 °C for 90 min, pyritic, organic and total sulfur decreased from 0.9%, 0.82% and 1.72% to 0.18%, 0.45% and 0.64%, a reduction of 81%, 49% and 65%, respectively. The results show that PAA+air oxidation pretreatment can be used as an effective method for enhancing the removal of organic and inorganic sulfur without severe dissolution of the coal organic matrix.Sulfur in coal occurs in organic and inorganic forms. The organic form is about 50% of the total sulfur that cannot be removed by physical coal cleaning methods ( Well known desulfurization processes include: caustic treatment ( The use of peroxyacetic acid (PAA) as an oxidative reagent for the desulfurization of coal has been reported by The structural properties of coal, such as porosity, surface area and pore size, play an important role in chemical desulfurization. Coal contains moisture in its pores and this moisture can be removed by heating at 100 °C. Moisture removal is accompanied by a substantial increase in porosity (  Recently The other chemical method of coal desulfurization is leaching with straight-chain aliphatic or aromatic organometallic compounds ( In this paper we applied air, PAA, and PAA The effect of other parameters, such as sodium butoxide concentration, leaching temperature and time, and particle size, on the extent of removal of different forms of sulfur from Tabas coal were investigated. The bulk sample (600 kg) was collected from all active stopes in the C1 seam of the Tabas coal mine in Iran. Sampling techniques similar to those of Jones riffles, and conning and quartering methods were adopted and representative samples were prepared for further studies. Proximate and ultimate analysis of a representative sample was carried out according to standard methods. Total, pyritic and sulfate forms of sulfur in all the samples was determined by ISO methods 334 and 157 in duplication ( The optical microscopy investigation shows that pyrite is present in the form of discrete grains, fracture and cavity filling, regular and irregular framboidal with particle size ranging from 1 to 40 μm. Scanning electron microscopy studies show that pyrite is distributed even finer than 1 μm. Fine grinding is needed for the removal of this fine distributed sulfur from coal and is impossible using the conventional methods in practice. A coal sample (−1400 μm) was placed on a large Petri dish and heated in an oven (in the presence of air) to the desirable temperature; it was then kept at this temperature for 1 h in order to achieve oxidation. Oxidation temperatures of 40, 60, 80, 100, 120 and 140 °C were used in the experiments. The oxidized sample was then withdrawn and allowed to cool to room temperature in a desiccator, following which it was used for desulfurization with sodium butoxide immediately. PAA oxidation was carried out by dispersing 8 g of coal in 240 ml of glacial acetic acid and warming it to the desired temperature, followed by adding 80 ml of H Some of the samples oxidized using PAA (dried at room temperature) were used for further oxidation with air in an oven, at 100 °C for 1 h, to study its effect on the increase of sulfur removal with sodium butoxide. Sodium butoxide was prepared by adding the requisite amount of sodium to 1-butanol (0.81 kg/l) in a flask fitted with a water condenser, and then placed in a cooling bath to decrease the heat of the reaction. A 17% solution was prepared by adding 42.84 g of sodium to 1000 ml of 1-butanol. This solution was then diluted with 1-butanol to prepare the other concentrations of sodium butoxide that were needed. The desulfurization experiments were carried out in an 80 ml microreactor ( Heating at different temperatures in the presence of air was used as a pretreatment process for increasing the desulfurization of coal with sodium butoxide (5%, on 120 °C for 90 min). The results are shown in It was found that heating (oxidation) the coal from ambient temperature to 100–150 °C resulted in the removal of absorbed moisture from the coal pores, leading to a substantial increase in porosity ( For desulfurization to be effective during sodium butoxide leaching, diffusion of sodium ions into the pores of the coal matrix is essential, in order for the sodium ions to interact with the sulfur molecules. As it shown in The change in pyritic sulfur reduction could also be a result of structural changes in the coal organic matter, resulting in the destruction of pores. A question arises from these results: why was organic sulfur removal increased less than that of pyritic sulfur as a result of air oxidation? This may be due to the fact that in oxidation with atmospheric oxygen, the rate of moisture removal and accessibility of sodium butoxide to fine distributed pyrite is preeminent to oxidation of organic sulfur groups. To study the level of selective oxidation required in the pretreatment step, four oxidations at 45 °C for 10, 20, 30 and 40 min were performed using PAA. It appears that as the level of oxidation in the pretreatment step increased, the removal of organic sulfur increased by 2.5%, whilst the pyritic sulfur removal decreased ( An interesting question is: why is organic sulfur removal low, and why pyritic sulfur removal decreased in PAA-treated samples during sodium butoxide leaching? This may be due to the fact that while treating coal with PAA the solution may penetrate into the pores of the coal mass, thereby blocking the pores, which are not accessible for diffusion of sodium butoxide solution. To solve this problem the PAA oxidized samples were heated in an oven for 1 h at 100 °C. According to the results shown in This suggests that in the PAA oxidation stage, organically bound sulfurs are converted to oxidized forms, sulfones and sulfoxides, which are more susceptible to removal with sodium butoxide. With heating of this sample, the remaining PAA in the coal pores can be removed and the accessibility of sodium butoxide to sulfur atoms increased. Also, the increase in pyritic sulfur removal in PAA On comparing the oxidized coals with the unoxidized control sample, it is clear that the oxidative pretreatment is necessary for the formation of low sulfur products. Pretreatment of Tabas coal with PAA at 45 °C for 40 min, followed by heating at 100 °C for 1 h can remove 67.41% and 33.58% of pyritic and organic sulfurs, respectively, in the sodium butoxide leaching process. 5% sodium butoxide was used with reaction times of 30, 60, 90 and 120 min, and temperatures of 90, 120, 150 and 190 °C, to study the extent of sulfur removal from PAA At 150 °C, the total sulfur reduction increased sharply to 33.21% within 30 min and reached 56.12% at 90 min. After 90 min it did not change significantly. It seems that for oxidized samples, most of the weak bond sulfurs were eliminated within 90 min, after which the sulfur removal was relatively slow. Since the pyritic, organic and total sulfur were effectively removed, and the coal yield reached about 93.2%, 150 °C and 90 min may be accepted as appropriate temperature and time, respectively. At these optimum conditions the total, pyritic and organic sulfurs of Tabas coal were reduced from 1.44%, 0.77% and 0.67%, to 0.63%, 0.22% and 0.41%, a reduction of 60%, 73.8% and 44%, respectively in reference to raw coal sulfur contents.  To evaluate the effect of particle size on the chemical desulfurization process, the representative sample was divided into fractions of 850–1400, 300–850 and <300 μm, oxidized (PAA From these results it must be concluded that mass transfer is limited in the process and sodium butoxide does not have free access to the reactive sites on the surface and also within the particles. Thus, grinding to a smaller particle size is necessary to enhance the level of desulfurization. Therefore, the PAA PAA was originally tested as a single-stage sulfur extraction technique, with disappointing results. It was found, however, to convert sulfur compounds into forms that were more amenable to other desulfurization processes, therefore it was studied as a pretreatment stage for other desulfurization methods. In a previous investigation, In the present work, PAA was used at a low temperature and short time (at 45 °C for 40 min), as well as air oxidation for 1 h at 100 °C, as a pretreatment method for desulfurization with sodium butoxide. At optimal conditions (150 °C for 90 min) approximately 60%, 74% and 44% of total, pyritic and organic sulfurs were removed. As a comparison with Prasassarakich et al’s work, PAA  The effects of oxidation pretreatment with air, PAA and PAA Air oxidation pretreatment had positive effects on enhancing sulfur reduction. With an increase in temperature from 25 (unoxidized) to 100 °C, sulfur reduction for organic and inorganic sulfur increased 7% and 11%, respectively. Increasing the temperature further decreased sulfur removal. For PAA oxidized samples that dried at room temperature, penetration of PAA into the coal pores blocked them, and diffusion of sodium butoxide decreased. Subsequently the pyritic sulfur removal decreased and organic sulfur increased slightly. PAA Desulfurization of oxidized samples with sodium butoxide at 150 °C for 90 min, with a particle size of −1400 μm, decreased pyritic, organic and total sulfur from initial values of 0.77%, 0.67% and 1.44% to 0.22%, 0.41% and 0.63%; a reduction of 73.8%, 44% and 60%, respectively. This sulfur reduction is greater than previous reported values. The particle size reduction had a positive effect on the efficiency of the leaching process. In this process there is mass transfer limitation, and sodium butoxide does not have free access to the sulfur atoms within the coal organic matrix. For particle sizes <300 μm, after oxidation and desulfurization (at 150 °C for 90 min), pyritic, organic and total sulfur reduced from 0.9%, 0.82% and 1.72% to 0.18%, 0.45% and 0.64%, a reduction of 81.43%, 49% and 65.46%, respectively. The results suggest that PAA The authors thank Dr. Zamanizadeh, head of complex laboratory, Research and Science campus, Azad University, for the financial support of this investigation.