Magnesium phosphate cements (MPCs) have been extensively used as fast setting repair cements in civil engineering. They have properties that are also relevant to biomedical applications, such as fast setting, early strength acquisition and adhesive properties. However, there are some aspects that should be improved before they can be used in the human body, namely their highly exothermic setting reaction and the release of potentially harmful ammonia or ammonium ions. In this paper a new family of MPCs was explored as candidate biomaterials for hard tissue applications. The cements were prepared by mixing magnesium oxide (MgO) with either sodium dihydrogen phosphate (NaH2PO4) or ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4), or an equimolar mixture of both. The exothermia and setting kinetics of the new cement formulations were tailored to comply with clinical requirements by adjusting the granularity of the phosphate salt and by using sodium borate as a retardant. The ammonium-containing MPC resulted in struvite (MgNH4PO4·6H2O) as the major reaction product, whereas the MPC prepared with sodium dihydrogen phosphate resulted in an amorphous product. Unreacted magnesium oxide was found in all the formulations. The MPCs studied showed early compressive strengths substantially higher than that of apatitic calcium phosphate cements. The Na-containing MPCs were shown to have antibacterial activity against Streptococcus sanguinis, which was attributed to the alkaline pH developed during the setting reaction.Injectable or mouldable inorganic cements represent a unique choice for some orthopaedic or dental treatments, and can facilitate the use of minimally invasive surgical procedures. Several ceramic cements have been developed and used in different clinical applications, based on various inorganic compounds that trigger a cementitious reaction and are able to set in vivo In this work an alternative family of inorganic cements based on magnesium oxide (MgO) and phosphate compounds that can overcome some of these disadvantages is investigated. Magnesium phosphate-based cements (MPCs) were first discovered in 1939–1940 by Prosen Despite the unique benefits provided by these systems, they have not been exploited to date in clinical applications. Only recently has the use of ammonium magnesium phosphate cements in combination with calcium phosphate cements been proposed for bone regeneration applications Nevertheless, the use of the ammonium magnesium phosphate cements may present some problems in clinical applications. On the one hand, the use of an ammonium salt may compromise the biocompatibility of the cement. In fact, ammonia released during processing and storage is one of the problems associated with these mortars This work aims at the development of novel magnesium phosphate cements with enhanced properties for clinical applications. Specifically, a twofold objective is proposed: (i) the total or partial replacement of ammonium dihydrogen phosphate by sodium dihydrogen phosphate, in order to avoid or reduce the release of ammonia or ammonium ions into the surrounding tissues; (ii) control of the exothermy of the setting reaction by adjustment of the granularity and/or the addition of retarding agents, such as sodium borate Moreover, another advantage that can be envisaged for this new family of cements is their potential antibacterial activity. In fact, an antimicrobial effect has already been proved for CaO- and alkali-containing cements The powder phase of the cement consisted of a mixture of magnesium oxide (MgO, Merck, Reference No. 105,867) as the basic component and an acidic component that was either ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH The initial MgO had a specific surface area (SSA) of 148 The ammonium and sodium phosphate salts were milled in the same planetary ball mill following different milling protocols, in order to obtain a coarse and a fine powder of each salt. The particle size distribution was characterized by laser diffraction (Beckman Coulter LS 13,320). The powders were previously sonicated in ethanol in order to avoid particle agglomeration. The parameters for the starting powders used for the different cements are reported in Sodium borate decahydrate, Na Three series of MPC were prepared by combining MgO with either ammonium dihydrogen phosphate or sodium dihydrogen phosphate or an equimolar mixture of the two. A MgO/phosphate salt molar ratio of 3.8:1 was employed, since it is known that in the case of ammonium magnesium phosphate cements an excess of magnesium oxide ensures that the reaction goes to completion and enhances strength development The setting times of the cement pastes were determined with Gilmore needles. To characterize the set cements cylindrical specimens (6 The phase composition of the MPCs was assessed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (PANalytical, X’Pert PRO Alpha-1). The X-ray powder diffraction measurements were carried out using Bragg–Brentano geometry and Cu The microstructure of both the reactants and the set cements was observed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (JEOL JSM 7001F). The SSA was analyzed by N The  The number of CFU ml The effect of the type of phosphate salt and of the powder granularity on temperature evolution during the setting reaction is shown in  The setting times (  The XRD patterns obtained for the different formulations after 0 The compounds formed after cement hardening depended on the phosphate salt used as starting reactant. Thus, in the case of NH The morphologies of the initial reactants are shown in The SSA and the skeletal density of the three compositions after 7 The pH values of the extracts prepared by incubating the cements in Todd–Hewitt broth for 72 The average CFU per millilitre values recovered from the control culture vials and those containing cement extracts are shown in The MPC formulations all consist of a mixture of MgO, which is sparsely soluble The results obtained in this study show that, as expected, the reaction kinetics and exothermy of the reaction strongly depend on the solubility of the phosphate salt used ( The fineness of the phosphate salt powder and the amount of borax were two processing parameters that were shown to be efficient for controlling the reaction kinetics and the heat evolved during the setting reaction ( In this work three cement formulations were selected with the aim of obtaining a fast setting MPC which could be used in clinical applications, with a moderately exothermic reaction in order to avoid protein denaturation and tissue necrosis The consistency of the three selected MPC formulations and also their setting times were acceptable for clinical applications, with setting times between 8 and 15 With respect to the chemical reaction responsible for setting of the different MPCs, the XRD studies revealed that the reaction of MgO with either NH With regard to Na-MPC, because of the lack of crystalline phases apart from magnesium oxide, XRD was not very useful in determining the phase composition. The presence of a broad hump around 2 The formation of an amorphous hydrated gel in Na-MPC was consistent with the SEM images obtained after 1 It is worth noting that the early compressive strength of all MPC formulations was much higher than that of CPCs, which are the hydraulic cements most used as synthetic bone grafts in bone regeneration applications. In these cements brushite or hydroxyapatite is formed through dissolution and reprecipitation of one or more calcium phosphates when in contact with water. The apatitic cements, which are more resistant than brushite ones, reach compressive strengths of typically 35–40 In addition to the good mechanical performance, another interesting feature of this new family of cements is their antibacterial activity, as shown in When the bacteria were immersed in either Na-MPC or NH The toxic effect of the Na-MPC and NH Although further characterization is needed with other bacterial strains, the antibacterial effect observed, together with the adhesive properties reported for MPCs A novel family of magnesia-phosphate cements containing different amounts of sodium dihydrogen phosphate were developed. The exothermia of the reaction was adjusted for each formulation by tuning the fineness of the phosphate salt and the addition of borax. The setting times were adequate for clinical applications, with very similar initial and final setting times due to the fast cement setting. The compressive strength of the novel MPCs was very high at times as short as 1 This work was supported by the Certain figures in this article, particularly Figures 1–4, 7 and 8 are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at doi: