The effect of uniaxial/biaxial loading on the martensitic transformation of a low stacking fault energy, metastable austenitic stainless steel was studied by in-situ neutron diffraction on cruciform-shaped/dogbone samples. Uniaxial loading favors the martensitic transformation following the sequence γ→ε→α′, where at low strains ε-martensite is the precursor of α′. During equibiaxial-loading, the evolving texture suppresses the formation of ε-martensite and considerably less α′-martensite is observed at high strains. The results are discussed with respect to the deformation textures, the loading direction and the mechanism of the ε-martensite transformation.In metastable austenitic stainless steels martensite forms upon deformation, the so-called transformation induced plasticity or TRIP effect, and this transformation is responsible for a good combination of strength and ductility that these materials exhibit. Two types of martensite can be formed during deformation: the hexagonal-closed-packed (hcp) ε-phase and the body-centered-cubic/tetragonal (bcc or bct) α′-phase. For some steels, it has been reported that ε-martensite is a precursor of α′-martensite as it forms at early stages of plastic deformation and that α′ forms at later stages of deformation in expense of ε-martensite The amount of α′-martensite formed during straining has important implications on the formability during cold forming processes Transformation kinetic models have helped in understanding the matter, but several points remain unclear. Some models suggest that a higher triaxiality factor Σ, i.e. the ratio of hydrostatic stress and the Von Mises stress, leads to a higher amount of formed martensite In the present study we address the effect of loading state on the transformation behavior of a low SFE austenitic stainless steel exhibiting the γ In situ neutron diffraction tests were carried out at the POLDI beamline of the Swiss neutron spallation source SINQ which is equipped with a biaxial machine and a tensile machine EBSD studies were carried out on the as-received and on the deformed material. For the latter, additional samples were deformed uniaxially (dogbone) and equibiaxially (cruciform) up to 13% equivalent strain in order to obtain samples at comparable strains. The samples were ground with 1200 The evolution of the neutron diffraction patterns during deformation is shown in The question arises why the martensitic transformation is suppressed during equibiaxial loading. To understand this, the mechanism of ε-martensite formation needs to be considered. According to the theory of Olson and Cohen The above results indicate that the deformation textures formed during uniaxial and equibiaxial loading play a significant role on the appearance/absence of ε-martensite. The as-received material exhibits only a very mild texture as shown in the IPFs of  In summary, in-situ neutron diffraction studies performed on metastable 201 stainless steel combined with EBSD measurements confirm that ε-martensite is a precursor for α′-martensite during uniaxial and equibiaxial deformation at the same loading rate. In both loading states, the grains that contain martensite belong to orientations for which the LPDs have higher Schmid factor than the TPDs. The martensitic transformation is suppressed during equibiaxial loading as a consequence of the different textures formed during deformation. E.P., W.-N.H., M.S. and H.V.S. thank the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at