Solvent extraction separation of divalent metal ions, Cd(II) and Zn(II), with an organophosphorus extractant, D2EHPA (di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid), and an aqueous hexadentate ligand with nitrogen donors, TPEN (N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine), was studied. The extraction process consists of two steps, namely, the complex formation between TPEN and the divalent metals in the aqueous phase, M(TPEN)2+ (M=Cd or Zn), and the formation of a hydrophobic complex between M(TPEN)2+ and D2EHPA in the organic phase. The stability constants for the formation of Cd(TPEN)2+ and Zn(TPEN)2+, which were measured by potentiometric titration technique, were evaluated as higher than 1013. By the addition of TPEN in amounts equimolar with the divalent metal in the aqueous solution, more than 99% of divalent metal was coordinated with TPEN at pH above 2.5, where the protonation of TPEN is negligible. Under these conditions, the extraction of Cd(II) with D2EHPA was promoted; on the contrary, that of Zn(II) was depressed remarkably. TPEN acts as a synergist for the extraction of Cd(II) and a masking agent for that of Zn(II). Then, the separation factor of Cd(II) was increased by more than 500 times than that without TPEN. TPEN is an excellent synergist that functions by small additions in the aqueous solution and promotes extraction selectively for soft metals such as Cd(II).Synergistic extraction, in which the extractability of metal species by the main extractant is improved by adding a ligand in the organic phase or aqueous phase, is an attractive concept that should be considered for establishing a functional extraction process. Many advantages, such as the enhancement of separation ability and the appearance of a new extraction function as well as the improvement of extractability, are expected by the introduction of synergistic extraction systems ( The object of this study is to find a new synergistic extraction system that extracts soft metals selectively by adding a slight amount of synergist. Some highly toxic metals such as Cd(II) and Hg(II) and noble metals such as Pd(II) and Ag(II) are classified as soft metals. The development of extraction processes to recover effectively these soft metals is useful for the reduction of environmental risk and the recycle of valuable metals. It is known that soft metals can be extracted selectively by use of sulfur-donor compounds such as Cyanex 301 (bis(2,4,4-trimethyl-pentyl)dithiophosphinic acid) and Cyanex 302 (bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)thiophosphinic acid) and nitrogen-donor compounds such as TPTZ (2,4,6-(2-pyridyl)-1,3,5-triazine) and BTP (2,6-di(5,6-dipropyl-1,2,4-triazin-3-yl)pyridine) In this study, an aqueous hexadentate ligand with nitrogen donors, TPEN ( TPEN was synthesized as reported previously Aqueous solutions with 8.9×10 Aqueous nitrate solutions with 8.9×10 The complexation of TPEN in an aqueous solution is described as the following dissociation reactions of protonated TPEN molecules, The equilibrium constants of reactions  From the equilibrium constants obtained, the complexation of TPEN in the aqueous solution can be estimated.  The analysis of extraction stoichiometry is useful to understand the complicated extraction behavior of  In the presence of TPEN Note that the extraction constant for Cd(II) was increased by adding TPEN; on the contrary, that for Zn(II) was decreased. These results support that TPEN acts as a synergist for the extraction of Cd(II) and a masking agent for that of Zn(II). The stability constants for the formation of Cd(TPEN) The present research was supported financially by the Innovative and Viable Nuclear Energy Technology (IVNET) Development Project of the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry(METI) of Japan. The authors are grateful to Dr. Kenneth L. Nash, Argonne National Laboratory, USA, for valuable discussions on the synthesis and complexation of TPEN.