In this laboratory study a process has been developed for zinc recovery from chloride-containing zinc ash formed during hot dip galvanizing. The ash is leached with diluted H2SO4 and the main impurities, such as iron, copper, cadmium, and organic compounds are removed from leach liquors by pH-controlled precipitation using ZnO as a neutralizing agent. The process is finished by active carbon and cementation precipitation. Chloride-free zinc hydroxy-carbonate is precipitated from purified leach solutions. Metallic zinc is obtained by the electrowinning process performed with zinc sulphate solution originating from dissolution of zinc hydroxy-carbonate prepared in diluted H2SO4.Various secondaries and wastes containing zinc are generated in metallurgical industries such as galvanizing, casting, smelting, scrap recycling, and several others. These are mainly zinc ash, zinc dross, flue dust from electric arc furnace and smelting operations, automobile scrap, sludges, and more. Zinc present in the secondaries is in the form of metal, oxides, and/or alloy and is associated with different levels of impurities depending on their source. Zinc ash, dross, flux skimming, and blowing secondaries are formed during the various operations of galvanizing of metal sheet or tube. The present study deals with zinc recovery from zinc ash, which is obtained in hot dip galvanizing process by oxidation of molten zinc on top of the bath. Zinc ash is a mixture of crude zinc oxide and varying quantities of entrained metallic zinc. There will also be various other metal contaminants (e.g. Fe, Pb, Al, etc.) and especially chloride compounds from the use of chloride fluxes in the galvanizing process ( A different approach to utilize chloride-containing zinc ash, proposed and tested in this study, is to leach this type of wastes in sulphuric acid followed by precipitation of chloride-free zinc carbonate from purified zinc sulphate solutions. Such zinc carbonates are suitable raw materials for the preparation of zinc electrolytes. A representative sample of zinc ash formed during the hot dip galvanizing process in Eurometal Chotěboř was used in this study. The composition of the processed ash is given in Leaching experiments were performed in a closed, stirred, thermostated glass reaction vessels provided with pH and temperature control and with a water cooler. Standard mixing was accomplished by means of an impeller. During leaching, samples were withdrawn at selected time intervals to determine the reaction rates of zinc and impurity dissolution. Elemental concentrations in the filtrates were established using AAS method. After the completion of leaching tests, leach residues were filtered, water-washed, dried, and weighed. Leaching conditions were chosen to achieve maximum possible zinc concentration using a minimum amount of acid based on our previous studies ( Precipitation and cementation techniques were carried out to remove impurities, principally iron, copper, cadmium, and organic impurities from acidic leach liquors. Iron was separated from zinc leach solutions by hydrolytic pH-controlled precipitation using ZnO as a neutralizing agent at pH 4 and at a temperature of 40 °C. Subsequently, organic impurities together with Al and Si were removed at 40 °C within 10 min using active carbon. Copper and cadmium was precipitated at pH 4 and temperature of 60 °C using zinc powder. The cementation, which was conducted only in one step without using any activation agent, was completed within 30 min. Zinc carbonate was precipitated from purified leach liquors using Na Electrowinning of zinc was carried out in a laboratory electrolyser without electrolyte circulation under the following conditions chosen according to the literature ( Time dependencies of zinc, iron, and manganese extraction efficiency in 10% H The course of refining precipitations performed is illustrated in Chemical composition of zinc carbonates precipitated from purified leach liquors is given in It is obvious that carbonate precipitation provides a selective separation of zinc from leach liquors while chlorides remain in the solution. Precipitates obtained at 20, 40, or 60 °C are suitable raw material for preparation of zinc electrolyte due to their low contamination, namely by Cu and Cd and relatively high zinc content. This was confirmed by electrolyses performed with solutions generated by dissolution of zinc hydroxy-carbonate precipitated at 40 °. However, zinc hydroxy-carbonate precipitated at 20 °C will also be suitable for preparing zinc electrolytes due to its purity and is more advantageous economically compared with that precipitated at 40 °C. Zinc precipitate formed at 80 °C appeared not to be advantageous for preparing zinc electrolytes due to its lower zinc concentration and higher energy consumption during its preparation in contrast to the precipitates prepared at lower temperatures. The results of zinc electrolysis are summarized in The resulting values of current efficiency (CE) and/or of electric energy consumption (EEC) appear to be very good, with their values slightly decreased (CE) and/or increased (EEC) at higher current densities, reaching 97% and 2.83 kWh/kg Zn, respectively, at 200 A/m Based on the results achieved in this laboratory study, it can be concluded that the method developed for processing of zinc ash formed during hot dip galvanizing, comprising leaching of zinc ash in 10% H refining of leach liquors using pH-controlled hydrolytic precipitation with ZnO followed by precipitation with the active carbon and cementation with zinc powder, and precipitation of zinc hydroxy-carbonate, This study will be continued. The proposed experiments will be focused on manganese removal from zinc leach liquors before zinc carbonate precipitation, probably using sodium oxychloride. Zinc carbonate precipitated from solutions containing only trace manganese concentrations could be a suitable raw material not only for zinc electrolysis but also for production of commercial ZnO. To utilize waste solutions generated during zinc carbonate precipitation, which contain, apart from Na The present study was supported by the Research Intention MSM: 223100002.