In many cases, the use of extreme thermophiles, like the archeon Sulfolobus metallicus, in a continuous bioleaching process of gold concentrates is limited by the arsenic content in the feed. In this work, a sequential two-step bioleaching process for gold-containing refractory pyrite/arsenopyrite concentrates has been investigated for the possibility of lowering the toxicity of arsenic with respect to the extremely thermophilic culture. In the first stage, a moderately thermophilic culture was used followed by the extremely thermophilic S. metallicus in the second stage. It was found that the S. metallicus culture survives higher arsenic concentrations than expected when the concentrate was pre-oxidized at a lower temperature. Thus, with this sequential two-step bioleaching process, it is possible to reduce the toxicity of the released arsenic. Therefore, the use of higher pulp densities of arsenic-containing minerals is enabled. When the leached mineral residues were subjected to cyanidation, cyanide consumption and thiocyanate formation were significantly lower after the second stage. In addition, a somewhat higher gold and silver grade was found in the residue from the concentrate ultimately oxidized by S. metallicus.Several commercially successful mesophilic (Biox The main objective of this study was to investigate the possibility of lowering the toxicity of soluble arsenic with respect to the extremely thermophilic An undefined mixed culture of moderately thermophilic bacteria, containing, e.g. The chemical composition of the two arsenic-containing flotation concentrates used in this investigation is shown in Bioleaching was started as a batch culture with 4% (wt/vol) pulp density at both temperatures and the continuous process was initiated when a high linear biooxidation rate was observed. Continuous biooxidation experiments were performed with previously described apparatus In order to obtain sufficient and representative material for cyanidation experiments a separate set of bioleaching experiments were performed continuously in a bench scale system with three reactors. The Olympias concentrate was chosen for this study since it is a refractory gold concentrate which has been thoroughly investigated in many bioleaching studies Water was also added intermittently to the reactors to compensate for loss by evaporation. The experiments were started in batch mode with a pulp containing 1–2% (wt/vol) solids. When a high redox potential of at least 600 mV (ref. Ag, AgCl) had been obtained in the first and second reactor feeding with a pulp containing 10% (wt/vol) solids was started. The retention time in the first stage was 48 h and 48+24 h in the subsequent reactors giving a total retention time of 5 days. Since the Olympias concentrate produced large amounts of acid during bioleaching, the pH was controlled at 1.4 in the first reactor and 1.6 in the second reactor by addition of 5 M NaOH. Bioleaching progress was followed as previously described In order to reduce the amount of test material and to obtain better control of dissolved oxygen and free cyanide in solution, approximately 100 g of each gently dried bio-oxidized Olympias residue were diluted with 400 g of inert silica sand before being subjected to cyanide leaching at 50% pulp solid content (wt/wt). The leaching tests were carried out in glass vessels provided with motor-driven stirrers. The free cyanide concentration was maintained in the range of 0.030–0.100% NaCN (vol/vol) as determined by titration with AgNO The initial test work was carried out on the Petiknäs North concentrate. The mineral used contained 12.1% (wt/wt) arsenic and therefore was not suitable for direct biooxidation at a reasonably high pulp density with The pH in vessel A (45 °C) decreased from 2.0 to 1.0 over the course of the batch leaching and therefore all of the iron and arsenic released from the mineral remained in solution. In vessel B (65 °C), the pH-drop was lower (to pH 1.3) due to manual addition of NaOH, thereby precipitating part of the released arsenic. Comparison of the iron released in the two vessels Two comparative continuous bioleaching experiments on the Olympias concentrate were performed, one with the sequential moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic processes and one with only the moderate thermophiles in all three reactors. The results of the experiment with combined bioleaching at 50 and 70 °C are shown in The total arsenic concentration obtained after dissolution of the precipitates was around 6 g/l in all reactors, showing that most of the arsenopyrite was oxidized in the first stage of moderately thermophilic leaching. Approximately 25% of the oxidized iron precipitated in the first reactor and 60% and 54% in the second and third reactor, respectively. It can also be seen that pyrite dissolution continued in the bioleaching stage at 70 °C. The experiment performed at 50 °C with only moderate thermophiles in all three bioreactors was pH controlled in the same way as the previous experiment. This experiment gave normal bioleaching results, i.e. redox potential increased throughout the reactor series from 600 to 630 mV, with a corresponding increase in soluble iron and arsenic concentrations. Total iron and arsenic oxidation was determined by the hydrochloric dissolution method and the values were almost the same as those obtained in the sequential bioleaching process. Total mineral oxidation was calculated from both experiments and gave similar results Finally, in order to obtain complete oxidation profiles and ultimately oxidized residues for cyanidation tests, an additional continuous experiment with only two reactors at 50 °C in the first and at 70 °C in the second reactor was allowed to reach steady state. The retention time was 48 h in each reactor. Once steady state had been reached, the pumping of feed and pulp was stopped, and the reactors continued to operate in batch mode for 124 h. The pH was maintained at the previously set level of 1.4 for the moderate thermophiles and 1.6 for the In Precious metal extraction was not enhanced after thermophilic treatment, in spite of a higher sulfur oxidation degree Cyanidation of the moderately thermophilic residues gave a normal shape of the cyanide consumption profiles (data not shown). However, the obtained consumption profiles for the thermophilic residues were unstable, especially for the batch (124 h) oxidized residue (data not shown). The cyanide consumption rate was initially high, and then slowed down before increasing again after about 24 h leaching. However, it is interesting to note that the highest initial cyanide and overall cyanide consumption were obtained for the completely oxidized moderately thermophilic bioresidue and lowest for the ultimately oxidized extremely thermophilic bioresidue. The thiocyanate profiles for the moderate thermophiles In this work, a sequential two-stage continuous bioleaching process for treatment of refractory gold concentrates with high arsenic concentration has been investigated. In the first stage, a moderately thermophilic mixed culture was used to solubilize the arsenic content in the feed and oxidize the majority of the arsenic to the less toxic As(V). The extremely thermophilic microorganism At the end of the continuous biooxidation using 12% (wt/vol) pulp only 50% of the released arsenic remained in solution in the moderately thermophilic bioreactor and the same amount of soluble arsenic (>7 g/l) was found in the extremely thermophilic bioreactor The huge amounts of precipitates formed during the experiments created problems regarding determination of total leaching yields. It is believed that the yields are underestimated due to problems dissolving precipitated arsenic and iron compounds with the standard procedures used in this investigation. The high levels of unwanted precipitates in the final bioleached residue may have interfered in the subsequent cyanidation. However, the pH during the leaching might have been too high. Experiments with the The calculated gold and silver head analyses based on the final solutions and residues showed considerable discrepancies to the direct fire-assays at both 50 and 70 °C Residues from biooxidation of refractory gold concentrates have been reported to consume large amounts of cyanide during the subsequent cyanidation step. This is due to formation of elemental sulfur or other reduced inorganic sulfur compounds, which react with cyanide to form thiocyanate (SCN The specific lime consumption during cyanidation of the bioresidue from the batch oxidation by means of thermophilic bacteria was significantly lower than for the corresponding moderately thermophilic residue. This shows that the precipitate at the higher temperature was more stable with regard to hydrolysis. In bioleaching of mixtures of arsenopyrite and pyrite concentrates, the arsenopyrite is usually oxidized faster than pyrite. This means that, if gold is associated with both minerals, its recovery is dependent on a higher degree of mineral oxidation. Therefore, it is advantageous to use extremely thermophilic cultures such as In order to evaluate the sequential two-stage process General optimization of bioleaching retention time ( Minimization of iron–arsenic precipitates in the extremely thermophilic stage to minimize the loss of precious metals. Operating at slightly lower pH whilst still maintaining the toxic level of arsenic under control may achieve this and test work has indicated this to be possible. Actual pulp density may also affect the amount of precipitate in the residue. Using limestone to regulate pH instead of caustic soda as used in this study may reduce the amount of iron–arsenic–sulfate precipitates by gypsum formation, lowering the sulfate ion activity. However, at the same time a minimization of iron–arsenic precipitation may increase the neutralization cost for the bioleached solution during down-stream processing. Also, a minimization of formation of precipitate will probably decrease the cyanide consumption. An installation of an intermediate thickener between the two stages may be beneficial by reducing the required reactor volume in stage 2 and the arsenic load on the extremely thermophilic culture. At the same time, the amount of precipitates in the final bioresidue will be reduced. A disadvantage might be that the temperature in a straight down-stream neutralization process would be lower by this arrangement as the leach solutions from the lower and higher temperature stage will be combined. This may give a less stable iron–arsenic precipitate for disposal. Siv Sääf is appreciated for skillful technical assistance.