Mechanical properties of starch depend on similar factors to those of synthetic polymers but with added considerations of water sensitivity and the influences of starch source, formulation, processing, and aging/retrogradation. Amylose/amylopectin ratios vary with starch source with high-amylose starches generally giving materials of higher strength and ductility. The amylose/amylopectin ratio also affects gelatinization processes, which generate the uniform amorphous thermoplastic by the action of heat and mechanical work in the extruder. Gelatinization is aided by suitable plasticizers, usually low-molecular-weight polyols and water. These also lower melt viscosity and T
                  g. Correct selection of plasticizers increases the toughness of the starch but decreases strength and modulus. Water content can vary with ambient conditions and directly affects mechanical properties. Increased water content has a similar effect to decreased strain rate or increased temperature. Quantifying these variables is important for use of starch materials in different applications.We gratefully acknowledge over 40 researchers who have worked in our laboratories on this work since 1995 and to the funding from the Cooperative Research Centre for International Food Manufacture and Packaging Science, the Australian Research Council, the University of Queensland, Plantic Technologies Limited, and the Cooperative Research Centre for Polymers. For starch-based plastics to be used for industrial applications, a thorough understanding of their mechanical properties and the factors that will influence their properties is required. Although many studies have investigated the mechanical properties and structure of starch-based plastics, definitive data are difficult to obtain since individual studies have been made on a wide range of starches, using a wide range of plasticizers and processing conditions and using a wide range of test conditions. Unfortunately, in many of these studies, the materials have been insufficiently characterized and the test conditions poorly defined or controlled, which makes the data of dubious use. Nevertheless, various parameters and factors have been observed to show a significant influence on their behavior. These factors can be classified into two primary groups: the composition and structure of the starch-based plastic and the conditions of testing. The majority of work has been focused on the first of these groups as selection, and the processing of starch was critical in the development of commercial products. This has also lead to blending of starch with other synthetic and natural polymers in an attempt to alleviate shortcomings in the properties of the starch. Few systematic studies have been undertaken to address the effect of test conditions, but with the growing maturity of these products, such information will be required for more advanced applications. Starch consists essentially of two types of polymers of α- To generate thermoplastic starch polymers (TPSs), this complex semicrystalline structure needs to be destroyed to produce an amorphous material. This process called gelatinization is achieved by heating the starch in the presence of water and/or some other plasticizer. In the extrusion of TPS, heat for gelatinization is supplied by the heated barrel of the extruder. Gelatinization is also assisted by the mechanical work imparted by the extruder screw. If during processing, gelatinization is incomplete, remnants of the original semicrystalline structure will be retained in the TPS with consequences for the mechanical properties of the material. It should also be noted that the gelatinization temperature changes with the amylose/amylopectin ratio of the starch ( Starch source has been shown to influence the properties of TPS, and these differences in properties have been ascribed partly to the differences in amylose and amylopectin contents and their molecular structure ( The effect of starch source on the stress-strain behavior is shown in High-amylose materials generally result in products with higher strength and stiffness than high-amylopectin materials (  Using light microscopy on iodine-stained amylose/amylopectin films, It should also be noted that variations in structure of amylose and amylopectin (such as molecular weights, branching degree of amylopectin, and occurrence of cocrystallization between amylose and amylopectin) also influence significantly properties of TPS ( Plasticizers have two important roles in TPS materials. First, most starch polymers require plasticizers to aid in gelation and to decrease the processing temperatures during extrusion to avoid degradation of the starch. In addition, unplasticized starch polymers are usually brittle at room temperature due to their relatively high The addition of plasticizers, which are often low-molecular-weight molecules, increases the interchain spacing (increase of free volume) and reduces the interactions between the polymer chains. Thus, polymer chains have increased chain mobility with the polymer The glass transition of thermoplastic starch depends on the type and concentration of plasticizer (  The effect of plasticizers can be quite complex since many of the substances used to plasticize starch are themselves hydrophilic and can affect the availability and interaction of water with starch.  The degree of crystallinity will affect the mechanical properties of any semicrystalline polymer. The modulus and strength will increase with increasing crystallinity, and there is a tendency to brittle in highly crystalline materials. The type and amount of crystalline structures found in TPS are influenced by the composition, processing methods and conditions and postprocessing recrystallization, and aging. According to The second type of crystallinity was processing-induced crystallinity. This was caused by fast recrystallization of amylose into single-helical structures such as V In amylose films obtained by casting, B-type crystallinity developed upon film formation ( Different authors ( Physical aging below Aging of starch materials above the glass transition occurs by retrogradation ( It has been shown that the plasticizer content affects the crystallization rate. Higher amounts of plasticizer increase the mobility of the starch chains and lower the Analysis of extruded samples prepared from high-amylose and high-amylopectin starches revealed that, in amylose-enriched materials, crystallization occurs much faster than in amylopectin-enriched materials ( Many mechanical properties, particularly toughness, elongation to break, and strength in brittle polymers, are dependent on the presence of flaws in the materials. These may range from the presence of internal voids or actual imperfections of the surface to local variations in the microstructure, density, or composition. For TPSs, another range of flaw can exist resulting from the processing. If the starch is incompletely gelatinized, then remnants of the initial crystallinity can provide hard particles that can initiate fracture in the sample. In addition, ghosts of the initial starch granules can survive processing and these too provide inhomogeneities in the structure that can limit ductility.  All polymer properties are time- and temperature-dependent, and an understanding of these dependencies is important in service behavior of the materials. However, there have been few systematic studies on how mechanical properties of TPS material vary with test conditions with the possible exception of the effect of RH on water plasticization of TPS. A recent study by Pure thermoplastic starch materials are extremely sensitive to water and display rather low mechanical properties when wet. The properties tend to vary over time, either permanently due to crystallization or transiently as a result of varying levels of plasticization due to water content that changes with ambient RH. Materials based solely on TPS are thus of limited practical value. Therefore, much of the commercial research on TPS has involved associating TPS with polymers (synthetic or natural), fillers, and nano-fillers and/or modified starches ( Early work on TPS blends includes the work of To maintain biodegradability, many different TPS blends have been developed using biodegradable polymers. Some of these have been with natural biopolymers such as pectins ( Starch and biodegradable polyester are rather immiscible. Their blends generally demonstrate phase separation and poor interfacial properties. Nevertheless, an interesting behavior results from this low compatibility. Several authors ( Various strategies have been followed to induce compatibilization between starch and polyester, such as functionalization of polyester with, e.g., maleic anhydride ( Since the 1970s, starch/PVOH blends have been studied primarily for producing films by means of solution casting or calendaring ( From an economic point of view, solution processing is unlikely to be acceptable for commercial products due to the cost and low efficiency of this process. Melt processing via extrusion using conventional plastic processing equipment is required for these blends to be commercially exploited.  Relatively little information is available on the compatibility, miscibility, and morphology of blends based on starch/PVOH mixtures. Characterization of solution mixtures indicated that the polysaccharide and the synthetic polymer are largely incompatible (  In a related paper, the toughness of a high-amylose starch sheet contained < Extruded starch/PVOH blends could be expected to result in more homogeneous dispersions because of the intense mixing and shearing during processing, helping the destructurization of starch granules. SEM micrographs of starch/PVOH blends with 13% PVOH from Many of the properties of starch-based plastics follow the trends that are now well established for synthetic polymers. For example, yield strength and modulus increase with crystallinity. Plasticizers reduce the Water content also acts as an additional variable to temperature and strain rate in determining the solid-state mechanical properties. Just as there is a well-known time/temperature equivalence for properties of synthetic polymer, an MC/time or MC/temperature equivalence exists for starch materials. Thus, the mechanical properties of starch-based plastics are highly depended on the source of the starch, the processing and aging conditions, and the test conditions. Consequently, any reporting of mechanical properties must specify these conditions for them to have any worth in comparing with other starch-based products. Future direction for starch-based polymers will be directed at overcoming the major issues regarding the water sensitivity of their properties. This is already occurring in the formulation of blends and layered materials. The challenges will be to maintain a sustainable and eco-friendly product. Other approaches will be to chemically modify the starch to make it inherently more hydrophobic. This will pose challenges both in processing the modified starch and in avoiding the production of a brittle material.