Selective leaching kinetics of calcareous phosphate rock in succinic acid solution was investigated. Using a known particle size range of the sample, liquid/solid ratio and acid concentration, the influence of various reaction temperatures was studied in order to elucidate the kinetics of calcareous material in the rock. The leaching rate increased with increasing temperature. A kinetic model was suggested to describe the selective leaching process of calcareous material analyzing the kinetic data. The selective leaching curves were evaluated in order to check the validity of shrinking core models for liquid–solid systems. The experimental data were tested by graphical and statistical methods and it was found that the leaching of calcareous material in the rock was controlled by chemical reaction, i.e., 1−(1−
                     x)1/3
                     =1.47×106e−64.92/RT
                     
                     t. The apparent activation energy of the leaching process was found as 64.92 kJ mol−1 over the reaction temperature range from 313 to 353 K.Phosphates are essential ingredients in the fertilizers used to supply food and feed for mankind and animals. There is no substitute for phosphate rock as a raw material in the production of phosphate fertilizers in the world at this time. As the world population continues to increase, so does the demand for phosphate. Phosphate rocks are complex raw materials and are mainly used in the manufacture of phosphate fertilizers. The composition of these rocks varies from one deposit to another. Therefore, phosphate rocks from different sources are expected to behave differently in acidulation processes. Most of the world's phosphate rocks are of sedimentary origin and are primarily composed of the apatite group in association with a wide assortment of accessory minerals, fluorides, carbonates, clays, quartz, silicates, metal oxides, etc. Low-grade phosphate rocks are not usually suitable for direct use in acidulation plants unless their tricalcium phosphate content is increased to 70% or more, using conventional methods ( A number of studies for the dissolution of magnesite were found in literature (  The present work aimed to study the selective leaching kinetics of calcareous phosphate rock from Haripur Hazara (Pakistan). Apatite reserves are located in the northeast of the country, Hazara Administrative Division of Pakistan, and are categorized as—Kakul and Lagarban, East phosphorite, South phosphorite, Oatkanala and Batkanala phosphorite. The rock phosphate of all these areas is generally grey to dark grey, hard and compact. However, the phosphate rock in the Lagarban area is mostly dolomitic in nature as opposed to the cherty base of the Kakul phosphate rock. Lagarban rock is oolitic, the matrix and cement being composed mainly of collophane with some quartz, haematite, limonite and chalcedony. It also contains a few veins of secondary phosphate ( The low-grade phosphate rock sample was crushed and sieved using U.S. Tyler standard sieves to collect various size fractions for analysis. The +24# (+0.701 mm) fraction was further crushed using a mortar grinder to obtain the desired size fractions. All the sieved samples were dried in an electric oven at about 105 °C, cooled to room temperature and stored in closed desiccators. These sample fractions were analyzed for the main conditions, namely, P For reaction kinetic studies, −80+115# (−0.175 After a long time, the reaction was observed to reach equilibrium or caused the formation of a solid product which prevented further leaching of the calcareous material as shown in The effect of succinic acid concentration and liquid/solid ratio (v/w), on P In the leaching of colemanite ore with acetic acid, The economy of the leaching process depends on the price of succinic acid and the cost of its recovery. Succinic acid may be recovered from the calcium succinate solution by a number of routes as reported in a similar work ( It was found that the reaction of sulphuric acid with the calcium succinate solution produced calcium sulphate which was insoluble in succinic acid solution and could be easily separated by filtration. In the recovery of succinic acid from the calcium succinate solution, 98 parts of H The selective leaching process can be simplified using the following general equations: The selectivity should be such that the second reaction does not take place, while the first reaction goes to completion or equilibrium depending on solubility products ( The dissolving ability of organic acids is relatively weak. However, these weak acids show high selectivity and may be used as leaching agents for low-grade calcareous phosphate rocks. On the other hand, in scale-up studies conducted with inorganic acid, high CO Any strong acid, when mixed with ground phosphate rock, will react with the main constituents of the phosphate and change them to other compounds. In this case, dilute succinic acid has been used to selectively leach the calcareous material in phosphate rock. The salts of succinic acid are, depending on temperature, soluble in water and may be separated easily from the leached solid phosphate product by filtration. Highly concentrated succinic acid solution may not react, for example, with pure calcium carbonate due to the large polarity of the succinic acid O–H bond. In dilute solutions, water molecules tend to decrease the effect of polarity of the succinic acid O–H bond. These characteristics allow the acid molecules to react with calcareous material, but not with the tricalcium phosphate itself appreciably. The dilute acid may be less destructive if some of the produced solution is added to the reaction solution or recycled to the process. No physical or chemical changes in the phosphate rock nor considerable losses of its tricalcium phosphate content are observed under lower concentrations of succinic acid about up to 6–9%. In a fluid–solid reaction system, the reaction rate is generally controlled by one of the following steps: diffusion through the fluid film, diffusion through the ash/product layer or the chemical reaction at the surface of the core of unreacted particles ( In the absence of an ash/product layer around the unreacted core during the reaction, there would be only two controlling steps, fluid film diffusion or chemical reaction control. If the process is controlled by resistance of chemical surface reaction, then Eq. In order to determine the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step in selective leaching of calcareous material in succinic acid solution, the experimental data was analysed on the basis of the shrinking core model (Eq. Eq. Such a value of activation energy indicates that the process is a chemically controlled reaction and agrees with the values obtained in the similar research of fluid–solid reaction systems ( To assess the agreement between the experimental conversion and the values calculated from the empirical equation, the graph of  Succinic acid can be used to reduce the calcareous material in low-grade phosphate rock as it improves the P Analysis of the kinetic data by different kinetic models indicates a chemically controlled process with mixed chemical-diffusion control at higher temperatures. The activation energy was found to be 64.92 kJ mol The economics of the leaching process mainly depends on the price of succinic acid and the cost of its recovery. Succinic acid may be recovered from solution by a number of routes. However, addition of sulphuric acid is potentially the most attractive method for recovering succinic acid from calcium succinate solution. The authors are very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and improvements to the manuscript. The authors also thank the Department of Chemistry, B. Z. University, Multan for providing the facilities, the Institute of Chemical Engineering and Technology, NFC, Multan, Institute of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Faisalabad and the Hazara Phosphate Fertilizers for helping to complete this work.