A new method was developed to infer the HGI (Hardgrove Grindability Index) values from the product fineness indicator, t
                     10, predicted by the multi-component breakage model. A total of 41 sets of JKFBC (JK Fine-particle Breakage Characteriser) tests, on coals from Australia and China, plus ores containing various minerals and a clinker, were used to validate this method. The JKFBC and the multi-component breakage model have the potential to improve or replace the traditional HGI test. A new coal grindability index can be generated from the multi-component model parameters. As the major error sources associated with the traditional HGI test have been removed in this new approach, superior repeatability and reproducibility can be expected. More work is recommended in this area to validate this novel approach and to identify its limitations.
                  Simulations were conducted by employing the multi-component breakage model to demonstrate the effects of particle size and density on pulverised fuel (PF) grinding; to troubleshoot the PF production problems related to the coal properties; and to elucidate the observed trend of the non-linear phenomenon of the HGI effect on the PF milling capacity; whereby a 10 unit reduction in HGI from 50 to 40 requires four times more energy than a 10 unit HGI reduction from 90 to 80 in order to achieve the same PF production rate.The improved coal breakage characterisation technique as presented in Part 1 of this paper In the past, the literature has reported different attempts at predicting a coal grindability index, HGI Li et al. Hower Hower The literature review reveals that it is very difficult to accurately predict the HGI values from the coal proximate analysis results, or by using their petrographic information. The present author was aware of this, and did not intend to develop a model for HGI prediction. However, when the new breakage model was incorporated into the vertical spindle mill (VSM) model developed at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC), and the breakage model parameters ( There is an immediate advantage in using the calibrated breakage model to predict the HGI values. Since the former model is calibrated with the direct measurement data of the energy-size reduction relationship, all variations in coal composition, size, analytical properties and petrology background would be reflected in the calibrated model parameters. Consequently the breakage model’s prediction of HGI values would be more closely related to the fundamental grindability of the given coal, as compared to the traditional predictions based on regression equations or neural networks. Another application of the multi-component model is to simulate the effects of particle size and density on coal grinding performance, and to use the simulation results to elucidate the trends often observed in HGI tests and pulverised fuel (PF) production. The literature reports the poor comparability between different standards of HGI tests Part 3 of this paper aims to demonstrate the applicability of both the improved coal characterisation technique and the multi-component breakage model to the coal industry. Part 2 of the paper presents a multi-component breakage model, which takes the following form: The model incorporates four parameters, For the HGI feed size 0.6–1.18 The procedures to predict the HGI using the multi-component breakage model are illustrated in The major challenge is to predict the specific energy consumed for a given coal in the JKFBC test. Unlike with an impact breakage test (such as the JKRBT test), in which the specific energy is simply determined by the impact velocity The JKFBC experimental data show the following trends of torque variation. In general, the instantaneous torque increases with particle size and particle density, but does not vary significantly with mill speed and the number of revolutions (within experimental error parameters). To prove the validity of this observation, the instantaneous torque values of a coal at the same size and density were averaged for various mill speeds and various mill revolutions. The standard deviations (SD) are very small compared to their mean torque values. The coefficient of variation (CoV) that is defined as a ratio of SD to the mean torque was used for statistical analysis. The average CoV of the two coals (one from Australia and one from China) was 6.4%, which supports the assumption that the instantaneous torque value is dominated by particle size and particle density, but not by mill speed or the number of mill revolutions. A regression equation was used to describe the mean net torque in relation to particle size and density. The regression equation takes the power form: To predict the HGI, There are 19 sets of coal data from the Australian and Chinese power stations. A number of ore samples were also tested with the JKFBC in other research projects to characterise fine ore particle breakage behaviour. As the testing conditions for the ore samples are similar to those for the coal samples, the model was also used to predict the HGI values for the ore particles. There were 21 sets of HGI data from ore samples, covering gold, copper and industrial minerals. In addition, one set of clinker data, using the sample collected in a Chinese cement plant during the APP project, was available. In total, 41 sets of HGI data were used to validate the HGI prediction approach, covering an HGI range from 38 to 89. In reviewing the experimental errors associated with the HGI test, Edwards et al. There are a few predicted data lie outside the ±5-unit band in Since particle size, density and grinding energy have been explicitly incorporated into the multi-component model, and their effects can be calibrated with experimental data for a given coal sample, the model can be employed in a simulation study to investigate the influences of coal properties on size reduction. The simulations were performed on two nominal feed sizes, 4.0 Both coals show that bigger particles will produce a larger Comparing the effect of density at two particle sizes for an Australian coal shows a decrease in These results imply that grinding mineral matter or finer particles would require more specific energy than grinding coal or bigger particles. When subjected to the same input energy, the mineral matter will be more difficult to grind; resulting in the circulating load increasing when the mill is in closed circuit with an air classifier. In the current JKFBC experiment, tests were conducted on narrow size and density fractions in order to establish clear trends showing the effects of particle size and density on the energy-size reduction relationship. In reality, a grinding mill treats blended coal of varying density. The effects of blended coal on the energy-size reduction relationship are another important area for investigation, but are beyond the scope of this paper. Part 1 of this paper shows the HGI deficiency in mill capacity prediction. A mill feed consists of particles of various densities and sizes, whose breakage behaviour inside a mill is very different, as demonstrated in The literature also reports the non-linear response of mill capacity with HGI values. The difference in mill capacity for coals with a change in HGI from 40 to 50 is great, while the difference between 80 and 90 is almost negligible, despite a corresponding 10 units change in the HGI values. The multi-component model simulations can explain the reasons for this anomaly. Simulations were conducted to calculate the energy requirement to achieve a nominal PF production, e.g. 20% passing 0.075 These four sets of model parameters were used to calculate the The simulations indicate that in order to achieve the same PF production rate, when the feed HGI changes from 50 to 40, the mill energy has to be increased from 6.0 The HGI test is a traditional characterisation method for coal grindability, and it has been standardised for the commercial specification of coal. The limitations and deficiency of the HGI have been reported in the literature. One of the criticisms is the lack of precision. The reproducibility of HGI values between laboratories is believed to be around 4–5 units. This lack of precision in the test has been known to cause friction between buyers and sellers within the coal industry. If the feed samples are identical, and the error associated with the feed preparation can be ignored, the lack of precision in the HGI measurements should be attributed to two major error sources. The primary source comes from the measurement method. The standard HGI test only measures mill output (the amount of −0.075 Obviously, all measured data fall on the same trend line, with a large percentage of −0.075 The reported reproducibility of HGI values between laboratories is five units, which corresponds to a change in percentage passing 0.075 The secondary error source is from the HGI machine calibration. According to the HGI standards, every HGI mill needs to be calibrated against a number of standard coals of known HGI values from 30 to 100. The known HGI values are plotted against the measured mass percentage passing 0.075 ACARP (Australian Coal Association Research Program) has made the case for improving the standard HGI test or replacing it with a more reproducible test with a tighter level of repeatability and reproducibility An additional benefit is the adoption of a new coal grindability indicator via using model characteristic parameters. Since the HGI mill calibration constants are not used in the new grindability indicator, the secondary error source from the HGI mill calibration is completely eliminated. However, in instances where the user might want to know the HGI values of a new coal grindability indicator, the method presented in Section 2 of this paper will provide a reference value, in which case the HGI calibration constants would be required. Since the inferred HGI values only act as a reference, rather than as an item in coal specification, the negative impact caused by the lack of precision in the traditional HGI tests would be diminished. Another application of this technique would be to troubleshoot PF grinding circuits in power stations. In the single size and single energy HGI tests, the Australian coal shows an HGI value of 53, and the Chinese coal a value of 80. From these HGI values, the Chinese coal would be expected to have higher PF production rate than the Australian coal. However, the plant survey data showed that the energy efficiency in grinding the Chinese coal was similar to the Australian coal. Why did a coal with HGI of 80 not yield a higher PF production capacity than a coal with an HGI of 53? The simulation results using the multi-component model, calibrated to the two coal samples, provides the answer. Take the results listed in Particle density also plays an important role in the PF grinding capacity. For coal in the 1.4 RD range, the difference in Other applications include numerical simulation or circuit modelling of comminution circuit. These more advanced modelling techniques require a relationship between energy and size reduction, preferably incorporating the effects of particle size, density, mineralogy, etc. The traditional HGI cannot be used in these applications, as it lacks the details of an energy-size reduction relationship. The multi-component breakage model calibrated with the JKFBC tests will provide a well described relationship for a more advanced modelling approach. Already the breakage model has been implemented in the JKMRC VSM model to simulate PF grinding performance in power stations. The two recently developed techniques, the JKFBC (which incorporates a precision torque measurement system to record the energy input to the HGI mill) and the multi-component breakage model (which describes the energy-size reduction relationship for various particle sizes and densities) have found new applications in coal breakage characterisation. A new method was developed to infer the HGI values from the multi-component breakage model. The procedures include a model calibration using seven JKFBC tests, the prediction of The JKFBC and the multi-component breakage model have the potential to replace the traditional HGI test. A new coal grindability index can be generated from the multi-component model parameters. As the major error sources associated with the traditional HGI test have been removed in the new approach, superior repeatability and reproducibility can be now achieved than was possible with the traditional HGI test. More work is recommended in this area to validate the new approach and to identify its limitations. Simulations were conducted by using the calibrated model to demonstrate the effects of particle size and density on PF grinding, to troubleshoot the PF production problems related to the coal properties, and to elucidate the observed trend of the non-linear phenomenon of the HGI effect on PF milling capacity, whereby a 10 unit reduction in HGI from 50 to 40 requires four times more energy than a 10 unit HGI reduction from 90 to 80, in order to achieve the same PF production rate. This coal breakage modelling work was funded by the Australian Government Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism as part of the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate Program (APP). The Chinese coal samples were provided by the APP Project collaborative research team from China University of Mining and Technology, led by Prof. Yaqun He. The contributions made by the experimental work of Dr. Stephen Larbi-Bram and Mr. Weiran Zuo, in providing JKFBC data for the model development, are gratefully acknowledged. The support from Prof. Emmy Manlapig of JKMRC in the APP project is also much appreciated.