Four aryl end-capped quaterthiophene derivatives were synthesized and their material properties were studied by computational, spectroscopic, electrochemical, and thermoanalytical methods. Compounds were applied as interfacial layers between the bulk heterojunction active layer and Ag anode in inverted organic solar cells. Results show that p-cyanophenyl end-capped quaterthiophene with hexyl side chains increases both the short circuit current density and power conversion efficiency notably compared to reference interlayer material, tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum. The improved cell performance was attributed to the optimal positions of the highest occupied molecular orbital and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of this material, relative to those of the photoactive electron donor poly(3-hexylthiophene) and Ag anode, and evenly distributed LUMO. In addition, the use of these materials as an anode interfacial layer increases the absorption of the solar cell, which could contribute to the formation of excitons and additional current production by the cell.Organic solar cells (OSCs) among other solar cell technologies will most likely have a major role in renewable and sustainable energy production in future. However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE, Different interfacial layer materials have been investigated in order to balance both energy level alignment and compatibility between the photoactive layer and electrode materials in inverted OSCs. The use of interfacial layers between the ITO cathode and the photoactive layer may improve the device performance significantly Oligothiophenes and, especially, their aryl end-capped derivatives have been applied as hole transport layers (HTLs) in organic light emitting diodes In this paper, we present the synthesis of four aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes. Their material properties were characterized by computational, spectroscopic, electrochemical, and thermoanalytic methods. The prepared aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes were tested as hole transporting interfacial layers between the organic photoactive BHJ layer and Ag anode in inverted OSCs. The results show that, particularly, A mixture of toluene (9  The specific amounts of chemicals used: compound The specific amounts of chemicals used: compound The specific amounts of chemicals used: compound The specific amounts of chemicals used: compound Quaterthiophene with alkyl side chains (50.0 A small amount of 3,3‴-dimethyl-2,2′:5′,2″:5″,2‴-quaterthiophene was prepared by using the first step described in the section “ Measurements were carried out by using a Mettler Toledo DSC821 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the hybrid Becke's three-parameter exchange functional The steady state absorption and fluorescence were measured employing a UV-3600 Shimadzu UV–VIS-NIR spectrophotometer and a Jobin Yvon-SPEX fluorolog. The fluorescence lifetimes were measured using a time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) system equipped with a Picoharp 300 controller and a PDL 800-B driver for excitation and a microchannel plate photomultiplier (Hamamatsu R3809U-50) for detection in 90° configuration. The excitation wavelengths were 405 The solvents and Alq Solar cells were constructed on commercial ITO covered glass substrates. The ITO layer was taped and lacquered for The photoactive layer compounds, P3HT and PCBM, were dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene and stirred (250 The photovoltaic parameters were obtained and calculated from current–voltage ( To determine the thickness of the evaporated anode interfacial layers, reference quartz plates were placed into the evaporator chamber for each interfacial layer material evaporation. A narrow strip of the reference film was removed with a cotton stick dipped in CHCl Differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) measurements were carried out by employing an Iviumstat (Compactstat IEC 61326 Standard) potentiostat and a three-electrode cell configuration to determine the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of the synthesized aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes. The measurements were carried out using 0.1 5,5‴-Dibromo-3,3‴-dimethyl-2,2′:5′,2″:5″,2‴-quaterthiophene ( In literature, there are few available reports about the synthesis of aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes with methyl or hexyl side chains In our previous study, we observed that 3,3'''',3''''',4′-tetrahexyl-2,2′:5′,2″:5″,2‴:5‴,2'''':5'''',2'''''-sexithiophene undergoes cost efficient direct arylation smoothly with brominated quinoline derivative and the reaction has higher yield compared to respective Suzuki–Miyaura coupling The outcome of direct arylation was satisfactory in the case of compound DSC curves of the aryl end-capped quaterthiophene derivatives are presented in The DFT-optimized ground-state geometries of the oligomers are shown in The frontier molecular orbitals of the aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes are shown in The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the synthesized quaterthiophene derivatives were measured experimentally using DPV. The experimentally determined values of HOMO, LUMO and band-gap energies are presented in Absorption spectra of Stokes shifts of the derivatives are of the same range, between 91 Excited state lifetimes of the aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes in chloroform solution and in solid films were measured using TCSPC set-up. In solution, the compounds have monoexponential decays, whereas in films the decays are multiexponential ( In order to test the synthesized aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes as interfacial layers between P3HT:PCBM photoactive blend and Ag anode, several OSC devices were prepared. The photovoltaic parameters of the OSCs with an optimal interfacial layer thickness in ITO|ZnO|P3HT:PCBM|interfacial layer|Ag cell configuration are presented in Based on the solar cell experiments, aryl end-capped quaterthiophene derivatives The results show minor difference in The cell with As an anode interfacial layer in the inverted cell structure, Alq Four aryl end-capped quaterthiophenes were synthesized in good overall yields (77–84%). Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction was more efficient way to make the aryl-quaterthiophene bond in the final reaction step compared to direct arylation method. After chemical characterization, the aryl end-capped quaterthiophene derivatives were studied by computational, spectroscopic, electrochemical, and thermal methods and applied to inverted OSCs as anode interfacial layers between BHJ active layer and Ag anode. Differences in structural, spectral and electronic properties of the prepared quaterthiophene derivatives affected their function as interfacial layers. Aryl end-capped quaterthiophene derivatives with hexyl side chains were more compatible as interfacial layers than the derivatives with methyl side chains and the reference material, Alq O.E.O.H. and H.J.L. act as group leaders. J.P.H., D.P. and W.A.E.O. synthesized and characterized all the compounds. V.M.M. performed the spectroscopic, electrochemical, profilometer and solar cell studies. T.K. and T.I.H. carried out the computational studies. The authors thank Mrs. Päivi Joensuu for the HRMS data. The