The paper presents data on cobalt extraction from sulfate solutions with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR) diluted with nonane and kerosene in the presence of electron donor additives (L). Trioctyl amine (TOA), trialkyl amine (TAA), trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO), trialkyl phosphine oxide (TAPO), tributyl phosphate (TBP), and n-octanol were used as additives.
                  Using an electronic spectroscopy method, the interaction between cobalt loaded extracts (CoR2) and the additives was first studied. It was shown that, in the presence of the additives, cobalt oxidation decreased in the series TOA≈TOPO>TBP>n-octanol. This is due to a decrease in the HR activity in the presence of L as well as to the interaction between L and the initial cobalt complex resulting in the formation of mixed ligand complexes such as СоR2∙
                     nL, where n
                     =1,2.
                  Suggestions for prevention of cobalt oxidation in the organic phase containing bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid are given.
                  The degree of cobalt extraction decreases in the series HR+TOPO>HR≈HR+n-octanol≫HR+TAA. Both synergistic and antagonistic effects take place in the HR and phosphine oxides mixture, whereas only an antagonistic effect takes place in the systems containing TAA which is due to the interaction between HR and TAA.
                  The possibility of using the HR and L mixtures for cobalt recovery from sulfate solutions (here the HR+TOPO mixture was examined for the kinetic separation of Co and Ni) and from leach liquors of oxidized nickel ores (using the extraction system based on HR and TAA) has been demonstrated.CYANEX 301, the active component of which is bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR), is of undoubted interest for cobalt hydrometallurgy ( In particularly, the great interest in this reagent is because it has been selected as the reagent of choice for cobalt and nickel extraction when processing nickel laterite leach liquors in the Vale Nouvelle Caledonie (formerly INCO's Goro) project in New Caledonia ( There have been few reported investigations of the main features of cobalt extraction with CYANEX 301 alone ( It should be noted that, in the majority of cases, when studying cobalt extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid, the possibility of redox processes proceeding in the organic phase was not considered at all which obviously does not fully reflect the real situation in the extraction system. The redox processes proceeding during cobalt extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid have been studied in detail ( Some attention has been given to the investigation of cobalt extraction from solutions with mixtures of CYANEX 301 and other extractants. In the main, the mixtures of CYANEX 301 and organic amines of various structures have been considered ( However, several studies of cobalt extraction with di(2-ethylhexy)dithiophosphoric acid (D2EHDTPA), which is similar in extraction properties to CYANEX 301, in the presence of various electron donor additives have been published ( Using the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of the systems containing D2EHDTPA and electron donor additives, the authors ( From the above, only a very limited amount of data on the solvent extraction of cobalt from solutions of various compositions with CYANEX 301 and other extractant mixtures are available. Besides, the possibility of redox processes proceeding in the organic phase was not considered at all in the studies described above. Taking into account the potential commercial interest in such mixtures, it is necessary, in our view, to continue such investigations in order to develop new, effective extraction systems based on CYANEX 301 for cobalt recovery from sulfate solutions. This article presents the results of an investigation of cobalt extraction from sulfate media with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid in the presence of commercially available additives which are already used in the industry as extractants or modifiers: tertiary amines, trioctyl and trialkyl phosphine oxides, tributyl phosphate as well as n-octanol. Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR), purified through the formation of its ammonium salt according to the published procedure ( The reagents used as additives were trioctyl amine (TOA) of 99% purity, a С Со(II) dithiophosphinate was prepared by exchange extraction, in a short-term contact between a 0.001–0.01 The electronic spectra of the organic phases were recorded with a Shimadzu UV-300 spectrophotometer using a 0.2 The liquid–liquid extraction testwork was carried out by mechanical mixing of the phases for 20 Adjustment of the pH of the aqueous solutions was carried out using the sodium salt of the extractant. To obtain the extractant in the Na-form, it was treated with a sodium hydroxide solution (С The pH values of the aqueous phases were determined by potentiometric titration with a glass electrode using a pH meter, Akvilon pH-410. The aqueous phases were analyzed for cobalt and other metal cations. Their contents in the organic phases were calculated from the mass balances. In several cases, to ensure accurate results, the metal-containing organic phases were completely stripped by mixing with 5.5–6.0 The concentration of dithiophosphinic acid in the organic phase was determined by potentiometric titration with sodium hydroxide in a water–acetone solution (1:4). For curve fitting, the least squares method was used. The accuracy of the calculated values was characterized by confidence bands for a confidence probability of 95%. Earlier it has been shown ( Fast extraction of cobalt(II) resulting in the formation of the tetrahedral СоR The subsequent oxidation of cobalt(II) to cobalt(III) with air oxygen in the presence of dithiophosphinic acid with the formation of the octahedral complex СоR Introduction of the electron donor additives (L) into the organic phase containing dithiophosphinic acid can essentially affect the equilibria in the extraction system. An interaction between L and HR will lead to a decrease in the extractant activity due to the formation of hydrogen-bonded complexes (H-complexes) (Eq. A decrease in the extractant activity, according to Eq. The cobalt extraction process, when mixed complexes are formed in the organic phase, is described by Eq. As shown above, the interaction of the additives with HR and CoR The interaction between various additives (L) and the extracted cobalt compound is considered below. The interaction between cobalt-loaded extracts and additives was studied using electronic absorption spectra (EAS). This spectrophotometric technique is most convenient for the investigation of the state of cobalt in these systems since the electronic absorption spectra of the cobalt(II) and cobalt(III) compounds are different. The degree of transformation of the Co(II) complexes to the Co(III) complexes in the organic phase was determined based on the change in the value of the optical density at λ Obviously, in this case, the value of the optical density is proportional to the oxidized cobalt concentration ( The transformation of the cobalt extracts may be observed visually by the change in color of the organic phases depending on the exposure time to air ( In the presence of additives, cobalt oxidation in the systems containing CYANEX 301 decreases in the series TOA As mentioned above, the interaction between the additives and the initial CoR Earlier, the formation of adducts of a similar type has been reported in mixtures containing cobalt di(2-ethylhexyl)dithiophosphate and TOA (TAA), (CoR From the above results, one can assume that the cobalt bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinate and TOA (TAA) complexes have most likely an octahedral configuration, while the complexes of CoR The data obtained on the interaction of the electron donor additives with HR and the extracted cobalt compound (CoR The dependences of cobalt extraction with dithiophosphinic acid in the presence of some additives upon the acidity of the initial aqueous solution (i.e. the proton concentration) are presented in The tgα values of the log D As seen from Based on the data obtained, one can conclude that the mixtures of HR with TAPO (TOPO) and TAA (TOA) are of most interest for cobalt extraction from solutions. In these systems, cobalt oxidation in the organic phase is almost completely inhibited; furthermore, both efficient cobalt extraction and its efficient stripping with the sulfuric acid solutions (particularly, in the HR and TAA mixture) are possible. Other additives studied (n-octanol and TBP), which do not prevent cobalt oxidation in the extracts, can be used as modifiers, for example, in the CYANEX 301 and TAA systems. The rate of nickel extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid is very slow ( Earlier this kinetic approach for the separation of cobalt from nickel has been demonstrated for mixtures of di(2-ethylhexy)dithiophosphoric acid (D2EHDTPA) and trialkyl phosphine oxide (TAPO) ( As seen from the figure, cobalt (curve 1) is extracted more strongly than nickel (curve 2) and the effect of the additive on cobalt extraction depends on its concentration and the curve of the log D The consecutive stripping of cobalt and nickel with sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid solutions, respectively, when taking into account the optimum time of contact of the phases, improves separation of the metals. Earlier, a similar approach has been used for the D2EHDTPA and TOPO system, where perchloric and hydrochloric acid solutions were recommended for cobalt and nickel stripping, respectively ( The presented results lead to the conclusion that cobalt and nickel separation with the mixture containing bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid and TAPO, when using the kinetic factor, can be of interest for solving various technological and analytical tasks. It should be added that, in this case, cobalt extraction can be carried out from quite acidic solutions whereas, for example, when extracting cobalt and separating it from nickel using the well-known extractant CYANEX 272 (bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid), the aqueous solution must be neutralized to pH The data presented here for the HR As shown above ( As seen from the figure (curve 2), in this case, high cobalt distribution coefficients are achieved at рН Stripping of the metals from the HR and TAA mixtures can be rather simply carried out with dilute sulfuric acid solutions. Since cobalt is not oxidized in the organic phase in these systems and remains in the Со(II) form, it is easily stripped together with nickel ( The HR and TAA mixtures are obviously of undoubted interest for cobalt and nickel recovery from various metallurgical solutions, including leach liquors of oxidized nickel ores. In these mixtures, both the effective extraction of these metals and their stripping with sulfuric acid solutions are possible, which is difficult or just not possible for other CYANEX 301 and L mixtures and, particularly, when using CYANEX 301 alone. Со and Ni recovery from leach liquors of oxidized nickel ores with the bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid and trialkyl amine mixtures has been considered in more detail in earlier work ( As stated above, the Co(III) dithiophosphinate complexes, produced as the result of oxidation, are kinetically very inert, as a result of which cobalt stripping is very difficult. This, accordingly, can result in the loss of the metal itself and a decrease in the extractant capacity in the industrial process. Practically, it is necessary to keep cobalt in the labile un-oxidized form, which allows its easy stripping with mineral acid solutions. To prevent cobalt oxidation with air oxygen, some recommendations were given earlier ( To use the salt of the extractant (for example, NaR, NH To decrease the partial pressure of oxygen in the system by carrying out the extraction process in an inert atmosphere, such as nitrogen or carbon dioxide ( To use the mixtures of dithiophosphinic acid with electron donor additives as an extractant. The interaction of the additives with dithiophosphinic acid, as well as the formation of mixed ligand complexes between cobalt(II) dithiophosphinate and the additives essentially decreases or even completely prevents cobalt oxidation. As shown in this work, cobalt oxidation is almost completely inhibited in the mixtures containing HR and TAPO or TAA. Such an approach would surely be preferred where all extraction operations can be carried out under normal conditions compared to the process where metals are extracted with dithiophosphinic acid alone in an inert atmosphere. Such an approach obviously opens up new possibilities for use of a wide variety of the electron donor additives, including aliphatic and aromatic amines, phosphine oxides of different compositions, bi- and polydentate neutral organophosphorus compounds, sulfoxides etc. Using an electronic spectroscopy method, the interaction of cobalt loaded extracts (CoR The degree of cobalt extraction decreases in the series HR It is concluded that the HR and L mixtures will be of significant interest for cobalt recovery from sulfate solutions. Thus, the HR Our special thanks go to CYTEC Industries Inc. Canada for free samples of CYANEX 301. The authors are grateful to the leading researcher N.G. Maksimov of the ICCT SB RAS for the help in recording the electronic spectra. Appreciation for valuable remarks is extended to Dr. D.S. Flett.