Strain localization during coseismic slip in fault gouges is a critical mechanical process that has implications for understanding frictional heating, the earthquake energy budget and the evolution of fault rock microstructure. To assess the nature of strain localization during shearing of calcite fault gouges, high-velocity (
                        
                           
                              v
                              
                                 max
                              
                           
                           =
                           1
                           
                           
                              m
                              /
                              s
                           
                        
                     ) rotary-shear experiments at normal stresses of 3–20 MPa were conducted under room-dry and wet conditions on synthetic calcite gouges containing dolomite gouge strain markers. When sheared at 1 m/s, the room-dry gouges showed a prolonged strengthening phase prior to dynamic weakening, whereas the wet gouges weakened nearly instantaneously. Microstructural analysis revealed that a thin (<600 μm) high-strain layer and through-going principal slip surface (PSS) developed after several centimeters of slip in both dry and wet gouges, and that strain localization at 1 m/s occurred progressively and rapidly. The strain accommodated in the bulk gouge layer did not change significantly with increasing displacement indicating that, once formed, the high-strain layer and PSS accommodated most of the displacement. Thus, a substantial strain gradient is present in the gouge layer. In water-dampened gouges, localization likely occurs during and after dynamic weakening. Our results suggest that natural fault zones in limestone are more prone to rapid dynamic weakening if water is present in the granular slipping zones.Field and trench observations from large fault zones show that while the surface trace of a fault can have a complex and broadly distributed geometry ( The degree of strain localization and the thickness of the active principal slip zone strongly influence the dynamic behavior of faults ( In high-velocity experimental studies on gouge layers, shear localizes to a thin (<300 μm) and highly-comminuted slip zone cut by one or more discrete slip surfaces ( Results from high-velocity experiments on room-dry calcite ( Two different rotary-shear apparatus were used in this study: the Slow-to High Velocity Apparatus (SHIVA; A total of 18 high-velocity, rotary-shear experiments were performed with SHIVA using strain markers ( A total of 24 high-velocity, rotary-shear experiments were performed with the Phv apparatus under room-dry and controlled pore pressure conditions ( Pore fluid in the Phv apparatus is introduced to the gouge layer (marked yellow in The calcite gouge was derived by crushing pieces of Carrara marble. The dolomite gouge used for the strain markers in the SHIVA experiments was derived by crushing cohesive dolostones from the Foiana Tectonic Line ( After each experiment performed with SHIVA, a sample of the gouge layer containing the sheared strain marker was preserved in resin and cut (using a water-cooled saw) subparallel to the shear direction to obtain a cross-section through the sheared strain marker ( Polished samples were coated with carbon or chrome for microstructural analysis using a JEOL JSM-6500F Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) at the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV) in Rome, Italy, a CamScan MX3000 SEM at the University of Padua and a LEO (Zeiss) 1530 Gemini High resolution thermally-aided Field Emission SEM at the Institute of Geology, Mineralogy and Geophysics of the Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany. Images were obtained in backscattered electron mode using an acceleration voltage of 8–20 kV and a working distance of 7.3–20 mm. In backscattered mode, the dolomite marker is easily distinguished from the surrounding calcite due to its darker grey color ( In SHIVA experiments, the evolution of shear stress The evolution of shear stress in the experiments performed with the Phv apparatus shows very similar behavior compared to the SHIVA experiments ( Compaction of the gouge layer during the experiments also varies with ambient conditions. At the initiation of sliding, the water-dampened gouges compact slightly faster than the room-dry gouges ( Peak stress in the experiments is reached after a strengthening phase (i.e. the slip distance prior to the onset of dynamic weakening) that is annotated schematically in Although the acceleration was higher in experiments performed with SHIVA (6 m/s For effective normal stresses of 3–21 MPa, the length of the strengthening phase decreases from c. 80 cm to c. 4 cm in the room-dry gouges, consistent with data in After the strengthening phase, dynamic weakening initiates and the gouge weakens to a steady-state shear stress ( The microstructure of the sheared calcite gouges evolves with increasing displacement, as previously described in dry calcite gouges by At larger total displacements of 0.13–0.2 m, the zone of comminution has expanded into the gouge layer in both room-dry and water-dampened gouges ( After a total displacement of 0.43 m, a discrete slip surface developed in both room-dry and water-dampened gouges ( At displacements exceeding 1 m, the size and shape of the particles and the distortion of the marker in the lower-strain zones of the gouge layer does not appear to have further evolved ( In summary, no significant differences in the microstructure of room-dry and water-dampened gouges could be observed in the preserved samples. In both cases, the high-strain zone evolves from a broad zone of comminuted material that is only slightly compacted and contains several poorly-developed shear bands, to a zone of highly-comminuted and compacted gouge cut by a discrete principal slip surface. From the 18 strain-marker experiments performed with SHIVA, 14 preserved a relatively intact strain marker that could be used to quantify the strain distribution in the gouge layer after a range of total displacements. The estimated errors in our strain measurements ( Within the lower-strain zones, the boundaries of the marker are sheared slightly in the direction of slip, but are still relatively straight and can easily be traced (annotated in The quantitative strain data obtained separately for these three textural zones are shown in The main aim of this study was to investigate the effect of water on the strain localization process in calcite gouges. In the following, we first discuss how strain localization progresses with increasing displacement. No significant microstructural differences were observed in room-dry and water-saturated samples, even though the mechanical behavior of the calcite gouge is strongly influenced by the presence of water. Secondly, we review potential dynamic weakening mechanisms that could lead to the observed differences in mechanical behavior. Finally, we discuss the implications of our experimental results for earthquakes occurring in natural carbonate-bearing fault zones. Scanning electron microscope analysis of our room-dry and water-dampened samples sheared to comparable total displacements revealed no significant microstructural differences ( Likewise, the quantitative strain data obtained from the distortion of the strain markers do not show a significant difference in the amount of strain hosted in the low-, intermediate-, or high-strain zones of the room-dry and water-dampened samples. No clear dependence on the total displacement is evident in the lower-strain regions. The strain hosted in the high-strain zone, however, increases approximately linearly with total displacement ( The conclusion that the strain localization process is similar in room-dry and water-dampened gouges seems to contrast with the mechanical data showing a pronounced difference between experiments conducted in dry and wet conditions ( In previous studies, the initial strengthening phase observed in the mechanical data has been attributed to progressive localization of strain to a high-strain shear band that has to evolve to a critical state prior to weakening (e.g., by Based on their mechanical and microstructural data, The close agreement of the shear stress evolution in room-dry and water-dampened conditions during the first ∼8 mm of slip ( The observed rapid dynamic weakening in water-dampened conditions suggests that the active weakening mechanisms are either more efficient or different from those acting in relatively dry conditions. In the following, we discuss possible weakening mechanisms such as the formation of a fluid layer, thermal pressurization, flash weakening, and the activation of grain-size dependent mechanisms and evaluate their potential to accelerate weakening in the presence of fluids. A simple explanation for the rapid weakening could be the formation of a lubricating water layer along one side of the gouge layer and/or the principal slip surface. However, this does not explain the slightly higher steady state shear stress observed in water-dampened conditions ( Flash weakening might play a role in both room-dry and water-dampened gouges sheared at high velocity. As modeled by Instead of enhanced cataclasis, phase transformation was proposed as an alternative mechanism to form nanograins ( It was found that the steady-state shear stress was lower and the amount of weakening was higher under room-dry relative to water-dampened conditions ( In nature, frictional sliding on a pre-existing fault will initiate if a critical shear stress due to tectonic loading is reached, potentially leading to dynamic weakening of the fault, i.e., an earthquake instability. Velocity-strengthening behavior of the fault rocks might lead to an arrest of rupture prior to catastrophic failure. In our rotary-shear gouge experiments, simulating frictional sliding on a pre-existing fault, such a potentially stabilizing strengthening phase is observed under room-dry conditions. In the water-dampened and saturated experiments the strengthening phase was significantly shorter, implying that at shallow depths, gouge-bearing faults in carbonates will be more prone to rapid dynamic weakening in the presence of water. A series of intermediate- to high-velocity rotary-shear experiments was conducted on synthetic calcite gouges prepared with dolomite strain markers. The strain marker experiments were conducted with varying total displacements (0.011–2.5 m), normal stresses (3–21 MPa) and ambient conditions (room-dry and water-dampened) to study strain-localization processes and to test the dependence of the strain distribution on these different experimental variables. The mechanical behavior of room-dry and water-dampened gouges sheared at 1 m/s is significantly different: while the room-dry gouges show a prolonged strengthening phase prior to dynamic weakening, the water-dampened gouges dynamically weaken nearly instantaneously to a steady-state shear stress that is slightly higher than in room-dry conditions. Microstructural analysis of the sheared dolomite markers revealed progressive strain localization to a thin (125–600 μm) high-strain layer that developed after several cm of slip in both room-dry and water-saturated conditions. The strain hosted in the bulk of the gouge layer did not change significantly with increasing total displacement suggesting that, once formed, the high-strain slipping zone and slip surface accommodated most of the subsequent displacement and that a substantial strain and velocity gradient exists in the thin layer of gouge. No significant differences in the degree or timing of strain localization were observed in room-dry and water-dampened gouges, leading to the conclusion that faster dynamic weakening in water-dampened conditions is not because of faster localization but due to a different or more efficient weakening mechanism than in room-dry conditions. The faster dynamic weakening in the presence of fluids might explain some of the observed slip distribution complexity in natural carbonate-bearing fault zones. Andrea Cavallo, Rolf Neuser and Leonardo Tauro are thanked for assistance with SEM analysis. Elena Spagnuolo, Fabio Ferri and Kentaro Hatakeda are thanked for technical assistance. This work was supported by Ca.Ri.Pa.Ro.; a 2014 University of Otago Research Grant; the