Bioactive ceramics, glasses, and glass-ceramics have the ability to enhance bone formation and bond to surrounding tissue. The purpose of this report is to explore the use of a silicate-based bioactive glass, designated 13-93, as an alternative for nonbearing applications in total joint replacement, such as the tibia and the meniscus. The mechanical strength of porous 13-93 glass constructs, coupled with the ability of the glass to support cell attachment, growth, and differentiation, and the fabrication of the glass into porous, three-dimensional constructs with anatomically correct shapes, indicates the potential of 13-93 glass for nonbearing applications in total joint replacement, and for bone tissue engineering applications.The repair and replacement of bone lost or damaged due to trauma and diseases often employs treatments involving autograft or allograft bone, sometimes in significant amounts. Since 1971, when the bone-bonding ability of 45S5 glass was reported by Hench and coworkers, Bioactive materials can consist of crystalline ceramics, amorphous glasses, or glass-ceramics with a microstructure of fine crystals in a glass matrix. A recognized issue with the use of bioactive ceramics, glasses, and glass-ceramics is their mechanical properties. In the dense form, these materials have much higher mechanical strength and elastic modulus than cortical bone, Hydroxyapatite (HA), Ca Since the early 1970s, the silicate-based bioactive glass, referred to as 45S5 bioactive glass, has been of primary interest for biomedical applications. Since the report of the bone-bonding property of 45S5 glass, several bioactive glasses and glass-ceramics have been developed, many of them with compositions based on the 45S5 composition. Hench Whereas 45S5 glass has excellent bioactive characteristics, it suffers from shortcomings for bone repair applications in which the ability to form porous, three-dimensional constructs with anatomically correct shapes is important. Because of its low SiO To alleviate some of the aforementioned limitations, the 45S5 composition has seen many modifications, often by increasing the SiO Borate glasses, based on the B While these 45S5B1 and 2-2-6 borate glasses undergo rapid and complete mineralization, a concern is the effect of the boron released from the glass during mineralization on cells. Borosilicate glasses, in which the glass-forming network contains a combination of Si and B atoms, can provide mineralization rates intermediate between those for silicate and borate glasses, low release rate of boron ions from the glass, and ease of formation of the glass into complex three-dimensional structures. A characteristic feature of all known bioactive materials is the time-dependent modification of the surface, resulting in the formation of an HA layer through which a bond with the surrounding tissue is established. The sequence of interfacial reactions involved in the formation of a bond with bone has been discussed by Hench. The mineralization leading to the formation of a surface layer of HA in vitro appears to be indicative of a material’s bioactive potential in vivo. The bioactive potential of a bioactive glass is dependent on its composition. In general, because of their higher durability, silicate-based bioactive glasses undergo mineralization more slowly than borate-based bioactive glasses and, often, the process effectively stops before complete mineralization of the material. The objective of the present work was to explore the suitability of silicate 13-93 glass as a scaffold material for nonbearing applications in total joint replacement. The investigations included the preparation of particles and fibers of the glass and their formation into porous three-dimensional constructs. The microstructure, mechanical properties, and mineralization of the constructs were evaluated. The interaction of 13-93 glass with cells was explored using in vitro tests with the MC3T3-E1 established line of murine preosteoblastic cells. Particles of 13-93 glass with the required sizes were prepared using conventional glass processing techniques, described in detail elsewhere. Based on information on the glass transition temperature and crystallization temperature of the 13-93 glass obtained from differential thermal analysis (DTA) and some trial and error, it was found that sintering for 15 min at 700°C provided sufficient sintering to take place without crystallization of the glass. In another route, a polymeric foam with the required cylindrical shape was infiltrated with a suspension of fine 13-93 glass particles (<5 μm). After drying, the system was heated to burn off the foam and sintered for 15 min at 700°C to form a dense cellular network of the glass. This foam infiltration method has the potential for providing better control of the porosity and pore size of the construct compared with the slip casting in a gypsum mold. The ability to use the slip casting process to form porous constructs with anatomically correct shapes was investigated. A plastic model of the proximal articulating end of a human tibia was used to prepare the shaped cavity in a gypsum mold, into which the suspension of glass particles was cast. The procedure for fabricating the tibial construct was similar to that described above for the cylindrical samples. A similar procedure can be used to form the tibial construct by infiltrating a shaped foam. The pore morphologies of the cylindrical constructs were observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S-4700) of the surfaces and cross-sections of the constructs. The porosity and pore size distribution of accessible (open) pores were measured using mercury intrusion porosimetry (Poremaster; Quantachrome, Boynton Beach, FL). The mineralization of 13-93 glass to form HA was studied by immersing dense glass disks in an SBF A portion of the 13-93 glass was remelted in a Pt-resistance type bushing from which fibers with a diameter between 25 and 40 μm were pulled. A controlled speed take-up drum was used to align and collect the fibers. Preparation of glass fiber rafts began with a strip (∼3 cm × 15 cm) of unidirectionally aligned fibers positioned on a glass sheet and carefully oriented into a tightly juxtapositioned, single-thickness layer. The fibers were bonded together with a continuous bead of silicone adhesive (GE ‘Silicone I’; Fisher Scientific; St. Louis, MO) applied perpendicular to the fibers at 1 cm intervals. After allowing the silicone to cure, the layer was sectioned to obtain 1 cm × 1 cm square rafts. Preparation of glass fiber constructs was initiated by crushing the 13-93 fibers with a pestle to obtain fragments with a mean length of 3 mm. The fragmented fibers were weighed, placed in short tubular ceramic molds (7 mm dia), and sintered under conditions similar to those described earlier for the particles. The result was formation of porous disks with dimensions of approximately 2 mm × 7 mm. The glass fiber rafts and porous glass fiber scaffolds were twice washed in ethyl alcohol and dry heat sterilized (2.5 h at 250°C). The MC3T3-E1 mouse preosteoblastic cells obtained from ATCC (American Type Culture Collection; Manassas, VA) were cultured in ascorbic acid–free α-MEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum plus penicillin (100 U/mL) and streptomycin sulfate (100 μg/mL). The medium used to test MC3T3-E1 differentiation on the glass fiber rafts and disks was additionally supplemented with ascorbic acid (50 μg/mL). Glass samples in the form of rafts, porous scaffolds, or disks were placed in 24-well plates and MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded in the wells at a density of 30,000 cells/cm Glass fiber rafts and scaffolds with attached cells were removed at culture intervals of 2, 4, and 6 days, washed with warm PBS, and fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde in PBS for 30 min. Fixed samples were twice washed with PBS, dehydrated through a graded ethyl alcohol series, and then soaked in hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) for 5 minute. After being rinsed in fresh HMDS, samples were allowed to evaporate as described elsewhere. At intervals of 2, 4, and 6 days, duplicate cultures on glass disks were washed with warm PBS, fixed with 10% formalin in PBS, and placed in Hoechst 33,258 (2 μg/mL) for 10 min to fluorescently label nuclei. The samples were then washed with PBS and examined under the 10× objective of an epifluorescent microscope fitted with a 390 nm exciter filter for visualization of nuclei. Images of four representative fields of each sample were obtained with a CCD camera (Model DP70; Olympus; Center Valley, PA) to assess cell density. Cultures on the glass fiber rafts or disks were washed with PBS and fixed with 10% formalin in PBS. After rinsing in PBS, the sample was placed in 1.0 mL of 10 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.5)/1 mmol/L EDTA and sonically disrupted using an ultrasonic oscillator (Model 250 Sonifier; Branson Ultrasonic; Cleveland, OH). The lysed cell suspension was spun at 3000 MC3T3-E1 cells were trypsinized, resuspended in complete medium, and inoculated onto glass fiber rafts or disks in 12-well plastic plates at a density of 50,000 cells/cm  The compressive strength of porous cylindrical samples was 22 ± 1 MPa. This value is significantly higher than the value for cancellous bone (∼5 MPa), but it is also significantly lower than that for cortical bone (100-200 MPa). While the design criteria for scaffolds for bone repair are unclear, it should be noted that the strength of the present constructs can be enhanced by a greater degree of sintering, at the expense of some reduction in the porosity and average pore size.  Thin-film XRD patterns for the as-prepared glass and for the glass after soaking in SBF for 1, 7, and 14 days are shown in The FT–IRRS spectra (  The mechanism of formation of silicate-based bioactive glasses, such as 45S5 glass, in a dilute phosphate solution, such as an SBF, has been discussed by Hench.  The photograph in Low-power scanning electron micrographs of MC3T3-E1 cells on the 13-93 glass fibers after culture intervals of 2, 4, and 6 days are presented in Results of the PicoGreen® fluorescent assay of amounts of DNA in cell lysates recovered from the raft cultures are represented by the bar chart in In addition to supporting cell proliferation, scaffold materials used for bone tissue repair and tissue engineering applications must also support differentiation of primordial mesenchymal cells to functional bone tissue. The activity of alkaline phosphatase was monitored in this study as a test for osteoblast differentiation on the 13-93 glass fibers. Formation of alkaline phosphatase is one of a number of well-characterized markers of expression of an osteoblastic phenotype. Particles of a silicate-based 13-93 glass were formed into porous, three-dimensional constructs with porosities >40% and pore sizes greater than ∼100 μm, suitable for supporting tissue ingrowth. The compressive strengths of the constructs were 16 to 22 MPa, approximately three to four times the compressive strength of trabecular bone. The ability to form the particles into a porous construct with the shape of the articulating surface of a human tibia was demonstrated. The 13-93 glass can be easily pulled into fibers that are relatively durable and sufficiently pliable for fabrication of a mesh scaffold of woven glass fibers. On immersion of the glass in a simulated body fluid at 37°C, a carbonate-substituted hydroxyapatite was detected on the glass surface in fewer than 7 days, indicating the bioactivity of the glass, as well as the potential for bonding to bone and early mechanical stabilization of an implant. The 13-93 glass, in the form of fibers, was shown to be a favorable substrate for the attachment, growth, and differentiated cell function of osteoblastic cells. The bioactivity of 13-93 glass, coupled with the ability to make porous constructs with anatomically correct dimensions, and the ability of the glass to support osteoblastic cell attachment, growth, and differentiation, indicates the suitability of this glass as a scaffold material for applications in bone repair and regeneration, such as the tibia and the meniscus. The authors thank Qiang Fu, Yadong Li, Wenhai Huang, and Steven Jung for assistance with the experiments.