An ion-imprinted polymer (IIP) was synthesized by radical copolymerization for use in the removal of trace Fe(III) ions from Cr(III)-containing solutions. During the synthesis process, Fe(III) ions, acrylic acid and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate were employed as the template ions, functional monomer and cross-linker, respectively. The optimal mole ratio of acrylic acid to Fe(III) ions, which significantly affected the adsorption performance, was determined. The maximum static adsorption capacity of the polymer for Fe(III) ions was 114.25 mg g−1, with a selective factor (k) of 492.18 and a relative selective factor (k′) of 50.87 for Fe(III)/Cr(III). The Fe(III) ions removal efficiency could reach 94.43%, leading to a final Fe(III) concentration of 0.053 mg L−1 in the treated solution. After the removal process, the mass ratio of Cr(III) ions to Fe(III) ions was higher than 26, 000:1 in the solution, with an initial mass ratio of Cr(III) to Fe(III) ions of 1500:1.Iron is the fourth most abundant element in the earth's crust. In addition to its presence in iron ore, it is widely found as an accompanying element in various other minerals. The existence of iron impurities in production processes adversely affect the reactions, reduce the purity of the products and change the product performance. Therefore, the removal of iron has become an important step in the production of nonferrous metal or chemical products ( Molecular imprinting technology is used to prepare molecular imprinted polymers (MIPs), capable of binding and recognizing desired target molecules with high selectivity and affinity ( In this study, an Fe(III)-IIP was prepared by the radical copolymerization of acrylic acid and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate in the presence of Fe(III) ions. The synthesis process was optimized to obtain an Fe(III)-IIP with excellent adsorption performance. The performance of the Fe(III)-IIP was tested in Cr(III)-containing solutions. Ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA), 2,2′-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN), acrylic acid (AA), ethanol, Fe(NO A Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrometer (Spectrum GX, Perkin Elmer, USA) was used for analysis of the synthesized materials in KBr with a wavenumber range from 400 to 4000 cm Fe(III)-IIP was prepared by bulk polymerization. In a typical procedure, 1 mmol (0.4122 g) of Fe(NO The binary competitive binding ability of Cr(III) ions with respect to Fe(III) ions was studied to evaluate the selectivity of the obtained Fe(III)-IIPs. A total of 20 mg of Fe(III)-IIP or NIP was added to 10 mL of a 50-mg L Batch experiments were conducted to evaluate the adsorption properties of the Fe(III)-IIP. The functional monomers, which react directly with target ions, are the key component to determine the adsorption performance of IIPs. The optimal mole ratio of functional monomers to template ions varies with the kinds of functional monomers and template ions. It is important to match the template ions and functional monomers in a complementary fashion in order to maximize complex formation and thus the imprinting effect ( The effect of pH value on the adsorption capacity was studied by adding 20 mg of Fe(III)-IIP to 10 mL of solution containing 100 mg L The effect of Na The adsorption capacity and removal rate could be calculated according to the following equations: All adsorption experiments were carried out in 10-mL glass bottles at an oscillation speed of 250 r min The FT-IR spectra of IIP and NIP obtained in the range of 400–4000 cm The SEM images of IIP and NIP are shown in The prepared IIP and NIP particles were studied by N The content of functional monomer used in the preparation is a key factor affecting the performance of IIPs. The formation of the compound between monomer and template ions is difficult when the functional monomer is insufficient. However, superfluous monomer will lead to the formation of a large number of non-imprinted sites ( According to the results observed in the SEM analysis, the packing density of IIPs might be affected by the content of acrylic acid during preparation. The packing density was calculated by measuring the mass and packing volume of the IIPs prepared with different acrylic acid contents. The selectivity is another important performance metric of IIPs. The effect of the content of acrylic acid on the selectivity of IIPs was also studied as shown in In the preparation of IIPs, three-dimensional porous polymers are obtained because of the bonding between the monomer and template ions, as well as the linking of monomers to cross-linkers ( According to Eq. At the optimal mole ratio, the value of The Fe(III) ions adsorption capacity of Fe(III)-IIP can be affected by the initial pH values of the solution. Iron ions are easily hydrolyzed in aqueous solutions. The cationic species Fe  The adsorption capacity of Fe(III)-IIP is an important factor because it determines the amount of polymer required to remove Fe(III) ions. The alteration of the adsorption capacity of Fe(III)-IIP was studied depending on the initial concentration of Fe(III) ions. According to the results shown in The effect of temperature on Fe(III) ions adsorption was investigated in a temperature range from 30 to 70 °C ( The equilibration time between Fe(III) ions and the IIP was controlled by changing the contact time between 0.5 and 18 h. The results of Fe(III) ion adsorption onto IIP at different contact times are shown in Two empirical equations, the Langmuir and Freundlich models, are the most widely employed models to analyze adsorption processes. These models can be described by the following equations ( The linearized Langmuir isotherm and the linearized Freundlich isotherm are shown in The adsorption kinetics of Fe(III) ions by Fe(III)-IIP were analyzed on the basis of the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models. These two equations are given as ( As shown in The removal of Fe(III) ions from Cr(III)-containing solutions was investigated in the present study. The solutions were adjusted to a pH value of 3.5, based on the above results. During the removal process, the presence of coexisting ions may have a significant effect on Fe(III) ions adsorption. Therefore, before the removal of Fe(III) ions, the effect of Na Neglecting the effects of Na After the determination of the adsorption capacity of Fe(III)-IIP in solutions with different concentrations of Cr(III) ions, the Fe(III) ions were removed from Cr(III)-containing solutions. The results in In addition, in practical situations, other common ions, such as K According to the previous studies, the removal rate of iron ions could be 75% to 96% by chemical precipitation, and 90% by solvent extraction, when the mass ratio of Cr(III) ions to Fe(III) ions was between 7:1 and 13:1 ( In this work, a novel approach was proposed to remove Fe(III) ions from Cr(III)-containing solutions by the preparation and application of Fe(III)-IIP. The main conclusions could be drawn as follows: Acrylic acid could be used as the functional monomer. The dosage of acrylic acid had a significant effect on the adsorption capacity and selectivity of the obtained Fe(III)-IIP samples. Under the optimal mole ratio of acrylic acid to Fe(III) ions of 9:1, the selectivity coefficient and relative selectivity coefficient were 492.18 and 50.87, respectively. The appropriate initial pH level for the adsorption of Fe(III) ions in aqueous solutions was 3.0–3.5. At an initial pH value of 3.5, the maximum adsorption capacity of Fe(III)-IIP was 114.25 mg g The presence of Na The selectivity of the Fe(III)-IIP was derived from the selectivity of its functional groups and the formation of the three-dimensional pores in the polymer. The Fe(III)-IIP could deeply remove Fe(III) ions from Cr(III)-containing solutions. The removal rate of Fe(III) ions could be 94.43% when the initial mass ratio of Cr(III) ions and Fe(III) ions was 1500:1 in solution. This work was financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at