The diffusion coefficient is one of the key parameters to control gas desorption and transport kinetics in coal with pressure evolution. Accurate estimation of diffusion coefficient of coal is of great significance for coalbed methane production planning and coal mine gas control management. However, the most commonly used analytical method was found to underestimate the gas diffusion coefficient due the assumption of constant surface concentration in solving the Fick diffusion model. This study conducted a series of experiments to measure the gas adsorption and diffusion using the volumetric method. The Fick diffusion model was solved by both analytical method and the numerical method to estimate the gas diffusion coefficient based on the experimental data. We compared estimated diffusion coefficients from both the analytical and numerical approaches. It is found that the diffusion coefficient is a pressure dependent parameter and it negatively correlates with the pressure. The gas diffusivity in coal is also a gas type-dependent property. As observed, the CO2 diffusion coefficients were found to be higher than of CH4. It suggests CO2 molecules diffuse faster than CH4 molecules through the same porous coal matrix. This may be attributed to CO2 molecules own relative smaller kinetic diameter than CH4 molecules. The analytical method will underestimate the gas diffusion coefficient because it assumes a constant gas concentration boundary condition. The numerical method is a better representation of the real gas diffusion process and we recommend to using the numerical method for the diffusion coefficient estimation if possible.Coalbed methane (CBM) is an unconventional natural gas resource and is known to be cleaner than coal and oil because lower carbon emission and less pollutants Bulk coal is known to be a typical dual-porosity medium, consisting of cleats/fractures and coal matrices The parameter inversion approach was commonly used to estimate gas diffusion coefficient within coal matrix or coal particle, which involves running series of coal-gas ad-/de-sorption experiments, solving the theoretical model of gas diffusion kinetics in coal, and fitting the experimental data with the estimated data When analytically solving the Fick diffusion model with assuming a constant concentration boundary, an infinite series proposed by Crank (1975) was used to describe the relationship between fractional gas desorption amount and time, and this infinite series was extensively applied to fit the measured data in diffusion coefficient inversion This study first ran a succession of coal-gas (CH The bulk coal samples with different metamorphic degrees were collected from six active coal mines. We run the coal proximate analyses and the results were summarized in A schematic of the ad/desorption experimental setup is illustrated in To capture the accurate pressure variation, all the pressure transducers were calibrated by using the ISCO pump. The transducers have the output of 0 to 5 V DC for a full pressure span of 0 to 3000 psi (0 to 20.68 MPa). Both transducers have the accuracies of ± 0.04% full scale and operating temperature ranges from −20 to 80 °C. Prior to the ad-/de- sorption test, the gas leakage test and void volume test were also conducted using helium gas at 303 K. In this study, we tried to mimic the gas production process and we will measure the desorption rather than adsorption to simulate the gas depletion in the CBM field. Before running the gas desorption/diffusion process, the coal sample was initially saturated with the targeted gas (CH With the pressure data recorded in the experiments, the accumulative desorbed gas amount can be calculated by Gas flow through micropores of coal matrix is considered to be concentration gradient-driven process, termed as diffusive flow, and is theoretically described with Fick's second law With initial and boundary conditions: When we model the gas desorption under the constant pressure boundary condition, Substituting the As discussed in Crank (1975) proposed the solution for non-steady diffusion flow in spherical porosity media with a constant and a variable surface concentration boundary The concentration at the center is given by the limit as The cumulative gas amount of diffusing substance entering or leaving the sphere is given by We wanted to point out that the Fick diffusion model with a variable surface concentration boundary is a two-order nonlinear partial differential equation and cannot be solved analytically. Several decades ago, the numerical solving technique was not well developed, and numerical solution was inconvenient for parameter inversion. As a compromise method, the With improvements of computer and information sciences, numerical solutions play critical roles in solving the complicated nonlinear equations. This section describes the detailed numerical solving procedure of Fick diffusion model using the finite difference method. It involves meshing and node generation, deriving the difference equation and programming the numerical code. The spherical coal particle is initially meshed as shown in For the nodal point 0, the difference equation can be established as: For the nodal point As stated above, the value of  The workflow of code programming in From The experimental program used CH From Cui et al. (2004) studied the gas adsorption/diffusion in coal and analyzed the correlation between gas diffusivity and pore pressure As shown in From As shown in  According to the particle method of diffusion coefficient estimation, gas pressure changes due to the gas released from coal particles in the sealed cell, and the surface gas concentration varies with gas pressure until the gas equilibrium is achieved. Therefore, assuming a constant surface concentration violates the real experimental boundary condition. The Fick diffusion model with a constant surface concentration are expected to naturally induce error because it is not the same as the experimental boundary condition. This suggests that analytical method to inverse the diffusion coefficient will have a systematic error. To evaluate the error caused by a constant concentration assumption in solution of Fick diffusion model, we quantified the discrepancy in the value of gas diffusion coefficient obtained by using both analytical and numerical methods. We found the analytical method consistently underestimates the diffusion coefficient. In principle, numerical method provides a realistic solution which considers the dynamic surface gas concentration as sample cell pressure evolves.  Substituting the With the dimensionless initial and boundary conditions: According to  Using the dimensionless numerical results, the dimensionless gas desorption curve could be plotted, and  For the CBM flow model, some assumptions introduced decades ago may need to be revisited. Due to the limitations of computing capability in 1960s, it was difficult to solve the coefficient matrix of hypermulti-grid nodes. Warren and Root (1963) introduced a uniform concentration distribution within matrix space to simplify the solution of Fick diffusion flow in CBM simulation On the other hand, gas diffusion coefficient plays significant role in matrix gas flow which dominates gas rate in late stage of gas depletion Gas (CH The diffusion coefficient of coal is a pressure dependent parameter and it negatively correlates with the pressure. The diffusivity is a gas type-dependent property of coal. As observed, the CO The analytical method will underestimate the gas diffusion coefficient because it assumes a constant gas concentration boundary condition. The numerical method is a better representation of the real gas diffusion process and we recommend to using the numerical method for the diffusion coefficient estimation if possible. A dimensionless method is proposed and recommended to ease the inversion procedure for the diffusion coefficient estimation. All persons who meet authorship criteria are listed as authors, and all authors certify that they have participated sufficiently in the work to take public responsibility for the content, including participation in the concept, design, analysis, writing, or revision of the manuscript. Furthermore, each author certifies that this material or similar material has not been and will not be submitted to or published in any other publication before its appearance in the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was sponsored by the Open Fund Project Funded by