Objectives
                  The aim of this retrospective study was to present our experience using condylar buttress plate in the treatment of distal femoral fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Thirty-two patients underwent open reduction and internal fixation with condylar buttress plates for distal femoral fractures from October 2000 through May 2010. Patient demographics, type of fracture, treatment, complications, results achieved, and follow-up assessment were reviewed. The fractures were classified with the AO system. The functional outcome was rated according to Schatzker and Lambert criteria.
               
                  Results
                  There were 22 men and 10 women with an average age was 44 (range 19–87) years. The fractures were classified as A1 (n = 7; 21.8%), A2 (n = 4; 12%), A3 (n = 5; 15.6%); C1 (n = 4; 12.5%), C2 (n = 6; 18.8%), and C3 (n = 6; 18.8%). The mean delay from injury to operation was 15 (range 1–27) days. Iliac bone graft was performed in four patients. Postoperatively, a posterior splint or a plaster cast was applied for 3 weeks. No patient had an intra-articular step-off of more than 2 mm. Sepsis of the operative wound occurred in two patients. Fractures healed in 22 (91.7%) patients with a mean duration of 4 (range 3–8) months. Twenty-four patients were followed up on an average of 15 (range 7–28) months. Varus deformity (>10°) was observed in five (20.8%) patients. Knee flexion was less than 90° in 11 (45.3%) cases. Non-union occurred in two (8.3%) patients. Functional results were good to excellent in 11 (45.8%) patients and considered as fair or failure in 13 (54.2%).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The current report also identifies varus deformity as a major concern of this implant. The main finding of this study was the ensuing knee stiffness after a prolonged immobilization and delay in performing surgery and rehabilitation program due to socioeconomic and logistic reasons.Distal femoral fractures (DFFs) are treated using several devices. From 2000 on, DFFs are also fixed with condylar buttress plates (CBPs). Patients undergoing open reduction and internal fixation with CBP for DFF from October 2000 through May 2010 were identified and their charts reviewed retrospectively. We included adult patients treated initially for isolated distal femoral fracture. Patients with CBP as a revision procedure to correct previous internal fixation were excluded. Polytrauma patients with ipsilateral lower limb fractures or concomitant fractures of the other limbs were also excluded because these injuries later interfere with evaluation of weight-bearing and other outcomes. The initial study population was 45 but 13 patients were excluded owing to the aforementioned criteria. Thus the final population was 32 patients. The notes and imaging findings were reviewed with particular attention to patient demographics, injury mechanism, treatment, complications, results achieved, and follow-up assessment. The fractures were classified using the AO system. Open fractures were described with the criteria of Gustilo. Data obtained were analyzed using simple statistics. Surgical procedure had been described in many reports. The patients were positioned supine on a standard operating table, the ipsilateral buttock supported by a pad in order to flex slightly the knee. The ipsilateral iliac bone was draped for autographing. Tourniquet was not used in any of the patients. A standard lateral approach to the distal femur was used, with the distal portion of the incision extending anteriorly across the lateral femoral condyle ending at the level of the Gerdy's tubercle. The vastus lateralis was reflected forwards. Arthrotomy was performed in all cases so that the patella could be dislocated medially. Meticulous care was taken to avoid excessive mobilization of the metaphyseal fragments to prevent further stripping of periosteum and blood supply. The multifragmentary fragments lying medially were left undisturbed. In extra-articular fractures which were not severely comminuted, reduction gained to be maintained temporarily by two crossed K-wire. A plate with proper length and suitable to the body side was selected. A plate bender was used to contour the plate to conform to the distal femoral condyle. The plate was centred along the midlateral line of the cortex with its lateral flare seated directly over the lateral flare of the condyle. The distal end of the plate should be applied too distal as possible but not extend below a point 1 or 1.5 cm above the joint line ( There were 22 men and 10 women with a mean age of 44 years (range 19–87). The fractures were the result of a road traffic accident ( The mean operation time was 50 (range, 35–60) min. The average stay in hospital was 28 (range, 4–77) days. No patient had an intra-articular step-off of more than 2 mm. Sepsis of the operative wound occurred in two patients. In one patient, this was a superficial wound infection which responded well to standard treatment local wound care with intravenous antibiotics followed by oral antibiotics. In the other case, it was a septic arthritis complicating an open fracture, in an old patient who finally died of decubital complications. Seven patients were lost to follow-up. Thus twenty-four patients with a mean follow-up delay of 15 (range, 7–28) months were available for final evaluation. Fractures healed after the index procedure in 22 (91.7%) patients with a mean duration of 4 (range, 3–8) months ( Varus deformity was observed in five (20.8%) patients. Knee flexion was less than 90° in 11 (45.3%) patients. All these patients had unsatisfactory results. The hardware was removed. The outcome of the third patient was uneventfully until a non-union was noticed 8 months after osteosynthesis. The patient was not re-operated. Implant was removed in 4 patients. After the index operation results were good to excellent in 11 (45.8%) patients and considered as fair or failure in 13 (54.2%). The main drawback of the CBP which is not a fixed-angle device is the varus deformity. Varus angulation rate of 20.8% in our series falls within the range reported by literature varying from 16.7% to 42%. Therefore this implant is not frequently used. Of a total of 60 fractures in the series of Siliski et al, CBP is readily available and suitable for severely comminuted fractures especially when the fracture line is very low, rendering difficult the fixation of the distal fragment to a plate with at least one cancellous screw. Alternatives overcoming varus angulation include modification of the angulation of screws, This is in line with report by Bolhofner et al. All these factors explained the knee stiffness observed in the current study. Delay in the management was another weak point of the current study. Patients presented to hospital as soon as possible but their surgical intervention was not performed from their admission for socioeconomic and logistic reasons. One theatre was dedicated to orthopaedics. This was used to cater for both trauma and elective procedures. Planned elective lists were carried out in the morning and the rest of theatre time was used for trauma surgery. Delay was identified by Nagy et al This was a retrospective study with several surgeons performing the procedure. Clinical and radiographic evaluations were performed by the attending surgeon but not an independent examiner not involved in the patients' care. These factors are source of bias and could explain complications observed. The strength of this report relies on the advantage of this implant. It is a cost effective device requiring no special equipment. The literature review and the experience reflected in the current report have emphasized that condylar buttress plate inserted with skilled surgical technique can yield satisfactory results. The current report also identifies varus deformity as a major concern of this implant. The main finding of this study was the ensuing knee stiffness after a prolonged immobilization and delay in performing surgery and rehabilitation program due to socioeconomic and logistic reasons. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.