The Jameson Cell concept was developed by Graeme Jameson of the University of Newcastle and the technology was developed for commercial application by Mount Isa Mines Limited (MIM). Laboratory investigations highlighted significant differences between Jameson Cells and other flotation technologies. The installation of Jameson Cells in MIM’s copper concentrator in 2002 has allowed a detailed investigation of Jameson Cell fundamentals to be conducted within a mineral flotation system. On line measurements, together with non-invasive measurement techniques for detailing operation within the primary contacting zone (the downcomer) and the secondary contacting zone (the tank) has allowed a detailed review of Jameson Cell operation to be conducted. This paper shows that assumptions based on mechanical flotation cells, conventional and non-conventional flotation columns and even pneumatic flotation devices do not necessarily transfer to the Jameson Cell. The effects of feed flow rate, feed percent solids, froth depth and aeration rate are discussed in relation to the Jameson Cell downcomer residence time. Aeration effects within the Jameson Cell tank are also discussed.downcomer diameter orifice plate diameter acceleration due to gravity height of bubbly mixture within downcomer depth of downcomer immersion into pulp superficial gas velocity superficial liquid velocity downcomer length nozzle length atmospheric pressure downcomer head space pressure downcomer exit pressure gas volumetric flow liquid volumetric flow jet velocity downcomer head space vacuum air void fraction air to pulp ratio gas viscosity liquid viscosity downcomer feed density downcomer bubbly mixture density liquid density surface tension downcomer residence time tank residence time The Jameson Cell was a joint development between Mount Isa Mines and Prof. G.J. Jameson of the University of Newcastle, Australia ( A review by In terms of “classic” fundamental parameters such as tank residence time and superficial air velocity the Jameson Cell can not be easily grouped with either flotation columns or mechanical flotation cells. The most likely category for the Jameson Cell would be that of recent pneumatic flotation cells such as the air sparged hydrocyclone or Centriflot. Common features include small tank residence times, high concentrate production rates and a high shear rate to produce very fine bubbles. The Jameson Cell however operates with no compressed air input and the vacuum developed within the downcomer produces interactions unlike conventional pneumatic devices. The principles of Jameson Cell operation have been discussed by numerous authors including The downcomer is where primary contacting of bubbles and particles occurs. Feed pulp is pumped into the downcomer through an orifice plate, creating a high-pressure jet. The plunging jet of liquid shears and then entrains air, which has been naturally aspirated. Due to a high mixing velocity and a large interfacial area there is rapid contact and collection of particles. The tank pulp zone is where secondary contacting of bubbles and particles occurs and bubbles disengage from the pulp. The aerated mixture exits the downcomer and enters the pulp zone of the flotation tank. The velocity of the mixture and large density differential between it and the remainder of pulp in the tank results in recirculating fluid patterns, keeping particles in suspension without the need for mechanical agitation. The tank froth zone is where entrained materials are removed from the froth by froth drainage and/or froth washing. Investigation into Jameson Cell operation was conducted in the copper concentrator at Mount Isa Mines. Preliminary operation was conducted with a 100 mm diameter downcomer in a 500 mm diameter Jameson Cell in a water frother system. This was compared with operation in a 250 mm diameter downcomer as a check on downcomer model validity. Operation was also conducted with the 100 mm downcomer treating chalcopyrite ore to determine the effects of pulp flow variation/tank residence time on recovery. Further operation was conducted using 250 mm diameter downcomers treating either smelter slag or talc prefloat concentrate to determine the effect of pulp density on downcomer operation. During operation on talc flotation a variable flotation area was used to maintain froth zone Critical downcomer parameters, which were measured during experimentation, included the downcomer vacuum, air flow rate, downcomer feed pressure and the pulp density. As the different investigations operated with differing downcomer configurations the air flow rate tended to be cell and duty specific. As such an air to pulp ratio was calculated for each specific test case. When plotted against the corresponding vacuum in the downcomer this provided a series of curves that were distinct for each application. The air to pulp ratio versus vacuum curves for the investigation are shown in Measurements were transmitted to the Yokagowa operating system and stored within the PI data management software for analysis. To determine contact volume within the downcomer an ultrasonic flow meter was used. The meter produced a distinct variation in signal strength between different zones within the downcomer allowing an accurate bubbly mixture height within the downcomer to be measured. Aeration effects within the tank were determined by removing pulp under vacuum and measuring the void fraction within a known volume. Plotting of tank void fractions was done using Origin 6.0 statistical software. The classical approach to flotation cell residence time refers to tank residence time,  One important consideration in regard to the Jameson Cell is to clearly define between operation within the downcomer and operation within the Jameson Cell tank. Unlike flotation tanks the contact volume within the downcomer is variable. The relationship between downcomer variables and the height of the bubbly mixture within the downcomer can be derived from the conservation of momentum equation around the downcomer. This states that the momentum of material entering the downcomer is equivalent to the momentum of material exiting the downcomer plus any momentum gain and minus any momentum loss within the downcomer, i.e. δ( As described by The downcomer residence time, Initial validation with a 100 mm diameter downcomer indicated that the assumption that the density within the tank was the same as the feed density of the liquid and that tank dynamics, other than depth of immersion do not affect the downcomer was flawed. The rise of air bubbles around the downcomer resulted in a reduction of density and hence affected the pressure acting on the downcomer from within the tank. It was found that frother concentration and the pulp flow through the downcomer affected the density of the mixture within the tank in the immediate vicinity of the downcomer. The relationship between the downcomer void ( Further comparison of calculated and experimental results shows that the model was inaccurate at high bubbly mixture heights. This appears due to the model allowing a downcomer of infinite length allowing an infinite height of the bubbly mixture, The relationship between Variation in flotation tank volume provides an initial simple comparison of downcomer and Jameson Cell tank residence times. Reduction in tank volume through alteration in the cross-sectional area will result in a linear decrease in tank residence time, at a fixed flow. In terms of downcomer residence time a change in tank cross-sectional area does not effect any of the variables referred to in Eq. Reduction in tank volume by a reduction in height once again results in a linear decrease in tank residence time. For purposes of predicting the downcomer residence time the height of the tank has been “reduced” by increasing the froth depth, as shown in Altering the aeration rate to the downcomer has a more complex effect on the momentum balance, bubbly mixture height within the downcomer and hence the downcomer residence time. An increase in an increase in total flow to the downcomer leading to a decrease in an increase in an increase in downcomer a decrease in an increase in The major variables used for predicting the effect of aeration rate on the downcomer residence time are shown in In the “classic” case of tank residence time the Jameson Cells have a residence time of between 1.20 and 1.55 min with no air addition. As the air rate is increased the available residence time volume decreases due to the presence of air voidage and the tank residence time shows a thirteen percent decrease at an air to pulp ratio of 0.6. A similar rate of decrease is predicted within the downcomer at lower air rates. It is evident that higher aeration rates to a Jameson Cell has a more significant effect on the downcomer residence time than on the tank residence time. Of interest is the downcomer residence time for copper slag flotation. This operation shows a residence time significantly below the others and also exhibits a dramatic decrease in downcomer residence time at an air to pulp ratio of 0.35. Slag flotation results in formation of a dry, brittle froth, which leads to an increase in instability within the downcomer. Above an air to pulp ratio of 0.3 stable operation cannot be maintained and the bubbly mixture within the downcomer begins to collapse. Altering the pulp flow to the downcomer, without changing the aeration rate also has a significant effect on the momentum balance and the downcomer residence time. An increase in an increase in total flow to the downcomer leading to a decrease in a decrease in an increase in downcomer an increase in an increase in a decrease in The major variables used for predicting this effect of pulp flow rate on the downcomer residence time are shown in The first item of note is that for the downcomer residence time no data points exist below a pulp flow of 40 m An alternative method of increasing pulp flow to a Jameson Cell is by increasing the diameter of the orifice plate. Operation of the Jameson Cell on slag flotation allowed measurement of the downcomer bubbly mixture height to be conducted from pulp densities ranging from 1.000 to 1.644 kg/l. It was found that up to a pulp density of 1.356 kg/l (37% solids) the calculated downcomer height agreed with that measured, In terms of the effect of pulp density between 1.000 and 1.400 kg/l on residence time it can be seen that varying the pulp density between 1.000 and 1.400 kg/l while maintaining the air and pulp flow rates constant has no effect on the tank residence time, but has resulted in a 10% decrease in the downcomer residence time, Detailed evaluation of the effect of downcomer residence time on the recovery within the downcomer is yet to be conducted. As an initial evaluation the average downcomer residence time for a series of tests were compared against recovery. The duty used was flotation of talc concentrate. The talc present was naturally hydrophobic and freely liberated allowing the effects of collectors and liberation to largely be ignored. The Jameson Cell used in the prefloat circuit also operated with a variable concentrate launder which allowed froth area manipulation so that the Flotation equipment such as mechanical flotation cells and flotation columns are commonly designed to provide even dispersal of bubbles within the pulp zone of the tank. The mapping of void fraction in the volume surrounding the downcomer for air to pulp ratios of 0.3, 0.54, and 0.94 shows that this is not the case for the Jameson Cell, In terms of operation within the Jameson Cell, tank void fraction measurements show that bubble patterns in general form a central, air swept cone surrounding each downcomer, as described by Taggart in 1945. The Jameson Cell tank contains areas of high, localised air void throughout the pulp zone. The rising swarm of bubbles is governed by a number of factors including recirculating patterns within the tank, pulp flow volumes and air flow volumes. Should the copper recovery results in Low recoveries at low tank residence times are due to fluid patterns within the tank resulting in mineral laden bubbles being drawn to tailing, under high flow conditions. The maximum recovery is due to optimum downcomer performance. The decrease in recovery after this point is due to instability within the downcomer caused by low flow. Jameson Cell recovery is largely insensitive to tank residence time but can be affected by the downcomer residence time. Altered fluid patterns within the Jameson Cell tank can effect recovery. The downcomer residence time is affected by a significant amount of operating variables and can be modelled using the momentum balance around the downcomer as a basis. The model successfully scales up from 100 mm diameter pilot downcomers to 250 mm diameter production downcomers. Above a pulp density of 1.356 kg/l measured results deviate from predicted results, until at a pulp density of 1.7 kg/l collapse of the model occurs. The authors would like to thank Mount Isa Mines Limited, MIM Process Technologies and the University of Queensland for permission to publish this paper. The assistance of Hydrometallurgy Research Laboratories is also acknowledged. One of the authors (GJH) is a recipient of an Australian Postgraduate Research Award (Industry) scholarship.