The present investigation deals with carrier-facilitated membrane transport of chromium (VI) from chloride media across a flat-sheet supported liquid membrane (FSSLM) using as organic reagent the phosphine oxide, Cyanex 923. The permeation of Cr (VI) has been studied under various experimental conditions: stirring speed of the source phase, initial metal and carrier concentrations, organic phase diluent, HCl concentration in the source phase, composition of the stripping phase and support characteristics. The mass transfer coefficient was calculated as 67 μm/s and the thickness of the aqueous boundary layer was calculated to be 15 μm. Chromium permeation and thus speciation across the membrane was also investigated, and the order found was: CrO4
                     2−=Cr2O7
                     2−>Cr3+.Membrane technologies are one of the most important topics in today's research, with sales of membrane systems expected to reach $1.5×10 These techniques have been extensively used in separation science, including metal recovery from pregnant and waste solutions, winning of precious and strategic metals from neutral waters, and treatment of effluents which include, e.g. toxic metals. Among LMs, supported liquid membranes (SLMs) techniques in flat-sheet (FSSLM), hollow fibre (HFSLM) and spiral wound configurations are gaining considerable importance due to their application in the recovery and separation of metals from aqueous phases The use of SLMs technologies on Cr (VI) has been considered before, with quaternary ammonium salts being the carriers most widely used In the present work, Cr (VI) permeation results through an FSSLM impregnated with the commercially available phosphine oxide Cyanex 923 are presented. All the chemicals used were of AR grade. The analytical grade diluents, cumene, xylene and toluene were obtained from Fluka and used as such. The phosphine oxide, Cyanex 923, was obtained from Cytec (Canada) and was also used without further purification. Its main characteristics have been published elsewhere Batch FSSLM measurements were performed in a two-compartment permeation cell which consisted of a source phase (200 mL) separated from a stripping phase chamber (200 mL) by a LM having an effective membrane area of 11.33 cm The organic membrane phase was prepared by dissolving Cyanex 923 in the organic diluent to obtain carrier solution of different concentrations. The polymeric supports were impregnated with the carrier solutions containing the extractant in xylene, cumene or toluene by immersion for 24 h, then leaving them to drip for a few seconds before being placed in the FSSLM cell. The physical characteristics of the support are summarized in The influence of the stirring speed on the permeability of Cr (VI) using Cyanex 923 in xylene is shown in This study was carried out using NaCl or HCl solutions as the stripping phase for Cr (VI) and the results obtained are shown in  The results concerning transport of Cr (VI) from the source phase to the stripping phase at various Cyanex 923 concentrations revealed no significant change in the permeation coefficient To study the influence of the HCl concentration in the source phase, a number of experiments were conducted at various acid concentrations, maintaining the carrier concentration in the membrane constant. The results are shown in Two membranes with different chemical compositions, thickness ( As in conventional solvent extraction, in LM processing, the membrane diluent should affect the metal transport and the membrane performance. It has been suggested that the polarity of the diluent is the most decisive factor to determine effectiveness as a membrane medium The permeability behaviour of Cr (VI) using various diluents is presented in To study the influence of the oxidation state and the species, in which chromium is present in the source phase, on the metal permeation, experiments were conducted using two sources of Cr (VI): Cr Cyanex 923 in xylene can be used effectively as carrier in Cr (VI) transport through a FSSLM. Metal permeation is influenced by the stirring speed of the source phase and the HCl concentration of this phase, whereas it is only slightly influenced by the organic diluent and the composition of the stripping phase. The metal flux increases with the initial metal concentration but tends to be constant at higher metal concentrations; from experimental results, the mass transfer coefficient in the aqueous phase is found to be 67 μm/s, and the thickness of the aqueous boundary layer 15 μm. Cr (VI) is transported preferably to Cr (III); thus, the separation of these metal species is possible using the present system. Transport resistance due to diffusion by the aqueous source boundary layer (s/μm) Thickness of the aqueous source boundary layer (μm) Average aqueous diffusion coefficient of the chromium-containing species (m Thickness of the membrane (μm) Tortuosity of the membrane Membrane porosity (%) Permeability flux (mol/m We thank the Comunidad de Madrid (Spain) for support through the project 07M/0053/1998. Thanks also to Mr. Bascones and Mr. López for assistance in the experimental and analytical work.