Copper slag, which is produced during pyrometallurgical production of copper from copper ores contains materials like iron, alumina, calcium oxide, silica etc. For every tonne of metal production about 2.2 ton of slag is generated. Dumping or disposal of such huge quantities of slag cause environmental and space problems. During the past two decades attempts have been made by several investigators and copper producing units all over the world to explore the possible utilisation of copper slag. The favourable physico-mechanical characteristics of copper slag can be utilised to make the products like cement, fill, ballast, abrasive, aggregate, roofing granules, glass, tiles etc. apart from recovering the valuable metals by various extractive metallurgical routes. This paper gives a review of characteristics of copper slag as well as various processes such as pyro, hydro and combination of pyro-hydrometallurgical methods for metal recovery and preparation of value added products from copper slag.Since the beginning of the industrial era, slags the glassy materials left over when metals are pyrometallurgically extracted from ores, have been considered waste. One such material is copper slag which is produced during matte smelting and converting steps of pyrometallurgical production of copper. During matte smelting two separate liquid phases: copper-rich matte (sulphides) and slag (oxides) are formed. It has been estimated that for every tonne of copper production about 2.2 ton of slag is generated and in each year, approximately 24.6 million ton of slag is generated from world copper production. The major slag producing regions with quantities is given in Recovery of copper at high temperature takes place by the process of smelting followed by converting. Major constituents of a smelting charge are sulphides and oxides of iron and copper. The charge also contains oxides such as Al The equilibrium constant for In the ore the oxides and sulphides combine covalently to form Cu–Fe–O–S phase in the absence of silica. During smelting when silica is added, it combines with the oxides to form strongly bonded silicate anions which group together to form slag phase. The sulphide shows no tendency to form these anion complexes and hence they remain as distinct covalent matte phase, quite dissimilar to the silicate slag. Silica is added directly for the most complete isolation of copper in the matte which occurs at near saturation concentration with SiO Some physical and mechanical properties of copper slag is shown in The air-cooled and granulated copper slag have a number of favourable mechanical properties for aggregate use, including excellent soundness characteristics, good abrasion resistance, and good stability. It has high friction angle due to sharp angular shape. However, the slag tend to be vitreous or ‘glassy,’ which adversely affects their frictional properties (skid resistance), a potential problem if used in pavement surfaces. Chemical analysis of various copper slags are shown in Microscopic observations indicate most of the copper slags are well crystallised. In addition to iron oxides, other oxides such as silica, alumina, lime and magnesia constitute 95% or more of the total oxides. Composition of some of the slag phases obtained by Quantitative Electron Microprobe analyses ( The TG/DTA tests on copper slag ( The exothermic peaks at 516 and 767 Various methods of recovering copper from the copper smelter slags with attention given to pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical, and mixed pyro and hydrometallurgical processes was briefly reviewed by One of the methods of processing copper slag is based on carbothermic reduction which involves recovery of the metals and also part of the iron yielding finally an iron rich alloy. The alloy is processed for the recovery of copper and cobalt. At the end of the treatment, iron which forms the major constituent of the slag usually remains as a residue (Fe The copper slag generated at Kure, has been investigated by The recovery of copper by flotation method from secondary copper slag is an alternate route ( Characterization studies on the tailings of the slag flotation mill from the Khetri Copper Project in Rajasthan ( The White Pine Copper Div. (Copper Range Co.) has developed a variety of ways ( Since the metals present in the slag are very minor amount, their recovery may not be economical by many processes. Therefore, its use in the production of different value added products like abrasive tools, pavement, abrasive, concrete, cutting tools, tiles, glass, roofing granules, cement, asphalt concrete aggregate etc. was explored. Utilisation of granulated copper slag as a ceramic raw material, especially its use as a component in ceramic binders was investigated by Copper slag was characterised by Copper slag was used A comparative studies on the application of grinding wheels made of copper slag and those made of polyurethane resins was carried out by The freely solidifying copper slag obtained as a waste material from a high temperature copper process was investigated for its use as abrasive ( The possibility of utilisation of freely solidifying copper slag as an abrasive was indicated by Minerals Research and Recovery, Arizona, USA manufactured a loose grained abrasive (sharpshot) from an air-cooled slag from a plant of Ajo, Arizona. These abrasives are very consistent in its composition and physical properties and are reported to be environmentally safe (<0.1% free silica). The use of copper slag aggregates in hot mix asphalt pavements was investigated by Transportation Research Board, Washington ( American concrete institute ( Investigation on the use of slag from copper smelting as fine aggregate in concrete was made by Studies on the mechanical attributes of the epoxide and epoxide-asphalt concretes filled with used abrasive of the post-copper slag was carried out by Utilisation of slag in cement raw material, Portland cement replacement in concrete, fill and ballast was investigated by ( Copper slag was used as fine aggregate for concrete by Use of copper slag as filler instead of conventional lithophone filler was investigated ( Use of copper slag in the production of tiles was reported by Iranian copper slag was used in formulating unglazed floor tiles ( In firing mutual diffusion of atoms between touching particles takes place, which is also known as sintering. As a result of sintering the particles become fewer and larger and pores are eliminated. Strength in fired body is due to interlocking of crystal. The principle behind fast-firing is that one can promote densification by bypassing the coarsening regime with rapid heating. It enables the material to obtain the mechanical characteristics required for the different uses and the properties of chemical inertia ( Copper slags was utilised for the manufacturing of coloured glasses by Copper slags have been used as granular base and embankment materials, aggregate substitutes in hot mix asphalt, mine backfill materials, railway ballast materials, grit blast abrasives, roofing granule material, and in the manufacturing of blended cements (granulated copper slags) ( Copper slags have been used as aggregate substitutes in hot mix paving. Air-cooled slags can be used as coarse or fine aggregate, while granulated slags can be used as fine aggregate ( Use of copper slag (15% mass) as a Portland cement replacement was reported by Favourable physico-mechanical and chemical characteristics of copper slag lead to its utilisation to prepare various value added products such as cement, fill, ballast, abrasive, cutting tools, aggregate, roofing granules, glass, tiles etc. These materials have been found to be possessing superior mechanical properties and they may be of cheaper varieties than the similar conventional materials. The utilisation of copper slag in such manners may reduce the cost of disposal. This may also leads to less environmental problems. Improvement in plant economics may also be expected. Metals and alloys can also be produced from the copper slag by various pyro, hydro and pyro-hydrometallurgical routes. Therefore, it is evident that judicial utilisation of different types of copper slag is of prime importance in the present days industrial waste management.