Mimicking native extracellular matrix with electrospun porous bio-composite nanofibrous scaffolds has huge potential in bone tissue regeneration. The aim of this study is to fabricate porous poly(l-lactic acid)-co-poly-(ε-caprolactone)/silk fibroin/ascorbic acid/tetracycline hydrochloride (PLACL/SF/AA/TC) and nanohydroxyapatite (n-HA) was deposited by calcium-phosphate dipping method for bone tissue engineering (BTE). Fabricated nanofibrous scaffolds were characterized for fiber morphology, hydrophilicity, porosity, mechanical test and chemical properties by FT-IR and EDX analysis. The results showed that the fiber diameter and pore size of scaffolds observed around 228±62–320±22nm and 1.5–6.9μm respectively. Resulting nanofibrous scaffolds are highly porous (87–94%) with ultimate tensile strength observed in the range of 1.51–4.86MPa and also showed better hydrophilic properties after addition of AA, TC and n-HA. Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) cultured on these bio-composite nanofibrous scaffolds and stimulated to osteogenic differentiation in the presence of AA/TC/n-HA for BTE. The cell proliferation and biomaterial interactions were studied using MTS assay, SEM and CMFDA dye exclusion methods. Osteogenic differentiation of MSCs was proven by using alkaline phosphatase activity, mineralization and double immunofluorescence staining of both CD90 and osteocalcin. The observed results suggested that the fabricated PLACL/SF/AA/TC/n-HA biocomposite hybrid nanofibrous scaffolds have good potential for the differentiation of MSCs into osteogenesis for bone tissue engineering.Biomimetic nanofibrous scaffolds mimicking the important features of native extracellular matrix (ECM) offer a positive approach to repair functions or complete favorable reactions for tissue regeneration. The prevalence of many bone deficiencies particularly massive bone defects due to trauma, infections, cancer or genetic malformations, presents a major task for clinicians Poly( Poly( The fiber morphology was observed under field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, FEI-QUANTA 200F, Netherland) at an accelerating voltage of 10 Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) obtained from Lonza, Singapore and cultured in DMEM having 10% FBS with 1% antibiotic–antimycotic formulation (100 Cell proliferation on the nanofibrous scaffolds was determined using the colorimetric MTS assay (cell titer 96 Aqueous one solution Promega, Madison, WI). The reduction of yellow tetrazolium salt [3-(4,5- dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2 (4 sulfophenyl)-2H tetrazolium] in MTS to generate purple formazan crystals by dehydrogenase enzymes secreted by mitochondria of metabolically active cells. The formazan crystal dye shows an absorbance at 490 Cell morphology was observed using FESEM (Hitachi S4300, FESEM). After 21 Alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP) of MSC differentiation into osteogenic lineages was measured by using alkaline phosphate yellow liquid substrate system for ELISA (Sigma Life Sciences, USA). In this reaction, ALP catalyzes hydrolysis of colorless organic phosphate ester substrate, p-nitrophenyl phosphate (PNPP) to a yellow product p-nitrophenol and phosphate. The scaffold constructs were rinsed with PBS and then 400 Alizarin red-S (ARS) is dye that binds selectively to calcium salts is used to determine and quantify mineralization of differentiated osteogenic cells. On days 14 and 21, the scaffolds seeded with MSCs were rinsed in PBS and fixed in 70% chilled ethanol for 60 The osteogenic differentiation of MSCs was proved using immunofluorescence staining by using both MSC specific marker protein CD90 and osteoblast specific marker protein osteocalcin (OCN). After 21 Experiments were run in triplicates and the data presented were expressed as mean Electrospinning method experienced an up-thrust in recent years for its ability to generate biomimetic hybrid nanofibrous substrates for tissue engineering to achieve native scaffold features like porosity, interconnected pores and large surface area In order to stimulate tissue growth, the scaffold must have a large surface area, optimum pore size and an interconnected pore network for cells adhesion and proliferation The chemical characteristics of functional groups on the bio-composite nanofibrous scaffolds were analyzed using FT-IR as shown in Scaffold properties play an important role in regulating cell growth, morphology and intracellular interactions. Cell behavior such as adhesion and proliferation characterizes the early stage of cell–scaffold interaction that consequently influences differentiation and mineralization The FESEM image of MSCs in CMFDA compounds have a group of chloromethyl derivative for the classification of active cells in vitro An active nanofibrous scaffold must have organic and inorganic components of ordinary tissues to support cell growth. ALP is a key component of bone matrix vesicles because of its role in the development of apatite calcium phosphate and also as a primary indicator of immature osteoblast activity Calcium mineralization was determined qualitatively as shown in EDX results indicated the occurrence of greater amounts of calcium and phosphorous deposition in PLACL/SF/AA/TC/n-HA nanofibrous scaffolds as compared to PLACL scaffolds as shown in Osteocalcin (OCN) plays a key role in regulating mineralization as it has glutamic acid rich regions with strong binding attraction to both Ca Electrospun bio-composite PLACL/SF/AA/TC/n-HA nanofibrous scaffolds have potential tensile properties, biocompatibility and bio-composition similar to that of the bone matrix. The interconnecting porous structures of the bio-composite nanofibrous scaffolds provided more structural space for the proliferation and mineralization of MSCs permitting efficient exchange of nutrients and metabolic wastes. The significance of this study resides in the use of bioactive macromolecules SF/AA/TC/n-HA that have been introduced into the polymeric nanofiber which increases specific biological functions like adhesion, proliferation, differentiation and mineralization in bone tissue regeneration. Bio-composites of PLACL/SF/AA/TC/n-HA nanofibrous substrate have different pore structures and the loose peripheral areas of scaffolds are favorable for cell infiltration. The hybrid nanofibrous scaffold provides sufficient space for MSC growth and differentiation into osteogenic lineage for in vitro bone tissue formation. Therapeutic applications of MSCs cultured on PLACL/SF/AA/TC/n-HA nanofibrous scaffolds hold great potential for cellular activities ranging from cell proliferation, differentiation to mineralization for the treatment of bone defects in bone tissue engineering. This work was supported by