This paper represents the result of a project conducted with developing a safe, practical and economical support system for engineering workings. In rock engineering, untensioned, fully cement-grouted rock bolts have been used for many years. However, there is only limited information about the action and the pull-out load capacity of rock bolts, and the relationship between bolt–grout or grout–rock and the influence of the grout properties on the pull-out load capacity of a rock bolt. The effect of grout properties on the ultimate bolt load capacity in a pull-out test has been investigated in order to evaluate the support effect of rock bolts. Approximately 80 laboratory rock bolt pull-out tests in basalt blocks have been carried out in order to explain and develop the relations between the grouting materials and untensioned, fully grouted rock bolts. The effects of the mechanical properties of grouting materials on the pull-out load capacity of a fully grouted bolt have been qualified and a number of empirical formulae have been developed for the calculating of the pull-out load capacity of the fully cement-grouted bolts on the basis of the shear strength, the uniaxial compressive strength of the grouting material, the bolt length, the bolt diameter, the bonding area and the curing time of the grouting material.In rock engineering, rock bolts have been used to stabilise openings for many years. The rock bolting system may improve the competence of disturbed rock masses by preventing joint movements, forcing the rock mass to support itself ( Generally rock bolts can be used to increase the support of low forces due to the diameter and the strength of the bolt materials. They enable high anchoring velocity to be used at closer spacing between bolts. Their design provides either mechanical clamping or cement grouting against the rock ( Anchorage system of rock bolt is normally made of solid or tube formed steel installed untensioned or tensioned in the rock mass ( A grouted rock bolt (dowel) is a fully grouted rock bolt without mechanical anchor, usually consisting of a ribbed reinforcing bar, installed in a drill hole and bonded to the rock over its full length ( Grouted bolts are widely used in mining for the stabilisation of tunnelling, mining roadway, drifts and shafts for the reinforcing of its peripheries. Simplicity of installation, versatility and relatively low cost of rebars are further benefits of grouted bolts is comparison to their alternative counterparts ( Bolts are self-tensioning when the rock starts to move and dilate. They should therefore be installed as soon as possible after excavation, before the rock has started to deform, and before it has lost its interlocking and shear strength. Although several grout types are available, in many applications where the rock has a measure of short term stability, simple Portland cement-grouted reinforcing dowels are sufficient. They can be installed by filling the drill hole with lean, quickly set mortar into which the bar is driven. The dowel is retained in up holes either by a cheap form of end anchor, or by packing the drill hole collar with cotton waste, steel wool, or wooden wedges ( Concrete grouted bolts use cement mortar as a bonding medium. In drill holes at minimum of 15° below the horizontal plane, the mortar can simply poured in, whereas in raising drill holes (roof anchoring) various design of bolts or other equipment is used to prevent the pumped mortar from flowing out ( The load bearing capacity of fully cement-grouted rock bolts depends on the bolt shape, the bolt diameter, the bolt length, rock and grout strength. The bond strength of fully cement-grouted rock bolts is primarily frictional and depends on the shear strength at the bolt–grout or grout–rock interface. Thus any changes in this interfaces shear strength must affect the bolt bond strength and bolt load capacity. This laboratory testing program was executed to evaluate the shear strength effect on the bond strength of the bolt–grout interface of a threaded bar and the laboratory test results confirm the theory. The effectiveness of a grouted bolt depends on its length relative to the extent of the zone of overstressed rock or yield zone. The shear and axial stress distributions of a grouted bolt are also related to the bolt length because equilibrium must be achieved between the bolt and the surrounding ground ( Bearing capacities of cement-grouted rock bolts ( The maximum (ultimate) bearing capacity of the bolt ( Bearing capacities of all type bolts must also be evaluated from the view point of the tensile strength of the bolt material ( The pull-out tests were conducted on rebars, grouted into basalt blocks with cement mortar in laboratory. The relations between bolt diameter ( The samples consisted of rebars (ranging 10–18 mm diameters two by two) bonded into the basalt blocks. These basalt blocks used have a Young's modulus of 27.6 GPa and a uniaxial compressive strength (UCS The test set-up is illustrated schematically in After filling prepared grout mortar into the hole, bolt is inserted to the centre of drilling hole. After curing time, the rebars in the rock were axially loaded and the load was gradually increased until the bolt failed. The bond strength (τ Pull-out tests were repeated for various grout types, bolt dimensions and curing times. The influence of the bolt diameter and the bond area on the bond strength of a rock bolt can be formulated as follows ( Bolt diameters of 10, 12, 14, 16 and 18 mm were used in pull-out tests. Typical results are represented in (1) The maximum pull-out load ( (2) Bolt section depends upon bolt diameter. The relation between bolt diameter and bolt bearing capacity can be explained as follow empiric formulae ( (3) The values of bolt bond strength were calculated between 5.68 and 5.96 MPa ( Bolt lengths of 15.0, 24.7, 27.0, 30.0 and 32.0 cm were used in pull-out tests as seen in (1) The pull-out force of a bolt increases linearly with the embedded length of the bolt. (2) Maximum pull-out strength of a bolt is limited to the ultimate strength of the bolt shank. The water to cement ratio should be no greater than 0.40 by weight; too much water greatly reduces the long-term strength. Because, part of the mixing water is consumed by the hydration of cement used. Rest of the mixing water evaporates and then capillary porosities exist which results in unhomogenities internal structure of mortar. Thus, this structure reduces the long-term strength by irregular stress distribution ( The water to cement ratio ( The bond strength of fully cement-grouted rock bolts is primarily frictional and depends on the shear strength at the bolt–grout or grout–rock interface. Thus any change in this shear strength of interfaces affects the bolt bond strength and load capacity. The influences of mechanical properties of grouting materials on the bearing capacity of bolt can be described as follows: (1) The uniaxial compressive and shear strength of the grouting materials has an important role on the behaviour of rock bolts. It was observed that increasing shear strength of the grouting material logarithmically increases bolt bond strength as shown in (2) (3) In An important problem in the application of cement-grouted bolts is the setting time of the mortar, which strongly affects the stabilizing ability of bolt. Cement-grouted dowels cannot be used for immediate support because of the time needed for the cement to set and harden ( In the pull-out tests, eight group of bolts having same length and mortar with a water to cement ratio of 0.4 were used for determining the effects of curing time on the bolt bond strength. Each group of rock bolt testing was performed after different setting times ( Rock bolts may lose their supporting ability because of yielding of bolt material, failure at the bolt–grout or grout–rock interface, and unravelling of rock between bolts. However, laboratory tests and field observations suggest that the most dominant failure mode is shear at the bolt–grout interface ( The laboratory investigation showed that the bolt capacity depends basically on the mechanical properties of grouting materials which can be changed by water to cement ratio, mixing time, additives, and curing time. Increasing the bolt diameter and length increases the bolt bearing capacity. However, this increase is limited to the ultimate tensile strength of the bolt materials. Mechanical properties of grouting materials have an important role on the bolt bearing capacity. It is offered that the optimum water to cement ratio must be 0.34–0.4 and the mortar have to be well mixed before poured into drill hole. Improving the mechanical properties of the grouting material increases the bolt bearing capacity logarithmically. The best relationship was observed between grout shear strength and bolt bond strength. Increasing the curing time increases the bolt bond strength. Bolt bond strength of 19 kg/cm Bond failure in the pull-out test occurred between the bolt and cement grout, of which the mechanical behaviour is observed by shear spring. This explains the development of bolt bond strength and the failure at the bolt–grout interface considering that the bond strength is created as a result of shear strength between bolt and grout. This means that any change at the grout strength causes to the changing of bolt capacity. The failure mechanism in a pull-out test was studied in order to clarify the bond effect of rock bolt. Thus one main bond effect was explained from bond strength of rock bolts. The authors would like to thank the Research Fund of Cukurova University for supporting this research. No. FBE.2000.YL.50.