Hybrid external fixators are useful for the management of complex tibial plateau and plafond fractures, as they provide rigid fixation with relatively minimal soft tissue disruption. We reviewed the outcomes of patients with proximal (plateau) and distal (plafond) tibial fractures who were treated with hybrid frames at the Royal North Shore Hospital from 1998 to 2001. Twenty-four patients were identified from the hospital operating records and chart, X-ray and clinical reviews were performed. Follow-up periods averaged 13 months. Fractures were classified using the Ruedi classification for ankle fractures, and the Schatzker classification for the knee fractures. Clinical outcome was assessed using the Iowa knee score and the AOFAS ankle score. As one of the first Australian audits our outcomes were consistent with international standards.Fractures of the tibial plateau and plafond are often high-energy injuries with extensive comminution and metaphyseal–diaphyseal disassociation Hybrid external fixators are extremely useful in this setting. The hybrid frame is a combination of traditional diaphyseal half pins seen in conventional external fixators, with periarticular tensioned fine wires attached to a ring. The periarticular fine wires allow rigid fixation of small pieces of cancellous bone and intra-articular fractures, minimal soft tissue disruption, easy wound surveillance, early joint mobilisation and weight bearing. The can be used in addition to percutaneous or limited open reduction and internal fixation. The universal joints and bars can be modified to suit individual patients and subsequent adjustments can be made easily ( The indications, surgical techniques and early follow-up results have been well described. The Ruedi and Schatzker X-ray classification systems and the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) and Iowa clinical scores were used to measure outcome. These methods are widely used and validated in the literature. The experience at the Royal North Shore Hospital is reported. This level three trauma hospital in Sydney has a catchment of approximately 750,000 people for major trauma, due to its role as the trauma referral centre to the Northern Area Health Service and regional New South Wales. The hybrid frame was introduced to this hospital in 1998 and the numbers of patients treated with this method has increased over the years. Initially the ACE-Fisher Royal North Shore Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee approval and patient consent was obtained for this study. From 1998 to 2001, the Royal North Shore Hospital operating theatre database identified 24 consecutive patients treated with hybrid external fixation. All patients treated were included in this study. Patients who were initially managed operatively at another hospital or had failed internal fixation were not included in the study. All surgeons used the techniques of fine wire insertion through safe tissue corridors as described by Reid et al. Hospital operation reports, progress notes and outpatient clinic entries were reviewed retrospectively. Details recorded included patient demographics, mechanism and severity of injury and other additional injuries. Operative details recorded included the use of additional limited internal fixation and bone graft. Post-operative details included complications, further procedures and adjustments to the frame, time in fixation, time to fracture union and incidence of failure of external fixation with subsequent internal fixation or cast bracing. Two investigators reviewed all X-rays and classified the fractures in this study to minimise intraobserver variability. The Ruedi and Schatzker X-ray classification systems were used for ankle and knee fractures, respectively. Initial post-operative films and most recent films were assessed for fracture alignment and joint congruence. Alignment of >6 varus or valgus was considered a poor radiological outcome. The patients were recalled to the outpatient clinic using the contact details in the hospital records. In the event that patients were unable to attend clinic, home visits were performed. A further history was taken and then clinical examination was performed. Clinical outcome was assessed using the AOFAS ankle score and IOWA knee score. The results of the study were collated and analysed in an electronic database designed to this study. Of the 24 patients identified, half were pilon fractures and half were plateau fractures. There were eight females and 16 males in our study. The mean age of the patients at the time of injury was 49.1 years. The most common mechanism of injury was road trauma. Six were pedestrians hit by cars, six were motor vehicle accidents and two were motorcycle accidents. Six patients fell off ladders, two were skiing injuries and two were simple falls. Eleven patients had open injuries, eight of which were Gustilo IIIB fractures. Eight patients had other injuries from the accident (multi-traumas). At surgery, additional limited internal fixation was used in seven plateau fractures (percutaneous cannulated screws) and five pilon fractures (two fibula plates and three patients with screw fixation) ( Post-operative complications included three pin site infections, two cases of cellulitis, one septic knee, three thombo-embolic events, three compartment syndromes and one non-union at 6 months. All complications were treated appropriately and none had residual problems. X-rays were available in 21 patients. Of the 11 ankle fractures, seven were Ruedi type I, and four were type III. Of the 10 knee fractures one was Schatzker type IV, one type IV and eight type VI. Initial post-operative films were analysed. Three patients had >6° of varus or valgus malalignment and underwent subsequent frame adjustment. At analysis of films of fracture union, four different patients had >6° of varus or valgus malalignment. All fractures had joint congruence of <2 Thirteen patients agreed and were available for clinical review. The mean follow-up period was 13 months with a range from 4 to 29 months post-operatively. The mean AOFAS score was 79.7/100 (54–100) and the mean Iowa knee score was 76.7 (51–97). Knee ROM averaged 118° (90–150). A detailed breakdown of the scores can be seen in Since 1998, the use of the hybrid frame at Royal North Shore Hospital has steadily increased due to the increasing availability of the equipment (each set costing approximately AUD$ 7500) and familiarity with indications and surgical technique. Hybrid frame fixation was well suited to our patients for the management of complex periarticular fractures, allowing management of wounds, measurement of compartment pressures and monitoring of neurovascular status. The frame also accommodated additional procedures and easy re-manipulations without major disassembly. All our complications were successfully treated without long-term sequelae. Our superficial pin tract infections were treated with oral antibiotics. Pin site infection is a well-recognised complication that can be reduced with vigilant pin site cleaning. Hutson in a meta-analysis of 16 studies with a total of 568 patients found pin site infection rates of 10% for tibial plateau fractures and 21% for pilon fractures treated with hybrid external fixation. Our study was hampered by the small number of patients and the difficulty in comparing the variation of presentations—a problem well described in the literature. No significant statistical correlation was observed between presentation and injury severity, radiological classification or deformity, and functional outcome as measured by the clinical scores. For example, in the knee group, the top score of 97 came from a Schatzker type VI patient with a residual deformity of 11° varus on his most recent film. The best ankle clinical score of 100 had a residual deformity 8° valgus on the most recent film. All but one fracture had acceptable joint congruence of <2 Clinical follow-up of all patients in the study was not possible and was expected in a hospital with a geographically large catchment area containing a mobile population. Three sets of X-rays had been checked out of the radiology department by the patients and were unable to be recovered, despite multiple attempts. Eleven patients did not present for clinical review. Nine patients were lost to follow-up due to death or moving overseas and interstate. Two patients declined to participate in our study. In conclusion, hybrid external fixation is a successful technique, which met our goals of alignment, joint congruence, ROM and other outcomes. The technique had a short learning curve and allowed good post-operative limb surveillance. As one of the first Australian studies, our findings are consistent with international standards.