As part of EU strategy to tackle climate changes, energy transition from fossil fuels to renewable resources is necessary. During the last few years, in the Republic of Croatia there is a strong tailwind towards promoting activities of geothermal energy exploration and exploitation. As geothermal sector was often neglected in a favour of petroleum business in the past, there is still a somewhat knowledge gap in groundwork related to defining geothermal resources potential. Since initial investigation related to defining hot spots in geothermal gradient were conducted more than 40 years ago, there was a need to remodel older imprecise maps with a completely new groundwork research in this area. More than 150 deep oil&gas exploration wells scattered in the Croatian part of the Pannonian Basin were elaborated. From the historical well development records and temperature measurements, obtained with different methods, a novel geothermal gradient map was constructed. Furthermore, to define local potential sites for direct heat utilization and electricity production, temperature maps were designed for a depth of 1000 and 2000 m, respectively.depth, m distance between points i and j geothermal gradient, °C/m fixed distance, lag heat transfer rate, W/m time, s time since circulation stopped, s temperature, °C thermal conductivity, W/m°C spatial width with a center at h bottomhole circulation time formation surface bottomhole temperature the Croatian part of the Pannonian Basin System Drill Stem Test Enhanced Geothermal Systems Organic Rankine Cycle root-mean-square Virgin Rock Temperature The use of geothermal potential is recognized and recommended in strategic plans and programmes in European Union (EU). After the process of updating energy goals at the end of the 2016, European Commission has published new energy legislative framework – the Clean Energy for All Europeans package. These new rules were formally adopted at the beginning of 2019 and they consist of eight different legislative acts. Most important binding target of a new framework is reaching at least 32% of renewable energy share and achieving energy efficiency target of 32,5% until 2030. Also, during December of 2019, European Green Deal was introduced to make EU climate-neutral continent by setting new growth strategy and to decarbonise energy sector based on renewable energy resources, including geothermal energy. In the new Renewable Energy Directive (EC 2018/2001) [ In the Republic of Croatia, geothermal energy exploration and prominent sites discoveries were always historically linked closely to petroleum sector activities. Exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons resources in Croatia has resulted in the drilling of more than 4000 deep wells over the last 70 years [ During the evaluation process of locating geothermal prospective sites, initial step is to investigate available maps of geothermal gradient or heat flow. Jelić [ Mapping of geothermal gradient values is recognized as a first step in determining geothermal potential of an area [ Therefore, the aim of this research is to construct a novel map of geothermal gradient and to compare the results with the previous study. Deliverables of this research will yield necessary input data during initial screening and exploration phase of the new geothermal sites. Furthermore, the geostatistical analysis used for interpolation is implemented and explained. During the next decade majority of the oil and gas wells in Croatia would need to be formally plugged and abandoned because of depletion of the existing reserves. To avoid these well assets being lost for good, their conversion to renewable source of energy is rather technically established and straightforward process, due to similarity of the production and collecting systems of petroleum and geothermal industry. Existing wells in Croatia could be used either by directly producing geothermal fluid from discovered reservoirs [ Since knowledge of geothermal gradient in certain area is of most importance when exploring geothermal reservoirs, and considering increased processes by government agencies to bring more geothermal sites into production, there was tremendous motivation to create completely new gradient map for northern part of the Croatia which would be solid foundation for all future researches in this area. The geothermal gradient is a thermogeological parameter that describes the temperature change within the Earth’s crust, which occurs due to the heat transfer process. The parameter is important when designing heating or power systems that utilize the underground as a heat source. The geothermal gradient is determined easily when two temperature values and their corresponding depths are known. The annual average surface temperature, With the current technology it not possible to directly measure the formation temperature at the static conditions [ The determination of static formation temperature is of most importance to determine the geothermal gradient. Various researchers concluded that the temperature obtained from stabilized drillstem test (DST) can be taken as a value as close as possible to the VRT. The drill stem test is a well-known method of well testing in petroleum engineering. The DST can be described as a temporary well completion which serves to sample the formation fluid and give early estimates of formation and fluid properties and give early estimation of commercial production of hydrocarbons. The tool for performing the DST isolates the zone of interest and allows the formation fluid to flow into the drill pipe or drillstem [ The most common method of correcting the bottomhole temperature due to logging with maximum thermometer is the Horner method. The method itself was derived from the same analogy of pressure build-up tests in petroleum industry. Both methods, the pressure build-up test and temperature evolution during the conductive heat transfer, have the same basis in Fourier’s diffusivity equation. Lachenbruch and Brewer [ The method of determining the virgin rock temperature, The bias and error study on different methods of correcting the BHT showed that the Horner’s method mostly underestimate VRT values when compared to methods that use a few more parameters, usually rock properties [ Obviously, the most representative data and the ones that show true static temperature can be obtained in wells with long shut-in periods. However, this data is usually very scarce, due to the fact that measurements are rarely conducted in closed and abandoned wells. For this research, only few of such type of data was identified. Because of small number of such measurement and seeing how it would not have statistical impact on the results, the data was not included in the research. The geothermal map was calculated by using geostatistical Kriging method. Geostatistical modelling is a technique of creating a model of a surface by using various geostatistical methods. Using these methods detailed models are derived by using measured or known data regarding structural settings in order to evaluate characteristics of surfaces between observed data. These methods were first used in mining industry, where wellbores/boreholes are usually close-spaced, and later in oil&gas industry, geology etc. Statistical methods are based on the assumption that individual patterns are statistically independent of each other. This type of statistical independence is not applicable on spatial data describing areas rich in minerals, oil&gas or geothermal fluid. In order to describe various spatial dependence geostatistical methods were developed [ With the Kriging method, it is possible to interpolate high-quality map data. The usual expression used to calculate values used for variogram is known as experimental semivariance [ The Kriging method is a geostatistical method of determining most favourable linear estimation, with minimal variance. It can be used on points or on blocks [ The data on selected 154 wells, located in the CPBS ( Out of 154 wells, over 60 of them had available DST data. As mentioned, the temperature obtained during the DST operations, are considered to be closest to the VRT as possible. With careful consideration when screening the DST data, some of the values were excluded due to ‘dry-runs’ or because of significant gas inflow. With this, out of 154 wells 61 of them had usable DST data. In cases when there was more than one good DST run, the values of depth and temperature were averaged, in order to have a single data for that well. The temperature data collected is seen on The geothermal gradient was calculated using equation The said ratio represents dimensionless correction factors for the 61 data sets. The correction factors, The same procedure was done for the data available for the Horner method. However, only 39 wells had good data to carry out the Horner correction of the BHT, with equations Out of the 39 wells, only 8 did not have DST data. The results of these 8 wells showed larger values of corrected temperatures, carried out with Horner’s method, in comparison with a single BHT data. The corrected values were adopted as being representative temperature data for the 8 wells. Out of 154 wells, 85 of them have only single bottomhole temperature value. Since the research showed that the temperatures obtained during the DST run show higher values than the temperatures obtained by using maximum thermometer, it was concluded that the BHT data for 85 wells can be corrected by using the factor determined by equation (6). For the remaining wells dimensionless factor The process of data collecting and calculation of geothermal gradient is shown by flow chart in Republic of Croatia can be divided into two main regions, the Pannonian Basin and Dinarides, from geological point of view. Out of these two regions the Pannonian Basin System is recognized with geothermal potential [ Geostatistics assumes that naturally occurring phenomena are spatially dependencies [ The module Geostatistical Analyst, part of the ArcGIS software, was used for geostatistical analysis and interpolation [ The data for geostatistical Kriging interpolation must follow a normal distribution. The first testing of a normal distribution is to compare mean and median values. If these values are similar, it can be interpreted as a possibility of normality in the data. For an obtained set of data, this criterion is met since the mean value is 58,818 and the median value is 57,765 ( In order to transform the data to have a normal distribution, logarithmic transformation was used. This did not produce results of good quality, therefore 15% of data with extreme values of temperature was separated. This ensured that the data had a normal distribution, as seen in The 13% of data (20 wells) are not disregarded since there is no indication that the data is corrupted. However, by using this data a good geostatistical model would be difficult to obtain. Therefore, the reduced set of data was used in order to create a variogram model for interpolation with normal distribution, as seen in The global trend of data was verified, in order to determine data that conform to normal distribution. The trend shows that the normal distribution follows a parabolic curve, in the NE-SW direction. Maximum values are located in the middle of the parabolic curve, and minimum values at both ends of it. The global trend model is used to create a geostatistical model as a polynomial curve ( By validating autocorrelation, using the semivariogram, it was determined that the spatial correlation is small and that is, by observing variogram models in every direction, similar ( Cross-validation was performed and compared on data from 134 to 154 wells ( The result obtained by cross-validation allows the assessment of whether the models and/or associated values are within acceptable limits. This means that if the mean prediction error is close to zero, the interpolated values will be close to the measured values. In case the interpolated values are closer to the measured values, the root-mean-square (RMS) prediction errors will have small values. The average RMS prediction errors are calculated as the square root of the average of the squared difference between measured values and interpolated values. If the RMS prediction error is lowest possible, then the model provides interpolated values of high accuracy. The values of the average standard error and the mean standardized prediction error should be lowest possible. Finally, the value of the RMS standardized prediction error should tend to reach 1 [ The same model was used to interpolate values of geothermal gradient and temperatures at 2000 m. All of 154 geothermal gradients were used to construct the map of gradients in the area of the CPBS. In order to smooth out the geothermal gradient contour lines at the states borders, maps of temperature at 1000 m of depth or geothermal gradient, whichever was available, from neighbouring countries were taken into account. Beside the use of smoothing the contour lines at the border, data from these countries was used in order to confirm geothermal gradient values in the bordering area. A buffer zone extending approximately 50 km into neighbouring countries is seen on the map. For Slovenia data for temperatures at 1000 m [ It can be seen form the map of geothermal gradient that the CPBS shows good potential when it comes to harnessing geothermal energy. This is especially evident in the areas where the geothermal gradient exceeds values 0,05 °C/m. When compared the previous map of Jelić et al. [ Based on the obtained geothermal gradients, temperature maps at a 1000 and 2000 m were also constructed and are seen on The map of temperatures at a depth of 1000 m is necessary for the initial screening process to determine potential of direct utilization of geothermal heat. From the map can be seen how deep wells must be constructed at certain area to directly utilize heat for example for central heating system, balneology, agriculture etc. Since CPBS does not have saturated steam geothermal sources, only geopressured geothermal aquifers are available for electricity production. The map of temperatures at a depth of 2000 m is necessary for the initial screening process to determine how deep wells must be constructed for power production with Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC). In Since the new Renewable Energy Directive (EC 2018/2001) promotes the use of geothermal energy, the need was recognized to show potential via geothermal maps. Even though the previous research was extensive, the need arose to construct new maps, since the original digital representation is considered to be lost. The data from 154 wells was gathered and analysed. The analysis showed that there were 61 usable temperature records obtained during the drill stem test, which is considered to be a very close value to the static formation temperature, if the test is carried out properly. The records from ‘dry-runs’ and with gas inflow were discarded. 8 wells were identified as having good and reliable data to perform the Horner correction on the BHT data available. These values, of temperature obtained by DST and Horner correction, were used to calculate the geothermal gradient. The remaining 85 wells had only single bottomhole temperature records. For those BHT data, a dimensionless factor, With this data the new map of geothermal gradients was constructed, by using geostatistic Kriging method of interpolation. The same method was used for the map of temperatures at 1000 and 2000 m. By comparing the newly constructed maps with the previous research, it is seen that there is a fairly good match, which confirms good geothermal potential in the Croatian part of the Pannonian Basin System. The maps of temperatures at 1000 and 2000 m show areas of potential for utilizing geothermal resource for heating or power production respectively. In future research map of geothermal gradient (or maps of temperature at a depth) can be used to analyse and select more feasible locations, especially with regard to heat demand. Since the use of geothermal energy for heating purposes is usually dependant on the distance between users and geothermal well, such analysis would show urban locations that could be among the first to prospect. Also, overlapping those favourable locations with the locations of abandoned wells (and the analysis of their respective available heating energy by using deep coaxial borehole heat exchangers) would show areas where feasible project could be developed first. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The data permission was provided by the