We reviewed the results of internal fixation in a series of 18 patients (mean age, 44.4 years; SD, 19.1 years; range, 16-81 years) with type C intraarticular fractures of the distal humerus after a mean follow-up of 24.7 months (range, 10-41 months; SD, 9.3 months). An excellent or good result was observed in 10 patients (56%), according to the rating system of the Orthopaedic Trauma Association. All patients younger than 40 years (n = 8) had an excellent or good result, whereas those rates were found in only 2 of 10 patients older than 50 years. Low range of elbow motion (extension-flexion) and, consequently, inferior postoperative score were also correlated to male sex, the triceps-splitting approach, and immobilization exceeding 3 weeks. When stability of the humeral columns is achieved and the articular platform is reconstructed, satisfactory results can be obtained, even in comminuted supracondylar fractures. However, age over 50 years, poor bone quality, and open fracture are correlated with increased risk for an inferior postoperative result. Early mobilization, when possible, and the use of an olecranon osteotomy are recommended. (J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2002;11:48-52.)An intraarticular fracture of the distal humerus is a serious injury, which often endangers the functional capacity of the affected extremity. The treatment of these fractures has been an issue of debate for decades. In the past, the use of closed reduction and immobilization was considered a substantial treatment alternative, We present a series of 18 patients with type C intraarticular fractures of the distal humerus treated operatively in our hospital. A total of 22 consecutive patients with AO/ASIF type C fractures of the distal humerus were treated operatively in our department from January 1997 to December 1999, representing 46% of all supracondylar fractures of the humerus treated during that period. Two of the 22 patients had rheumatoid arthritis, which had destroyed the affected elbow joint, and one of these patients was treated with a prosthesis shortly after a failed osteosynthesis and was excluded from the study. Of the remaining 21 patients (Table I), 8 were men (mean age, 43.3 years; SD, 16.4 years) and 13 were women (mean age, 44.5 years; SD, 19.4 years). Operative treatment was, as a rule, performed on the day of the patient's admission. Of the 21 operations, 7 (33%) were performed by a specialist in orthopaedics and traumatology, and the remainder were performed by a resident surgeon. The lateral decubitus position, with a padded sterile arm holder under the brachium, was used in 8 patients, whereas 11 patients underwent surgery in the supine position, with the affected arm hanging in a vertical position over the table. All except one of the operations were performed with a tourniquet and bloodless field. A straight midline posterior approach with a chevron-type olecranon osteotomy was used in 14 patients, and a triceps-splitting approach in 7. Data on ulnar nerve identification were available in 15 patients, and protection of the nerve was documented in 12 of these cases. Internal fixation was performed in all cases with techniques described by the AO, beginning with a reduction and reconstruction of the trochlea and the articular surface. The joint was reduced and temporarily fixed with K-wires or cannulated screw guide pins. The definitive fixation was established either with a cannulated 3.5-mm screw or by replacing the K-wire with a transcondylar 3.5-mm cortical screw (lagged or nonlagged depending on the extent of comminution) or a 4.0-mm cancellous screw. The columns were reconstructed and stabilized with 2 plates, usually a medial 3.5-mm reconstruction plate in the medial condyle and a posterior 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate or a reconstruction plate in the lateral condyle (orthogonal plate fixation). None of the patients needed a bone graft. The osteotomy of the olecranon was fixed with either a screw or 2 obliquely placed K-wires with a tension band wire. Standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the elbow were obtained postoperatively. The follow-up included radiographic and clinical evaluation usually at 3, 6, and 9 to 12 weeks postoperatively, until healing was obtained. Later follow-up evaluations occurred at variable intervals. Mobilization of the elbow was custom-made for each patient, starting with a range from 0 to 36 days after the operation. Immediate postoperative mobilization (within 1-2 days) was started in patients with good bone quality and rigid osteosynthesis. Early mobilization (<3 weeks) was started in patients in whom there was stable osteosynthesis but some doubt about the bone quality. Longer immobilization was used when the bone quality was poor and the stability of the osteosynthesis was questionable. Factors in Table II were evaluated at the time of the follow-up evaluation and compared with the normal extremity. Statistical significance in this series was estimated by calculating relative risk and comparing differences of means. All values are presented with their 95% confidence intervals (CI), unless stated otherwise. An anatomic reconstruction of the joint was accomplished in all cases when evaluated from standard postoperative radiographs. Patients younger than 40 years had, on average, a significantly shorter immobilization of the elbow (9.5 days; SD, 10.7 days) compared with those over 50 years (25.1 days; SD, 6.1 days) (difference of means, 15.6 days; 95% CI, 7.1-24.1 days). None of the patients had operative neurovascular complications, but symptoms due to a trauma-related transection of the radial nerve persisted in one patient. The other two trauma-related neurologic injuries resolved within a few weeks. Nonunion of the fracture was observed in 2 patients (C2 and C3 type fractures), one of which (C2) underwent reoperation 6 months after the primary procedure. One patient had nonunion and failure of the olecranon osteotomy, which was re-fixed 3 months after the primary procedure. One patient had a deep wound infection (a grade III open fracture). Eighteen (85.7%) of the initial 21 patients were successfully contacted and scheduled for a final follow-up examination. The mean follow-up time was 24.7 months (range, 10-41 months; SD, 9.3 months). When the criteria published by the OTA ( All 8 patients younger than 40 years and 2 of 10 patients older than 50 years had an excellent or good result (RR, 5.0; 95% CI, 1.5-17.3). An excellent or good result was observed in 2 of 7 men (28%) and 8 of 11 women (73%) (RR, 2.2; 95% CI, 0.6-7.8). All 6 patients with immediate or early mobilization of the elbow had an excellent or good result, whereas only 2 of 6 patients who were mobilized later achieved the same excellent or good level (RR, 3.0; 95% CI, 1.0-9.3). Follow-up time of less than 1 year showed a slight trend toward an inferior result (n = 3; 1 good) when compared with those who were followed up for more than 2 years (n = 12; 2 excellent and 5 good). However, all 3 of these patients had regained their preinjury activity level. Patients with an olecranon osteotomy more often showed an excellent or good postoperative result than did those with a triceps-splitting approach (RR, 2.0; 95% CI, 0.6-6.6). None of the patients with an open fracture had an excellent or good postoperative result. Table IV summarizes the correlation between postoperative scoring and the characteristics of the patients. Five patients had not regained their preinjury activity level at the final follow-up. Four of them were men older than 50 years with a follow-up of more than 2 years. The type of fracture showed no correlation to the age of the patients or to the postoperative result. However, all patients with an open fracture were older than 50 years. Apart from the case with loss of bone matrix described formerly, all patients treated in our series had anatomic reconstitution of the joint surface in the postoperative radiograph, despite initial comminution. At the latest evaluation, all but one patient who had a nonunion and breakdown of the osteosynthesis showed anatomic shape of the joint surface. Thus there was no correlation between the radiographic outcome and the postoperative result. The mean loss of extension was 28° (SD, 19°; 95% CI, 19°-36°), and mean flexion 134° (SD, 14°; 95% CI, 130°-140°). The mean range of motion was thus 107° (SD, 21°; 95% CI, 98°-116°). Only 1 patient had lost forearm rotation at the time of evaluation. A comminuted intraarticular fracture of the distal humerus is a serious injury, which often challenges the skills of even an experienced orthopaedic surgeon because of the complex nature and scarcity of these fractures. However, several earlier studies have shown that satisfactory results can be achieved in more than half of patients with a supracondylar humeral fracture, even in comminuted cases. All patients in our series were treated by methods introduced by the AO, and the anatomy of the distal humerus was restored in all cases. A chevron-type olecranon osteotomy has been recommended as the primary method of approach, The main reason for an inadequate postoperative result is usually limited range of motion, which may be observed even after anatomic reconstruction of the distal humeral joint. The most important factor causing stiffness of the elbow conceivably is prolonged immobilization. Therefore, immediate or early mobilization of the elbow has been recommended, but this requires stable fixation of the fracture. Only a few authors have previously evaluated the correlation between age and postoperative result. Four of the 18 patients who were called for follow-up examination in our series had an open fracture initially, which seldom leads to an excellent or good result. Our follow-up time was relatively short, with 3 patients having the final follow-up less than 1 year after operation. One of the 3 patients with this short follow-up time had a good result, whereas the other 2 showed a fair result, mainly because of limited range of motion (85° and 90°). Nevertheless, all patients had returned to their preinjury activity level, and none reported having pain. This finding suggests that limited range of motion does not inevitably impede activity of the patient, although the published score may be unsatisfactory. It is further possible that the ultimate range of motion has not been achieved at 1 year, and if these 3 patients were followed up for an additional year, better ratings could be observed if no other restrictive factor exists. However, some earlier reports have suggested that the final range of motion may be accomplished in a few months after mobilization. In conclusion, our results concerning operative treatment of intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus are comparable with those of earlier studies when differences in patients and methods, particularly those concerning postoperative rating, are considered. The type of fracture does not inevitably correlate with the outcome, but open fractures are prone to eventuate in an unsatisfactory result. The most significant factors associated with a good result were age under 40 years, female sex, use of olecranon osteotomy, and early active mobilization of the elbow. Common causes for an unsatisfactory result are poor exposure of the fracture, no mobilization of the ulnar nerve, and an unstable internal fixation combined with late mobilization.