In this work, the extraction of Pd(II) with triisobutylphosphine sulfide (CYANEX 471X) in kerosene from nitric acid medium has been studied. The effects of different parameters affecting the extraction of the investigated metal ion such as nitric acid, extractant, metal ion concentration and temperature were separately investigated. The stoichiometry of the extracted metal species was found to be Pd(NO3)2.CYANEX 471X. The stripping of the extracted metal species was carried out using stabilized thiosulfate solution. The results indicate the possibility of separation of palladium from some interfering ions namely; Co(II), Fe(III), Cu(II), Cd(II) and Zn(II). Extraction of Pd(II) from hydrochloric and sulfuric acid media was also carried out. Thereafter, the method developed was applied for the recovery and separation of Pd and other metal ions from a synthetic solution similar in composition to that expected from the leaching of spent automotive catalyst in hydrochloric acid.Palladium (Pd) is one of the rare elements found in the earth's crust. Its high melting point, catalytic activities for various chemical reactions and corrosion resistant properties both as pure metal and as alloys make it important in several applications, such as jewelry and ornaments, electronics, telephone circuits, heat and corrosion resistance apparatus, catalysts and dental alloys ( The extraction of platinum group metals (PGMs) from chloride medium has a potential as the monolithic automotive catalysts are typically cordierite type honeycombs with platinum, palladium and rhodium ( Palladium is also found as a fission product in spent nuclear fuel (SNF). Platinum group metals' (PGMs) (namely, ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum) recovery from fission products was developed to add benefits to the reprocessing option in spent fuel management strategies ( In this respect, the solvent extraction of palladium from nitrate medium by different extractants was studied by different authors ( All chemicals and reagents used are of analytical reagent grade (A.R.). The extractant CYANEX 471X was kindly supplied by Cytec, Canada; and used as received; kerosene was used as diluent and n-octanol as phase modifier. The palladium salt used is PdCl During batch experiments a good shaking was carried out for 5 The influence of CYANEX 471X concentration in the range (2 The results of the influence of nitric acid concentration in the range (0.5–5 The effect of [H Based on the above experimental results and considering that the predominant Pd(II) species at 2 The extraction equilibrium was calculated with respect to CYANEX 471X in the range 2 The effect of initial Pd(II) concentration on its extraction by 1.0 The loading capacity of CYANEX 471X in kerosene was studied by shaking 7 The effect of temperature on the extraction of 7.0 Stripping of Pd(II) from the loaded CYANEX 471X was tested using nitric, hydrochloric, sulfuric acid and ammonia solution but the stripping percent was poor, (less than 10%.) The use of 1 Preliminary investigations were carried out on the feasibility of recovery of palladium from some metal ions namely Co(II), Fe(III), Cu(II), Cd(II) and Zn(II) which may be found as fission products with Pd. In this respect, 50 Most of the processes used for the dissolution of precious metals in hydrometallurgy are based on aggressive reagents and sometimes high pressure leaching which are environmentally unsafe, highly corrosive and costly. Unlike platinum group metals, Pd can be brought somewhat easily into solution. Different leaching mixtures ( The results of influence of hydrochloric and sulfuric acid concentrations in the range (0.1–5 The extraction of Pd from sulfuric acid is relatively the best where the extraction increases from 77 to 99% with the increase in acid concentration in the same range. Although the extraction of palladium from sulfuric acid medium is more favored than from hydrochloric acid medium, in the application study as shown later, the authors generally use the hydrochloric acid for the recovery of palladium and collector metal ions from automotive catalyst due to the ease of recovery of platinum as diammonium hexachloroplatinate (NH The obtained results encouraged us to develop a separation scheme for the recovery of palladium from a synthetic solution similar in composition to that expected from the leaching of spent automotive catalyst by hydrochloric acid and given by In the proposed method, and based on the results given above in A process development for extraction of palladium from nitric acid solution was carried out by solvent extraction with CYANEX 471X in kerosene using n-octanol as modifier. The stripping of the loaded organic phase was performed using stabilized thiosulfate solution. The extraction was found to be exothermic and the loading capacity of the extractant is 1