Activated carbon was used to adsorb and concentrate rhenium and molybdenum from liquors (pH 6–8) produced from a pilot plant set up to scrub a fume generated by a molybdenite roaster. The kinetics of adsorption of Re and Mo relating the loading of Mo or Re (Qt) to concentration at time t (Ct) and carbon concentration (X) follows the rate equation:
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Q
                                    t
                                 
                                 =
                                 k
                                 
                                 
                                    C
                                    t
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    t
                                    
                                       m
                                       L
                                       o
                                       g
                                       (
                                       X
                                       )
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     where k is the rate constant, m is 0.90 and 1.0 for Mo and Re, respectively.
                  The adsorption follows the Freundlich isotherm and is influenced by temperature and solution pH. The elution of metal values from the 300–400g/L carbon loaded with 14.4mg/g Re and 4.2mg/g Mo by 1M NH4OH at 95°C could produce a concentrated liquor containing ~2.8–3.2g/L Re and ~0.6–0.8g/L Mo after 4h (at 50–68% metal recovery). The batch elution of the same loaded carbon at 100g/L concentration yielded a liquor of 1.2g/L Re (at 91.5% elution efficiency) and 300mg/L Mo (at 80% elution efficiency). Stripping of Re using NaOH (1–3M) at 95°C is not as effective as with NH4OH.Rhenium (Re) has found important application in several industries ( Most rhenium occurs with molybdenum in porphyry copper minerals. The Re values therefore follow the same processing routes such as flotation from which copper sulphide or molybdenum sulphide concentrates are recovered. Typically 50–100 Several techniques have been proposed for recovering Re from wet scrubbing acid liquors produced during the roasting of molybdenum sulphide to make molybdenum trioxide required for ferro-moly alloy production ( Commercial ion exchange resins containing tertiary amines (TOA) such as Hostarex A324 and Amberlite IRA910 have also been used in several plants for recovering Re ( The use of activated carbon for uptaking cations such as Ni, Cu, Co, Fe, etc. from diluted liquors and wastewaters has been extensively studied in the literature. Most studies modelled the solid–liquid equilibria by fitting data into the Freundlich or Langmuir equations, whereas several rate equations were also used to describe the kinetics of the adsorption process ( La Brooy model (Le Roux et al., 1999; where: loading of adsorbate on carbon at time t (mg/g carbon) Concentration of adsorbate in the solution at time 0 and time t, respectively (mg/L) Various rate and carbon characteristic constants of different models Adsorption by activated carbon is suitable for recovering high valuable metals such as gold (from cyanide liquors) from dilute solutions of 10 This study therefore investigates the use of activated carbon in recovering Re from treated stripped liquors (pH 6–8) produced from a molybdenite roaster and minimizing the uptaking of Mo from the scrubbing liquors. The study evaluates the different characteristics of Re and Mo adsorption using activated carbon and the parameters controlling the loading and elution processes. A liquor (400 The water scrubbing of the fume generated from the SeAH molybdenite roaster (producing MoO As demonstrated in previous studies ( Samples obtained during the carbon adsorption or stripping experiments were analysed for Mo and Re and mass balance calculations conducted to derive the loading capacity (Q, mg/g) of Mo and Re. Typical concentration profile and loading capacity vs time curves for Mo and Re at different carbon concentrations (5,10, 20 and 30 The adsorption of Mo and Re anions onto activated carbon fits well to the Freundlich isotherm equation (Log Q Various kinetic models were tested by fitting data to Eqs. Typical La Brooy model plots (Log(Q The kinetics of adsorption of Re, Mo and As therefore can be represented by a modified La Brooy model, expressed as: The adsorption of Re is dependent on the solution initial pH (adjusted by sulphuric acid from pH 6 to 8 of the lime-treated liquor, which hardly changed during adsorption) as shown in From preliminary studies on both original (pH Ammonia is the preferred caustic eluant as the presence of ammonium ions will be required for the production of ammonium perrhenate in subsequent stages. Using 1 Little improvement of the elution was made using a more concentrated NH A NaOH eluant of 1 Ammonia is the better eluant to strip Re and Mo from the loaded activated carbon. The quantitative removal of Mo from the ammonia-stripped liquor to ppm ranges was demonstrated earlier ( A liquor containing only Re and Mo could be produced from low sulphate liquors produced during scrubbing of molybdenite roaster fumes (containing 155–240