This paper presents an indirect method for determining the local gas holdup in the collection zone of flotation machines. The method includes a linear model to describe the gas holdup as a function of the superficial gas velocity and the percent area, defined as the 2D area fraction occupied by bubbles in binary images. Such images were recorded using a bubble viewer. More than 250 images of bubbles were processed to obtain suitable percent area estimations. The ability of the model to describe local gas holdup was tested at laboratory and industrial scale. The latter included self-aerated and forced-air mechanical cells from 8.5m3 to 300m3 and industrial columns from 42m3 to 160m3. The model was able to estimate the gas holdup ranging from 2.5% to 15% in laboratory and from 6.0% to 21.0% in industrial machines. As a result, a database of industrial gas holdup is presented, which includes 8 copper concentrators. The proposed methodology is a promising tool for gas dispersion characterization using a unique measurement system.Flotation continues to be one of the most important methods for mineral concentration due to its reliability to process ores with low grades as well as heterogeneous mineralogy and liberation. Gas dispersion indicates how the gas is distributed within a flotation machine and it is typically characterized by means of four main parameters: bubble size (  The presence of gas in the collection zone leads the effective pulp residence time to be shorter than the nominal value ( Gas dispersion characterization enhances the understanding of its relationship with the metallurgical performance and allows control strategies to be developed in industrial flotation machines. Thus, the evaluation of gas dispersion in flotation equipment by bubble size, superficial gas velocity and gas holdup measurements is necessary to detect opportunities for improvement in industrial machines. The typical methods for local gas holdup measurements at laboratory and industrial scale are based on: (i) pressure difference ( Gas holdup measurements based on pressure difference have accuracy constraints mainly related to the unknown pulp density, the assumption of negligible bubble-particle density and the error propagation in the Other methodologies have been proposed in literature for gas holdup estimation in flotation machines. For instance, In this paper, a model for determining the local gas holdup as a function of the percent area occupied by bubbles in binary images and the superficial gas velocity is presented. The percent area was defined as the quotient between the black pixels (bubble representation) divided by the total pixels in the binary images recorded by means of a bubble viewer ( The gas holdup as a function of superficial gas velocity and image analysis (images recorded by a bubble viewer) was studied at laboratory scale, using a two-dimensional cell that represents a slice of the upper radial section of an industrial flotation cell ( The McGill bubble size analyser (MBSA) along with a Canon GL2 digital camera were used for the image acquisition. The MBSA consists of a sampler tube and a bubble vision chamber. The chamber has an angled window yielding an approximately single plane of bubbles. The rising bubbles are registered by the video camera and the gas accumulates at the top of the chamber. A halogen lamp was employed as an illumination source to obtain close to uniform background for the images. The installation at laboratory scale is depicted in The MBSA was adapted to determine the local superficial gas velocity, which was obtained from the water volume displacement over time together with the cross-sectional area of the sampling pipe (bubble input). The estimated local superficial gas velocities were in good agreement with the nominal values obtained with the available instrumentation. Nominal superficial gas velocities were determined as the ratio between the volumetric air flow rate and the cross sectional area of the cell. Volumetric flow rate was measured by a rotameter–manometer system. The gas holdup was firstly obtained by pressure difference as reported by The two gas holdup estimations were compared with the Comparisons between ε The gas holdup was correlated to the 2D projected area fraction occupied by bubbles in binary images (black and white images). The percent area parameter,  A 5  Industrial gas dispersion measurements were performed between 2008 and 2014. This measurement allowed a general model structure for the gas holdup estimation to be obtained. Industrial machines included self-aerated and forced-air mechanical cells from 8.5 The MBSA was also used for image acquisition as well as for determination of the local superficial gas velocity. The MBSA was installed in the same location in which the gas holdup measurements were carried out (calm zone), about 10–20 Each gas holdup measurement included 3 replicates. Percent areas were estimated from a set of more than 120 images, processed at 1 sample per second. An empirical model to describe the local The model structure of Eq.   Although outliers were removed, a justification for the prediction error at laboratory and mainly at industrial scale was the image recording during temporal (or local) gas segregation or during temporal (or local) empty zones, due to the stochastic nature of the flotation process. The temporal or local presence of large bubbles (churn condition) might cause an increase in the  Based on the results shown in The proposed methodology allowed for the estimation of the local gas dispersion variables with a unique measurement system, using vision techniques to obtain the An indirect method for local gas holdup estimation in the collection zone of flotation machines was proposed. The method considers a model structure that takes into account for the superficial gas velocity, An extensive database of industrial gas dispersion data was presented, which included 8 copper concentrators and flotation machines of different designs and capacities. The proposed methodology allowed estimating gas dispersion variables in industrial machines with a unique measurement system. A close to linear trend between the bubble surface area flux and gas holdup was observed for industrial flotation machines of 8.5–300 Funding for the process modeling and control research was provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1160547, and Federico Santa María Technical University, Project 116.27.2. In addition, the authors wish to thank to Mr. Patrick Blonde for the professional proofreading of the manuscript.