The fundamental flotation process is the formation of a flocculant by air bubbles and solid particles in an aqueous solution. The behavior of plastic particles is significantly influenced by the wettability of the plastics. In this article the reciprocal relationship between the flotability and wettability of polystyrene was studied at different concentrations of flotation agents, particularly terpineol, polyethylene glycol dodecyl ether, tannic acid, and calcium lignosulfonate. The conclusions obtained demonstrate the dissimilar action of flotation depressants, what means different adhesion mechanisms on a plastic surface.The study of fundamental impact of flotation agents began with the first flotation experiments in the 19th century. First mineral ores and coal were separated using flotation methods; in later decades waste water has been cleaned and mixtures of plastics have been separated using similar principles. The reagents employed in flotation are generally interfacial surface tension modifiers, surface chemistry modifiers, and flocculants. Usually they are classified under five headings: collectors (sometimes known as flotation promoters), frothers, modifiers, activators, and depressors Macromolecular depressants are widely used for suppressing flotation of naturally hydrophobic materials. Due to the close analogy between naturally flotable minerals and plastics with regard to flotation, such reagents have been tested in flotation research. Polymers used in practical applications are mostly polydisperse. This reflects the flotation agent's being a mixture of polymer molecules of various chain lengths. It is presumed that longer chains will gradually displace shorter ones from the solid surface when the agent concentration is heightened, and thus the total number of long chains will increase. At a given concentration, preferably long chains will be on the surface while the short ones remain in solution The standard polystyrene (GP-PS) used for the experiments originated from the Stirol company (Ukraine) and was obtained from a local agent under the trademark Stirol 118. According to the manufacturer this material is free from additives and its melting index is 12 g/10 min. The particle diameter was about 4 mm and the density 993 kg/m The agents used for flotation experiments included the frothers terpineol and polyethylene glycol dodecyl ether (also called Brij 30) from the Fluka company and the wetting agents tannic acid and calcium lignosulfonate supplied by Penta Prague and Sigma-Aldrich, respectively. Their CAS numbers, molecular formulae, and molecular weights and the calcium concentration in calcium lignosulfonate are listed in The surface tensions of water and solutions of flotation agents were measured using the semistatic ring method. A LAUDA TD1 tensiometer with outer thermostating of the measuring vessel was used. During all experiments a constant temperature of 25 °C was maintained. The contact angles were measured by a direct method, monitoring the drop profile on a smooth flat surface, represented here by a polystyrene foil. The method is based on the following principle: an illuminated drop, in particular its contact point with the solid surface, is monitored under a microscope with sufficient enlargement and scanned by a video camera and its signal is processed by a computer. The contact angles were evaluated by the Image Tool program. The PS-coated surfaces were prepared by a solvent-casting technique; the plastic granules were dissolved in chloroform and the solution was infused on a microscope glass. After chloroform had evaporated, a thin but very compact and even layer of plastics was formed. The flotation experiments were performed on a laboratory flotator of Denver type with vessel content 1.4 L. The weight was always 100 g and tap water was used for the experiments. The flotation time was 10 min. The recovery at the end of a flotation test was determined by weighing the particles collected in the outgoing phase. The percentage recovery corresponds to the mean value of three tests. Initially the surface tensions of distilled and tap water were measured. For distilled water a value of 71.9 mN/m was obtained at 25 °C, which is in good agreement with the literature data (71.97 mN/m The concentration dependence of surface tension was measured in solutions of four flotation agents. In In the presence of air bubbles the behavior of the plastic particles is significantly influenced by the wettability of the plastics. If a drop of liquid (water) is placed on a smooth solid surface it takes a specific shape due to solid–liquid interactions. This configuration has minimum free energy and the contact angle is, therefore, a measure of the competing tendencies of the drop to spread. It is beneficial to know about the influence of the flotation agent on the wettability of plastics to set its optimal concentration. First, the contact angles were measured with both distilled and tap water. In both cases the average value was 84° and shows no difference in wettability when using distilled or tap water. When these data are compared with the published results (90° Contact angles measured at different concentrations of flotation agents are given in The flotation recovery was measured in tap water and in solutions of flotation agents. Here, the recovery is defined as a ratio of a component separated from the flotation vessel to the original amount of this component at the beginning of the experiment. The results are listed in The plastics surfaces are made up of low-energy organic compounds and some polymers, including polystyrene, contain no polar groups. Different authors have suggested various mechanisms for the adsorption of reagents on plastics. Most popular is the model proposed by Fraunholz The aim of this article is the study of the mutual relationship between the flotability and wettability of plastics (specifically polystyrene) at different concentrations of flotation agents. Frothers, supporting the foam production and stability, play a significant role during the flotation process. A frother terpineol belongs to the most simple and commonly used type of nonionic surfactants. The experiments confirmed that this reagent does not influence the wettability of polystyrene. Its aqueous solution has a surface tension lower than that of water; it foams easily and contributes to the high flotability of each plastic, including polystyrene. The influence of TEGD ether is more complicated. This compound contains a large, highly hydrophilic polar group and a long hydrocarbon chain and belongs to the group of nonionic surfactants. It is strongly surface-active and according to the literature Macromolecular depressants are widely used to suppress flotation of naturally hydrophobic materials. However, the adsorption mechanism for these compounds is not fully evident. The present work has studied the behavior of two depressants—calcium lignosulfonate, which counts among polyelectrolytes, and tannic acid, a macromolecular nonionic depressant. The simplest model of wetting agent behavior assumes that contact angle decrease implies lower flotability. Comparing experimental data measured for calcium lignosulfonate and tannic acid, we found the presumption to be invalid. The flotability of tannic acid decreases linearly with increasing concentration and the recovery reaches only 2% at the concentration 100 mg/l. In contrast, the flotability of calcium lignosulfonate sharply decreases already at a concentration of 20 mg/l and, furthermore, at higher concentrations the recovery does not change (average 5%). From experimental data it can be deduced that there is a certain difference in the adsorption mechanisms of these two agents. Adsorption of both types of depressants occurs only if the repulsion between molecular segments is sufficiently attenuated by counterions Analogous data on flotability of plastics as a function of the concentration of various depressants can be found in the literature. In the case of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) In this article the reciprocal relationship between the flotability and wettability of plastics (specifically polystyrene) was studied at different concentrations of flotation agents. Terpineol, as a representative of the simplest type of frothers, does not affect the plastic wettability, and its presence especially influences the properties of the flotation solution. The agent polyethylene glycol dodecyl ether, formally assigned to frothers due to high surface activity, enhances the wettability of polystyrene considerably and above a concentration of 60 mg/l decreases the flotability. The flotability of polystyrene, however, is lowered at markedly higher concentrations than the wettability or surface tension. This behavior will be the object of further studies. The curves representing the dependence of polystyrene wettability on the concentrations of tannic acid and calcium lignosulfonate have similar shapes, whereas the curves describing the concentration dependence of flotability diverge completely. On one hand, the addition of calcium lignosulfonate already leads to a considerable decrease of the flotability at a low concentration of this agent; on the other hand, the flotability of polystyrene decreases almost linearly with increasing concentration of tannic acid. These conclusions demonstrate the difference in the adsorption mechanisms of the two agents. Macromolecular depressants of the polyelectrolyte type adsorb more quickly on such polymers, which do not contain oxygen molecules in their structures. The adsorption of the depressant is then enabled by the presence of ions such as Ca This work has been supported by Project MSM 223400007 of the Czech Ministry of Education.