Vitrinite reflectance (Ro) and Raman spectra of carbonaceous material (RSCM) are both widely used as indicators of the maximum attained temperatures in sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. However, the potential of these methods to estimate temperature increases associated with fault slip has not been closely studied. To examine this issue, friction experiments were conducted on a mixture of powdered clay-rich fault material and carbonaceous material (CM) at slip rates of 0.15 mm/s and 1.3 m/s in nitrogen (N2) gas with or without distilled water. After the experiments, we measured Ro and RSCM and compared to those in starting material. The results indicate that when fault material suffers rapid heating at >500 °C in ∼9 s at 1.3 m/s, Ro and the intensity ratio of D1 and D2 Raman bands of CM (ID2/ID1) markedly increase. Comminution with very small temperature rise in ∼32 min at 0.15 mm/s is responsible for very limited changes in Ro and ID2/ID1. Our results demonstrate that Ro and RSCM could be useful for the detection of frictional heating on faults when the power density is ≥0.52 MW/m2. However, the conventionally used Ro and RSCM geothermometers are inadequate for the estimation of peak temperature during seismic fault slip. The reaction kinetics incorporating the effects of rapid heating at high slip rates and studies of the original microtexture and composition of CM are required to establish a reliable thermometer for frictional heating on faults.The detection of heat anomalies associated with frictional heating on faults yields valuable information on coseismic shear stress and frictional work during an earthquake (e.g., Systematic changes in the molecular structure and geochemistry of CM including vitrinite have been well documented for increases in temperature on geological time scales associated with burial (e.g., Previous friction experiments on CM were performed under air conditions or a mixture of 90 wt% quartz powder and 10 wt% CM ( The fault sample for the friction experiments was the same as that used by Friction experiments were conducted using the rotary shear, low- to high-velocity frictional apparatus at Kyoto University. The clay-rich fault sample was powdered using a pestle and sieved to a grain size of ≤0.12 mm. The powdered gouge composed of a mixture of 95 wt% sieved clay-rich fault sample and 5 wt% CM was used for experiments. To avoid oxidization of CM associated with temperature rise due to frictional heat, the apparatus was equipped with an acrylic vessel that has an inlet for N We calculated temperature changes during experiments using the finite-element method ( Radial thin sections were used for observation of microstructures under an optical microscope and measurements of R Raman spectroscopic analysis on CM was conducted using a laser Raman microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Nicolet Almega XR) installed at Nagoya University with a ×100 objective and 532 nm Nd-YAG laser. The scattered light is collected by backscattering geometry and dispersed by a 2400 lines/mm grating. To prevent damage of CM due to laser heating, the laser power was reduced to 1% of the maximum laser power (12 mW) by ND filter. The acquisition time was 30 s. Spatial and wavenumber resolution are about ∼1 μm and ∼1 cm Various Raman spectral features have been used for the evaluation of the metamorphic grade, which include intensity (i.e., height) ratio, area (i.e., integrated intensity) ratio, full width at half maximum (FWHM) of peaks, and center (peak) position of Raman bands ( Friction experiments at a slip rate of 1.3 m/s and The temperatures in the gouge increase with displacement. Compared to the dry test, the wet test shows a smaller temperature rise due to the lower friction and associated heat production. Hence, the maximum temperatures in the gouge at the end of the wet and dry tests are 258 °C and 534 °C, respectively ( A dry test at a slip rate of 0.15 mm/s and Microstructural observations after the wet test at 1.3 m/s show the development of a 0.24–0.56 mm-thick foliated zone defined by the clay particles parallel or sub-parallel to gouge boundaries (  The relationship between the size of vitrinite particles and R Representative RSCM and their decomposed peaks are shown in At 0.15 mm/s, friction is nearly constant at 0.5–0.6, and the temperature is 25.4 °C after ∼0.30 m displacement ( Compared to the starting material, the number of fine-grained CM ( There are a few data points showing increased R If we assume that The 10-mm-thick clay-rich fault gouge in the Nankai megasplay fault zone, where increased R In summary, our experiments indicate that increased heating is necessary for an increase in R The kinetic model of The RSCM and increased I Our dry test at 1.3 m/s is in disagreement with previous high-velocity friction experiments on CM, which demonstrate larger increases in R The temperatures during shear-induced graphitization (∼900 °C or 1200 °C) are much lower than those in heating experiments (∼2500 °C) due to the lower activation energy for the reaction associated with shear-induced comminution and temperature rise ( The friction experiment of samples with natural fault gouge compositions confirms that R We thank Arito Sakaguchi and Yuzuru Yamamoto for assistance with R Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.