The extraction and stripping characteristics of CYANEX 301® binary extractant systems were investigated for the recovery of cobalt and nickel from sulphate solutions. The selectivity properties of these systems against calcium, manganese and magnesium were also studied. These binary extractant systems consisted of mixtures of CYANEX 301 with basic extractants (Primene® JMT, Amberlite® LA-2, Alamine® 336 and Aliquat® 336). Based on criteria such as extraction and stripping characteristics (efficiency and rates) and selectivity against calcium, manganese and magnesium, screening experiments were performed to select the most appropriate binary extractant systems. From this screening work, the CYANEX 301/amine systems all demonstrated that cobalt and nickel could be selectively extracted from calcium, manganese and magnesium. A large synergistic effect on the stripping kinetics and efficiencies of cobalt and nickel was also observed when any amine extractant was added to CYANEX 301. Among the amine extractant systems, CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 was shown to be the most promising binary extractant system. McCabe–Thiele extraction and stripping isotherms with this system were then constructed to determine the number of stages required. Complete extraction of cobalt and nickel could be achieved in 2–3 stages while still maintaining a high selectivity against calcium, manganese and magnesium. Complete stripping of cobalt could also be achieved in 2–3 stages while complete nickel stripping was shown to still be difficult. The loading capacity of the binary system for cobalt and nickel was determined and found to be lower than the loading capacity of CYANEX 301.Unlike CYANEX 272® extractant, CYANEX 301® extractant can extract cobalt and nickel at very low pH therefore requiring minimal caustic addition during the extraction process. This property along with the ability to reject metals such as calcium, manganese and magnesium led to its inclusion in the hydrometallurgical process flow sheet developed by Inco ( Besides stripping efficiency problems, the stripping kinetics of nickel were also reported to be slow and depended greatly on the hydrochloric acid concentration ( It was the objective of this study to examine the effect of adding a second extractant to CYANEX 301 in order to improve not only the stripping efficiency of cobalt and nickel but also their stripping kinetics. Different binary systems were investigated and included mixtures of CYANEX 301 with basic extractants. The solvent extraction reagents used in this study were primary amine (Primene JMT from Rohm and Haas), alkyl secondary amine (Amberlite LA-2 from Rohm and Haas), tri C8 and C10 alkyl tertiary amines (Alamine 336 from Cognis), tricaprylyl methyl ammonium chloride (Aliquat 336 from Henkel) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (CYANEX 301 from Cytec Canada). The diluent employed was Isopar M supplied by Exxon Mobil Chemicals. All inorganic salts were of analytical reagent grade. All extractants and diluent were used as received. The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving the sulphate salts of the metals in deionized water and contained approximately 0.14 g/L cobalt, 0.05 g/L calcium, 0.29 g/L manganese, 1.3 g/L nickel and 3.0 g/L magnesium. The organic solution contained either CYANEX 301 (10% v/v) in Isopar M or CYANEX 301 (10% v/v) combined with a second extractant in Isopar M. The additional extractants studied were the basic extractants Primene JMT, Amberlite LA-2, Alamine 336 and Aliquat 336 and their concentrations varied between 2%, 5% and 10% v/v. Equilibrium distributions of cobalt, nickel, magnesium, calcium and manganese between organic and aqueous phases as a function of time were determined at 50 °C by contacting equal volumes (400 mL) of the two phases by rapid mechanical stirring in a glass vessel. No initial pH adjustment was effected. Samples of each phase (20 mL) were withdrawn at different time intervals. The equilibrium pH of the aqueous samples was measured using a Ross combination pH electrode. The pH meter was initially calibrated at room temperature with pH 1.00 (potassium chloride–hydrochloric acid buffer), 4.00 (potassium biphthalate buffer) and 7.00 (potassium phosphate monobasic–sodium hydroxide buffer) buffer solutions. For all experiments, the aqueous samples were analyzed by ICP. The metal concentration in the organic phase for each sample was deduced by subtracting the raffinate concentration from the initial metal concentration in the feed solution. Initial metal loading of the organic phase was carried out by contacting CYANEX 301 with a cobalt/nickel sulphate solution at an aqueous to organic phase ratio of 2 and at room temperature for a contact time of 30 min. The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving the sulphate salts of the metals in deionized water and contained approximately 0.14 g/L cobalt and 1.3 g/L nickel in 0.1 M sodium sulphate. The organic solution contained CYANEX 301 (20% v/v) in Isopar M. For the stripping kinetics studies, the loaded organic phase was either diluted by a factor of two to make up a solution of 10% v/v CYANEX 301 in Isopar M or was combined with a second extractant. The additional extractants studied were the basic extractants Primene JMT, Amberlite LA-2, Alamine 336 and Aliquat 336 and their concentrations varied between 2%, 5% and 10% v/v. All organic solutions contained approximately 0.14 g/L cobalt and 1.3 g/L nickel. The aqueous phase was sulphuric acid and the initial concentration varied between 185 and 195 g/L. For the equilibrium distributions of cobalt and nickel between organic and aqueous phases as a function of time, the experimental procedure was as described in For all experiments, the aqueous samples were analyzed as described in The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving the sulphate salts of the metals in deionized water and contained approximately 0.73 g/L cobalt, 0.3 g/L calcium, 1.5 g/L manganese, 6.7 g/L nickel and 15.0 g/L magnesium. The organic solution contained 20% v/v CYANEX 301 and 10% v/v Aliquat 336 in Isopar M. Equilibrium distributions of cobalt, nickel, magnesium, calcium and manganese between organic and aqueous phases were determined. The experiment was carried out in conical flasks in a wrist action shaker at 50 °C. No initial pH adjustment was effected. A contact time of 15 min was applied and the aqueous-to-organic phase ratio values ( For all experiments, the aqueous samples were analyzed as described in The experimental procedure was identical to the one described in The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving the sulphate salt of cobalt in deionized water and contained 4 g/L cobalt. The organic solution contained 20% v/v CYANEX 301 and 10% v/v Aliquat 336 in Isopar M. The experimental procedure was identical to the one described in The organic solution (20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 in Isopar M) was pre-treated with water as described in For the stripping isotherm experiment, the organic solution containing the metals was as mentioned above and the aqueous solution was 200 g/L sulphuric acid (2 M). Equilibrium distributions of cobalt and nickel between organic and aqueous phases were determined. The experiment was carried out in conical flasks in a wrist action shaker at 50 °C. A contact time of 15 min was applied and the aqueous to organic phase ratio values ( For the stripping isotherm experiment, the aqueous samples were analyzed by ICP. The metal concentration in the organic phase for each sample was deduced by subtracting the aqueous metal concentration from the initial metal concentration in the organic phase. The experimental conditions were as described in The single metal aqueous solutions were prepared by dissolving the sulphate salts of the metals in deionized water. Each single metal solution contained approximately 5 g/L of either cobalt or nickel. The organic solution contained either 20% v/v CYANEX 301 in Isopar M (single system) or 20% v/v CYANEX 301 combined with 10% v/v Aliquat 336 in Isopar M. Loading capacities for cobalt and nickel were determined at room temperature by contacting the respective aqueous phase (125 mL) with the respective organic phase (25 mL) in a conical flask. Mixing of the two phases was operated by a wrist action shaker for a contact time of 60 min. No initial pH adjustment was effected. The two phases were then separated in a separatory funnel. The organic phase was then contacted with a fresh sample of the single metal aqueous solution in a similar manner. To ensure maximum metal loading, the loading procedure was repeated 3 times. For all experiments, the aqueous samples were analyzed as described in The extraction of cobalt and nickel at 50 °C with the binary extractant systems of CYANEX 301 (i.e. 10% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Amine Extractant) as a function of time is illustrated in From Similarly to the single extractant system CYANEX 301, all binary extractant systems with amines (solvent nos. 2–5) exhibited a high selectivity for cobalt and nickel over calcium, manganese and magnesium. The magnitude (in terms of extraction efficiency) to which cobalt and nickel are extracted increased in the order: With any of the CYANEX 301/Amine systems, the extraction of cobalt is initially fast but decreased with time to eventually reach equilibrium after a contact time of about 60 min. This may be explained by a rapid extraction of cobalt followed by a progressive replacement of the cobalt by nickel as nickel is loaded into the organic phase. The addition of any of the amines, Primene JMT, Amberlite LA-2, Alamine 336 or Aliquat 336 had a deleterious effect on the extraction kinetics and efficiencies of cobalt and nickel. This antagonistic effect is in accordance with The stripping kinetics of cobalt and nickel at 50 °C using the same 10%+10% v/v systems (CYANEX 301/Amine Extractant) are shown in From When the system Primene JMT/CYANEX 301 was used, emulsion was formed and the system required a few minutes (i.e. 3–5 min) for clean phase separation. It is unclear as to why 2 M sulphuric acid caused the phase separation problem to occur. With most of the binary extractant systems with the amines, the stripping kinetics and stripping efficiencies of cobalt and nickel were improved. This is likely due to the amine extractant acting here as a phase transfer catalyst for the extraction of the bisulphate anion and/or sulphuric acid ( The stripping of cobalt from all systems was shown to be quantitative with 2 M sulphuric acid. The stripping kinetics of cobalt were, however, the fastest when CYANEX 301 was either combined with either Primene JMT or Aliquat 336. Only the systems CYANEX 301/Primene JMT and CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 exhibited relatively fast stripping kinetics for nickel where the equilibrium was shown to be reached within approximately 15 min. Comparison with the CYANEX 301 single system indicated that 3.9%, 26.4% and 59.8% nickel were being stripped respectively from the systems CYANEX 301, CYANEX 301/Primene JMT and CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 after a contact time of 10 min. The maximum stripping efficiency for nickel with the two binary systems was however low being about 60% and 25% respectively for the systems CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 and CYANEX 301/Primene JMT. This could be compared with the 90% stripping efficiency obtained for nickel with the systems CYANEX 301/Amberlite LA-2 and CYANEX 301/Alamine 336 after 6 h of contact time. This suggested that, although the presence of either Primene JMT or Aliquat 336 had greatly improved the nickel stripping kinetics, an antagonistic effect was observed in terms of nickel stripping efficiency. Since it is important to achieve good metal stripping while not hindering the metal extraction process, it is clear that the best results were obtained when either Primene JMT or Aliquat 336 was used in combination with CYANEX 301. Although the systems CYANEX 301/Amberlite LA-2 and CYANEX 301/Alamine 336 could strip nickel in a quantitative manner (about 90%), the stripping kinetics of nickel were far too slow (6 h) to make the process economically viable on a large scale production. Subsequent work was therefore only focused on the systems CYANEX 301/Primene JMT and CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336. The effect of the amine concentration (i.e. as a function of CYANEX 301/Amine concentration ratio) on the extraction and stripping properties of the binary extractant systems was studied. The results for the CYANEX 301/Primene JMT and the CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 are reported in From A general trend for both binary systems can be seen for extraction and stripping. As the amine concentration is increased (from 0 to 10% v/v) at constant CYANEX 301 concentration (10% v/v), the amount of metal extracted decreases while the amount of metal recovered during stripping increases. It is therefore important to choose a system which will exhibit relatively good metal extraction and stripping efficiencies and not a system which shows high extraction/poor stripping or vice versa. For the system CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 ( For the system CYANEX 301/Primene JMT ( Phase separation problems were encountered when the CYANEX 301/Primene JMT systems were contacted with 2 M sulphuric acid. Increasing the temperature to 50 °C improved the phase separation but the time for separation was still slow being of the order of 3 to 5 min. Subsequent work was therefore only focused on the CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 binary extractant system. Extraction isotherms for cobalt and nickel from sulphate medium at 50 °C with the system 20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 are shown in As such, the presence of hydrochloric acid in the organic phase could be responsible for the partial stripping of cobalt from the organic phase. Since the stripping of nickel from a CYANEX 301 organic phase is much more difficult than the one of cobalt (see In order to elucidate the validity of the second argument, a water treatment of the organic phase was therefore undertaken to remove any hydrochloric acid that may be present in the organic phase. The extraction isotherms for cobalt and nickel were reconstructed and are shown in As mentioned earlier, the decrease in cobalt extraction could have also been caused by a progressive replacement of the cobalt by nickel as maximum loading is being reached. The extraction isotherm of cobalt from a single metal solution was constructed to see whether the cobalt decrease would still be observed in the absence of nickel. The 20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 organic solution was used without any prior water treatment. The results shown in The stripping isotherms for cobalt and nickel from sulphate medium at 50 °C with the “washed” 20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 and 200 g/L sulphuric acid (2 M) are shown in The stripping behaviour of cobalt and nickel from the same organic solution was further studied by increasing the sulphuric acid concentration to 4 M. These results are shown in The loading capacity of the binary extractant system 20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 for cobalt and nickel was determined and compared with the loading capacity of the single extractant system 20% v/v CYANEX 301 for the same two metals. The results, shown in If we assume 100% interaction between the Aliquat 336 and CYANEX 301 molecules on a one to one molarity ratio and that the “free” CYANEX 301 is complexed with the metal, the CYANEX 301/Metal concentration ratio becomes very similar to the one where only CYANEX 301 is present. In comparison to CYANEX 301, a large synergistic effect on metal stripping was observed with the binary systems CYANEX 301/Amine. More particularly, CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 demonstrated that cobalt and nickel could be much more easily stripped with sulphuric acid while still exhibiting quantitative cobalt and nickel extraction and also high selectivity against calcium, manganese and magnesium. In comparison to CYANEX 301, the loading capacity of the system CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 for cobalt and nickel was, however, reduced due to the possible interaction between the CYANEX 301 and Aliquat 336 molecules.