Spiral welded tube (SWT) structures have found worldwide application in pipeline construction, wind turbine towers, foundation piles, and columns in tall buildings. However, the understanding of their fundamental behaviour is still insufficient and efficient analysis and design methods have not been precisely developed owing to the lack of experimental and numerical research on these types of structures. A distinct advantage of SWT is their streamlined manufacturing process, so that today large diameter SWT can be economically produced. Due to the application of SWT as structural members being relatively new, this paper presents an investigation into the behaviour of hollow and concrete-filled steel SWT columns when subjected to axial compressive loading. Parameters of particular interest affecting the strength and failure modes include the weld's spiral geometry and initial imperfections from the production process. To evaluate the behaviour of SWT columns, an accurately developed finite element model (FEM) which incorporates the effects of initial local imperfections and residual stresses using the commercial finite element program ABAQUS has been prepared. The FEM buckling behaviour of SWT is compared with that of longitudinally welded tubes (LWTs). Experimental laboratory testing is carried out on twenty columns under displacement-controlled loading conditions in order to calibrate and verify the accuracy of the model results. Furthermore, a design model is proposed for circular concrete-filled steel tube columns. In addition, comparisons with the prediction of axial load capacity using the proposed design model, Australian Standards, Eurocode, and American Institute of Steel Construction code provisions for hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns is also carried out.Steel tubes are widely used in many industrial applications, and are usually distinguished by their method of production. They can be produced either seamless (with diameter from 21 to 406 The most common structural application of a cylindrical shell with helical features is the SWT, first used at the end of the 19th century in water transmission pipelines SWTs provide significant benefits over traditional longitudinal and butt-welded tubes, for the following reasons: (a) SWTs are a cost-effective solution compared with other manufacturing processes, (b) SWTs can be manufactured in 30 SWTs can be used as structural columns in buildings. These SWT columns will be more effective especially if they are filled with concrete. Concrete filled steel tubes (CFSTs) are stiff and strong in axial compression, and have substantial bending resistance which has been proven in previous studies In this study, SWTs have been used in CFST columns and the research has been conducted with an eye towards characterising the engineering properties of SWTs and resulting design recommendations. Available code provisions do not currently address the design of CFST incorporating SWTs and this study attempts to remedy this situation. Moreover, a finite element model (FEM) which includes the effects of initial local imperfections and residual stresses using the commercial program ABAQUS has been implemented to evaluate the behaviour of SWT and LWT columns. Experimental laboratory tests are carried out on ten hollow SWT and LWT columns and ten concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns under axial compression loading conditions in order to calibrate and verify the accuracy of the model results. Moreover, a design model incorporating a concrete confining pressure approach is proposed for predicting the ultimate axial strength of circular CFST columns. Furthermore, comparisons with the prediction of axial load capacity by using the Australian Standards, Eurocodes, American Institute of Steel Construction code provisions, and the proposed design model for hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns is also carried out. This section outlines the test program undertaken which consists of hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT column tests and associated material property tests. The test set-up for the columns will be described and the results will then be presented. A general review and description of the failure modes will then be presented. One of the crucial concerns for the SWT is the possible influence of material anisotropy on the bending resistance of the resulting fabricated tube. The rolling process used to form the SWT causes the steel to develop anisotropic characteristics In this study, two tensile coupon test scenarios have been considered. To determine the stress-strain characteristics of the SWT and LWT steel plate in tension, six 400 Six tests were conducted for virgin SWT and LWT steel plates with a mean value of yield stress of 288 Another six tests which were conducted for six 400 Using self-compacting concrete (SCC) produces several benefits over conventional concrete and it is especially useful for concrete-filled steel tubular structures The stress-strain behaviour of the specimens under compressive load has been experimentally evaluated by conducting uniaxial compressive load tests. The axial and circumferential strains were recorded by means of extensometers/strain gauges mounted on the specimen. The stress-strain curves of SCC at age 28 This section of this study involved a general description of the hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT column experimental test programme. SWT and LWT columns were welded using the MIG process with a welding current of 160 It should be noted that all specimens displayed some initial geometric imperfections, in the form of ovalisation, variations in the weld thickness and tube length. The effects of this source of error were mitigated by taking the average of several measurements along the tube and averaging these values. The final dimensions of all twenty specimens are summarised in The test specimens considered were hollow SWT and LWT columns and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns. The hollow SWT and LWT set consisted of ten columns and the composite SWT and LWT section set consisted of ten columns giving a total of twenty columns which are summarised in The SWT and LWT columns were fabricated from four equal diameter steel plates (i.e. 102 The SWT and LWT columns were also fabricated with end stiffeners to ensure that localised bearing failure was prevented at the ends. The aim of this was to avoid failure occurring at the column ends that would adversely affect the test results at low stresses. After the columns were fabricated, six stiffeners were welded to each end of the columns. The stiffeners were designed so that local buckling would not occur in the stiffeners. Details of both the cross-section and end stiffeners are illustrated in The SWT and LWT columns had a different plate slenderness limit, the local buckling stress was calculated for the hollow columns and the composite columns to establish if any of the experimental columns would be affected by the onset of local buckling prior to full yield of tests developing. The local buckling slenderness limits for hollow and concrete-filled circular steel tubes can be determined by using the local buckling coefficients derived by Bradford et al. The elastic local buckling stress for a hollow circular steel tube section is given by: The elastic local buckling stress for concrete-filled circular steel tubes is given by: The elastic modulus of the SWT and LWT were taken as 199,856 The elastic local buckling stress is determined and this allows one to determine the post-buckling behaviour. The post-local buckling behaviour is best characterised using an effective width principle. The effective width is given by Eq. The experimental test series was carried out in a 2000 All columns were tested under displacement control so that the full displacement to failure and the resultant ductility could be observed. Moreover, this allowed more extensive observation of the post-local buckling reserve of strength of the steel plates and the unloading path was monitored in greater detail. The placement of the strain gauges was an important consideration in the design of the experiments. Strain gauges were used to monitor the strain distribution along the cross-section of the columns. Six strain gauges were used per specimen and they provided more reliable information on longitudinal strains. One transverse strain gauge and five vertical strain gauges were placed on the short and long SWT and LWT columns. The transverse strain gauge was used to monitor the confinement of the concrete provided by the steel and vertical strain gauges monitored the distribution of vertical strains to allow the monitoring of the buckling behaviour of the plate elements. The strain gauges used were general-purpose uniaxial foil strain gauges with a gauge length of 5 Linear strain conversion transducers (LSCTs) were used to measure the axial shortening of short and long columns and also to measure the lateral displacement of the long columns. Two LSCTs in the top and bottom of short and long columns have been used for measuring the axial shortening and six LSCTs on two sides of the long columns have been used for measuring the lateral displacement. This section outlines the results for failure loads and discusses the pertinent failure modes for each of the specimens. For the hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns, load–axial shortening measurements were all recorded. The maximum loads attained by all hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns are summarised in The axial (load-shortening) response of each column was recorded and these results were useful in being able to establish the location at which yielding took place and the onset of ultimate failure, which was generally characterised by concrete crushing and softening. The load-average longitudinal strain curves for the hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns are useful in establishing the onset of yield as well as highlighting local buckling on the compression faces which was inelastic in all the columns tested. Additionally, the load-average lateral strain curves and load-average lateral displacement curves were used to monitor the confinement of the concrete provided by the short and long concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns. The load-average longitudinal strain, load-average lateral strain, and load-average lateral displacement curves were plotted for each of the tests and these are collectively shown in The average transverse and vertical strains (i.e. The confinement of the concrete by the circular section was determined by Eq. Different failure modes of hollow and composite columns were observed for the different column lengths. The main failure modes associated with these columns involved local buckling. None of the specimens showed any signs of weld fracture in the welding lines of SWT and LWT columns during the tests. All these failure modes are highlighted in The majority of local buckling failures of the SWT and LWT columns were due to a radial expansion of the steel tube in the inelastic range. Also, columns with large The FEM program ABAQUS The steel tube was modelled with solid elements using the ‘extrusion’ tool and was reshaped using the ‘cut’ tool to make space for the weld to fit into the steel tube. There were two weld shapes used for the models with one representing the SWT weld and the other representing the LWT weld. The different weld shapes are a result of the slight difference in the manufacturing process of these two tubes, as shown in The LWT weld has a straight seam weld and was modelled with an ideal straight base, despite the presence of rough lumps on the experimental samples. Based on the assumption that the steel tube-weld bond would be perfect, the SWT weld was modelled as a single part with the combined dimensions of the outer and inner welds. This effectively eliminated the need to define an interaction at the weld interface and minimised the computational time. Once the weld was aligned correctly into the cut seam of the steel tube, the concrete infill was modelled. The curved geometry of the tube posed a challenge as ABAQUS utilised a discretisation method in which a smooth continuous shape (such as the circle of the tube's ends) was replaced by a series of straight lines connected in the general shape of a circle. When the concrete was modelled as a circle and assembled together with the tube, the discretisation would cause areas of overlap and gaps along the steel-concrete boundary. In order to accurately represent the concrete as a component that tightly fits into the tube, which acts as formwork during its setting period, the concrete was modelled with a ‘cut/merge’ tool. This not only allowed a tight fit but no re-alignment of the concrete part was required. To observe the buckling behaviour of the hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns under axial compression loading, it was necessary to impose the appropriate boundary conditions. The bottom end of the columns was fully fixed with zero degrees of freedom, whilst the top end was given a single degree of freedom for translation along the Moreover, to minimise the computation time, a “rigid body” constraint was applied to the top loading surface such that the whole surface would replicate the loading conditions of the reference point (located at the centre of the top plane). The load was modelled onto the constrained reference point as a controlled displacement value (the whole top surface would be subjected to a fixed vertical deflection). After conducting multiple trial tests to determine the most appropriate displacement-length ratio such that a certain degree of ultimate failure was reached, a final ratio of Several FEM models used in past research conducted by Scott and Finneran In theory, analytical results would converge towards a single solution as the mesh density is increased (smaller mesh size), however this would also lead to higher computational times even for the most simplest case. Although the use of C3D8I elements would minimise the effects of mesh thickness on the accuracy of the results, a mesh sensitivity test similar to the test conducted by Kulkarni It is clear that as the mesh seed size is reduced from 12 to 11 there is a change of 5.5% in the von Mises stress and a 2.6% increase in the ultimate load. However when the mesh seed size is reduced further by 1 unit, there is a negligible 0.72% change in the von Mises stress and almost no change in the ultimate load capacity of the H-SWT102-S. Thus, it was assumed that convergence was reached and a mesh seed size of 10 was used for the final analysis of this particular model. This test was repeated for all hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT column models to obtain an appropriate mesh density that would produce accurate results. SWTs are produced in accordance with the dimensional and tolerance requirements of EN 10219-2 As initial imperfections are considered in the present model, an eigenvalue buckling analysis was first carried out to provide the lowest buckling mode to be used as the shape of the initial imperfection in following the load-deflection nonlinear analysis as shown in To incorporate the effects of geometric imperfections primarily due to ovalisation, both imperfection values proposed by Mahmoud et al. Sectional residual stress have a significant influence on the mechanical performance of steel structural members, especially the ultimate capacity of columns caused by premature yielding and loss of axial and flexural stiffness. The quality of SWT is directly influenced by forming and welding input parameters. During the production of SWT, the plate or strip material goes through bending, forming, and welding. These mechanisms interact to produce a complex three-dimensional residual stress field. On the other hand, even relatively small unbalanced states of residual stress at some locations could lead to stress corrosion cracking or corrosion fatigue fracture to steel tubes in the presence of a corrosive medium. Therefore, a common problem faced by SWT manufacturers is the control of process input parameters to obtain a good tube quality with minimal detrimental residual stresses Vasilikis and Karamanos Steel material properties specified in ABAQUS included the elastic modulus of the SWT and LWT and Poisson's ratio ( The weld material was differentiated from the steel by having a yield strength 10% greater than that of the steel tube, based on past finite element modelling conducted by Susilo The steel tube provides confinement to the concrete infill in CFST columns under axial compression which increases the strength and ductility of the concrete infill. The confinement effect depends on the diameter-to-thickness ratio of the steel tube and material properties. By using the FEM, strength improving at the state of triaxial loading can be achieved by the definition of the yielding surface, and the description of the plastic behaviour coming from the equivalent stress–strain relationships of the concrete infill Concrete material parameters required to be defined included elastic modulus ( The elastic modulus of the concrete was calculated as The The compressive equivalent stress-strain curve proposed by Han et al. The tensile behaviour is assumed to be linear until the tensile strength is reached, which is taken as In all hollow SWT and LWT columns, no noticeable signs of failure were detected prior to the specimens reaching their predicted ultimate load capacities. In the post-peak range, the structural failure processes became obvious. The mode of failure for the hollow columns tested was local buckling of the steel tube wall. The failure of the hollow LWT columns was characterised by the formation of a continuous concentric local buckle around the tube diameter as shown in Concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns were found to fail in a concrete shear failure mode. The ultimate load capacity was linked with the formation of a classical shear plane at an oblique angle within the concrete infill for all concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns tested. The initial signs of failure were shown by the presence of small lateral bulging on the exterior of the SWT and LWT corresponding with the achievement of the ultimate load capacity. As specimens were loaded well into the post-peak range, the angle of inclination became clearly noticeable with local buckling and Lüders bands appearing on the SWT and LWT exterior. These inelastic failure mechanisms were detected in the SWT and LWT until well into the post ultimate phase. Experimental test results not only confirmed this buckling shape but also verified the increase in concrete strength due to the confinement effect. The general buckled shape produced in the FEM is remarkably similar to the buckling in the actual experiment. The failure mode predicted by the present model also agrees well with that observed in the tests as shown in To quantify the various ductile responses observed from the concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns load-displacement curves, a Ductility Index (D Comparisons between the presented test results and the calculated results were carried out to verify the FE model. The ultimate strengths predicted by the FEM and code provision predictions are compared with the experimental results in The test results The ultimate axial strength of circular CFST columns subjected to axial compression depends on the material and geometric properties. It also relies on the concrete confinement offered by the encased steel tube In the Tang et al.  In conclusion, experimental and numerical investigations have been conducted in order to provide a better understanding of the behaviour of hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns when subjected to axial compression. The methods utilised to analyse the specimens involved experimental laboratory testing, finite element modelling, and a study of the suitability of international code provisions. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the results of this study: The experimental laboratory testing of the specimens under displacement-controlled concentric axial compressive loading is amongst the first of its kind to be conducted. The experimental tests have provided load-displacement curves, ultimate axial strengths, qualitative identification of failure modes, and transverse and longitudinal strain data. The results suggest that SWT are as good as LWT in terms of strength. Comprehensive refinement of simulations conducted using the commercial finite element program ABAQUS has produced a reliable FEM model for the nonlinear analysis of hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns. The FEM model accounts for the unique properties of the steel and weld materials, unique spiral geometry of the SWTs and initial imperfections and residual stresses. Verifying the FEM results against the measured experimental behaviour has illustrated that the model provides a sound, conservative prediction of the ultimate strength. The measured experimental ultimate axial strengths have been used to demonstrate the suitability of Australian Standards, Eurocode, and American Institute of Steel Construction code provisions for the design of hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns under axial compression. The results have illustrated that Australian Standards, Eurocode, and American Institute of Steel Construction models are conservative and appropriate for designing hollow and concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns. A design model for predicting the ultimate axial strengths was proposed for concrete-filled SWT and LWT columns. The proposed design model yields accurate predictions for the ultimate axial strengths of axially loaded composite sections. The experimental results presented in this study could be expanded upon with further testing in the future. It is crucial that this testing be carried out in order to increase understanding as to how SWTs and LWTs would perform in construction (e.g. large diameter CFST columns, and high strength CFST columns). Both analytical and experimental parametric studies are required to fully understand the behaviour of these complex structures under different loading conditions. The information in this study will be valuable in the development of new or modification of existing design codes, for the purpose of creating an easily available and reliable means for professional engineering practice. Future studies on SWT columns under both bending and compression loading and cyclic loading are essential. The authors would like to acknowledge the