Residues such as sewage sludge or fly ashes are usually contaminated with toxic heavy metals. These metals leach out after contact with water, thus polluting the groundwater. If aqueous concentrations of metals are exceeded, these residues require expensive disposal. Supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) is a promising method to reduce the metal content of contaminated particles to such an extent that leachability is reduced and the demands of legislation are observed. This paper focuses on the metal leachability and the effect after extraction in a 12-L revolving vessel with supercritical CO2 with fly ash from a municipal waste incinerator as model compound. Pre-leaching with water prior to SFE led to the removal of water-soluble compounds and structural changes on the ash surface. Standard leaching tests of fly ash after SFE with Cyanex 302, TBP, D2EHPA, or mixtures of TBP–D2EHPA focussed on metals such as Zn, Pb, Mn, Cd, Cu, V, Sb, Ni, Mo, Cr, and Co. The leaching test showed a leachability increase of Sb and the successful reduction in leachability of Zn, Pb, and Mn in particular.Partial removal of heavy metals from solid residues such as sewage sludge or fly ash from municipal solid waste incinerators (MSWI) has been a challenge over recent years. At the same time, supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) with CO Due to the mobility of the water-leachable compounds, a successful removal of the metals is expected applying SFE with CO This study is aimed at the development of a 12-L scale SFE process that removes metals from solid residues and results in reduction of metal leachability. In this paper, “leaching” refers to aqueous and “extraction” to CO MSWI fly ash was supplied by a municipal waste incinerator (AVR, Rotterdam). SFE was carried out using the extractants Cyanex 302 (bis(2,4,4 trimethylpentyl)monothiophosphinic acid, Cytec), D2EHPA (di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid, Alfa), and TBP (tributyl phosphate, British Drug House). Analytical grade acids for dilution and digestion of ash were purchased from J.T. Baker (HCl, 38 wt.%; HNO A polypropylene container was filled with 20–35 L tap water (pH 7) at a temperature of 60 °C. pH 7 was preferred to reduce dissolution of heavy metals and to avoid leachate contamination with heavy metals. Under constant stirring, 2–3.5 kg of fly ash was added, obtaining a liquid/solid (L/S) ratio of 10. Gentle stirring was continued for 1 h. Liquid samples of 2 mL were withdrawn regularly, filtered on a 0.45-μm filter and diluted with nitric acid solution (5%). After 1 h, the solid was allowed to settle, and superficial water was carefully removed. The remaining water (L/S=2.5) was evaporated by hot air, adjusting the ash humidity between 5% and 38%. Ca, K, and Na were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma absorption emission (ICP-AES), and Mo, Zn, Cu, and Pb were analyzed by high resolution ICP-mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) and the concentration of sulfate and chlorides was determined by ion chromatography. The extraction of 2 kg ash samples was carried out with a revolving extraction vessel (12 L). The extractants were pumped continuously into a constant CO The column leaching test for the determination of leachable metals from solids is standardized and described in the Dutch To study the influence of the water pretreatment, pre-leached ash was compared with original ash using (1) scanning electron microscope (SEM), (2) volumetric N The complexity of the ash structure allows the identification of only a few crystalline phases The pH of the pre-leachate solution changed almost immediately to a constant value of pH 11.7 after the addition of the fly ash to the water. The various metal concentrations in the solution of the pre-leaching are listed in After an initial surge for all metals, pre-leaching of Mo increased with time, while leaching of V, Ni, Cu, Mn, Co, Cd, and Sb was poor but constant. The results of the leached fractions of the studied ash The leachability of Zn, Pb, Mn, Cd, V, Sb, Ni, Mo, Cr, and Co, from both original MSWI fly ash and from fly ash after SFE with Cyanex 302 (experiments C1, C2, C3), TBP (experiment T1), D2EHPA (experiment D2), and mixtures of TBP–D2EHPA (experiments TD1, TD4), was determined with column leaching tests. The experimental conditions of the SFE experiments are listed in As an example for Zn, the leaching after SFE with Cyanex 302 is plotted in SFE (in particular with Cyanex 302) led to a reduced leachability of Zn. Water treatment increased the extraction of Zn (C2, C3), but it did not show a strong correlation with the leachability. Therefore, not only water but also SFE obviously change the ash surface and the availability of Zn. The leaching curves (not shown here) were similar to those of Zn, and the original ash reached values above the legislative limit of 4.6 mg Pb/kg. The leaching was reduced significantly by water pre-leaching and subsequent SFE with Cyanex 302 to 10% and 40% of the maximum allowed value (C2, C3) and better extraction (C3). In these cases, water was important to change the availability of Pb since the variations of the extracted amount of Pb were only minor. The difference in availability might be caused by the removal of other compounds through SFE. In cases of higher leaching (about three times, C1), this removal apparently enables an easier access of water in the leaching test. In all experiments, the extraction of Mn was successful (20–70%) with and without water. The leachability either did not change significantly or decreased to about 50%. For Experiment C3 (with water pre-leaching), it increased by about 5 times. Apparently, the availability of Mn in the leaching is strongly enhanced during pre-leaching. The leachability of Cd was not reduced and remained above the leachability limit. While the extraction extent was typically about 30–40%, the leachability did not change or even increased dramatically. Apparently, the availability of Cd for leaching was changed, but a relation between the leaching behavior, the SFE process parameters, or the remaining Cd after SFE is not evident. A high extraction extent (>99.98%) to a concentration below 0.059 mg Cd/kg would be required to guarantee leaching below the leaching limit. The extraction efficiency of V was high, in particular after experiments with TBP and/or D2EHPA (90–95%), while the leachability of V from SFE treated ash was worse compared to the original ash. However, the leachability only increased to about 25% of the leaching limit of 3.5 mg V/kg. Although the extraction of Sb was good (60–98%), leachability increased dramatically. The leachability rose to values slightly (C1) or three to five times above the legislative value of 0.10 mg Sb/kg (T1, D2, TD4) or up to about 115 times above this value (C3). Obviously, water pre-leaching increased the availability of Sb for the leaching liquid (pH 4) of the test. Low leaching seems to be obtained through (i) SFE with D2EHPA or with mixtures of TBP–D2EHPA, or (ii) high extraction extent (>99.98%) to reduce the remaining content below the leachability limit. The extraction of Ni was very good (98%) with the exception of Experiment C3. Despite the significant extraction of Ni, the leachability varied only slightly or increased about 4 times (Experiment TD4). After Experiment C3, the leachability even increased dramatically 40 times above the legislative limit (2.2 mg Sb/kg). Both a better availability and a better accessibility of Ni for leaching water, in particular after water pre-leaching, might have caused this increase. However, a correlation between extraction and leachability was not found. The leachability was not reduced significantly after SFE experiments with dry ash despite a good extraction extent (70–95%). Although pre-leaching prior to SFE only resulted in 55% extraction, the leachability was reduced to 25% of its initial value. It seems that the water-leachable Mo compounds (compare Despite the high extraction of Cr, its leachability increased with the exception of Experiments C3 and T1. Apparently, during SFE, the availability of Cr for leaching water was enhanced. However, a relation between SFE conditions, and the remaining Cr and leachability was not observed. The comparison of Co extraction with leachability In most cases, a direct link between extraction and leachability could not be found (exceptions with Zn or Mn). The availability of the metal is a key factor. Apparently, SFE and/or pre-leaching changes the surface structure, which results in the changed accessibility of leaching water and the higher leachability of V, Sb, Co, or Ni (despite high extraction extent). Therefore, the degree of extraction does not exclusively determine the leachability of all metals. The original fly ash exceeds the maximum leaching values of Pb, Mo, and Cd. The best reduction of Pb (below the maximum value) and Mo was obtained after pre-wetting and SFE with Cyanex 302. For Cd, an additional treatment step or another extractant are required. Pre-leaching removed the major part of the water-soluble compounds while the undesired removal of heavy metals through pre-leaching was low for the studied fly ash. Pre-leaching did not necessarily improve the result of SFE and a general relation between the SFE results and leachability was not evident. Leachability of metals exceeding the leaching limit was reduced. Along with a combination of treatment steps, SFE has a potential to reduce the leachability below legislative values for fly ash or other contaminated residues. We wish to thank SENTER, Den Haag, for the grant of the IOP project IZW 97407 and Cytec Industries, Canada, for the kind donation of Cyanex 302.