Vast quantities of coal ash, originating from the steam generation coal-based process have accumulated over the years. Continuous research is conducted to identify opportunities for the utilization of fly ash. This coal ash typically contains 30% alumina, 1.5% titania, 2.5% hematite, 9.5% lime and 60% silica. Due to the availability of alumina in fly ash and large quantities of alumina imported by South Africa annually, a project was initiated to evaluate the possibility of extracting the alumina from fly ash.
                  The mullite-containing fly ash was mixed with calcium oxide and subsequently calcined at a temperature ranging from 1000 to 1200 °C to yield acid or base soluble calcium aluminate. The calcined ash was leached with a sulphuric acid solution to produce a solution containing iron, aluminium and titanium species. An aluminium extraction efficiency of 85% was achieved when the sintered pellets were leached with sulphuric acid using an acid concentration of 6.12 moldm−3 at 80 °C for 4 h. The leached residue, from the sulphuric acid leaching, could be considered as a co-product in this process and could possibly be suitable for use as a lightweight aggregate in masonry concrete applications or cement production. Purification methods such as precipitation, solvent extraction and crystallization were evaluated to selectively separate both iron and titanium ions from the aluminium containing aqueous solution.
                  The solvent extraction method was found to be superior for the removal of iron and titanium from the aluminium-containing aqueous solution in comparison with all of the purification methods evaluated in this study. The major final product obtained with the solvent extraction method contained approximately 99.4% alumina, whilst the minor product contained 97% titanium oxide. The alumina product can be used for the production of aluminium chemicals and in refractories, while the titanium oxide product can possibly be used as a white pigment in the production of paints.Coal ash from Sasol combustion plants typically contain 60% SiO In an attempt to convert Sasol fly ash into value added products thus substituting utilization for disposal, research at Sasol Technology began into the recovery of minerals from the ash. The recovery of alumina from coal ash or clay is based on the application of hydrometallurgical processes such as acid or base leaching, precipitation, solvent extraction and re-crystallization ( The traditional Bayer process for the recovery of alumina from Bauxite (low in silica) involves the dissolution of alumina and trace amounts of silica in sodium hydroxide. According to In the proposed process, ash was pelletised together with fine coal and a calcium source prior to sintering in order to decompose the mullite phase present in the ash. Due to the low cost and stability of sulphuric acid, this acid has been used as a lixiviant during the recovery of alumina from calcined coal ash pellets prepared from calcium oxide sources. Alumina and Al The experimental procedures followed during the leaching of fly ash with sulphuric acid are described below in detail. A 200 kg sample of the dry fly ash was collected for the leaching testwork. One kilogram representative sample of fly ash was obtained from the bulk sample using the cone and quartering method ( A 100 g representative sample of fly ash obtained from a steam plant at Sasol SynFuels, Secunda was added into a 1000 ml Pyrex beaker. A 400 ml of 6.12 mol In the proposed process, fly ash was pelletised with fine coal and calcium oxide using a ratio of 5:4:1 to produce pellets with a strong mechanical strength. To the mixture of fly ash, calcium oxide and fine coal (100% The abovementioned mixtures were thoroughly mixed and subsequently pelletised with water to produce pellets for the sintering and leaching steps. Approximately 50 g dry pellets of fly ash mixtures as given in A 100 g representative sample of the sintered pellets was leached with sulphuric acid concentrations (3.06 mol Approximately 100 g of the leached pellets were washed with 300 ml of 1 mol The purification methods such as selective precipitation, crystallization and solvent extraction described below were used to selectively separate both total titanium ions and total iron ions from the aluminium-containing aqueous solution. A 500 ml aliquot of the leach liquor was transferred into a 1000 ml Pyrex beaker. A solution of sodium hydroxide (12.5 mol A solution of sodium hydroxide (12.5 mol A solution of sodium hydroxide (12.5 mol A 500 ml aliquot of the leach liquor from the sulphuric acid leaching step was transferred to a 1000 ml Pyrex beaker. Sufficient sodium hydroxide solution (12.5 mol The filtrate recovered from the precipitation of Fe(III) and Ti(IV) ions at pH 13 contains soluble Al ions (in the form of sodium aluminate). This filtrate was combined with wash solution (obtained after washing the precipitates of Fe(OH) A 500 g aliquot of the leach liquor containing 49 g The experimental procedures described in this section were used to determine a suitable type of extractant for the solvent extraction process. A 500 ml aliquot of the leach liquor containing 12 g A 250 ml aliquot of the loaded organic phase (containing both Ti(IV) and Fe(III) ions) was transferred to a 1000 ml separating funnel. A 250 ml aliquot of 2 mol A 250 ml aliquot of the stripped organic phase (containing only Ti) was transferred to a 1000 ml separating funnel. A 250 ml aliquot of ammonium hydroxide solution (1 mol The results obtained during the leaching of the sintered pellets as well as the characterization of fly ash, sintered pellets, leached pellets, products from the purified leach liquor and washed pellets are summarized in The XRF analysis of a sample of fly ash arising from Sasol power stations shows that a representative sample of fly ash used in this study consists of 9.54% CaO, 49.80% SiO The direct leaching of fly ash with sulphuric acid solution (6.12 mol The main objective of the sintering step is to provide strong materials (crushing strength The leaching parameters such as the concentration of sulphuric acid, leaching time particle size of pellets and solid to liquid ratio are considered to find the optimal extraction efficiencies of alumina and titanium oxide. The possible reactions that take place in the leaching of the pelletised fly ash are as follows: However, the increase in temperature from 40 to 90 °C during the leaching of the sintered pellets with sulphuric acid resulted in a relatively insignificant improvement in the extraction efficiency of metals ( From the results presented in The results presented in According to From the results given in The XRF results of the leached residue indicate that the leached residue consists of 16.2% CaO, 41.60% SiO The wet analysis shows that the leached residue contains high sulphur trioxide content (15% SO In this study, sulphuric acid was used as lixiviant to dissolve alumina from the sintered pellets prepared with CaO, ash and coal. Sulphuric acid allows good solubilisation of alumina from the sintered pellets and it is cheaper than hydrochloric acid or nitric acid. It is also easier to handle. The classic Bayer process for the recovery of alumina from bauxite (normally containing low silica content) involves the dissolution of hydrated alumina in caustic soda ( The preliminary results of the products formed during the purification of the leach liquor by selective precipitation, crystallization and solvent extraction are presented in this section. According to From the results presented in The XRF analysis of the precipitates formed during the precipitation of iron(III) and titanium(IV) at pH 13 with sodium hydroxide from the leach liquor indicate that the precipitate contained 85% Fe Visual observation indicated that the brown metal hydroxide precipitates were formed at pH 13. This brown colour can be attributed to the presence of Fe ions in the product. This iron was in an oxidation state of +3. The selective precipitation method used in this study seems effective in separating Fe The XRF analysis of the precipitate formed after bubbling the filtrate with carbon dioxide indicates that high levels of the impurities such as iron oxide (0.16% Fe At pH 13, the aluminium ions in the filtrate react with sodium hydroxide to form soluble sodium aluminate. White gelatinous metal hydroxide precipitates were formed after bubbling the filtrate, recovered from the precipitation of Fe The disadvantage of adjusting the pH of the leach liquor to a value of 13 is the use of large amounts of expensive sodium hydroxide for the precipitation of metal ion hydroxides. The sodium hydrogen carbonate obtained from the precipitation of aluminium hydroxide can be converted to sodium hydroxide. This sodium hydroxide can be recycled to the sodium hydroxide leaching step to reduce the cost of the sodium hydroxide reagent. The second disadvantage of this process is that the white gelatinous precipitates must be washed in order to dissolve unreacted sodium hydroxide. The water consumption during this washing step is high. The process seems effective in separating Al Visual observation clearly indicated that after the addition of ammonium hydroxide or ammonium sulphate to the leach liquor, white crystals were readily formed. White crystals indicate that aluminium ions from the leach liquor were crystallized at the pH value of 1.5 in the form of aluminium ammonium sulphate. XRD analysis confirmed that aluminium ammonium sulphate (crystalline phase) is present in the white crystals formed after the addition of ammonia to the leach liquor ( The iron free alumina that is being used by BHP Billiton in the production of aluminium metal contains <0.01% SiO The extractants evaluated were di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) from Merck, Henkel and Altrochem and Primene JMT (primary amine) from Rohm and Haas. Visual observation clearly indicated that third phase formation or emulsion was present when using only di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid. The problem of third phase formation or emulsion formation can be attributed to the solubility of the organic phase in the aqueous phase. The third phase took a long time (24 h) to disappear. This third phase can be avoided by the addition of a modifier. The addition of a modifier to the extractant during the solvent extraction step was not evaluated in this study. White aluminium ammonium sulphate crystals were formed from the aqueous phase after the solvent extraction experiment. A total of 16% of the aluminium ions present in the leach liquor and other impurities were loaded into the organic phase during the solvent extraction experiment when using di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid obtained from Merck. The XRF analysis indicates that the alumina product obtained after calcination of aluminium ammonium sulphate crystals formed when using Altrochem di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid as the extractant still contains impurities such as phosphorus pentoxide (0.19% P A total of 60% of the aluminium ions present in the leach liquor were loaded into the organic phase when using di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid from Henkel. Due to the high level of impurities in the alumina products obtained when using the different types of di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acids during the solvent extraction experiment, these acidic extractants are not suitable for the solvent extraction process. Based on visual observation, phase disengagement after using Primene JMT as the extractant, obtained from Rohm and Haas was highly acceptable. No sign of emulsion or third phase formation was observed during the solvent extraction experiment. White crystals of aluminium ammonium sulphate were formed from the aqueous phase after the solvent extraction experiment. These crystals conform to the requirement of the South African Bureau of Standards (SABS) specification for aluminium sulphate in terms of chemical purity ( A total of 0.5% of the metal precipitates from the leach liquor were formed in the aqueous phase, after mixing the two phases of loaded organic and aqueous ((NH The XRF analysis of the product obtained during the stripping of the loaded organic phase with ammonium carbonate shows that the product contained 50% Fe Visual observation indicated that a third phase with a white colour was formed after mixing the stripped organic phase with a solution of ammonium hydroxide. This white colour in the third phase could be attributed to the presence of titanium hydroxide (Ti(OH) The XRF analysis of the product obtained during the stripping of the loaded organic phase with a solution of ammonium hydroxide shows that the product contained 94.5% TiO The overall objective of this study was to propose and develop a process for the recovery of alumina from a low rank bituminous coal fly ash. The high temperature calcination of the mixture of coal ash and CaO source was used to break the crystalline mullite phase (3Al The XRD analysis of coal fly ash indicates that predominate minerals such as mullite, quartz, calcium silicate and quicklime are present in the coal fly ash. Direct acid leaching (no mullite decomposition pre-treatment) yielded an Al extraction efficiency of only 18%. This is in agreement with previously published findings. Preliminary sulphuric acid leaching experiments were conducted on the sintered pellets containing 50% fly ash, 40% fine coal and 10% CaO. An Al extraction efficiency of 85% was obtained when leaching the pellets for 4 h at 80 °C at an acid concentration of 6.12 mol The secondary objective of this study was to evaluate methods for removal of both iron and titanium ions from the aluminium containing leach liquor. Purification methods such as solvent extraction, selective precipitation by increasing pH and crystallization of aluminium ammonium sulphate were evaluated. The separation efficiency of metal ions from the leach liquor was used to select the best purification method. In this study the selective precipitation method and crystallization of aluminium ammonium salts were not effective. All solid products, obtained when using the above methods, contained unacceptable levels of impurities such as silica, calcium, phosphorus, titanium and aluminium. In terms of removing iron and titanium from the aluminium containing leach liquor, the solvent extraction method proved superior to all purification methods evaluated in this study. The results from the experiments indicate that the extractant Primene JMT was found to be superior to all types of extractants evaluated in terms of the removal of impurities such as Fe, Ti and Si ions from the leach liquor. Pure aluminium ammonium sulphate crystals obtained after solvent extraction conform to the requirements of commercial iron free aluminium sulphate (SABS) in terms of chemical purity. This product can be used for the production of aluminium derived compounds such as polyaluminium chloride, aluminium chloride and aluminium hydroxide. The final product obtained after the calcination of pure aluminium ammonium sulphate crystals or its aluminium hydroxide contains 99.4% of alumina. This product could be suitable for the production of aluminium metal via the commercial process used by BHP Billiton (Hall–Heroult Process). A by-product containing 92–97% TiO In conclusion, the best conditions found for the leaching of aluminium species from uncalcined fly ash and calcined pellets (50% fly ash Concentration of sulphuric acid required during the calsinter-leaching step can range from 3.06 mol Leaching time can range from 4 to 12 h. Leaching temperature can range from 60 to 90 °C. Pellet composition (%Ash Solid to liquid ratio of sintered pellets and sulphuric acid can range from 1:3.5 to 1:5. Size of pellets can range from −4.75 mm to +4.75–6.7 mm. Concentration of Primene JMT is 10%, no modifier is required. Temperature of the leach liquor is 70 °C. pH of the leach liquor is pH 0.05. Concentration of the illuminating paraffin (diluent) is 90%. Contact time of two phases is 15 min. Al extraction minimized at 70 °C during the solvent extraction experiment.