The use of air jigging for performing multi-component separation in the treatment of mixed construction and demolition waste was studied. Sorting tests were carried out with mixtures of equal bulk volume of concrete and brick in which fixed quantities of unwanted materials - gypsum, wood and paper - were added. Experimental results have demonstrated the possibility to use air jigging to carry out both the removal of low-density contaminants and the concrete concentration in only one process step. In relation to the removal of contaminants only, the overall performance of jigging process can be comparable with that of commercial air classifiers and automatic sorting systems. Also, the initial content of contaminants seems does not have a significant effect on the separation extent. These results are of particular importance for recycling plants processing as they represent an alternative to optimize the use of air jigs. Further investigation is needed in order to evaluate the practical feasibility of such method.Construction and demolition wastes (CDW) constitute a major waste generated worldwide. Environmental pressure with regard to waste disposal and the exploitation of non-renewable raw materials have encouraged the search for viable technologies for recycling of CDW. The choice of appropriate recycling techniques depends on to a great extent on its composition. Mixed CDW typically consists of stony fraction (concrete, ceramics, mortar and aggregates), metals (steel, iron, copper and aluminum), non-stony fraction (plastics, wood, paper, organic materials and glass) and, occasionally, hazardous wastes as lubricants, oils and materials containing asbestos and heavy metals ( For each of these groups, a set of techniques has been addressed in order to upgrade the quality of the recycled concrete. For instance, is considered a good practice to separate organic materials such as wood and paper using air blowers, float separators or hand picking ( Among these techniques, air jigging has been pointed out as an appropriate technology for use in high-performance recycling plants ( However, despite the significant quality improvement of the recycled aggregate, the use of air jigs implies higher processing costs than those of conventional recycling plants. For instance, Simultaneously, there has been a growing interest in improving the performance of pneumatic classifiers used to separate low-density wastes such as paper and wood. This category includes the drum density separator, the zigzag air classifier and vertical or diagonal windshifter ( On the basis of the foregoing, it is very reasonable to suppose that air jigs can be able to separate low-density wastes from a particle bed in a similar way as pulsed air classifiers do. Moreover, given that air jigs are able to sort coarse aggregates with nearly equal densities (as concrete and brick), the separation of organic impurities is expected to be an easier task. In this case, an air jigging system could perform the removal of light contaminants from the stony fraction and the concentration of heavy aggregates in a single stage. In terms of processing, this could enable air jigs to work directly with mixed CDW, reducing the number of process steps necessary to recover the recycled aggregate and thus decreasing the cost per ton of CDW processed. In order to investigate the technical applicability of the aforementioned approach, this study aims to examine the usage of an air jigging device to simultaneously carry out the separation of organic impurities, gypsum and brick from the concrete fraction in only one single stage. The sorting process and the composition of jig products for a batch scale operation were examined in detail. Experimental results show the potential of the multifunctional use of air jigging to combine processing steps and also provide the framework for future studies to assess the feasibility of practical implementation. The experiments were performed in a batch pilot-scale air jig model AllAir® S-500 from AllMineral, which is able to reproduce the sorting process experienced in an industrial jig. The jig has a capacity of approximately 50 In the control panel is possible to set the fluidizing air rate and the pulse frequency of the air flow. The first is adjusted in terms of the percentage of the blower power (Combimac 49631/B1Y1), ranging from 0% to 100%. The blower power is 15 The tests were conducted with binary mixtures of concrete and brick wherein limited amounts of gypsum, wood and paper were added. The presence of such constituents, including the brick, is highly undesirable since they compromising the quality of the RCA produced ( Four mixtures containing increasing amounts of impurities were prepared: 0%, 1%, 2.3% and 4.6% in mass. The mass proportion among contaminants was maintained in 40% of wood, 40% of gypsum and 20% of wastepaper. The composition of each mixture is shown in The experiments were carried out using the procedure described by Tests were performed with a bed thickness ranging from 100 to 125 Two additional tests were conducted with the highly contaminated mixture (4.6% in mass) in order to verify the effect of changes of the jigging cycle on the sorting performance. One of them was performed with the fluidizing air rate decreased to 70% and the other one with the pulse frequency decreased to 140  The separation engendered by the pulsed air flow could be better observed from the examination of the top view of the jig products (  Concerning gypsum, it was apparent beforehand that its separation would be not as simple as it were for wood and paper, since it density is much closer to that of concrete. In fact, it was observed a slight increase in gypsum content in the lower layers as its content in the initial mixture increased. However, considering concrete in the bottom ( In spite of the close particle density of brick and concrete, the separation between them could be carried out in a way good enough to increase concrete concentration (  The degree of contaminants removal was determined as follows: In the main, paper and wood were withdrawn to a great extent from the lower zones of the bed, as can be seen in As reported in the previous section, there was a tested case in which some pieces of paper were kept retained in the layer 1 (for the contaminant level of 2.3%), even though all paper initially contained in upper layers (layers 2 and 3) had been removed towards the top. It suggests that the jigging cycle used, i.e. the combined effect of expansion, frequency and jigging time, might not be able to avoid the formation of enclosures near to the bottom and thus to allow to all paper pieces to move upward. Therefore, an appropriate use of air jigs to also separate non-stony materials should also take into account the alterations induced by the presence of such materials within the bed. The simplest way to deal with it is by adjusting the operating parameters. The effect of jigging time on the separation extent of such mixtures of concrete, brick and gypsum is well documented in the literature ( In order to verify how variations in the jigging frequency and bed expansion affect the product quality, two additional tests were performed with an impurity level of 4.6% in mass. In the first one, the optimal operating parameters were used as defined by In the second case, the fluidizing air rate and the jigging time were kept in 80% and 120 It is interesting to note that the net effect of decrease the jigging frequency on the removal of non-stony contaminants seems to be similar to that of increase the bed expansion, i.e. there is an increase of the net removal of lighter constituents. However, contrary to the latter case, the decrease of jigging frequency does not involve large additional operating costs. After the jigging process is finished, practically all non-stony materials were removed from the bed and remained covering its top surface. On the other hand, brick and gypsum, even though considerably segregated in relation to the initial state, were distributed over all the volume of the particle bed. This relative distribution in function of the bed height is shown in The influence of the overall impurities level on the separation of stony contaminants is demonstrated in In all tested cases, the product obtained after jigging (layer 1) contained less than 1% in mass of the undesired lighter components (wood, wastepaper and gypsum) and approximately 90% in mass of concrete, which meets the requirements set out by several countries to classify the jig product as coarse RCA ( It should be emphasized that a feasible use of air jigs for multicomponent separation in recycling plants requires the fulfillment of certain conditions. For instance, the absence of coarse scraps of contaminants in the feed is mandatory in order to achieve a good separation. Thus, preceding stages of screening and/or manual sorting must be carefully carried out in order to avoid the intake of large pieces into the jigging device. It also should be considered the marked sensibility of dry separation in relation to the moisture content of the stony fraction, which requires maintaining low levels of surface moisture in the feed ( The potential for expanding the usage of air jigs in the treatment of CDW was studied with a view to its use in multicomponent separations. Tests results have indicated the technical feasibility of the combined use of batch jigging for the removal of undesired contaminants such as wood, paper and gypsum together with the removal of brick particles in only one single stage. Furthermore, the initial content of contaminants seems to have a negligible effect on the separation performance. For all cases tested, the product obtained showed contamination levels lesser than 1% in mass and approximately 90% in mass of pure concrete. This is in agreement with the requirements set out by several countries to classify the recycled aggregate as a recycled concrete aggregate, a significantly more value added product. The reported separation efficiency in the removal of low-density material (wood and paper) revealed that air jigging has capacity to reach separation performances comparable to those of air classifiers and automatic sorting systems. Moreover, the jigging can simultaneously carry out the sorting by density among the components of the stony fraction. Also, it is shown that the separation extent can be further improved if appropriate modifications in the operating parameters are performed. Finally, the possibility of combination of two separation stages in the air jigging stage could be useful in order to decrease the related costs in recycling plants. However, the practical implementation may require occasional adjustments in the equipment and process design, so that further studies are needed to evaluate the effective applicability of such method. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the