The datasets in this article are supplementary to the corresponding research article [1, 2]. The planar morphology and topography of TiC thin films coated on commercially pure Titanium (CpTi) grown by RF magnetron sputtering were investigated using Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) and Atomic force microscope (AFM). The mechanical properties such as Hardness and Young Modulus of the thin film coating was studied using Nanohardness. Furthermore, grazing incidence X-ray diffractometer (GIXRD) and Raman spectroscopy were used to analyse the structural and composition of the TiC thin film coating. ZEISS Gemini*2 Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), IIT, Kharagpur, India. Hysitron Triboindenter T1950 Nanohardness, IIT Kharagpur, India VEECO Atomic force microscope (AFM) Wits University, South Africa PANalyticals's Xpert Pro Grazing incidence X-ray diffractometer (GIXRD), India. Alpha 300R WITEC Raman spectroscopy, University of Johannesburg, South Africa. The data provide an insight into the significance and influence of thin film coatings on properties of metals These data can be used for research applications and industrial usage in the area of surface coatings, materials application and mechanical engineering The data is applicable for the development of predictive and mathematical models for optimization of RF process parameters The data presents the effect of RF magnetron sputtering process parameters on the coating properties The data can be explored by scientists and researchers in the field of materials and mechanical engineering The RF magnetron sputtering process parameters develop by using L9 Taguchi orthogonal array is presented in TiC thin films were deposited in an RF Magnetron sputtering on CpTi substrate under different process parameters. The purity of the stoichiometric TiC target used is 99.99% pure TiC. The process parameters varied for the deposition processes were deposition time, power and temperature. An L9 (3 Atomic force microscopy (Veeco Di2100 AFM) was used to evaluate the 3D surface topographies of the samples. Image scan size of 5 × 5 μm Raman analyses were carried out on TiC thin films using an alpha300R (WITec) confocal laser Raman microscope configured with a frequency-doubled Nd-YAG laser (wavelength 532 nm). Raman spectra were collected using ×50 Nikon objectives. A laser power of 2 mW at room temperature was used to prevent burning of the film surface. Beam centring and Raman spectra calibration were performed before spectral acquisition using a-Si standard (111). The Raman spectrum of the substrate was obtained and used to compare with the TiC thin films deposited. Grazing Incidence X-ray Diffractometer (GIXRD PANalyticals's Xpert Pro with Cu K-alpha and wavelength 1.540598 A) at a very low angle of incidence of 0.02°/s from 10° to 90° was used to study the structural properties of the thin film. The crystallite size (D) was calculated using the Scherer equation, D= (0.9 λ)/βcosθ; where λ is the wavelength of the X-ray used (1.540598 A); β, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the highest-intense peak; and θ, the Bragg angle. Nanomechanical properties such as Young's modulus and hardness of thin films were obtained by nanoindentation technique (Hysitron, Triboindenter TI950, USA). Load controlled indentation testing followed a trapezoidal (loading-dwelling-unloading) profile with a hold time of typically 15 s at peak load. The peak load was 300μN at a loading rate of 10 μN s The authors would like to acknowledge the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at