In this research, a zinc sulfide (sphalerite) concentrate of Angouran mine was studied by direct atmospheric leaching process. This process is an alternative to the conventional method of roast-leach-electrowinning (RLE) for zinc production by assisting ferric ions as powerful oxidant. The independent sphalerite leaching parameters investigated were ferric ions concentration (0.4–1.2M), temperature (40–80°C), particle size (21–53μm), sulfuric acid concentration (0.5–1.5M) and time (2–6h). Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to optimize the process parameters. The most influencing parameter was found to be temperature and the less effective was acid concentration. Based on the results, ferric ions illustrate a complex effect on the recovery of zinc; In this regard, interaction of ferric ions with operational parameters was proposed. The optimum recovery for leaching of the zinc sulfide concentrate (e.g., 84.72%) was obtained at ferric ions concentration of 1.2 M, temperature of 80°C, mean particle size of 21μm and leaching time of 6h. The predicted percentage recovery of zinc at the optimum condition was found to be 84.96% which was very close to the experimental value of 84.72%. Kinetic investigation was carried out in the optimum condition that obtained by RSM. Kinetic results showed that there were two stages in the sphalerite leaching. At the beginning of the leaching process, kinetics of sphalerite leaching is fast, while after about an hour the overall rate of leaching has decreased. The kinetic of leaching in the first stage is affected by both rate of chemical reaction and rate of diffusion through the sulfur layer. In this stage, the contribution of chemical reaction gradually decreases by increasing the temperature. In the second stage, the leaching rate of sphalerite is controlled only by diffusion through the product layer.The traditional method for the production of zinc from sphalerite concentrate is the roast–leach–electrowinning (RLE) process. Sulfur dioxide (SO The sphalerite atmospheric leaching is influenced by different parameters such as ferric ions concentration, temperature, particle size, sulfuric acid concentration and pulp density ( To optimize hydrometallurgical processes, response surface methodology (RSM) is one of the best DOE methods because of two main reasons: first, it provides more favorable results in minimum number of experiments and second, it determines the interactions between the operational parameters ( Shrinking core model (SCM) has been extensively used for solid-liquid reactions, which is also adopted for kinetic investigation in this study ( In this paper, parameters influencing direct leaching of Angouran sphalerite concentrate are determined by RSM method. The effectiveness of the operational parameters including ferric ions concentration, temperature, particle size, acid concentration and time on the zinc recovery has been investigated. Determining the optimum conditions to maximize the zinc recovery was also the subject of the current study. In addition, the leaching kinetics of sphalerite was investigated using the shrinking core model. All tests were performed with a sphalerite concentrate (approximately 73% ZnS) from Angouran mine, Zanjan (Iran). Ore sample was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) using an (VARIAN 240, Australia) instrument.  Sulfuric acid (H Design of experiments was used to develop an empirical model for obtaining the optimum operating conditions for the leaching process. The optimization procedure was based on CCD and RSM. In general, CCD requires a total of (2 In a typical leaching test, after reaching the desired temperature of the leaching medium, 20 A cubic polynomial equation was derived to predict the zinc recovery as a function of independent variables and their interactions in terms of coded factors. The same procedure in different leaching media has been reported earlier ( where A, B, C and E are coded values of the tests variables, A: ferric ions concentration in M, B: temperature in °C, C: particle size in μm and E: time in hour. Several regression analyses were engaged to evaluate the model coefficients and the response for the cubic polynomial equation. The following equation was applied to transform a real value (X in which The results of the ANOVA are shown in Sphalerite leaching directly depends on the ferric ions concentration as shown by the following reaction: When the ferric sulfate concentration is low, the zinc recovery will be low. According to According to the derived model (Eq. Further support for this model is given by the temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity of sulfur. According to The ferric oxidizing performance is strongly sensitive to the temperature variation. As it can be seen in  In order to investigate the effect of temperature, leaching tests were done in a wide range of temperature (40–80 According to The effect of particle size on the zinc recovery is presented in  From In the numerical optimization, a minimum and a maximum level must be provided for each parameter. A multiple response of any combination of five parameters, namely ferric ions concentration, temperature, particle size, acid concentration and time was applied. Applying an experimental design with ferric ions concentration of 1.2 The condition of experiment number 20 (  In the present work, the shrinking core model was employed to describe the leaching rate of zinc from sphalerite particles. Three kinetic mechanisms have been proposed for sphalerite direct leaching: diffusion ( In order to find out whether the mechanism has been changed during leaching, the equation corresponding to one of the mechanisms should be considered for the whole period of leaching. If the trend changes (change in the slope of the line) at a point, it can be concluded that the mechanism has been changed at that point. Considering the above discussion, two stages exist in the leaching process. At temperatures 50, 60, 70 and 80 where t is time of reaction, t The calculated constants ( As mentioned before, elemental sulfur layer is formed on the sphalerite surface (Eq. The calculated activation energy for first stage of sphalerite leaching is 23.91 Atmospheric leaching was carried out to leach a sphalerite concentrate from Angouran mine. A model was developed to describe the leaching process by response surface methodology. Using this model, the most operational parameter was found to be temperature and the less effective one was acid concentration. From the experimental results, the sulfuric acid consumption can be reduced at high concentration of ferric sulfate. The results showed that ferric ions concentration has interactions with temperature and time. Ferric ions, as a powerful oxidant, acts better at high temperatures (ca. 80 According to the kinetic results, it was found that two stages exist in the leaching process. At the beginning of the leaching process, kinetics of sphalerite leaching is fast, while after about an hour the overall rate of leaching has decreased. The kinetic of leaching in the first stage is affected by both rate of chemical reaction and rate of diffusion through the sulfur layer. In this stage, the contribution of chemical reaction gradually decreases by increasing the temperature. In the second stage, the leaching rate of sphalerite is controlled only by diffusion through the product layer. The activation energies for first and second stages were 23.91 The partial financial support for PhD studies of Mr. Saeid Karimi by