Extraction of molybdenum and vanadium from ammonia leaching residue (main chemical composition: 2.05% Mo, 0.42% V, 65.6% Al2O3 and 10.7% SiO2) of spent catalyst was investigated by roasting the residue with soda carbonate, followed by hydrometallurgical treatment of the roasted products. In the roasting process, over 91.3% of molybdenum and 90.1% of vanadium could be extracted when a charge containing a sodium carbonate to spent catalyst ratio of 0.15 was roasted at 750 °C for 45 min and the roasted mass was leached with water (liquid to solid ratio of 2) at 80–90 °C for 15 min. After the purification of leach liquor, an extraction solvent consisting of 20 vol.% trialkylamine (N235, commercialized in China) and 10 vol.% secondary octyl alcohol (phase modifier) dissolved in sulfonated kerosene was used to extract molybdenum and vanadium in leach liquor. 10 wt.% ammonia water was used as stripping agent. Adding 30 g/l NH4NO3 to the stripping solution and adjusting the pH to 7–8.5, over 99% of vanadium can be crystallized as ammonium metavanadate. Over 98% of molybdenum can be crystallized as ammonium polymolybdate when pH is between 1.5 and 2.5 (pH is adjusted by HNO3). Ammonium metavanadate and ammonium polymolybdate were calcinated at 500–550 °C, the purity of MoO3 and V2O5 was 99.08% and 98.06% respectively. In the whole process, 88.2% of molybdenum and 87.1% of vanadium could be achieved. The proposed roasting, leaching and separation steps give a feasible alternative for the processing of ammonia leaching residue of spent catalyst and can be applied in the comprehensive utilization of low grade molybdenum ores.Molybdenum and vanadium have strategic and industrial importance due to their applications in many technological fields ( Petroleum refining industry mostly uses molybdenum-containing catalysts for desulphurization and mild hydrogenation process, trace amount of vanadium in petroleum can be adsorbed and concentrated on the catalyst ( During the past decade considerable research was devoted to the processing of spent catalyst. A survey of literatures revealed the technology for recycling molybdenum from spent catalyst and other resources ( The raw material used in this study is the ammonia leaching residue of spent catalyst, the particle size is between 0.040 and 0.074 mm. The residues were mixed with sodium carbonate in a certain proportion and then the mixture was put in a furnace (the temperature accuracy of the furnace is ± After the purification, the leach liquor was free of Al, Si and P, 20 vol.% trialkylamine was used to extract molybdenum and vanadium in leach liquor (pH 1.5–2.5, O/A In this process, the roasting temperature was varied in the range of 450–1000 °C, using 20 wt.% sodium carbonate with 60 min of roasting. The recovery of molybdenum and vanadium vs. temperature is shown in The effect of sodium carbonate addition on the recovery of molybdenum and vanadium was studied for a period of 60 min at 750 °C. The addition of sodium carbonate varied from 2 to 30 wt.% and the results illustrated in In order to study the role of reaction time on the recovery of molybdenum and vanadium, the reaction time was varied from 15 to 90 min, with an interval of 15 min, keeping the temperature and Na Thus, the above results revealed that, on the basis of laboratory scale study, it is possible to recover 91.3% of molybdenum and 90.1% of vanadium at 750 °C with 15 wt.% sodium carbonate when roasting for a period of 45 min. The roast was leached in a glass beaker with water on a heating plate at 80–90 °C for 15 min, at liquid/solid ratio of 2 with magnetic stirring. The molybdenum and vanadium in leach liquor were analyzed and the leaching recoveries were calculated from the leach liquor. Under the above mentioned optimum conditions, the content of molybdenum and vanadium in filtrate can be down to 0.2 wt.% and 0.05 wt.% respectively. Due to the low grade of Mo and V in the materials, the concentration of Mo and V in leach liquor was poor (Mo: 10–13 g/l, V: 2–2.5 g/l), organic solvent extraction was chosen to concentrate Mo and V in solution. However, in the leaching process, part of alumina, SiO The impurity of Si, As and P were removed by chemical precipitation with the addition of Mg (NO According to our experience, the initial pH of solution and reaction time was very important in the precipitation of As and P. The effect of pH on the purification of leach liquor was illustrated in With the forming of precipitations, hydrogen was released to the solution. Therefore, when the initial pH of solution was low (pH The effect of reaction time on the removal rates of P and As was shown in Under the suitable condition (addition of 0.8 wt.% Mg (NO A considerable research has been devoted to recovering molybdenum and vanadium from aqueous solution by solvent extraction with organic solutions of various extractants ( In order to get the product of MoO The material balance of the whole process was listed in An investigation was conducted to develop an approach to recover molybdenum and vanadium from ammonia leaching residue of spent catalyst. Based on results obtained from the current work, the following conclusions are made: Under selected conditions, i.e. roasting at 750 °C and addition of 15 wt.% sodium carbonate for 45 min, up to 91.3% of molybdenum and 90.1% of vanadium could be extracted, and the content of molybdenum and vanadium in filtrate can be down to 0.2 wt.% and 0.05 wt.% respectively. After the purification of leach liquor, solvent extraction was used to concentrate Mo and V in solution, the extraction rate of molybdenum and vanadium was no less than 99.9% by single stage extraction (O/A Ammonium metavanadate and ammonium polymolybdate were crystallized from the stripping solution by the addition of NH In the whole process, over 88.2% molybdenum and 87.1% vanadium could be recovered from the ammonia leaching residue of spent catalyst. The proposed roasting, leaching and separation steps give a feasible alternative for the processing of ammonia leaching residue of spent catalyst and can be applied in the comprehensive utilization of low grade molybdenum ores.