Superelastic properties of Ni50.9Ti shape memory wires were studied after cold drawing and post-deformation annealing at 450°C. Characteristic transformation temperatures were determined using differential scanning calorimetry. Microstructural investigations were performed using optical and transmission electron microscopy. Results indicate that deformations more than 0.4 of true strain yield in high stress and high strain values of upper plateau. On the other hand, deformations less than 0.4 result in work hardening and reduce plateau strain. Post-deformation heat treatment at 450°C leads to precipitation of Ni4Ti3 particles and development of recovered microstructure in slightly cold drawn wires. Post-deformation annealing of wires with cold work value of 0.6 in true strain develop nanocrystalline microstructure and hindered the formation of Ni4Ti3 precipitates. Precipitation of Ni4Ti3 particles improves the superelastic properties of not cold drawn wires. However, in comparison with annealed and aged wires, severely deformed wires attain better superelastic properties after annealing at 450°C without any Ni4Ti3 precipitates.Functional properties such as shape memory and superelasticity accompanied with good biocompatibility and high corrosion resistance have lead to great utilization of NiTi alloys in various applications Fine and coherent Ni Many industrial producers of NiTi alloys have their own practical information about the effect of cold work amount on mechanical behavior and transformation characteristics. However, information about the effect of cold work amount on superelastic behavior is scarce in open literature Cold work degree has a sharp influence on superelastic properties of NiTi alloys due to work hardening effect. Moreover, grain size refinement and development of precipitates during post-deformation heat treatment seems to be highly dependent on cold work amount. Accordingly, present study concentrates on the effect of cold work amount prior to post-deformation aging/annealing on superelastic properties of Ni A NiTi wire with nominal composition of 50.9 A bruker D8 Advanced XRD (X Ray Diffraction) with a Cu Kα radiation was used to obtain XRD spectra of the samples. Microstructures of the samples were analyzed using an Olympus optical microscope of type PMG3 and transmission electron microscope (TEM) of type Philips CM20. The etchant was composed of 100  As shown in The cold drawn samples were subjected to straightening annealing for 8 The time of straightening annealing was based on the minimum time needed for straightening of samples after cold drawing. Moreover, it should be noted that the furnace was an open-air furnace and technically the samples temperatures may be lower than the furnace temperature in short times according to heat transfer mechanism. As shown in As indicated in Effect of post-deformation aging on transition temperatures and microstructures were studied using XRD and DSC in order to analyze the above-mentioned superelastic behavior.  Considering the XRD results it could be seen that cold drawing results in peak broadening and decreasing the peak intensity accompanied with appearance of new peaks. Appearance of new peaks and decreasing the intensity of (1 DSC curves of the samples aged at 450 DSC measurements with continuous heating cycle were used in order to determine the reverse transformation and recrystallization temperatures. Further investigation of microstructural changes was performed by microscopy analysis.  It is important to note that the mechanical properties of the wires show distinct change after cold drawing degrees more than 0.4 in both deformed state and deformed-aged state. The differences in cold drawn samples, before heat treatment are related to known deformation mechanisms. While after heat treatment, there are two effective parameters, which are (i) grain size and (ii) suppression of precipitation. In fact, it is not clear that high stress level of upper plateau after post-deformation heat treatment in samples with cold work values more than 0.4 is due to nanocrystalline structure or is related to suppression of precipitation. Furthermore, high strain value of upper plateau in the sample with cold work degree of 0.6 after post-deformation treatment could also be affected by precipitation suppression. Furthermore, complete recovery or changes in texture due to recrystallization could affect the strain value of upper plateau. However, more investigation is needed to clarify the effect of nanostructure on superelastic behavior of NiTi shape memory alloys. Strain value of upper plateau during loading of cold drawn wires after post-deformation heat treatment at 450 R phase transformation occurs in annealed and cold drawn wires after heat treatment at 450 The differences in superelastic behavior of cold drawn samples, before heat treatment are related to known deformation mechanisms. While after heat treatment, there are two effective parameters, which are (i) sub-grain size and (ii) suppression of precipitation. The authors acknowledge Professor Gunther Eggeler, Dr. Jan Frenzel and Dr. Tobias Simon from Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany for FIB and TEM investigations.