A novel process for the regeneration and purification of spent electrolyte from sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy to reduce sodium hydroxide consumption is reported in this paper. This is achieved through a method of causticisation, which maintains the quality of zinc metal powder. This process consists of two steps: sodium carbonate separation and causticisation. The sodium carbonate in the spent electrolyte is separated by adding solid NaOH to increase the alkaline concentration to over 350g/L. The delamination of the solid–liquid phase appears after the above mixture stands for a few hours. Solid–liquid separation is carried out subsequently. The solid phase is redissolved by the addition of the wash water from the leaching of slag or zinc powder, and this solution is used for causticisation. The sodium carbonate, sodium silicate and sodium sulfate in the solution are causticised with CaO to regenerate NaOH. The causticised alkaline solution mixed with the supernatant liquor of the Na2CO3 separation step is recycled to the next alkaline leaching operation. Meanwhile, the spent electrolyte is purified. The optimum causticisation conditions were found to be as follows: an initial NaOH concentration of 80 to 100g/L, a weight ratio of 1.0 CaO/Na2CO3, a temperature of 90°C and an initial Na2CO3 concentration above 40g/L. Finally, a scaled-up experiment was performed. In this experiment, 400ml of spent electrolyte was used to regenerate 11.35g of NaOH. This finding means that a plant with an annual output of 2000tons of metallic zinc powder can save US$678,000 in 1year. At the same time, the removal rates of, for instance, Fe, Cu, Cd, Cr, Mg and Mn in the spent electrolyte varied between 10% and 60%. Particularly, the removal rate of As reached 62%. The high cost of sodium hydroxide and the accumulation of impurities are the two challenges in alkaline zinc hydrometallurgy. The above process allows reduce significantly the consumption of sodium hydroxide and clarify the recycled solution.As the primary source of zinc, natural sulfide ores are steadily being depleted, and for future demand, there is an obvious recognition that the recovery of zinc from oxide ores and solid wastes containing zinc is an alternative source of zinc. Oxidised ores (such as Smithsonite (ZnCO In our previous work, the technology of sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy, a cost-effective alkaline leaching and electrowinning process for the extraction of zinc and lead from the oxidised zinc ore and wastes, was developed ( However, an increase in sodium hydroxide consumption and impurities accumulation will appear following the adoption of this technique of sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy in the disposal of lean zinc-bearing ores and wastes, especially when the zinc grade is below 10%. In addition, it is found that arsenic impurities seriously affect the electrolysis of metallic zinc powders in alkaline solutions. Thus, reducing the NaOH requirements and the removal of impurity ions are important steps in the improvement of this technology. Because the main forms of the lean zinc-bearing oxidised ores and wastes are ZnO, ZnCO In the process of sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy, the spent electrolyte typically contains 220 to 280 Therefore, the major focus of this work is on the preparation of a suitable solution for the causticisation process using the spent electrolyte and other solutions in the process of sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy. Reducing the alkaline concentration to proper levels and extracting Na Based on the regular dissolution pattern of Na Analytical-grade chemicals such as NaOH, Na The spent electrolyte used in the scaled-up experiment was obtained from the Mengzi Zinc Powder Plant in Mengzi county, Yunnan province of China. This plant was a demonstration project with an annual output of 1000 A three-neck 300 The supernatant was taken with a pipette and its concentrations of Na A given ratio of Na In this experiment, 400 The volumes of each solution in the experiment, such as the spent electrolyte, supernatant liquor, causticisation solution, causticised alkaline solution and washing water for leaching slag, were measured using a 500-ml measuring cylinder. The concentration of zinc, NaOH and Na The NaOH regeneration and the material balances of the scaled-up experiment were computed according to the following equations: The ternary system of Na As shown in The effects of the initial NaOH and Na It can be seen in As shown in The integrated process of regeneration and purification of spent electrolyte from sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy by causticisation based on the above results is shown in In this experiment, 400 The spent electrolyte was purified, and the impurity ions were partly wiped off in this process. The removal rates of, for instance, Fe, Cu, Cd, Cr, Mg and Mn were 10% to 60%. In particular, the removal rate of As, an impurity with seriously detrimental effects on the electrolysis of metallic zinc powder in the alkaline solution, reached 62% ( The raw materials that can be used in the process of sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy include low-grade oxidised zinc ores and solid wastes containing zinc. The main compositions of these raw materials are ZnO, ZnCO In conventional chemical recovery, Na In Reactions (12) through (14), one CO In addition to the regeneration of NaOH, the purification of the spent electrolyte is also realised by the process of regeneration and purification of spent electrolyte. In fact, the first sodium carbonate separation unit is the crystallisation of sodium carbonate by the addition of solid NaOH to yield sodium carbonate supersaturated in the spent electrolyte. The supersaturation of Na In the second causticisation unit, the direct causticisation is achieved by the reaction of Ca(OH) At the same time, the other impurity ions formed insoluble metal hydroxides, carbonates or subcarbonates and are removed into the caustic residue via coprecipitation, adsorption, coacervation and net-capture. Considering that the NaOH solution is constantly recycled in the sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy process, and the chemical composition of the raw ore is notably complex, impurity ions such as As, Al, Cu and Fe will accumulate in the recycled solution. These impurities will affect the quality of the metallic zinc powder. Thus, the impurity ions are partly removed, and the concentrations of the impurity ions in the recycled solution become stable in this process. For the technology of sodium hydroxide zinc metallurgy, to reduce the loss of NaOH and clarify the recycled solution, the integrated process of regeneration and purification of spent electrolyte by causticisation was developed in this work. The addition of solid NaOH can be used to separate Na In the later scaled-up experiment, 400 This project was supported by the