With advances in numerical modeling techniques, the combined finite-discrete-element-method (FDEM) is increasingly being used to study the mechanical behavior and failure processes of brittle geomaterials under various loading conditions. The progressive rock fracturing process from initial formation to subsequent propagation can be simulated explicitly in FDEM models where the corresponding mechanical response in the simulations is governed by a set of microparameters. Previous studies have calibrated these microparameters by comparing the macroscopic results of simulated laboratory tests with those obtained in physical tests or by comparing larger-scale model results to observed field performance of engineered structures. Very few studies, however, have calibrated models at both the laboratory and field scales, and there is, therefore, a lack of understanding of the scale-dependency of FDEM material parameter inputs. To explore this scale issue, this study presents a series of calibrated laboratory-scale models of Creighton granite. Next, models of 8 m-wide pillars with different width-to-height ratios are calibrated against the strength trends predicted by empirical relationships. In the context of the pillar models developed, the effects of each input parameter on the macroscopic pillar stress-strain behavior are presented, considering the yield stress, peak strength, and post-yield behaviors. Ultimately, it is found that while the same set of input parameters can be used to reproduce both the expected laboratory specimen behavior and the expected pillar peak strengths at different width-to-height ratios, the post-yield behavior of the pillar models obtained using the laboratory parameters is much more brittle than would be expected in reality.As global society continues to extract ore from ever-increasing depths below the surface, stable unmined pillars are purposely left in place to support excavated areas. Most underground mines depend upon robust pillar systems for over mine stability, especially in deep underground operations. Because of this, many rock mechanics researchers have made efforts to study the mechanical behaviors of the pillars using empirical and numerical approaches. Over the past half-century, several empirical approaches to predict rock pillar strength have been developed using large amounts of in-situ observations of pillar response to loading from various underground mines. With recent advances in computing hardware, numerical tools are increasingly used to simulate the stress-induced yielding and damage process of rocks and rock masses. To date, the numerical methods used to represent rock mass behavior can be classified into three categories: continuum models, discontinuum models, and hybrid models. The combined finite-discrete element method (FDEM) is a state-of-the-art approach where continuum phenomena (deformability) and discontinuum phenomena (separation and interaction of individual elements) are solved using the finite element method and the discrete element method, respectively. In FDEM simulations, the macroscopic behavior of the material under a given loading condition is an emergent result of the evolution of micro-scale damage, rather than being prescribed according to a specific macroscopic constitutive model. The parameters input into FDEM models are related to properties of discretized triangular elements and four-noded crack elements by which mechanical behaviors are represented. Since the size of each element is much smaller than the entire model (and may approximate the rock grain size in laboratory-scale simulations), these parameters are often referred to as microparameters. The modeling results are dependent on the assigned microparameters which cannot be easily measured in the laboratory, so in order to replicate more reliable and accurate material response, FDEM models require calibration of the input parameters through iterative adjustment until the modeled macroscopic behaviors match those expected in reality. Bulk parameters defining the elastic triangular elements: Young's Modulus ( Penalty parameters governing the interaction of contacting elements: normal penalty ( Strength parameters determining the fracture initiation and propagation: crack element tensile strength ( The laboratory-scale models presented by Tatone and Grasselli While previous studies have calibrated FDEM model microparameters by comparing the macroscopic behavior of simulated laboratory tests with those obtained in real tests or by comparing larger-scale model results to observed field performance of engineered structures, there is still a gap of understanding of how the FDEM input parameters in a laboratory-scale simulation are related to those in a field-scale simulation. From an engineering performance prediction standpoint, the goal is to calibrate model parameters using laboratory testing data and then use these parameters to simulate the expected performance of field-scale geostructures. However, the capability of state-of-the-art FDEM models to provide reliable predictions of field-scale behavior using such a methodology has not been demonstrated sufficiently. The purpose of this paper is to validate the capability of a 2D FDEM code to accurately represent in-situ pillar behavior and to evaluate the relationship between microparameters calibrated at the laboratory-scale and at the field-scale. To that end, results from a series of simulated laboratory tests (UCS, Brazilian and triaxial tests) are presented and compared to those obtained from real laboratory tests. An empirical relationship between pillar strength and width-to-height (W/H) ratio was used as the fundamental basis for field-scale model calibration (e.g., determination of a set of micro parameters that could produce expected pillar strengths for multiple W/H values). One limitation of using an empirical pillar strength formula directly is that such formulae were developed for supported pillars, where loss of surficial material and subsequent degradation of the pillar geometry is prevented by commonly used mine support (e.g., bolts, mesh, etc.); in contrast, most FDEM software programs do not have a well developed and validated support logic. To overcome this issue, the models of Sinha and Walton are used as a comparison baseline for FDEM models. In this study, the mechanical response of the Creighton granite in laboratory tests and field pillar cases is simulated by the combined finite-discrete element method (FDEM), which simulates the rock fracturing process. In a 2D model, the crack elements being subject to forces can deform elastically and break in tension (Mode I) or in shear (Mode II) upon reaching the critical opening or sliding distance As mentioned by Mahabadi et al. The initiation and propagation of a mixed Mode I-II fracture are defined by the coupling criterion based on opening and shearing displacements as below: This study was conducted using the FDEM software Irazu, developed by Geomechanica Inc.; Irazu is a commercialized version of the original open source software, Y-Geo. The granitic rock selected for this study is from the Creighton Mine, located at the southern edge of the Sudbury Igneous Complex (SIC) in Canada. Abdelaziz et al. A simulated test sample with 120 mm height and 55 mm width was placed between two elastic loading platens with steel properties, Prior to calibrating the model's input microparameters, the mesh size used and the loading velocity applied to the model platens were determined to be 0.08 mm and 0.01 m/s, respectively, based on sensitivity tests similar to those presented by Mahabadi et al. In order to avoid dynamic loading effects, Over the past several decades, the failure process of brittle rocks has been extensively studied by many researchers. This progressive damage process can be divided into five stages Crack closure Linear elastic deformation Systematic stable crack growth Unstable crack growth and coalescence Post-peak behavior The axial stress-strain curve for a typical laboratory compression test includes an initial portion of non-linearity associated with the stress-induced closure of pre-existing cracks under initial loading. Following this stage, the rock starts to undergo a period of stable elastic deformation during which no new damage is generated; correspondingly, the evolution of the axial and lateral strains are linearly proportional to the axial stress. At a certain stress level referred to as the crack initiation stress (CI), the lateral strain – axial stress curve transitions to being non-linear; this is widely regarded as the onset of dilatancy associated with the stable, systematic growth of stress-induced cracks. By recognizing the critical stress thresholds that indicate transitions in specimen behavior (CI & CD), additional data can be used to constrain the numerical model calibration process. Overall, five parameters from the laboratory unconfined compressive strength tests were used: Young's Modulus, Poisson's ratio, the Crack Initiation stress (CI), the Crack Damage stress (CD), and the peak strength under unconfined conditions. The iterative procedure of laboratory-scale calibration used in this study is based on the methodology proposed by Tatone and Grasselli.  Following an initial calibration to the unconfined compressive strength test data, further simulations were performed to test the ability of the model to replicate the peak strength behavior observed under triaxial and Brazilian tensile loading conditions. The mesh, boundary conditions, and material properties used in the triaxial simulations are identical to those used in the uniaxial compression test, except the confining stress boundary condition applied to the vertical sides of the specimens. The sample was initially loaded by the top platen moving downwards as 0.1 m/s with the bottom platen fixed. The confining stress (2 MPa, 4 MPa, 6 MPa, 8 MPa, 10 MPa, 20 MPa, 40 MPa or 60 MPa) was applied to vertical sides of the specimen after finite amounts of elastic axial strain (0.004%, 0.005%, 0.011%, 0.014%, 0.017%, 0.033%, 0.066% or 0.102%, respectively) in order to avoid the negative axial strains that would be induced via the Poisson effect by immediate application of lateral pressure. Although the standard laboratory loading approach (hydrostatic loading up to the designed confinement) was not applied in these simulations, before reaching the hydrostatic loading condition, the simulated specimen undergoes a fully elastic mechanical response, meaning that the obtained results are independent of the loading path used. With increasing confining stress, the post-yield response gradually transitions from brittle to ductile in the triaxial test simulations at varying levels of confining stress as shown in The Brazilian test has become a commonly applied approach to estimate the tensile strength of brittle geomaterials because the direct uniaxial tensile test is relatively expensive and logistically complicated. To better understand the failure process of the Brazilian disc, many researchers have conducted numbers of studies on analytical solutions and numerical simulations using continuum or discontinuum methods. As illustrated in As seen in  The previously presented laboratory-scale models demonstrate that the FDEM approach is able to capture the expected mechanical behavior of laboratory tests. To understand whether or not this set of parameters can be directly used to replicate the mechanical response of field-scale underground mine structures, three pillar models with width to height (W/H) ratios of 1, 2, and 3 were developed using the set of microparameters obtained from laboratory-scale calibration. The geometry of pillar models is illustrated in The resulting stress-strain curves are compared with a previously FLAC3D model constrained by empirically-derived pillar strength predictions. The results presented in The following field-scale calibration presented in the following sections considered only adjustments to the second and third parameter categories discussed in Section Given that the crack elements in an FDEM model have a finite stiffness value (governed by penalty terms), the overall stiffness of simulated structures can be influenced by these values to varying degrees. In general, it is suggested that the FDEM penalty terms should have diminishing effects on the overall model elastic stiffness as they approach infinity; from the perspective of modeling elastic behavior, therefore, large values of the penalty terms (relative to the Young's Modulus of the intact rock material) are typically selected. Note that in most works, the penalty terms in FDEM models are presented as a function of Young's Modulus (  The values of the FDEM strength parameters, including cohesion ( When the rock at the pillar walls fractures and dilates, the development of confining stress can suppress the formation of damage further into the pillar, particularly when the rock material has a high friction angle. Based on the findings of the sensitivity analysis presented above, the post-yield ductility is more sensitive to the value of Mode II fracture energy and friction angle than to other parameters. As a result, the first calibration step was to enlarge these two parameters until the post-yield ductility was increased significantly to be approximately consistent with the expected trends at different W/H values. The yield strength of the continuum models was then modified by adjusting the normal and tangential penalty together, as well as the parameter with the greatest impact on the modeled peak strength (cohesion) and the Mode I fracture energy. The adjustment of these parameters allowed the modeling results to approximate the overall desired model behavior. Since the elastic modulus assigned to model zones interacts with the fracture penalty to influence the emergent model stiffness as illustrated in the previous sensitivity tests, it was important to adjust this parameter to counteract any changes in the emergent elastic response previously induced by changes to the fracture penalty value. Finally, minor adjustments of combinations of parameters were conducted together until a single set of parameters allowing for the recreation of the expected pillar stress-strain response at several W/H ratios of 1, 2 and 3 were obtained. The final set of calibrated parameters is presented in A comparison of the different pillar damage and failure mechanisms observed in the calibrated FDEM models is shown in This study demonstrates the ability of FDEM models to replicate the mechanical response of brittle rocks at the laboratory-scale and field-scale. In the past, the process of upscaling laboratory-scale models to field-scale models of geostructures has not been studied in great detail. With the goal of working towards filling this gap, the well-studied case of rock pillars has been considered. A series of laboratory-scale FDEM models of Creighton granite were calibrated to obtain a single set of microparameters that could replicate observed specimen behaviors in uniaxial compression tests, triaxial compression tests, and Brazilian tensile tests. It was then found that this set of laboratory-scale input parameters could not be directly used to accurately predict the post-yield deformation behavior of field-scale pillars, although reasonable pillar strength predictions could be obtained. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to understand the influence of individual input parameters on different aspects of the mechanical behaviors of the pillar models. To calibrate the pillar models to the expected post-yield behavior, the friction angle and fracture energy values were increased to increase post-yield ductility of the higher W/H pillar models, and the cohesion was correspondingly significantly decreased to avoid increases in the pillar peak strength values. Ultimately, input parameters were obtained to reproduce the expected pillar behavior at varying W/H ratios. This study will contribute to advance the rock mechanics community's understanding of FDEM model scaling issues. Additionally, the capability of the FDEM method to reproduce expected progressive pillar damage behaviors at the field-scale was demonstrated. This study was supported by the