Much of the information on land cover and land use that can be derived using remote sensing (RS) cannot, or can only with great difficulty and/or cost, be obtained using in situ methods. One of the most important distinguishing characteristics of RS, relative to other data acquisition approaches, is that it can provide detailed, quantitative land surface information at large spatial coverages In order to understand the potential role of RS-derived land-cover and land-use change information for planning, it is useful to first provide a working definition of planning. According to One of the most effective information synthesis and analysis tools for incorporating detailed spatial information for planning is provided by geographic information systems (GIS) ( Sectors and activities that stand to benefit from RS-derived change information for planning and management include: agriculture (e.g. irrigation, cropping, fertilizing, harvesting), forestry (e.g. harvesting, silviculture, pest management, distribution), urban planning (e.g. utilities, transportation, telecommunications, housing development), oil and gas (e.g. exploration, pipeline development, drilling, refining), conservation (e.g. species at risk, protected areas, habitat monitoring, rehabilitation), and environmental monitoring (e.g. ice extent, biomass, urbanization, drought). Even with just these few examples it is evident that the specific nature of the land-surface change information required is likely to vary considerably between planning and management contexts. The discussion below focuses on the types of information that can be extracted using RS and the methods used to extract it. Output from RS analyses is typically quantitative. Thus, if RS information is to be useful in planning, it is necessary to be able to conceptualize the land surface in ways that are amenable to quantification but are still meaningful from a planning perspective. These can be described in terms of: (1) the pattern of physical land-surface features (i.e. structure) and/or (2) the physical processes between these land-surface features (i.e. function) ( A ‘structural–temporal’ description of the land surface entails describing how land surface entities occur through space and time ( Based on the definition of ‘planning’ introduced above, the concept of ‘time’ is a central component of the planning process. A second important aspect for some, although not all, planning activities, is the concept of ‘space’. Remote sensing data are able to address both time and space considerations at a range of spatio-temporal scales. Two fundamental means of conceptualizing scale are in terms of data/information frequency, and in terms of data/information range. From a spatial remote sensing perspective, frequency refers to pixel resolution while range refers to image coverage. From a temporal remote sensing perspective, frequency refers to temporal intervals at which images are obtained and range refers to the time period spanned by the image data set. Spatial frequency, spatial range, temporal frequency and temporal range have a fundamental bearing on how RS-based change analysis is performed in relation to planning objectives. Remote sensing can be defined as the collection of information about an object, area or phenomenon without coming into direct contact with that object, area or phenomenon. Practically, this is an involved process that can entail numerous steps, which draw on varied information sources and incorporate a range of assumptions. Remote sensing has been described as a process by which conditions measured for a ‘field’ at one location are used to draw conclusions about quantities that influence the field at another location ( Remote sensing analysis requires the conversion of raw quantitative reflectance data into useful information, most often quantitative. Thus, RS is fundamentally a quantitative modeling exercise since conclusions are drawn about the land surface using a data/information model of that land surface ( Remote sensors can be coarsely grouped into active or passive systems, both of which are comprised of non-imaging, imaging, and sounding systems. Given the present state of remote sensing technology and analysis methods, the optical and shortwave infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum (i.e. 400–3000 nm) are recognized as among the most useful for quantifying land-cover and land-use distribution and change ( Absorption and emission are two basic interactions between electromagnetic radiation and matter ( Measured Radiation Quantity=Function (Property of Matter) Property of Matter=Inverse Function (Measured Radiation Quantity) Since multi-temporal techniques are built on single-date processing techniques, it is useful to discuss the latter first. A useful paradigm for conceptualizing image analysis is in terms of the degree of indirectness with which the measured radiation field and the wanted quantity are linked ( Examples of a first-order analysis are the extraction of surface reflectance from raw radiance values, whereas a second-order analysis would involve the extraction of some type of measured surface characteristic such as surface temperature or ozone concentration in the atmosphere. The reason this is considered second-order is because the extracted parameter is still closely tied to the underlying physical ‘cause and effect’ process. Third-order analysis uses second-order output to derive biophysical parameters such as ‘leaf area index’, ‘biomass’, or ‘leaf pigment content’. Fourth-order analyses use third-order outputs to derive parameters that are further removed from the original radiative transfer equation (e.g. fuzzy and thematic measures of land cover and land use, measures of net primary productivity). The difficulty with accurately extracting high-order parameters such as land use is that they are not very closely tied to the physical remote sensing process. A second and complementary way of describing RS models is in terms of their ‘determinism’ ( Empirical methods include: (i) discrete classification; (ii) fuzzy classification; (iii) neural network approaches; (iv) spectral indices; and (v) spatial/ancillary methods. Empirical approaches have been applied in a variety of mapping contexts (e.g. forestry ( Deterministic-oriented analyses have been used to characterize: (i) chlorophyll content ( ‘Mixed’ models are neither strongly empirical nor strongly deterministic. Useful examples of ‘mixed’ modeling approaches are: (i) linear spectral unmixing (e.g. estimating biophysical forest parameters ( Before discussing change methodologies in detail, it is prudent to outline key considerations that constrain RS-based change analyses. The most important of these are discussed below and include: (1) technological constraints; (2) environmental constraints; and (3) image preprocessing. When describing RS data it is useful to do so in terms of spatial, spectral, temporal, and radiometric resolution ( Many land surfaces are extremely dynamic. Examples of important ‘natural’ sources of change include: (1) disturbances (e.g. fire, storms, disease); and (2) ‘natural’ ecosystem cycles (e.g. daily, seasonal [intra-annual], and inter-annual cycles). Examples of important anthropogenic sources of change include: (1) urbanization/industrialization (e.g. expansion of urban, residential and commercial areas); and (2) resource extraction (e.g. agricultural, timber, and mineral extraction). Awareness of this dynamism is crucial to effective change modeling. Image timing can be as important as the choice of sensor(s), and change detection algorithms ( Failure to understand the impact of various environmental characteristics can profoundly influence change results ( Image pre-processing is often explicitly mentioned in more empirical change analyses since it constitutes an initial deterministic component of the analysis, whereby multi-temporal data are adjusted to allow for more accurate comparison of results through time. With deterministic change analyses, pre-processing is rarely mentioned explicitly since it is typically integrated as part of the analysis process ( Of the various aspects of pre-processing for change detection, there are two outstanding requirements: spatial registration and radiometric calibration. Accurate spatial registration of multi-temporal remote sensing data is essential to digital change detection, in that minor registration errors can introduce considerable error into the change analysis, particularly at change/no-change boundaries ( A much more difficult challenge is posed by differences in the radiometric character between image dates and even within images themselves ( In summary, remote sensing data collected under the following conditions will help provide for a systematic analysis for detecting change: Data collected by the same sensor will have similar characteristics (e.g. spatial, spectral and radiometric resolution; geometry, radiometric response). Data acquired under clear atmospheric conditions (i.e. free of cloud and haze) will assist in the identification of real change on the ground surface. Data collected on anniversary dates will have similar surface conditions for the area under study (i.e. consistent plant phenology) as well as consistent sun-terrain-sensor geometry. The basic challenge in change analysis is one of ‘model inversion’, whereby a model can be inverted through space and time. Temporal inversion models that are closely tied to physical cause and effect are deterministic and generally represent models of low-order. The major assumption underlying change modeling is similar to any RS analysis in that it deals with the signal-to-noise ratio (i.e. the change in radiance values between successive imaging dates, that result from changes on the ground, can be sensed, and are large relative to differences in atmosphere, illumination and background conditions) ( Empirical approaches to extracting change information are generally comprised of some or all of the following steps: (1) pre-processing; (2) spectral enhancement of individual dates; (3) change enhancement to precipitate individual dates into ‘change’ images; (4) change masking to reduce change images into binary ‘change/no-change’ masks; (5) classifying ‘no-change’ information from individual dates; (6) overlaying classified dates to extract change information; and (7) constraining change analysis using a binary change mask ( An example is provided here that depicts a typical application of a ‘hybrid’ empirical approach for extracting nominal (‘from–to’) land-cover and land-use change information in regional planning ( Examples of applications of these empirical change methods include: eroded lands monitoring ( Generally, change in low-order parameters such as biomass, mineral content, chlorophyll content, soil moisture content is monitored using deterministic change models. The main benefit of deterministic models in this regard is that, once developed, they can be applied in a standardized way to a variety of similar scenarios. From a planning perspective, such standardized information is preferable to non-standardized information since it places research, and decisions based on that research, in a more robust framework. An example is provided here that summarizes how a deterministic model might be applied within a precision agriculture context ( Other examples of deterministic change approaches and applications include: monitoring net primary productivity for ecological and climatological studies ( Change analysis, by definition, requires comparison of land-surface information through time but it does not necessarily require comparison through space beyond the confines of the image bounds being analyzed. Under Quenzel's paradigm, some of the RS-derived land-surface information required for planning is of ‘high-order’ meaning a reduction in the degree to which results can be compared or ‘inverted’ to other images. Although the ability to compare land surface change information across space is important for many planning activities, there are also many scenarios where access to high-order information is more important. The basic decision that emerges from this fact is whether to use deterministic or empirical approaches for the context at hand. Traditionally, two very general RS-monitoring applications are identified, namely: (1) biophysical monitoring for establishment and calibration of mass/energy models; and (2) context-specific land surface monitoring ( This chapter has provided an overview of the status of remote sensing change analysis, with particular emphasis on methods for conducting change analysis. Automated monitoring of the land surface remains an important goal for remote sensing, the achievement of which could contribute a great deal to the field of land-use planning. For some scenarios automated monitoring is already possible. However, in most contexts, particularly where information on change in high-order parameters is desired, such automation remains an elusive goal. There are many planning applications for which scientists should aim to move beyond empirical techniques so that RS can be used as a reliable mapping and monitoring tool. However, there are many other planning applications where automation and the ability to compare outside the immediate context of the RS analysis is superseded by the ability to extract higher order information. For such contexts, empirical modeling approaches, if applied in an accurate and traceable way, have the potential to be very useful well into the future. Presently, the most important progress toward automated monitoring is being made on two fronts: (1) development of improved modeling approaches; and (2) development of improved RS technology (