Granular activated carbon (GAC) was evaluated as a suitable sorbent for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) removal from aqueous solutions. For this purpose, kinetic measurements on the extraction of a family of six PAHs were taken. A morphology study was performed by means of a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of GAC samples. Analyses of the batch rate data for each PAH were carried out using two kinetic models: the homogenous particle diffusion model (HPDM) and the shell progressive model (SPM). The process was controlled by diffusion rate the solutes (PAHs) that penetrated the reacted layer at PAH concentrations in the range of 0.2–10mgL−1. The effective particle diffusion coefficients (D
                     eff) derived from the two models were determined from the batch rate data. The Weber and Morris intraparticle diffusion model made a double contribution to the surface and pore diffusivities in the sorption process. The D
                     eff values derived from both the HPMD and SPM equations varied from 1.1×10−13 to 6.0×10−14
                     m2
                     s−1.
                  The simplest model, the pore diffusion model, was applied first for data analysis. The model of the next level of complexity, the surface diffusion model, was applied in order to gain a deeper understanding of the diffusion process. This model is able to explain the data, and the apparent surface diffusivities are in the same order of magnitude as the values for the sorption of functionalized aromatic hydrocarbons (phenols and sulphonates) that are described in the literature.stoichiometric coefficient Elovich model constant (g constants of the Redlich–Peterson isotherm Elovich model constant (g total concentration of sorbing species (M) concentration of sorbing species A in bulk solution (M) total concentration of both sorbing in the sorbent phase (M) concentration of sorbing species at the bead's unreacted core (M) diffusion coefficient in solid phase (m effective diffusion coefficient (m diffusivity of a single solute in solution (m pore diffusivity (m surface diffusivity (m sorption Freundlich constant (g distribution coefficient (dm Weber and Morris intraparticle diffusion rate Weber and Morris (mg rate constant for film diffusion (infinite solution volume condition) sorption Langmuir constant (m mass transfer coefficient of species A through the liquid film (m octanol/water coefficient reaction constant based on surface (m pseudo-first-order rate constant (min pseudo-second-order rate constant (g Freundlich exponent amount of solute sorbed at equilibrium (mg amount of solute sorbed at time (t solid-phase concentration inside particles, mg average particle radius (m) time (min) fractional attainment of equilibrium or extent of solid conversion intraparticle porosity viscosity (g particle density (g tortuosity factor Discharges from coal mines, old gas works and wood preservative treatment sites have been identified as being responsible for many of the contamination problems involving high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in soils and groundwater. As a result, many of these facilities have been recognized as priority targets for decontamination, as is the case in Europe through the Megasites Programme or in the case of the USA through the National Priorities List of Superfund Sites Program The main remediation processes tested initially included the utilization of physical containment barriers and groundwater pump-and-treat methods More recently, air stripping, soil washing and Fenton oxidation have been evaluated Activated carbon sorption is the best technology available for the control of many organic contaminants in waters. Treatment options may range from a wide variety of activated carbons that differ in pore structure and surface chemistry to the control of one or more chemical compounds and mixtures The volume of water that can be properly treated by a certain amount of GAC is limited as the process depends on the specific sorption capacity of the type of GAC used. Therefore, the sorbent must be replaced when contaminant concentrations exceed a given threshold at the reactor/column/barrier outlet. Granular activated carbon has a porous structure that makes solids both macro- and microporous. This makes it possible to control pore sizes and relatively high surface areas (1000–2000 GAC is particularly suitable for the efficient sorption of high molecular weight organic molecules with lipophilic properties, as is the case of PAHs Kinetic PAH sorption data for a given sorbate/sorbent pair are generally scarce. Therefore, it would be desirable to develop a tool capable of predicting the kinetic sorption performance of GAC for aqueous trace PAHs based on fundamental sorbent and sorbate properties. For this purpose, a family of PAHs with two to four rings was evaluated in a set of kinetic sorption tests. This paper describes the PAH extraction kinetics behaviour of GAC. The aim is to determine the kinetic parameters of the PAH sorption process in the conditions expected to be found in ground and industrial wastewater with a PAH content in the range of 0.2–10 The GAC sample was provided by Aguas de Levante (Spain). The sample used (F400) was an activated carbon specially tailored for the treatment of organic contaminants, macromolecules, colour, taste and smell. It is an activated carbon with a macroporous volume of 1.5 The PAHs (acenaphthene, anthracene, fluorene, fluoranthene, naphthalene and pyrene) were purchased from Merck and Aldrich Chemical Co. Acetonitrile was purchased from Panreac. The PAH solutions were prepared from a stock solution of each PAH in acetonitrile. Synthetic solutions were prepared by proper dilution in deionized water. The characteristics of the PAHs and the composition solutions are shown in The composition of the aqueous solutions varied depending on the nature of the experiment. PAH content in the aqueous phase was determined by UV–vis Spectrophotometry (Hewlett Packard, model HP-8453). The extent of sorption was calculated from the residual concentration of the PAH in the equilibrated solution. The absorbance values of PAHs, were determined at the following wavelengths: acetonaphthene, 281 A standard agitated reactor experimental set-up was used to determine the kinetic data of F400. A wet-sieved F400 fraction of narrow particle size range (3–6 Dynamic contact between the GAC and the solution was carried out on a mechanical shaker at different shaking speeds to determine the minimum speed above which the kinetics are independent of the degree of agitation and, hence, not influenced by film diffusion. Sorption rates were always measured above this minimum speed. The kinetic analysis was carried out at room temperature (21 A JEOL 3400 Scanning Electron Microscopy with Energy Dispersive System (SEM-EDS) was used to observe the surface morphology of GAC. Prior to analysis, samples were dried in a vacuum oven at room temperature and then gold coated. The sorption of organic micropollutants onto natural and synthetic sorbents has been described as a complex process, in which the properties of the sorbate and the solvent often play a critical role. The sorption process occurs within the boundary layer around the sorbent and proceeds in the liquid-filled pores or along the walls of the pores of the sorbent. The latter two processes are called the external and internal mass transfer steps, respectively. The sorption of organic micropollutants using GAC, as is the case of other heterogeneous processes between solids and fluids, could be explained through a number of sequential processes that determine the rate of reaction: (a) the diffusion of the solute through the liquid film surrounding the particle (liquid film diffusion control); (b) the diffusion of the solute through the sorbent matrix of the GAC (particle-diffusion control); (c) the chemical reaction with the functional groups attached to the matrix. One of these steps usually offers much greater resistance than the others and may thus be considered as the rate-limiting step of the process The kinetic models selected to describe the solute extraction data are two models widely used for fitting sorption and ion exchange data: the homogeneous particle diffusion model (HPDM) and the shell progressive model (SPM) or the shrinking core model In this model, the extraction mechanism involves the diffusion of PAH molecules from the aqueous solution into the sorbent phase through a number of possible resistances. The sorption of the PAH molecules can be rigorously described by Fick's equation. This applies the diffusion of PAH compounds in a quasi-homogeneous media. The sorbent phase controlled diffusion of PAH molecules from an infinite volume of solution into sorbent particle was described by Boyd et al.  Vermeulen's This equation could be further simplified to cover most of the data points for calculating effective particle diffusivity by using the following expression: If liquid film diffusion controls the rate of sorption, the following analogous expression can be used: The shell progressive or unreacted shrinking core model is a mass transfer model in which the reaction starts at the particle surface, which forms a reacted zone and moves inward at a certain velocity. In this case, the relationship between the sorption time and the degree of sorption is given by the expressions below When it is controlled by the fluid film: When it is controlled by the diffusion though the sorption layer: When it is controlled by the chemical reaction: The aim of this kinetic study was to find a diffusion model that describes the experimental data. This was in order to determine the rate controlling steps and the kinetic parameters of the mass transfer for each PAH. However, since the data were collected under conditions of minimum film diffusion resistance, the models based on reacted layer diffusion control and chemical reaction control were tested first. Kinetics measurements in the extraction of PAH with GAC in the range 0.2–10 All experimental data were treated graphically with all the fractional attainment of equilibrium functions  The results of the linear regression analysis for Eqs. The linear correlation coefficients indicate a good fit for both models. The slope values were used to calculate effective diffusion coefficients ( The effective application of GAC requires a detailed knowledge of their structural (geometric) and surface heterogeneities. Aqueous phase sorption onto carbonaceous sorbents is influenced by several factors, in particular the chemical composition of the carbon surface, the pore size distribution, and the internal surface area. The size, shape and physic-chemical properties of molecules occurring in source waters are also important. In a previous study, the sorption equilibrium data were determined using three isotherm models: the Freundlich, Langmuir and Redlich–Peterson models. Similar behaviour was observed when the pseudo-first-order constant ( From a phenomenological point of view, this observation implies that a target PAH with a greater It could be conjectured that the most important step in a given groundwater procedure by the application of GAC will largely depend on the size of the organic compounds to be removed. Moreover, a breakdown of the approximate sizes helps to explain the fact that mesopores may be as important as micropores when high molecular-weight compounds are present. It is clear that a large micropore volume (high surface area) results in the efficient removal of small molecules. However, water treatment applications that deal with larger molecules such as PAHs, which thus includes mesopores and macropores, may be also important The scanning electron microscopy examination of the F400, as presented in The sorption of PAHs onto a porous sorbent such as GAC goes through three consecutive stages. The first stage is assumed to occur rapidly and does not form a rate-limiting stage in the sorption of organic compounds on activated carbons. It is proposed that the main resistance to mass transfer occurs solely in the second stage, during the movement or diffusion of the PAH in the internal structure of the sorbent. It is suggested that the pore structure of the sorbent particles used in the process consists of macropores, transitional pores (or mesopores) and micropores. The transitional pores are instrumental in the transport of sorbate molecules to the micropores. Most molecular sorption pores will incorporate diffusive mass transfer based on a pore, surface or pore-surface diffusion control mechanism. The interpretation of the overall sorption behaviour in terms of the true diffusivity and equilibrium properties is not always straightforward. However, an apparent diffusion coefficient can be derived by fitting the experimental sorption data obtained. The mass transfer kinetics of PAHs on GAC is relatively slow. Theoretically, the solute transport inside a macroporous sorbent particle occurs in parallel through both the pore and solid phases. This parallel solute transport mechanism has formed the basis of several intraparticle diffusion models for macroporous particles It is assumed that the external resistance to mass transfer surrounding the particles is significant only in the early stages of sorption. This can be seen in the initially steeper linear. The second linear portion is the gradual sorption stage in which intraparticle diffusion dominates. If the Weber–Morris The intraparticle diffusion constants can be calculated using Eq. Homogeneous and heterogeneous intraparticle diffusion models (with two or more steps) have been described in the literature Taking into account the sorption equilibrium of the PAH described by the Langmuir isotherm gives: For a favourable sorption process, as is the case of PAH onto GAC F400, the following applies: Thus, The pore diffusion coefficient could be estimated from the diffusion coefficients in water ( Thus, The molecular diffusion coefficient In this preliminary approach, Eq. Scarce data of the sorption of PAH onto GAC could be found in the literature. In most cases, the data available were chemical interpretations. If this work is compared with sorption data on PAH removal by hypercrosslinked polymeric resins, the range of the apparent surface diffusivities are very close to the result reported for this specific sorbent HPDM and SPM models can be used in the study of PAH removal by GAC. The results obtained in this work on the kinetic sorption of PAH from aqueous solutions indicated that the rate-determining step of PAH extraction is the sorbent-phase diffusion. Both the HPDM and SPM models allow a mean or average intraparticle diffusion coefficient to be calculated in the case of high levels of PAH and the mass transfer coefficients for the low range of PAH concentrations, which provide an insight into the diffusion mechanism and a parameter for subsequent design calculations. Fick's law and the shell progressive mechanisms represent good general approaches to the kinetics of PAH extraction on granular activated carbon. The kinetic parameters obtained (surface diffusion) for the F400 were in the same order of magnitude as those measured by other authors for F400 when it is used in the sorption of organic micropollutants (aromatic hydrocarbons, phenolic compounds and dyes). A comparison of published data on kinetic parameters in the form of surface diffusion coefficients with measured data were in the order of 10 The authors wish to acknowledge CTQ2005-08957-CO2-01/PPQ project (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia de España) and Aguas de Levante for supplying samples of activated carbon. They are also indebted to T. Rovira and A.M. Lozano for their help in carrying out sorption experiments in the laboratory.