The combined effect of incorporation of four non-muscle proteins, NMP (blood plasma, BP; sodium caseinate, SC; soy protein isolate, SPI; gelatin, G) at 2g/100g levels on hydration and textural characteristics of pork gels processed without or with 0.6g/100g microbial transglutaminase preparation (MTG) was investigated. Addition of SC and BP most favourably affected hydration properties and thermal stability, yielding lower cooking loss and expressible moisture for pork gels. Interactions between NMP and MTG were observed. Improvement of gel strength by addition of transglutaminase was observed for treatments containing SC and BP but not G nor soy isolate. Of the four proteins tested SC was found to be a superior substrate for MTG in enhancing textural properties of a gelled meat system. None of the tested ingredients was able to yield gel cohesiveness equivalent to the control containing 8% muscle proteins. Results of this study indicate a potential for using MTG to improve or modify the functional and textural properties of investigated food proteins (SC and BP in particular) in comminuted meat products.Numerous non-meat proteins have been studied for their effects on textural properties of gels made from individual salt-soluble proteins and of complex muscle foods such as frankfurters and bologna ( Non-meat proteins are often used as alternative gelling agents in comminuted meat products to enhance the yield and texture by improving water-binding properties. However, non-meat proteins have no positive technological effect in meat emulsions in cases when they do not participate in the protein structure or can even negatively affect texture by a diluting effect or by interference with the gelation of the myofibrillar proteins ( The possibility of modifying the functional properties of non-muscle proteins (NMP) would improve utilization and processing qualities of these ingredients in meat products. In recent years, the potential of exogenous transglutaminase in catalyzing cross-linking of food proteins and modifying the functional properties of these proteins has been demonstrated. There have been a number of reports concerning the transglutaminase-mediated polymerization of food proteins such as milk proteins, soybean proteins, egg proteins, beef, pork, chicken and fish gelatin and myosin ( Although effects of transglutaminase on texture are well documented for raw (not cooked), restructured meats ( A completely randomized design with a 2×5 complete factorial arrangement of treatments was used. The main effects investigated were: MTG level (0 Fresh (24 The ingredients used in the homogenate formulations included curing mixture (containing 99.5% sodium chloride and 0.5% sodium nitrite), and sodium erythorbate (Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co Ltd Japan). BP (spray dried porcine blood plasma powder) (VEPRO 75 PSC) was obtained from VEOS NV, Belgium. SPI (SUPRO 595) was purchased from Protein Technology Int., USA. SC was purchased from PHZ SM “Lacpol”, Poland. G was donated by “GELPOL”, Nowa Sol, Poland. MTG, (Ajinomoto, Barentz, Poland) was a mixture containing 99% maltodextrin and 1% MTG (activity of ∼100 Before processing, the pork was tempered at 4 Total moisture was determined in quadruplicate by AOAC method 950.46 B ( Following overnight storage each chilled gel was removed from the plastic tube, blotted dry with a paper towel and weighed to determine cooking loss. Overall cooking loss was calculated as a percentage of raw stuffed weight. The modified Hamm ( Textural characteristics of gels were analysed according to the texture profile analysis (TPA) method ( The experiment was replicated three times. Statistical analysis of results was performed using a Statistica package (Statistica 5.1 for Windows, StatSoft, Poland). Data were analysed as a 2×5 factorial design with two MTG levels (0 and 0.6 The pH values of the pork gels ranged from 5.87 to 6.26 (average pH of 6.01). The highest pH values were reported for the gels containing SC and BP ( Generally, regardless of MTG addition, the NMP improved the hydration properties of gels, resulting in significantly lower cooking losses as compared to samples containing only 8% muscle proteins. However, the cooking losses in gels produced with SPI, SC and BP addition were significantly ( Non-meat proteins are often used as alternative gelling agents in comminuted meat products to enhance the yield by improving water-binding properties. Cooking losses were also markedly improved by cross-linking induced by transglutaminase, but its effect was strongly dependent on NMP type. Significant improvements occurred only for treatments processed with SC, G and without non-muscle protein addition, whereas MTG had no effect on hydration properties of gels processed with BP or SPI. Both MTG and NMP had significant effects on expressible moisture from the pork gels. Generally, addition of all tested ingredients to the pork homogenates decreased the percentage of water loss from gels after pressing the gel samples, indicating that they improved water retention of pork gels ( Disparate results are reported in the literature with respect to the effect of transglutaminase addition on batter stability and water-holding capacity. The greatest improvement of gel strength (by 80%) due to MTG addition was observed for treatments processed with SC. Our results support the findings of  Regardless of MTG presence, NMP significantly decreased cohesiveness of gels. MTG treatment resulted in a significant increase of cohesiveness of the gels produced with SC, BP and G. However, overall it was not successful in restoring cohesiveness of gels containing NMP to that of the 8% C gels. With the exception of the treatments with addition of G to the meat system, which significantly decreased springiness, none of the other NMP affected the elastic characteristics of the gels.  Addition of SC and BP most favourably affected hydration properties and thermal stability, yielding lower cooking loss and expressible moisture for pork gels. Interactions between NMP and MTG were observed. For example, improvement of gel strength by addition of MTG was observed for treatments containing SC and BP but not G or soy isolate. Of the four proteins tested SC was found to be a superior substrate for MTG in enhancing textural properties of gelled meat system. Of the NMP used, only addition of soy protein contributed to improved hardness of pork gels processed without MTG. However, none of the tested ingredients was able to yield gel cohesiveness equivalent to the C containing 8