Low-density materials, such as the commercially available hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) offer a low dielectric constant. Thus HSQ with a low value of k (∼2.85) can be spin-coated if the density of SiH bonding is maintained at a high level and the formation of OH bonds and absorption or creation of water in the film is minimized. O2 plasma exposure on HSQ film properties increases leakage current of metal/HSQ/Si/metal structures. Also the dielectric constant shows a significant increase after O2 plasma exposure. Another important consequence of the O2 plasma exposure is the large decrease in the contact angle of the HSQ surface. In this paper, we demonstrate first damage repair process involving trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) treatment for 10min at atmospheric pressure leads to a regain of a leakage current density and dielectric which approach values very near to the as-deposited film. These results show that the TMCS treatment is a promising technique to repair the damage even in the commercially available and highly applicable low-k material and increase the visibility of its use at the 0.1μm technology. The increase of the hydrophilic nature of the surface after O2 plasma exposure leads to increase absorption of moisture with a subsequent increase in the dielectric constant.The shrinking in dimensions of devices in ULSI circuits to achieve faster performance has led to a very large device density in today's ULSI circuits. Subsequently interconnects are becoming narrower (increases their resistance, Plasma exposure is widely used for post-etch treatment, such as resist strip or residue etch cleaning The standard RCA cleaned p-type Si〈1 The as cured HSQ films and the O The chemical bonding of the HSQ films before and after various treatments was investigated by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy (Nicolet Model Magna 550). The film thickness and refractive index were measured by Ellipsometry (Scentech Model SE 800). The film surface hydrophobicity is studied by contact angle measurements (Reme Hardt, Model 100-00-230). MIS capacitors were fabricated by evaporating aluminum (0.25  Si Si Si Si Si Si The appearance of the Si The possible reaction is In order to confirm that the hydrophilicity of the film surface does increase after the oxygen plasma exposure, we carried out the contact angle measurement with water drop. These observations are depicted in The most significant effect of concern is the increase in the dielectric constant of the films after plasma exposure.  Now we consider the effect of a TMCS treatment on the plasma-damaged HSQ films. From Regarding the leakage current density, we have seen that it increases by nearly two orders of magnitude when HSQ sample undergoes O The possible reasons of the repair of the plasma damage has also been discussed by Chang et al. In this study, we have shown that even HSQ films are prone to damage when exposed to oxygen plasma. As we know such plasma exposure is unavoidable during the O The work was carried out with financial support from the Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India under the project No. SR/FTP/PS-41/2000.