Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy is a common non-invasive treatment for urinary stones whose fragmentation is achieved mainly by acoustic cavitation and mechanical stress. A few years ago, in vitro and in vivo experimentation demonstrated that such fragmentation can be improved, without increasing tissue damage, by sending a second shock wave hundreds of microseconds after the previous wave. Later, numerical simulations revealed that if the second pulse had a longer full width at half maximum than a standard shock wave, cavitation could be enhanced significantly. On the other side, a theoretical study showed that stress inside the stone can be increased if two lithotripter shock waves hit the stone with a delay of only 20μs. We used the Gilmore–Akulichev formulation to show that, in principle, both effects can be combined, that is, stress and cavitation could be increased using a pressure pulse with long full width at half maximum, which reaches the stone within hundreds of microseconds after two 20μs-delayed initial shock waves. Implementing the suggested pressure profile into clinical devices could be feasible, especially with piezoelectric shock wave sources.Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) continues to be a worldwide accepted therapy During the treatment’s early stage, urinary stones fragment as a consequence of longitudinal and transverse stress waves, as well as of surface waves and circumferential squeezing. Since urinary stones are often surrounded by urine and pooled blood with cavitation nuclei and micrometer-sized bubbles, as fissures get filled with fluid, cavitation erodes the fragments We implemented a numerical model to analyze the dynamics of a small spherical bubble immersed in water and subjected to different shock wave profiles. The purpose of this article was to propose the use of a novel pressure profile to enhance stress-induced fracture and acoustic cavitation simultaneously. We will refer to conventional lithotripter shock waves as The maximum radius It is known that the collapse energy of the microbubbles can be increased significantly if a second shock wave arrives shortly before the bubbles, generated by the previous shock wave, start to collapse In a preceding article Tham and colleagues The hypothesis was that a short-delay tandem pressure profile (referred to as We defined the A graph of a long-delay tandem shock wave, referred to as The The dynamics of a single spherical air bubble in water, exposed to passage of the above-mentioned pressure variations was modeled by the Gilmore–Akulichev equation Since Gilmore’s equation is Eq. Let In this equation, all variables should depend on the time  The resulting equation is an ordinary second order differential equation. As Eq. This model, used by several authors to describe the dynamics of a bubble exposed to lithotripter shock waves In this study, bubbles of three different sizes ( As the positive pressure pulse of the standard lithotripter shock wave To evaluate the response of the bubble (  When exposing our ideal bubble to the As shown in A graph of Results obtained by using  During SWL shear forces and cavitation contribute synergistically to stone pulverization A main concern was if the second shock wave of the Our numerical model showed that the second shock wave does not interfere significantly with inertial bubble growth, so that bubble collapse can indeed be enhanced by a third pulse i.e., short-delay and long-delay tandem shock waves could be used simultaneously, resulting in improved stone comminution. The results demonstrate that the A concern about using the The proposed Stress waves play an important role when the size of a stone or stone fragment is larger than half the compressive wavelength inside it Implementing The pressure profile proposed in this article may not be generated using electrohydraulic lithotripters, because single-spark gap systems cannot produce two consecutive shock waves at delays shorter than 10 Electromagnetic lithotripters have also been used to generate long-delay tandem shock waves We believe that the simplified model discussed in this article is valid, because it was useful to analyze the feasibility of enhancing simultaneously stress and cavitation during SWL. The Gilmore–Akulichev model is suitable to predict if a novel shock wave profile could enhance microbubble collapse. Implementing the Paula Bernardino, Juan Carlos Álvarez and Guillermo Vázquez are acknowledged for assistance.