Inorganic grits contained in shellfish can be used for the thermoluminescence detection of irradiation treatment. Acid hydrolysis of the flesh of the shellfish to leave the minerals behind has been explored as an alternative to the physical dissection method previously employed. The hydrolysis technique was developed and assessed using six species of shellfish (Nephrops norvegicus, brown shrimps, mediterranean crevettes, black tiger prawns, warm water shrimps and king scallops). It has also been evaluated under interlaboratory trial conditions. In all cases, excellent discrimination between irradiated and unirradiated products was obtained using hydrolysis extracts. The method produces results which are comparable or better than conventional physical extraction, and has some benefits in sample handling.The applications of radiation treatment have been shown to be of particular relevance to food processing [ In Europe and the United Kingdom, uptake of the technique has been inhibited by consumer acceptance ( Thermoluminescence (TL) is a radiation specific phenomenon which arises due to energy stored by trapped charge carriers following irradiation. The energy released following thermal stimulation is accompanied by detectable luminescence ( Recent attention has been focused on extending the validated method to other food products, such as fruits, vegetables ( TL analysis of shellfish can utilise both carbonates from the shell ( The development of a simple and less time consuming mineral extraction method would clearly be advantageous. Isolating minerals by dissolving the organic (flesh) portions of the shellfish, leaving the insoluble inorganics behind, is a promising alternative. Use of acid hydrolysis was investigated at SURRC and applied during collaborative trials in 1997 which confirmed that it has some benefits in comparison with physical extraction methods ( Acid hydrolysis, therefore, appears to be the most promising alternative to manual dissection. For the technique to be adopted, however, it must be established that the detection performance is at least as good as for the conventional method. The experiments described below quantitatively compare the two methods and present the case for validation of the alternative method. Two methods for the extraction of minerals from the intestines of shellfish for TL analysis were investigated. The first requires manual dissection, followed by separation of the remaining organic material, while the second method involves the dissolution of the flesh leaving minerals behind. Suitable minerals for TL analysis are found in the intestines of shellfish. The intestines can be seen through the shell (where present) on the convex side of the shellfish as a 1–2 mm dark tube. Once the tract has been identified the flesh can be cut carefully with a scalpel and the intestines removed with forceps. Several approaches have been developed including hand picking ( Ten to twenty grams of whole sample were placed into a round bottomed flask containing 200 TL measurements for this study were carried out on the SURRC PC TL reader with computer controlled temperature ramping, automatic reheat facility and background subtraction program, with a single photon counting light detector (EMI 9883QB photomultiplier tube with Corning 7/59 and Chance HA3 filtration). The TL glow curves (photon counts versus temperature) were recorded from each sample disc from ambient temperature to 400°C at a heating rate of 6°C A series of controlled experiments was conducted to examine the possibility of extracting silicate minerals from the intestines of shellfish using acid hydrolysis and to compare the results of TL analysis of these extracts with those minerals extracted by the conventional manual dissection method. Six shellfish species ( The amount of silicate material extracted using either method will vary considerably from species to species and also within species. However, overall the acid hydrolysis method does give slightly higher quantities of minerals. An example of this is the results from twelve discs of Examples of glow curves from unirradiated and irradiated A set of six unknown samples from two species of prawns (Vietnam cat tiger prawns and China Reds) obtained for a German interlaboratory blind trial ( A further opportunity to assess the validity of the hydrolysis method arose during recent interlaboratory trials organised by SURRC. The protocol called for both acid hydrolysis and manual dissection methods to be carried out on five species of shellfish ( The analyses described above have demonstrated that it is possible to extract silicate minerals from shellfish by acid hydrolysis and distinguish between unirradiated and irradiated samples, at least as reliably as with the manual dissection method. The hydrolysis technique is very simple, removing the need to select intestines from large quantities of individual shellfish and allowing several analyses to be carried out in parallel which is essential for speedy routine analysis. In cases where the material is in an advanced state of decay, it may be the only practical method. All the species of shellfish examined under controlled experimental conditions show TL characteristics in keeping with their irradiation status; glow curves from acid hydrolysis preparations are cleaner with better reproducibility than those obtained for the physical extraction method. Sensitivity varied from aliquot to aliquot with both methods as expected from samples with heterogeneous mineralogy; the filtering and other instrumental conditions were optimised for feldspars. Density separation to obtain pure samples could be carried out, but would negate the speed advantage of the separation method and might not produce sufficient yields. The use of heat during the acid hydrolysis separation might be expected to result in thermal shift observable in the TL glow curves. Examination of the peak maxima ( In recent interlaboratory trials aimed at validating TL detection of irradiated shellfish, where both methods of mineral extraction were used, reliable qualitative results were obtained from either method. Quantitative discrimination, however, between irradiated and unirradiated samples, and the reproducibility of quantitative results were generally better for extracts prepared by hydrolysis. The technique can clearly be used without compromising quality, has some practical benefits, and has further potential for extracting silicates from other food matrices. The work reported here was supported by a grant from the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Foods (MAFF).