This paper describes the sintering of pre-alloyed Fe–Cr–Ni–B–C alloy components produced by metal injection moulding. The solidus temperature of this alloy was determined to be about 1150°C and coincides with an increase in the sintering rate. At just 10°C above the solidus, near full density is attained after 1h. Initially, the hardness follows the same pattern as the density, however at temperatures above 1170°C, the hardness decreases as a result of the coarsening of the borides. Despite the high hardness, the strength of this alloy was only moderate – a result of the low ductility.An alloy based on the Fe–Cr–Ni–B–C system has recently been developed to provide improved performance of rolls in the hot rolling of steel In the last decade or so, metal injection moulding (MIM) has captured some of the market for small complex parts that were previously investment cast The powder used in this work was produced by MBC Metal Powders, Birmingham, UK. The composition of the powders is listed in Differential scanning calorimetery (DSC) of the raw powder was performed using a Netzsch STA 409C instrument under a N Debinding and sintering was performed in a single furnace cycle. The green parts were placed on an alumina substrate that had been sprayed with BN to minimize friction. Parts were thermally debound in flowing N Density of the sintered parts was measured as per MPIF Standard 42, with the exception that ethanol was used instead of water. The theoretical density of the alloy was calculated to be 7.12 Samples for metallographic examination were mounted in epoxy resin and polished using standard techniques. The final polish was performed using 0.04 The TGA results of The effect of sintering temperature on the density of injection moulded parts is shown in A typical as-sintered microstructure of this material is shown in Four tensile bars that had been sintered for 15 The aim of this work was to investigate the possibility of injection moulding an Fe–Cr–Ni–B–C powder, with potential to be used as mould components in the manufacturing of glass bottles. One of the important aspects for the successful production of such parts is the complete removal of the binder. Any binder remaining in the compact at temperatures above about 500 Boron as a sintering aid for ferrous alloys has been widely reported (for example see The EDS results shown in At temperatures up to 1170 The sintering of an Fe–Cr–Ni–B–C alloys has been investigated in order to assess its potential for powder injection moulding. The solidus was determined to be ∼1150 The microstructure of the alloy consisted of (Fe,Cr)-borides in a ferrous matrix. These borides coarsen significantly at high temperatures and lead to a decrease in the as sintered hardness. The material proved to be extremely brittle, with crack propagation through the boride: matrix interface, with cracking of the borides also occurring. However, these alloys are not typically used for their room temperature properties, but instead for their high hardness and thermal fatigue resistance. Additionally, the properties are the same or better than cast equivalents.