Following the completion of triaxial compression tests on cement ellipsoid specimens, the particle size distribution for the specimen was analyzed after testing. It is found that neither particle strength nor confining pressure had much effect on the particle size distribution of completely broken particles. That is, the aggregates with different particle strengths have approximately the same fractal dimension. Hardin’s relative breakage was modified based on the concept of optimum distribution. Also, a relationship between relative breakage and plastic work was suggested and verified in this paper.Particle crushing (or particle breakage) has been attracting increasing attention in such fields as powder technology, minerals and mining engineering, geology, geophysics, and geomechanics. For coarse aggregates such as sand and rockfill, particle crushing is inevitable under certain stress states In order to quantify the amount of particle breakage, several particle breakage indices have been defined Particle breakage generally is assumed to be related to energy input, so relationships between indices for breakage and energy have attracted much attention. Miura and O-hara Lade et al. Based on a triaxial test on calcareous sands, Wu et al. In contrast with natural coarse aggregates, the initial particle shape and strength of artificial materials can be controlled, as well as the initial particle size distribution. Such proxy materials as glass beads, gypsum rods, wood rods, steel balls, and metal rods are often adopted to simulate real coarse aggregates The aggregate used in this study is made up of four sizes of cement ellipsoids cast from cement paste. The three principal axes of the four ellipsoid sizes are 9, 9 and 12 The compressive strength of ellipsoids can be controlled by adjusting the water cement ratio and curing age. Five compressive strengths, Triaxial compression tests and isotropic compression tests were made on the aggregate. The specimen is 265 The consolidated-drained triaxial compression tests in this study included a complete triaxial test, an incomplete triaxial test, and a load-unload-reload triaxial test. The complete triaxial test was actually a conventional triaxial compression test in which the sample is sheared till the axial strain reaches The procedure for making a specimen was reported in Zhang et al. After the specimen was prepared, the pressure chamber was placed onto the base of the triaxial apparatus. De-aired water was then fed from the bottom to saturate the specimen. Confining pressure was applied to the specimen once the saturating process was completed, and the drainage valve was opened to allow consolidation of the specimen, after which axial loading was applied with a rate of 0.62  After testing, the particles were categorized into three types: apparently intact particles (particles for which no crushing is observed after testing), partly damaged particles (particles that are partly damaged in the test although their sizes remain unchanged), and completely broken particles (particles that are crushed after testing and the sizes of the crushed particles are smaller than their original values). For natural coarse aggregates, the size and shape of initial particles varies. Crushed and non-crushed particles are mixed up after a triaxial test, and are impossible to distinguish from each other. The cement ellipsoid aggregate adopted in this study overcome such problems because the initial shapes and numbers of ellipsoidal particles are known accurately, and the particles can be distinguished readily after testing, thereby facilitating statistical analysis of the crushed particles. An analogy can be drawn between the particle size distribution of crushed particles after testing and that of decomposed soil originating from the decomposition of rock due to weathering. Following Talbot’s equation According to fractal theory Based on Eq. Obviously, Eqs. For the completely broken particles, the mass percentage ( Assuming that the particle size distribution of completely broken particles satisfies Eq. As shown in  According to the test results for the cement ellipsoids shown in Additionally, the calculated and test grading curves of completely broken particles after incomplete triaxial tests are also analyzed ( The initial aggregate is made up of cement ellipsoids with four sizes, i.e., minor axes of 9, 12, 15 and 21 For apparently intact and partly damaged particles, the mass percentage ( The initial particle size of the aggregate is artificially selected, and is not generated naturally, so it is therefore meaningless to discuss its particle size distribution. However, to be consistent with the particle size distributions of the completely broken particles, here we assume that such distributions of apparently intact particles and partly damaged particles also satisfy Eq. Particle crushing involves very complex phenomena that are affected by a variety of factors. Particle crushing of coarse aggregates generally can be attributed to weathering of rock particles, grinding between particles, and breakage caused by contact stresses exceeding the particle strength. Different crushing modes may induce different particle size distributions. For the first two of these modes of particle crushing, each particle can be expected to eventually break into very fine particles after some period of weathering or repeated grinding. For the latter mode, the grading change after particle crushing may be not the case. The relative breakage In fact, coarse aggregates can adjust themselves to be adapted to a load. The adjustment includes relative movement between particles, as well as particle crushing. As a result, the contact relationship between particles is optimized. In this sense, particle crushing under a load can be regarded as a means of self-optimization, i.e., a way to make the structure of coarse aggregate more favorable to sustaining load. Therefore, the grading of coarse aggregate is expected to gradually tend to an “optimum distribution” to make full use of its potential capacity with the development of particle crushing. The optimum distribution determines the ultimate grading of the coarse aggregate as well as the trend of development of a grading curve caused by particle crushing. Obviously, the optimum distribution will also be the ultimate distribution as defined in Based on the concept of optimum distribution, Eq. Obviously, the numerator in Eq. For the cement ellipsoid aggregate, the initial shapes and sizes of ellipsoidal particles are regular, and apparently intact particles can be clearly discerned by the naked eye after testing. The number of crushed particles can then be calculated by subtracting the number of apparently intact particles from the original total number of ellipsoids. Total energy for particle crushing in the aggregate can be obtained by summing the energy for each crushed particle, i.e., Assuming that Obviously, it is impossible to measure   To calculate the total energy input, we must obtain the number of crushed particles after testing. This is only suitable for certain artificial materials such as the ellipsoid aggregate used in this study; for real coarse aggregates, it would be impossible to distinguish between apparently intact particles and crushed particles. Therefore, in this section we further investigate the relationship between relative breakage and plastic work Referring to Eq. Based on the results of the complete triaxial tests,  An investigation on particle crushing of cement ellipsoid aggregate was conducted based on a series of triaxial compression tests. In this study, the compressive strengths of the ellipsoids are Particle crushing occurred in the complete triaxial tests and incomplete triaxial tests. Based on the test results, the particles were categorized into apparently intact particles, partly damaged particles, and completely broken particles. The particle size distribution after testing was then analyzed based on the assumption that particle size distribution follows fractal theory. In addition, by assuming that the energy consumed to crush particles in the specimen is proportion to the energy input for crushing each ellipsoid in the compression test of single particle, the relationship between particle breakage and energy input was also investigated. And the following conclusions are drawn. It was found that the particle size distributions of apparently intact particles and partly damaged particles are mainly controlled by the initial gradation of the aggregate, since their sizes are the same as the original particles. Assuming that particle size distribution of completely broken particles follows fractal theory, it is found that the fractal dimension Particle crushing under loading can be regarded as a means of self-optimization. With the development of particle crushing, the grading of a coarse aggregate may gradually tend to an “optimum distribution” to make full use of its potential capacity, i.e., to make the structure of coarse aggregates more favorable to sustaining load. The optimum distribution determines the ultimate grading of the coarse aggregate as well as the development trend of the grading curve caused by particle crushing. Hardin’s relative breakage can then be modified by the optimum distribution, with modified relative breakage ranges between 0 and 1. The relative breakage is closely related to the energy input, independent of particle strength and confining pressure. Additionally a critical breakage work is required, that is, no particle can be damaged if the plastic work is smaller than a critical value. The supports from