This study determined the influence of mixing speed and time on the dissolution and deagglomeration of a micronised, poorly water-soluble drug, indomethacin, in lactose interactive mixtures. Mixing occurred in a Turbula mixer; dissolution studies were performed using the USP paddle method, and the extent of deagglomeration was determined using modelling strategies and laser diffraction particle sizing of the powder mixtures. During low energy mixing at low rates and short mixing times, dissolution profiles showed an unusual flat asymptote indicating incomplete extents of dissolution caused by agglomerates that did not readily disperse in the dissolution medium. The study showed that increasing both speed and time of mixing increased the extent of dissolution and deagglomeration of the indomethacin powder. Nonlinear least squares modelling of the dissolution data using a sigmoidal equation provided estimates of the extent and rate of dissolution. Mixing speed and time had a much greater influence on the extent of dissolution which was controlled by deagglomeration than on the initial dissolution rate which was related to dispersed indomethacin. While some deagglomeration did occur at higher mixing energies, the deagglomeration of the indomethacin was not complete with only about 58–80% of indomethacin particles overlapping with the primary indomethacin particle size distribution. The significant outcome of this study was that mixing conditions have a major influence on the mixing quality, especially in areas where agglomerate characteristics influence performance.Poorly water-soluble drugs are often micronised to improve dissolution rates and bioavailability. When micronised drugs are mixed with excipients prior to processing into dosage forms, a complex array of particulate forms can exist due to cohesive and adhesive particle interactions occurring within the mixture. These particulate forms include interactive units and agglomerates of varying compositions Mixing speed has been shown to influence the rate of mixing of cohesive powders, where the generation of stronger shear forces as a function of rotational speed produced improved mixing due to the cohesive inter-particulate forces of agglomerates being exceeded A study using sulphonamides discovered the same increasing trend in the adhesive tendency within interactive mixtures as a function of blending time Most of the literature studies have focussed on interactive mixtures, where the drug concentrations are relatively low and carrier surfaces are well below saturation. While the presence of agglomerates and rate of deagglomeration have limited the formation of truly interactive mixtures, the studies have not focussed on the mixtures where the content of micronised drug is greater, exceeding surface saturation, and where agglomeration of micronised drugs is likely to affect the quality of the mixtures. Therefore, this study will focus on the influence of mixing conditions on agglomeration of a cohesive, micronised drug, indomethacin in lactose interactive mixtures. The outcome of this research could then be used to further our understanding of agglomeration and design improved pharmaceutical powder formulations and processing techniques. The model drug, indomethacin (Sigma Chemical Company, USA), was micronised using a Laboratory Fluid Energy Mill (Model 75P; Chrispro Ltd., UK, compressed air 5.8 Mixing was performed in a Turbula mixer (T2F model; Willey A Bachofen AG, Maschinenfabrik, Basel, Switzerland). For all experiments, micronised indomethacin was placed between the two layers of spray-dried lactose in 30 Homogeneity assessment was performed to test the efficiency of the mixing process. Eight binary indomethacin interactive mixtures were selected, and 20 samples of 50 The concentration of indomethacin in the dissolution media was determined by an UV spectrophotometric assay using a Cecil CE 3021 spectrophotometer (Cecil Instruments Ltd., England). The wavelength of maximum absorbance of indomethacin for phosphate buffers of pH 6.0 was 267 Dissolution tests were conducted using an Erweka, 6 flask automated apparatus (Erweka DT6, Germany) connected to a UV spectrophotometer (Cecil CE3021, Cecil Instruments Ltd., England) via an Isamtec Accurately weighed samples of interactive mixtures were subsequently added to each of the dissolution vessels using the count-down timer in the WinDis A Malvern Mastersizer S (Malvern Instruments, UK) with a 300RF lens of path length 2.4 For the particle sizing of indomethacin in interactive mixtures, the interactive mixture of indomethacin was added to the dissolution medium in the dispersion unit using a constant stirring speed. Size distributions for interactive mixtures were determined at 2 A Hitachi S570 SEM was employed to generate images of micronised indomethacin, spray-dried lactose and selected binary interactive mixtures. Samples were prepared by sprinkling powder onto adhesive tape attached to metal stubs, before gold sputter coating for 180 Dissolution data obtained for the tests performed using phosphate buffer of pH 5.0 as the medium were modelled using a nonlinear least squares regression analysis in the SigmaPlot 8.0 Binary mixtures comprising micronised indomethacin (10% w/w) and spray-dried lactose were blended in a Turbula mixer at 23, 49 and 101  In general, observation of the dissolution profiles demonstrate that both increase in mixing speed and increase in mixing time produce mixtures that dissolve more completely during the time of dissolution. For example, the dissolution profile asymptotes for the mixtures prepared at a rotational speed of 101 Multi-exponential equations have been used previously to model dissolution data Modelling of the dissolution data using exponential decay equations Dissolution data (average percent undissolved versus time) obtained for indomethacin interactive mixtures prepared at different mixing speeds and time conditions were modelled using the multi-exponential decay equations. The estimated parameters and the modelling statistics are not shown; however, dissolution data were not adequately fitted to any of the multi-exponential equations. The initial lag phase seen in all dissolution profiles coupled with a flat asymptote was postulated as causes for the poor fits provided by multi-exponential decay equations. Slow wetting of the indomethacin in the phosphate buffer was hypothesised as the reason for the existence of the lag phase. The flat asymptote could be related to very slowly dissolving indomethacin agglomerates. This behaviour has not been seen in the previous studies The occurrence of the lag phase and flat asymptote gave the dissolution profiles the appearance of a sigmoid. For this reason, regression data analysis in SigmaPlot 8.0 The estimated parameters of UA and dissolution rate constant and the modelling statistics resulting from the sigmoidal modelling of the dissolution data determined at the extremes of speed and time conditions are shown in Compared to statistics deduced using multi-exponential equations, sigmoidal modelling resulted in a correlation coefficient close to 1, indicating a high degree of correlation, large In contrast to the markedly large differences between experimental and predicted values observed at early time-points for exponential modelling, an almost complete overlap was evident at all time points for the interactive mixtures prepared at both extremes of speed and time conditions. In addition, the small magnitude (<2%) of the residuals across the entire time series as opposed to the large non-random residuals for multi-exponential modelling (<15%) verified the suitability of sigmoidal (4 parameter) modelling for fitting of the experimental dissolution data. While dissolution data at the extremes of the mixing condition are shown in this paper to illustrate the goodness of fit, all dissolution data provided fits similar to those shown in Following the establishment of the sigmoidal model for data fitting using average values of the six dissolution replicates, nonlinear regression analyses using this sigmoidal equation were performed on the dissolution data for individual dissolution vessels to estimate the dissolution parameters of extent of dissolution (UA) and dissolution rate constant (1/ Results of statistical modelling and analysis for the extent of dissolution reflected the trends seen previously for asymptotes of dissolution profiles. Significant differences ( The data in  Particle size analysis has previously been used for the verification of dispersed particles and agglomerates during dissolution In A transition from bi-modal to mono-modal behaviour occurred as a function of mixing time at 49 High extents of dissolution attained for all mixing times at 101 The forces of cohesion and adhesion between the particles include intermolecular forces due to van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions due to contact potential and Coulombic forces, capillary forces due to the presence of a liquid bridge between particles and solid bridging due to crystal bonding Dissolution profiles and statistical modelling of the dissolution data for the mixtures prepared at 23, 49 and 101 At 23 The presence of bi-modal distributions for all mixing times at 23 At mixing speeds of 49 and 101 For mixtures under all mixing conditions studied, the extent of the incomplete deagglomeration was further reinforced by the only partial overlap between the so-called “dispersed” indomethacin particle size distribution for the interactive mixtures and the true size distribution for micronised indomethacin. It was clear from the particle size distributions shown in Mechanistically, two different processes could be occurring to ensure the incomplete dispersion. Firstly, partial comminution of the agglomerate occurred with a resultant decrease in agglomerate size which was not complete dispersion, but sufficient to give complete indomethacin dissolution in the 60-min time period for the high mixing energy conditions. Secondly, complete deagglomeration might be occurring, but the indomethacin re-agglomerated either by forming new agglomerates by networking on the spray-dried lactose surface or by re-agglomerating through individual inter-particulate interactions off the spray-dried lactose surface. The first of these is most likely to occur; however, in either case, the full extent of dispersion had not been achieved and the mixing process had not been optimised for mixture functionality which is to maximise dissolution. Theoretically, for a mixture consisting of distributions of fully dispersed particles and agglomerates, the initial rate of dissolution should be dependent to a large extent on the rate of dissolution of the fully dispersed particles due to the large surface area of these particles. Some dissolution will occur from agglomerates, but the major contribution to the initial stages of drug dissolution will be from fully dispersed particles. Thus, it might be expected for the mixtures containing different proportions of fully dispersed particles and agglomerates that the initial dissolution rates will be similar provided that fully dispersed particles exist. The dissolution rate constant data in The principle focus of this study has been the influence of mixing energy, produced using different rates and times of mixing on the deagglomeration of micronised indomethacin particles. The extent of deagglomeration has been studied using a unique modelling approach of dissolution data obtained from the mixtures prepared at differing mixing conditions. In addition, particle sizing of the mixtures under condition on non-sink conditions has been useful in identifying the state of deagglomeration of the indomethacin powder. The study, not surprisingly, has shown that increasing both speed and time of mixing has decreased the extent of agglomeration of the indomethacin powder. Interestingly where the mixing energy was low, i.e. at low mixing rates and/or at short mixing periods, agglomerates structure was such that little indomethacin dissolution occurred from the agglomerate during the dissolution-time profile. This was indicative of agglomerates that are large in size and/or possess high packing fractions minimising the surface of indomethacin exposed to the dissolution medium. At higher rates and times of mixing, the size and concentration of these agglomerates decrease giving rise to the complete dissolution of the indomethacin. However, while some deagglomeration does occur at higher mixing energies, the deagglomeration of the indomethacin is not complete with only about 58–80% of indomethacin particles overlapping with the primary indomethacin particle size distribution. Dissolution profiles, outcomes of statistical modelling and analysis and particle size distributions demonstrate a more significant influence of mixing speed and time on the extent of dissolution and hence, deagglomeration rather than rate constants and associated degrees of dispersion. While restricted extents of dissolution (around 80%) were determined for the mixtures prepared at 23