Albite and microcline are the most important commercial feldspar but the products usually contain varying proportions of the other members of the system. The feldspar containing ores are relatively complex and equally contain mica, spodumene, quartz, and other ferro silicate. The ore reserves of feldspar worldwide are large but supplies of pure feldspar are not sufficient. In most of the cases, beneficiation of feldspar ores involves flotation. In this chapter, the beneficiation of feldspar using the flotation technique is presented.Introduction Ore and minerals of feldspars Flotation properties of feldspar minerals Feldspar quartz separation without use of HF acid Beneficiation practices of ores containing feldspar spodumene quartz and mica Sequential flotation of Na–feldspar and K–feldspar References The feldspar may be divided into two of the following main groups: (1) orthoclase or microcline or (2) plagioclase, an isomorphous mixture of albite and anorthite. Albite and microcline are the most important commercial feldspar but the products usually contain varying proportions of the other members of the system. The feldspar containing ores are relatively complex and equally contain mica, spodumene, quartz, and other ferro silicate. The ore reserves of feldspar worldwide are large but supplies of pure feldspar are not sufficient. In most of the cases, beneficiation of feldspar ores involves flotation. In this chapter, the beneficiation of feldspar using the flotation technique is presented. There are varieties of ores that contain feldspar minerals. These include, pegmatites, ores of valianogemic origin and also some of heavy mineral sand. Feldspar containing ores contain, in addition, mica, lithium minerals, silica, and sometimes iron silicates. The most important feldspar minerals are: Albite: Na Microcline: K Albite is a major source of soda feldspar while microcline is a source of K–feldspar. There is also an important lower temperature form of potassium feldspar. Feldspar can also be divided into a number of compositional series including anorthite, sanidine, andesine, and labradorite. Feldspars are found in a wide variety of geological conditions and are more widespread than any other mineral group. They occur in granites pegmatites together with quartz and mica minerals. It should be noted that feldspar is a general term applied to a group of minerals that are silicates of aluminum, combined with potassium, sodium, or calcium or a mixture of these elements. Flotation of feldspar has been the subject of numerous studies over the past several decades. Most of the fundamental work on feldspar flotation has been concerned with the mechanism of fluoride activation at low pH. The explanation regarding fluoride activation over a number of years included the following: Cleaning mineral surfaces by dissolving amorphous layers Formation of SiF Formation of a potassium or sodium silicofluoride layer at the mineral surface. This layer might be expected to be negatively charged in the presence of an excess of potential—determining silica fluoride ions in solution In the case of complex ores of granites and pegmatites, the ore contains mica, spodumene, and other iron-containing minerals. From these ores, first mica is recovered followed by lithium flotation. From the lithium tailing the feldspar silica separation is carried out using HF as an activator and amine collector. In this case, mica is removed first. There are two possible methods of mica prefloat: One method is to float mica under acid conditions with a small amount of amine collector. Good mica removal is achieved at pH 2–3, using 280 The second method for mica removal involves a cationic/anionic float at pH 9.0–10.0 using sodium carbonate and lignin sulfonate to depress quartz and feldspar. Collector used was a mixture of oleic acid and tallow amine. After mica removal, the flotation of feldspar is performed in an acid circuit. Usually after mica is removed the feldspar is then floated from the quartz. Feldspar, in fact, is more floatable than quartz under acid conditions (i.e., pH 2.0–3.5) with the additions of HF. This method is a major method in production of feldspar. A typical method The amount of HF requirements depends on the type of ore treated. If the feldspar is pure and unaltered it will require small quantities of HF, but weathered feldspar would require a larger quantity of HF. A number of studies were conducted in which feldspar was floated without use of HF The molar ratio of amine/cationic collector has a significant effect on feldspar flotation. In these experiments ArmacT (tallow fatty acid primary acetate), as a cationic collector and sodium petroleum sulfonate (Reagent 308) were used. An optimum ratio (anionic/cationic) of 0.5:1.0 in the case of plagioclase and extending to 1.5 for orthoclase can be seen from the figure. Another method of feldspar flotation involves the use of activators Ca(II) and Al(II) in the presence of sulfonate collectors. In the experimental work alkylbenzene sodium sulfonate was used. The effect of activators as a function of pH on flotation of albite is presented in It was concluded that flotation of the minerals of the plagioclase group without use of HF increases in the order of albite The flotability of these minerals also increases with increasing solubility of the minerals. That is the case of flotation response intimately related to the cation release from the solid phase especially Al(III) and Ca(II).  This product is manufactured by SKW, Germany under the trade name Melflock. It has been concluded that this low molecular cationic polyelectrolite has a hydrophobizing activity because of missing C–C bonds collector used in these studies of alkyl aryl sulfonate. The effect of Melflock on separation of feldspar and quartz using sulfonate collector is illustrated in In a study These experiments were conducted at natural pH. There are a number of operating plants around the world that produce feldspar, most of which uses hydrofluoric acid and amine collector. From the complex pegmatite ore containing mica iron silicate, silica, and feldspar, sequential flotation is used. A typical example of the flotation process is Spruce Pine Ridge operation. The ore contains mica, iron silicate, feldspar, and silica. The plant flow sheet is shown in The flow sheet consists of four separate flotation stages. Initially mica is removed, followed by iron silicate flotation. From the iron/silicate tailing feldspar is recovered followed by silica purification. The reagent scheme for each circuit is presented in The flotation of muscovite mica was performed using a cationic collector (Tallow amine acetate-ArmacT) at pH 3.2–3.3. The mica tail is dewatered followed by flotation of garnet, iron silicate, and residual mica using an anionic collector consisting of petroleum sulfonate (R825). Separation of feldspar from quartz is achieved using a cationic collector (tallow amine acetate) after activation with HF.  The beneficiation flow sheet is presented in The ore is ground in the presence of NaOH. The ground ore is deslimed three times. Cyclone underflow from the first desliming stage is scrubbed. The spodumene flotation feed contained 55% solids and is conditioned with 700 A spodumene concentrate assaying 6.5% Li Spodumene tailing is dewatered and reconditioned for iron mineral and mica removal. Flotation was performed using petroleum sulfonate in an acid circuit. Feldspar flotation was performed using a nonfluoride reagent scheme The white mountain titanium deposit in Chile contains significant quantities of feldspar in addition to rutile. Research work was performed on rutile flotation tailing Muscovite flotation using a standard anionic collector alone was not satisfactory. Good removal of muscovite was achieved using a collector mixture consisting of 50% tallow alkyl amine, 25% petroleum sulfonate (R825), and 25% phosphoric acid ester (SM15). This collector was used over 85% of iron containing muscovite. Soda feldspar flotation was performed with NaF dissolved in HCl and the collector tallow diaminopropane dioleate (Duomeen TDO). Metallurgical results from continuous tests using the described reagent scheme are shown in Very little work was done on sequential flotation of albite (Na–feldspar and microcline K–feldspar). Some separation works have been performed by a Russian researcher In a research study conducted over several years, a new process has been developed by which selective separation of albite and microcline was achieved using a flotation technique It is known that monovalent salts, NaCl and KCl act as albite and microcline depressants. With these salts depression of albite is more pronounced than microcline. Using these salts it was possible to sequentially float microcline and albite. The sequential flotation flow sheet is shown in Results obtained showed that NaCl is more selective than KCl. The NaCl is used in the final continuous tests shown in Flotation of both K–feldspar and Na–feldspar is performed at pH 3.2. The pretreatment before desliming was done in the presence of NaOH. Metallurgical results obtained in continuous tests using the above reagent schemes are summarized in Good separation results were achieved using sequential flotation method.