The carbonyl method of refining nickel and iron was invented more than 100years ago and has been used for refining of nickel commercially. CVMR® developed the process of direct extraction of nickel and iron from laterite ores as metal carbonyls which in turn produced pure nickel and iron metals.
                  CVMR®’s carbonyl technology has been applied to several types of limonite and saprolite ores containing other metals such as copper, cobalt and PGE. The process consists of reducing the ore with hydrogen, extracting of iron and nickel in the form of volatile metal carbonyls, separating the metal carbonyls and producing high purity nickel and iron metals; and production of copper, cobalt and PGE concentrate by gravity or magnetic separation. Economic evaluation of this process shows significant increase in cash flow. The CVMR® process does not produce liquid waste and does not require tailing dumps. This makes CVMR®’s process attractive for projects in areas that are environmentally sensitive, or have a high level of rainfall.Over the past 30 Nickel refining by the Mond (carbonyl) process was commercially applied more than 100 In July 1970 INCO proposed to a French consortium to use the carbonyl method (as one of 3 technologies) for refining of nickel in the Gorolaterite project in New Caledonia (with capacity to produce 45,000 Limonite and saprolite ores from central Africa were analyzed by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF, NitonXLt). AAS analyses of ores are presented in Process gases: argon (99.95%), carbon monoxide (99.5%), hydrogen (99.995%) were purchased from Praxair. Reduction and metal extraction from the ores were carried out in a high pressure TGA unit (Thermomax 500 supplied by Thermofisher) capable of testing 100 A sample of ore was placed in a quartz bucket suspended inside the TGA. TGA was closed and pressure tested. The instrument was purged with argon and the sample was heated to 650 A medium scale pilot unit (5 There are two major steps in refining of laterite ores by the carbonyl method: the first step consists of drying, calcining and reduction of the ore being used and the second consists of extracting the metals in the ore in the form of volatile carbonyls. Hydrogen, carbon monoxide and coal could be used for laterite ore reduction. The process is well investigated and widely used for production of DRI, pig iron and nickel pig iron ( The initial approach in the 1970s was to minimize the reduction of Iron, and to use appropriate conditions for preferential nickel reduction ( Using hydrogen at the same temperature will reduce nickel, almost completely, and approximately 95% of iron (Eqs. Typical time for reduction with CO/CO Metal extraction phase of the process consists of formation of volatile nickel and iron carbonyls at an elevated pressure and temperature (60 Under these conditions (60 Iron and nickel carbonyls are separated by fractional distillation. Less volatile iron carbonyl ( The residue after Ni and Fe extraction contains trace amounts of Ni, reduced Fe, Co, Cu, Platinum Group Elements (PGE) and mixture of oxides. Magnetic separation of the residue can recover close to 80% of Fe, Cu and Co, 60% of Ni. Gravity separation is considered in cases when an ore contains significant amounts of PGE. The concentrate is then redirected to a secondary carbonylation cycle to maximize recovery of Ni and to extract Cobalt. When high concentration of Cu is present, the residue can be treated with sulphur followed by flotation. A typical process flow diagram is presented in A cobalt recovery method was also developed at CVMR. In this process Cobalt forms solid cobalt carbonyl which could be converted to volatile cobalt nitrosyl carbonyl. The decomposition of cobalt nitrosyl carbonyl produces Co metal ( Composition of limonite ore is presented in Sample #2 had higher concentration of Ni and Fe; and similar composition of Cu, Co and PGE. The initial tests were performed in a TGA. Pre-treatment, reduction and metal extraction resulted in 98.1% and 86.5% yield for Ni and Fe. The same treatment in the pilot unit yielded 96.3% and 78.4% extraction for Ni and Fe. The recovery rate for both metals was more than 99% ( Secondary extraction of Fe and Ni afforded only 44.6% and 76.5% yields. Overall yields after primary metal extraction, magnetic separation and secondary metal extraction were 97.3% for Ni and 90.7% for Fe. The residue contained Co, Cu and PGE (platinum group of metals and Au). After Ni and Fe extraction, concentration of Cu increased from 0.2% to 1.8% ( The ore sample #3 contained 0.62% of Nickel, 42.0% of Fe, 0.38% of Co, 2.24% Cr and 2.11% Mn. Reduction and Fe/Ni extraction in the TGA resulted in a residue the contained 0.02% Ni and 16.06% Fe. These correspond to yields of 98.9% Ni and 86.5% Fe. Co and Mn were concentrated by this method in the residue to 1.22% Co and 7.39% Mn. Cobalt refining was not part the study, but metallic Co could easily be recovered using one of the leach processes or magnetic separation. The sample Saprolite ore used for this experiment was composed of elements presented in Addition of iron as a product of the refining process significantly increases cash flow of the operation. In addition to cash flow from produced iron, production of high purity metals further increase cash flow. For example even if price of iron product was to be calculated as DRI or sponge iron, one could observe significant increases in the cash flow. Nevertheless, the purity of produced iron by the CVMR carbonyl process corresponds more to the high purity iron or LME steel billets ( High purity nickel from carbonyl process (Chemical grade nickel) is produced by Vale and sold above LME. A comparison of purity of chemical grade nickel and CVMR’s nickel produced directly from the ore is presented in A simple calculation shows that iron product cash flow can be close or even equal to the cash flow from nickel metal sales. Based on today’s LME prices of Ni and steel billets, iron, produced from low grade laterite ore (samples #1 and #3), will have the same value as the nickel product. Addition of Co, Cu and PGE product lines will increase the cash flow 3 times. In this study, direct extraction of nickel and iron from laterite ores was investigated in a two step process using CVMR’s carbonyl technology. Iron turns out to be an important product of this process, increasing the cash flow and decreasing costs of disposal of the tailing. Application of the carbonyl process to low Ni grade laterite ores containing significant amount of Co, Cu and PGE makes recovery of these metals quite feasible. Considering experimental results given in Sections Ore reduction with hydrogen gas (temperature of 650 Purity of Ni and Fe products were compared with chemical grade Ni, Steel billets and high purity iron and summarized in The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of several persons, all of whom are members or were members CVMR Corporation especially Professor Walter Curlook, Dr. OlujideB. Olurin, Dr Kamran M. Khozan and Mr. Colwyn van der Linder.