Fish fillets can be coated/treated with nanoscale chitosan using the electrospinning technique. To obtain successfully nanoscale chitosan, the determination of molecular weight, concentration, solvent system of chitosan, and electrospinning parameters should be optimized. Therefore especially, applied voltage, distance, flow rate, environmental conditions, and collector type in the electrospinning unit should also be well defined. The electrospun chitosan-based nanoscale materials have functional and structural advantages since they provide high encapsulation efficiency, a large surface-to-volume ratio, and good stability of encapsulated bioactive compounds such as thymol. Morphological properties, encapsulation efficiency, thermal stability properties, zeta potential, and size of the electrospun chitosan-based nanoscale materials could also affect the shelf life of aquatic food products. Furthermore, chitosan-based nanofibers and nanoparticles, as well as bioactive material(s)-loaded chitosan-based nanofibers delay the microbiological spoilage, physical and chemical deterioration, as well as sensory changes. Therefore this chapter highlights that chitosan-based nanoscale materials could prolong the shelf life of seafood products. Consequently, the use of characterized chitosan-based nanoscale material(s) can be a promising and cost-effective technique to maintain seafood products safety.Optimization Definition of chitosan molecular weight Determination of concentrations Solvent system Preparation of electrospinning dope solutions Determination of electrospinning parameters Applied voltage Adjustment proper distance Flow rate Environmental conditions Selection of collector Characterization of fabricated nanoscale material(s) Definition of morphological characteristics of chitosan-based nanomaterial Encapsulation efficiency Controlled release property of chitosan-based nanomaterial Thermal decomposition of chitosan-based nanomaterial Zeta potential and size of chitosan-based nanomaterial Use of electrospun nanomaterials for seafood products safety Chitosan-based nanofiber coating Bio/active material-loaded chitosan-based nanofiber coating Chitosan nanoparticles Conclusion References  There are some studies related to the optimization of electrospun nanoscale chitosan. According to Jacobs et al. These parameters affect the antimicrobial and antioxidant properties of the electrospun chitosan-based nanoscale materials. The molecular weight (MW) of chitosan is widely classified as low, medium, or high, thus the MW can change between 50,000 and >375,000 The processing parameters directly affect the morphology of electrospun chitosan fibers. The diameter of the fibers depends on different factors, such as concentration of polymer in the solution, type of solvent used, and feeding rate of the solution Thus the diameter of electrospun chitosan nanomaterials is affected by electrospinning process parameters. Although viscosity and concentration of solution are important parameters changing the diameter of nanomaterials, the viscosity of the solution alone is not effective for the fabricatation of nanofibers with lower diameter. Crucial factors affecting the diameter and characteristics of the nanomaterials are likewise discussed in this chapter. Chitosan is usually insoluble in aqueous solutions above a pH of ~7. However, it becomes water soluble in acidic conditions because of –NH The electrospinnability of chitosan is limited since chitosan has a rigid chemical structure, specific inter- and intramolecular interactions and high viscosity. In the traditional spinning processes, chitosan is dissolved in an acetic acid solution due to the amine functions present in the chemical structure A strong solvent, such as concentrated acetic acid solution (90%), is necessary for chitosan electrospinning Therefore it is difficult to fabricate pure chitosan nanofibers However, cospinning agents are usually biodegradable, nontoxic, and easily electrospinnable polymers, such as PEO In addition, there are a few reports investigating the use of inorganic ions as doping agents for producing electrospun fibers. The addition of salt greatly changes the morphology of the electrospun fibers from a beads-on-fiber structure to a uniform fiber structure The electrospinning dope solutions can be prepared after the first steps of the optimization have been successfully completed. Chitosan is added into the test tubes and then it is dissolved by the proper solvent in the same tubes. In this step, the heating process can be used to dissolve the chitosan or it can be dissolved by only using continuous stirring at room temperature. In this process, time is highly changeable. For example, while the preparation of electrospinning dope solution by the heating process can just take a few hours. depending on the concentration of the chitosan, in the case of dissolving the material under room temperature conditions, it takes at least 2 days. In the electrospinning process, the applied voltage is a very crucial factor. Once the applied voltage is high enough to overcome the surface tension of the electrospinning dope solution, the jets continue drying to form nanofibers by the time they are collected on the collector surface. In this sense, the applied voltage can vary depending on the material type used in any nanotechnological application. Mengistu Lemma et al. The tip-to-collector distance affects the electrospun nanofibers diameter, as tip-to-collector distance has a direct effect on jet flight time and electric field strength. A decrease in the tip-to-collector distance shortens flight and solvent evaporation time, and increases the electric field strength, resulting in more bead formation Aliabadi et al. Flow rate of the polymeric solution is another parameter which affects the size and the shape of the nanomaterials. Generally, a lower flow rate is more recommended, as sufficient time is required for the formation and maintenance of the Taylor cone The effect of temperature and humidity on electrospinning is important in the successful fabrication of nanoscale materials. Jabur et al. Following the Taylor cone and the distance, (chitosan-based) nanofibers can be obtained by electrospinning dope solutions. During this step, the solutions evaporated turn into nanofibers and the nanofibers are collected on the surface of the collectors, which are usually flat or drum (mandrel) ( The electron microscopic techniques are most frequently used for the analysis of nanomaterials. Although there are several microscopy techniques used to observe nanomaterials, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) are the most popular Li et al. In addition to SEM and TEM, advanced techniques like energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) are employed for further observation The EE is generally defined as the remaining amount of the material encapsulated in polymer electrospun nanofibers compared with the starting amount Moomand Chitosan has been widely used for the release of bioactive substances Thermogravimetric analysis is mostly used to investigate the thermal stability of nanoscale materials. The first thermal decomposition (50°C–100°C) for electrospun nanofibers from mixed poly(vinyl alcohol)/chitosan solutions (known to be hydrophilic polymers) was attributed to the loss of moisture (about 10% mass) In the electrospinning process, zeta potential (ZP) is one of the most important parameters determining the uniformity and stability of nanomaterials, as ZP has been used for predicting and controlling the stability of colloidal solutions The ZP also affects the antimicrobial behavior of electrospun chitosan nanomaterials. For example, Zhao et al. For tissue engineering, materials having a positive ZP have been used, since a positive ZP provides the attachment to anionic cell surfaces, which consequently facilitates cell adhesion on its surface Electrospun chitosan-based nanofibers affect meat, fish spoilage, and pathogenic bacteria Fish fillets without skin were successfully coated with an electrospun chitosan-based nanofiber by In addition to the limitation of chemical deterioration in fish fillets, Ceylan et al. In addition to coating fish fillets with electrospun chitosan-based nanofiber, Garcia-Moreno et al. Loading of different active or bioactive materials into chitosan-based nanofibers has been applied to improve the antimicrobial or antioxidant activity of the electrospun chitosan-based nanofibers. Recent studies show that active material-loaded chitosan-based nanofibers are used to provide an antimicrobial agent for tissue engineering, drug delivery, wound healing, and wound dressing Kohsari et al. EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) values of fish fillets coated with nanoencapsulated thymol-loaded chitosan-based nanofibers were found to be more stable when compared with those of uncoated fish fillets during cold storage Chitosan nanoparticles are currently used in various formations as a novel food additive. Khan et al. Seafood products could be preserved using electrospun chitosan-based nanoscale materials. Optimization and characterization processes are very crucial issues to prove whether chitosan-based nanoscale materials are obtained or not. Also, electrospinning parameters such as high voltage should be clearly defined. Morphological properties, EE, thermal stability properties, ZP, and size of the electrospun chitosan-based nanoscale materials play key roles in limiting the microbiological spoilage, and physical and chemical deterioration in seafood, while the nutritional quality of seafood products has been preserved by using nanotechnology applications. Chitosan has already been used as a food