The kinetics of hematite reduction and formation cementite were studied by a gas mixture of 30vol% CH4, 60vol% H2 and 10vol% Ar, inside a fixed-bed reactor at 700–800°C and different times in this research work. The percentage of reduction was determined by thermogravimetry method with a precision of 0.001g. The results obtained showed that the hematite pellets were first reduced to metallic iron and then cementite is formed. The kinetic modeling has shown that the reduction rate of hematite pellets is controlled by the mixed mechanism of chemical reaction-diffusion at the interface of and the rate of the formation of cementite is controlled by the chemical reaction of methane adsorption on the surface of reduced iron. On the other hand, the results showed that the temperature and time of the process are the two very important factors in the formation of cementite and its stability. In fact, by increasing the temperature (from 700°C to 800°C) led to increase in the rate of cementite formation. But, selection of an appropriate temperature can be very effective in the rate of the decomposition of cementite into metallic iron and graphite. The results of XRD and Feritscope demonstrated that at 750°C over time even for 80min, a negligible percentage of cementite is decomposed. Furthermore, the images obtained from SEM and RLM showed that an increase in time can also change the formed cementite morphology from layer state to block state.2 98 Pearlite(brown or black) Cementite(white) 1 5 100 Pearlite(brown or black) Cementite(white) 2 25 100 CEMENTITE(black) Pearlite(uneffect) Iron carbides and specially cementite (Fe In general, the reduction of hematite and cementite formation with CH a) Reduction of iron oxide to metallic iron b) Adsorption and decomposition of methane on the surface of the reduced iron c) Formation of iron carbide However, the total reactions produced in these three stages can be summarized in the following two reactions: In 1970, In spite of this fact that many researches have been done on the field of iron carbide formation but the researches that studied the kinetic modeling for this matter are less and remained unclear yet. However, in this research, the kinetics of hematite reduction and cementite formation with CH In this research, iron oxide powder with a purity of more than 99.7% hematite by weight and with a particle size range of 53–150 The above hematite powder is mixed with 10% naphtha by weight (as cold-setting resin) and for sample preparation (to form the cylindrical pellets with size of 9 Experimental setup to carry out the reduction and carburization process is schematically presented in The percentage change of reduction (R%) during the reduction process is calculated according to the following equation: The fraction of the formed cementite is determined by the following equation: To study the phase of the samples, all the samples were tested by the x-ray diffraction, XRD, (Cu Ka Philips, X'PERTMPD). Also, the Feritscope (FM 30, Helmut Fischer) device was used to determine the content of ferrite iron in the sample. The microstructure and morphology of reacted samples was analyzed by both reflected light microscopy, RLM, (Nikon, EPIPHOT 300) and scanning electron microscopy, SEM, (Philips, XL30 Series). With regard to the fact that the identification of iron phase and carbide phase is not an easy task to do with light microscope, differentiating and color etching solutions were used for this purpose. The etching solutions used for the distinction of the morphology of the samples are presented in The reduction of hematite to metallic iron and then carburization and change into iron carbide in CH In XRD pattern of the samples in different times of reduction and carburization at 750 With regard to the different intensity of the magnetic field measured between ferrite phase (B The microscopic structure of the pellets reduced and carburized (i.e. any change in the type, and morphology of iron carbide during the processes) at 750 The reduction mechanism of hematite pellets was studied at three temperatures of 700 Regarding the studies performed by researchers, iron carburization kinetics cannot be controlled by carbon diffusion reaction inside iron ( Eq. On the other hand, the rate of Also, according to Also, by inserting Eq. Hence, from Eqs. Now, if the rate of Hence, Eq. By inserting Eq. Finally, from substitution Eq. Now, according to Eq. In this research, the kinetics of hematite reduction and cementite formation, by the gas mixture of 30% CH The reduction rate of hematite pellets to metallic iron increases by an increase in temperature from 700 The kinetics of the reduction of iron oxides was studied by the use of kinetic models of solid-gas reactions and it was proved that the rate of reduction of iron oxides is controlled by the mixed mechanism of diffusion and chemical reaction at the interface. By the use of the analysis of the kinetic data, the carburization kinetic of reduced iron was studied and it was proved that the process of cementite formation was controlled by the rates of adsorption of methane on the surface of reduced iron. Structural and phase study showed that by an increase in the time of carburization process at 750 