The extraction of rare earth oxides from fluorapatite rich phosphate concentrates often involves a weak acid leach of fluorapatite and a sulphuric acid bake of the leach residue followed by water leach and precipitation to obtain an intermediate product. The main aim of this study was to determine and rationalize the solubility of rare earth metal ions in synthetic solutions representing various process liquors at the temperatures 40, 60 and 80°C. The liquors contained different acid and metal ion concentrations with respect to sulphuric acid, phosphoric acid and sulphate salts of sodium, magnesium, aluminium, potassium, calcium and iron(III). A solid of mixed rare earth carbonates was used as the source of rare earth metal ions. The solubility tests and characterisation of solids using XRD were conducted at Murdoch University laboratories as part of the process development for the Arafura Resources Nolans rare earth project. The composition of initial carbonate solids and the solids and solutions formed after saturation were analysed for rare earth and other elements at TSW Analytical Laboratories in Perth using ICP-MS and ICP-OES. The precipitated solid in sodium-rich acidic sulphate solutions is the double salt NaRE(SO4)2 based on the solid assays. However, in acidic solutions free of sodium or of low concentrations of sodium the precipitated solid appears to be RE2(SO4)3.The rare earth (RE) phosphate minerals such as monazite ((Ce,La,Th,Nd,Y)PO  This work was specifically aimed at determining the maximum solubility of REEs in predominantly sulphate media and to consider the effect of the concentrations of sulphuric and phosphoric acids, pH, temperature and the presence of other cations on the saturated solubility of REEs. The study also investigated the nature of RE solids precipitated from acidic solutions under varying conditions of pH and temperature. More specifically the test work program had six main objectives: (i) to investigate the effect of anion by comparing the solubility of REEs in solutions of 1 Different rare earth carbonate solid samples were provided by Arafura Resources Limited. They were prepared in a pilot plant from Arafura Resources high grade ore utilizing the flowsheet described by  The solubility of RE2-carbonate solid in a solution of 1 If the double salts, which consist of rare earth and sodium sulphates, are precipitated from the liquors the solubility of the RE will be governed by the concentration of sodium and sulphate ions as well as pH and temperature. Thus, a systematic study on the effect of sulphuric acid concentration on rare earth carbonate dissolution was conducted and selected results are shown in Moreover, the highest solubility of TREEs is shown by the carbonate solid T1 (   A plot of logarithm of concentrations of Na, Al, Mg, Ca, P and S in saturated solutions as a function of pH is shown in The concentration of K Thus, according to Eqs. Due to the presence of sodium ions in the initial RE2-carbonate solid a certain fraction of RE is expected to be precipitated as the double salt NaRE(SO Solubility of rare earth carbonate salts in perchloric acid solutions was 70–80 This study was funded by Arafura Resources Limited who also provided the rare earth carbonate samples. It was undertaken as part of the process development for their Nolans rare earth project in the Northern Territory of Australia. Their assistance in preparing this paper and granting permission of its publication are both gratefully acknowledged. This paper was presented at the Hydrometallurgy 2014 conference in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada (June 22–25, 2014).