Statistical and spatial distributions of apertures may be changed due to chemical dissolution. The chemical dissolution in rocks may result from the passage of acidic water through fractures or acid fracturing treatment. In this study, an acid injection cell was developed to simulate acidizing stimulation into fractures and investigate fractures surfaces etching and aperture evolution due to acidizing. Results showed that initial hydraulic and mechanical apertures and permeability (under zero stress) were increased due to fracture acidizing and a varying range of 2%–12% contact area was observed. Apertures before and after fracture acidizing followed a log-normal distribution and all of statistical moments were increased by acid injection while the calculated coefficient of variance in both arithmetic and logarithmic scales was decreased after acidizing. Correlation length increased in the direction of acid flow (x-direction) after acidizing. Results of fluid flow modeling using a developed finite element code showed a channeling path in the x-direction. Furthermore, using fast sequential simulation algorithm, apertures with various spatial correlation length in x and y directions were generated. Numerical modeling results of these generated aperture patterns showed that flow channelizing was increased by increasing of correlation length in the x-direction. Fluid flow rate was increased with increasing of correlation length in x-direction, while it decreased with increasing correlation length in y-direction.Accurate prediction of fluid flow is of great importance in various engineering applications including constructing underground structures such as dangerous waste disposals, geothermal energy extractions and hydrocarbon reservoirs. Effective development of fractured hydrocarbon reservoirs requires a deep understanding of characteristics of fluid flow in fractures. Acid fracturing is one of the eligible techniques to increase productivity of hydrocarbon reservoirs where fracture surfaces are etched by acidizing treatment. It is a complicated phenomenon of injecting acid into created fractures under certain pressure which cause to a chemical reaction and etching of fracture surfaces. The volume and pattern of etching depend on rock type, inhomogeneity of fracture surface and treatment parameters such as acid type, temperature, acid-rock contact time (acidizing time) and injection rate. Fracture surface etching creates two surfaces with different roughness distribution resulting in fracture with high conductivity. Laboratory fracture acidizing tests are performed on reservoir rock samples to characterize the effect of treatment variables and formation properties on the etching of fracture surfaces. Equivalent aperture as well as distribution of local aperture and surface morphology control transmissivity and flow pattern in a fracture. Various studies have been conducted to measure natural and artificially fracture apertures. According to the literature, local fracture apertures usually follow normal or log-normal distributions. Lee and Cho Noriaki et al. Tsang and Tsang The coupled chemical-mechanical-hydraulic-thermal behavior in a fracture has been studied using a tri-axial testing system (with 30 MPa stress). Many studies have used acid etching tests to simulate acid fracturing. Laboratory measurements of fracture apertures give the unique chance of fluid flow simulation in fractures. Therefore, conceptual models of fractures are produced by dividing fracture surface into small parts with varying geometries. As mentioned before, statistical and spatial parameters of apertures have been measured in many studies. The variation of these parameters and their effects on fluid flow and permeability has been studied in various shear and normal stresses. Acid etching in fractures changes statistical and spatial parameters in fractures; however, the variations of these parameters and their effects on permeability and fluid flow have seldom been considered. In this study acidizing tests are performed on Asmari limestone samples (one of the reservoir rocks in Iran) and fracture aperture and statistical and spatial distributions of apertures before and after acidizing are measured. Hydraulic aperture is measured at zero stress condition. Using numerical modeling, equivalent hydraulic aperture and permeability of fractures are calculated after calculating local apertures. Spatial dependency of aperture (correlation length) in fracture after acid etching is a key factor in increasing of fracture permeability. Acid etching of fractures with the same treatment variables on a unique formation type may cause to a similar statistical distribution of local apertures while the spatial aperture patterns which controls permeability, might be different. In this case, a sensitivity analysis about the effect of aperture correlation length in different directions with proper distribution function was conducted using Fast Sequential Simulation (FSS) algorithm. Then, fluid flow through the fracture was numerically calculated and the effect of correlation length of apertures on fluid flow was investigated. Creating of a fracture using a viscous fluid and acid injection into the fracture are two stages of an acid fracturing stimulation. Injected acid etches the fracture surfaces and increased fractures hydraulic conductivity. In this study, an acid injection cell was developed to simulate acidizing treatment into fractures and investigate fractures surfaces etching and aperture evolution due to acidizing. The acid injection cell was developed by this research group for fracture acidizing. Fluid flow in a rough fracture was simulated considering local aperture distribution by using Reynolds equation. Above equations are solved by a finite element code developed in MATLAB. Quantity of fluid flow pressure in each node and velocity vector and eventually flow quantity (flux) in each element are calculated. After calculating flow rate in fracture, equivalent hydraulic aperture Since measuring the local apertures for flow modeling in fractures is necessary, in this study, topography of upper and lower fracture surfaces are measured according to a reference surface (level). Then, fracture surfaces are put together in a way that they have the same ( In this study, a 3D laser scanner with a precision of There are many methods to calculate the initial mechanical aperture (in zero stress). Lee and Cho In this equation Measured hydraulic aperture in zero stress in the laboratory, calculated initial mechanical aperture by numerical modeling and the ratio of hydraulic aperture to mechanical aperture and percentage of contact areas before and after acid injection are tabulated in Equivalent permeability of fractures at zero stress condition before and after acidizing are shown in The approximated local fracture aperture distributions follow log-normal distribution as shown in  Spatial correlation of apertures is investigated by semi-variograms. Semi-variogram is defined as a half of mean squared difference of two attribute values which are separated by a vector For laboratory studies with a large number of measurements, Eq.  Semi-variograms may be theoretically fitted on exponential models such as following equation, The proposed Fast Sequential Simulation algorithm (FSS) by Dolloff and Doucette A sensitivity analysis about the effect of correlation length in different directions on local aperture patterns by FSS algorithm and first and second statistical moments of 6.52 and 0.93 (Average of acidized fractures statistical parameters) respectively, was conducted. In this case two different test setups were performed. In the first series, with constant correlation length of 5 mm in the  Flow rate is calculated using numerical modeling. As can be seen of Basically fluid flow through fractures in the ground is dependent on the fracture aperture. Apertures in the fracture surface have different values, which eventually follow different statistical distributions. Statistical and spatial distributions of apertures may be changed due to chemical dissolution. The chemical dissolution in rocks may be due to the flow of acidic water through fractures or fracture acidizing in acid fracturing stimulation. The final process in acid fracturing is fracture surface etching by acid. In this study, an acidizing cell was developed for acid injection into fractures. The tests are performed on prepared core samples of a hard limestone with low permeability from Asmari formation which is one of Iran's oil reservoir formations. Acid with specified pressure, output flow rate and temperature are directed into fracture. The process of fracture surface etching by acid was simulated by laboratory tests and statistical and spatial changes of fracture apertures before and after etching was investigated and the obtained results as follows; Tests results showed that apertures on fracture surfaces follow a log-normal distribution before and after acidizing. Acid etching increases initial hydraulic and mechanical aperture on the fracture surfaces and measurements of aperture after acidizing was shown that a 2%–12% of fracture surfaces are in contact at zero normal stress. All of statistical moments are increased by acid injection, while the coefficient of variance in both arithmetic and logarithmic scales in almost all fracture samples is decreased after acidizing which means that the distribution of aperture towards as a normal forms. Acidizing in fracture cause to increase equivalent permeability of fracture in zero stress by two order differences as 10 The small values of γ in Fracture fluid flow modeling after acidizing showed that flow is channelized in The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at