The effect of waste rock minerals introduced by dilution on the flotation of spodumene was investigated. The objectives of this work were to investigate how flotation yield and grades deteriorate mainly by Mg-bearing biotite and amphiboles that are introduced to the system by waste rock dilution and find the possible ways to improve the flotation performance regarding these Mg-bearing minerals.
                  Laboratory flotation tests were conducted with modifications to the standard procedure and new conditions. Analytical methods used in this work include mineralogical tests like electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA) to find out accurate elemental assays for the minerals in the deposit, especially biotite. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) to analyse flotation products contents. Mineral liberation analysis (MLA) for liberation, associations, Mg-distribution and modal mineralogy. Information about mineral recoveries in different flotation stages was obtained from element to mineral conversion calculations with HSC Chemistry software.
                  The target grade and recovery of Li2O for the Rapasaari ore were established on 4.5% and 84.18% (as a previous standard test). The use of Na2CO3 and starch modifiers gave promising results slightly improving the recoveries to 85.29% and 85.11% respectively while reaching almost 4.5% grade in final concentrate.
                  Mineral liberation analysis (MLA) showed that biotite contains most of the Mg (80–90%), other minerals are amphiboles (mainly edenite and hornblende) and in less extent chlorite and clays. Biotite and amphiboles end up in the final concentrate mostly fully liberated while apatite is mostly coarse mixed grains. Mg-bearing minerals float into the concentrate because of similar surface properties with spodumene. Those similar properties may be due to chemically active Al-O sites that form on the mineral surfaces when the mineral breaks through its cleavage planes during comminution. Al-O sites act as collector attachment spots in fatty acid flotation and compete for collector adsorption.Most of the lithium production from hard rock deposits comes from spodumene (LiAlSi₂O₆) and petalite (LiAlSi Spodumene is a type of monoclinic pyroxene mineral with a single-chain structure and chemical formula of LiAlSi Typical gangue minerals of spodumene and lithium ores are oxides and silicates and they are the most diverse group of minerals when it comes to flotation. Their flotation can be conducted with many different collectors depending on mineral surface properties like isoelectric point and the so-called active sites on the mineral surface. Achieving selective separation of minerals in a flotation system requires that there is a way to make some mineral particles hydrophobic and others hydrophilic. It is well known that selective separation among oxide, silicate and hydroxide groups can be quite difficult due to their similar surface properties after comminution process ( The first spodumene rock deposit in Northern Europe will enter in operation in 2021. Pilot and laboratory scale tests done in recent years have given promising metallurgical results to produce lithium carbonate but there is room for optimization. Past research with Keliber’s ore showed that biotite and amphiboles are the main gangue minerals outside of silicates that end up floating into the final concentrate with spodumene, which is troublesome because MgO impurities in the concentrate can cause problems regarding the later metallurgical processes in the production chain. Waste rock dilution can be defined as the contamination of ore with lower grade waste rock material. Waste rocks can contain gangue minerals outside of the actual planned ore body, which can affect the production process in several negative ways, or it can consist of low-grade ore that did not make up the cut-off grade. Dilution is considered as one of the most important factors affecting the economy of mines ( Dilution is usually divided into planned and unplanned dilution. Planned dilution also referred to as primary or internal dilution is contamination of ore by low-grade material from within the ore block and unplanned dilution, also known as secondary or external dilution, is contamination of ore outside the ore block. Both of these dilute the mill feed and cause several issues and expenses during the project ( The current flotation circuit shows grade and recovery deterioration when waste rock dilution is introduced to the system. Waste rocks from different deposits contain different minerals than the ore itself and seem to float with spodumene or by other means and concentrate into the last cleaner stage, which negatively affects the concentrate quality. Especially magnesium containing minerals like biotite and amphiboles are prime suspects to be the main cause of negative results as they have shown good floatability in the same conditions as spodumene Several mineralogical and analytical methods were applied in conjunction with batch flotation tests in laboratory scale. Rapasaari ore from the largest Keliber’s ore deposit was used in this work. A blended sample of 12 kg with 12% diluted ore was prepared to use 1 kg of ore for each flotation batch test. The preparation of the blending included; first, a representative Rapasaari ore crushed to −3.35 mm and split to obtain 10.56 kg. Waste rock (1.44 kg) crushed to −3.35 mm and combined with Rapasaari ore and homogenized, then divided into 1 kg of blended ore samples using laboratory scale riffle splitter and rotary cone sample divider to get an even and random division. Main flotation reagents that were used in the tests were collector PRIFAC 8944-LQ-(GD) rapeseed fatty acid (Croda) later denoted as RSFA, emulsifier BEROL 050 (Akzo Nobel) and on some tests collector ATRAC 922 (Akzo Nobel). PRIFAC is an oleic rich fatty acid mixture consisting mostly of oleic acid (C The average qualitative and quantitative mineralogy of Rapasaari ore and waste rock was determined by MLA as is shown in A series of batch flotation tests were performed in GTK Mintec Outokumpu investigating the effects of different reagents and water quality for improvement of the results from the current standard flotation procedure. The set-up conditions used in this work are summarized in The standard procedure (Rapasaari Test 11) was used as a reference. In order to obtain p80 of 130 µm, first, the 1 kg of ore was ground for 20 min at 53% solids in an iron rod mill (22 cm length and 18.8 cm diameter) with 8 kg of rods of 20.3 cm in length and three diameter sizes 2.5 cm, 2.0 cm and 1.5 cm. The ground sample was sieved (150 µm) and the oversize sample (+150 µm) was re-ground for 8 min (in the same mill). Desliming was conducted by elutriation in 4 L Outokumpu’s cylindrical flotation cell using 650 rpm rotor speed and 0.18 l/min water flow. Water was fed into the cell from the bottom of the cell through the rotor water outlet. Correct water flow was calculated using the Stoke’s Law, the target fineness of slimes fineness (p80 11 µm) and the diameter of the flotation cell. The desliming time was set in 35 min. The slurry settled overnight to eliminate the excess water by decantation and obtain 4 L of pulp with 60% solids. The pH of conditioning for preflotation was set to be above 10.5 in a 4 L GTK flotation cell with 1800 rpm, 500 g/t of NaOH for 15 min, the collector rapeseed fatty acid (RSFA 120 g/t) and emulsifier Berol 050 (30 g/t) were conditioned for 5 min each. In preflotation, naturally and easily floating gangue minerals like apatite and calcite were floated. Addition of fatty acid lowers the pH, but more NaOH was added if necessary. The preflotation was done with 3 l/min airflow, 1800 rpm and 30% of solids for 4 min with an automatic scraping of froth. The tailings of preflotation were treated by wet low intensity magnetic separation using a SALA equipment with an operating intensity of 0.07 Tesla (Kg/s Rougher flotation time was 7 min with 2 l/min air, 30% solids and automatic scraping. After the rougher flotation, the concentrate was cleaned seven times. Collector and emulsifier are added in first three cleaning stages (Cleaning 1: 400 g/t RSFA/100 g/t Berol, Cleaning 2: 300 g/t RSFA/75 g/t Berol, Cleaning 3: 200 g/t RSFA/50 g/t Berol) with conditioning times of 3 min each. First cleaning was done in the same 2.5 L cell with same air and rotor rpm, cleanings 2–7 were done in 1.5 L cell with 1.5 l/min air, 1100 rotor rpm and manual scraping of froth. Flotation times for cleanings were as follows: C1 and C2: 6 min, C3: 5.5 min, C4: 5 min, C5: 4.5 min, C6: 4 min and C7: 3.5 min. Filtrated water samples from rougher tailing and cleaning waters (from tailing and concentrates from couple of tests) were collected to be reused. The objective was to study the effects of different metal ions and chemicals that are introduced into the process water when recycled water is used and the effects of different modifier reagents that have proven to be useful in other research work and mine operation regarding spodumene beneficiation. A preconcentrate cleaning test (Test 8) was done by increasing the dosage of reagents in the preflotation stage from 120 g/t to 200 g/t of collector and from 30 g/t to 50 g/t of emulsifier and then running two cleaning flotations on the concentrate from the preflotation. Cleaning flotations were done with no chemical additions or pH adjustments, but pH naturally decreased to around 9 in first cleaning and to around 8 in the second cleaning because of water added to adjust the flotation pulp level during the test. Polished sections of the final concentrate, average ore and waste rocks of different Keliber’s deposits were prepared and analyzed with optical microscope to have initial lower resolution look at the samples and to pinpoint the locations of different minerals for EPMA analysis. Seven samples of feed and flotation products were cast into epoxy in thin section mould and analysed using the MLA equipment FEI Quanta 650F FE-SEM scanning electron microscope with acceleration voltage of 25 kV and emission current of ~207 µA. Backscattered electrons were analyzed with 100x magnification for +125 µm fraction and with 400x magnification for −32 µm fraction. The measurement program was XBSE_STD. Thin sections were produced from Rapasaari Feed 12% Dilution bulk, Rapasaari Feed 12% Dilution +125 µm, Rapasaari Feed 12% Dilution 32–125 µm, Rapasaari Feed 12% Dilution −32 µm, Rapasaari AT Test 4 PR, Rapasaari AT Test 4 CC7 and Rapakeli Test 11 CC7. The number of particles measured was 60 000 for every sample, except for Rapasaari Feed 12% Dilution +125 µm since it only contained about 20 000 particles. Modal mineralogy, spodumene, apatite and biotite liberation, Mg distribution, Li mineral, biotite, amphibole and apatite mineral associations were determined with the MLA from all samples before mentioned. The elemental composition of minerals was determined with EPMA model JEOL JXA-8200 SuperProbe WD/ED Combined Microanalyzer while used acceleration voltage was 15 kV, probe current 15nA and probe diameter 5–10 µm depending on mineral grain size. Measurement points were chosen in the sample especially to analyze the Mg-bearing gangue mineral compositions that were of interest i.e. biotite and amphiboles. Results were used in element to mineral conversion calculations. EMC calculations were performed with HSC Chemistry version 9.2.2 from Outotec (Geo module). The modal calculations use the analyzed XRF chemical assays and qualitative mineralogy. The elemental compositions from EPMA results were input in HSC Chemistry for the minerals that were analyzed, and stoichiometric compositions from the program’s mineral database were used for common minerals. The Mg-bearing minerals were of special interest in this work of which biotite proved to be the most relevant to focus since the MLA analysis showed that it contains around 80–90% of the magnesium in the minerals ( The spodumene ore itself doesn’t contain Mg-bearing minerals (biotite and amphiboles) but they are introduced into the system when the ore is diluted with waste rock, which is almost impossible to prevent in an economically feasible way with current mining methods because of the uneven distribution and shape of the ore body in the deposit. Mg, Al, K and Si are the major elements in the composition of Biotite. Mg content is 6.92% and assumed to have a negative effect on the flotation. Previous studies showed flotation results with waste rock diluted ore containing biotite and amphiboles build up in the final concentrate and reduce concentrate grade and recovery in addition to increasing the chemical consumption (  Tests 4 and 6 (Na Water samples were taken during all the flotation tests showing clearly that increasing amounts of metal ions in the process water decrease the spodumene recoveries and overall flotation results. Tests 2 and 5 were done with recirculated tailing waters and show the build-up of metal ions in the water analysis with consecutive uses of the same water. These tests also showed decreasing Li recoveries in the final concentrate proportional to the increment of metal ions and more recycled water (test 5 less recovery than test 2), as minerals dissolve in the water and water species (metal ions) undergo various reactions (adsorption, complexation, precipitation) that affect interfacial reactions. Test 3 was done with GTK pilot pond water (containing higher amounts of various metal ions Ca, Na and Mg) gave the lower recovery and grade. Other species in water such as decomposition products of remaining reagents in the water or complexation of various components and differences in reagent dosages could also affect these results. A different collector (Atrac922 from Akzo) was tested in Test 7 and 9 for spodumene flotation without emulgator. In addition, preconcentrate cleaning (Test 8) was attempted to improve the flotation of spodumene. The results were not satisfactory (not shown here) and more research is recommended. Mineral liberation for spodumene, biotite and apatite were measured for seven samples (bulk and sized feed and products) as is shown in Results for spodumene liberation show that spodumene is well liberated having around 80–90% of grains as pure grains and around 95% of grains being 90–95% spodumene, which shows that grinding times were sufficient regarding spodumene flotation ( The concentrate shows 80% of biotite grains ( For apatite liberation ( MLA analysis regarding magnesium distribution showed that biotite contains around 80–90% of the magnesium in the minerals, which means that looking at the MgO grades and recoveries can give a good picture of how the flotation of Li Flotation results show that MgO grade-recovery curve ( In general, the recovery and grades of MgO were higher than 50% and 1.3% respectively. When using starch modifier (test 6) recovery and grade of MgO are the highest in all stages reaching 58% and 1.34% in the 6th cleaner when Li MgO is recovered much more into slimes and preconcentrate than Li The average distribution of MgO and Li recovery in the flotation test products can be seen in The interest in this work are the magnesium-bearing minerals thus the Mg-distribution between different minerals was determined based on the MLA results. Biotite contains the majority of the magnesium in all the samples, but other noteworthy minerals include amphibole and chlorite. The Mg-content of amphiboles, chlorite and clay minerals was determined from semi-quantitative EDS-spectra gained from the scanning electron microscope analyses. Other minerals were determined by stoichiometric Mg-content. Mineral associations for lithium minerals, biotite, amphibole and apatite were determined for six samples ( Li minerals are spodumene, cookeite, bityite and sicklerite. Other silicates are quartz, plagioclase, microcline, augite, muscovite, chlorite, serpentine, garnet, epidote, tourmaline, titanite, zircon and clay. Carbonates include calcite. Sulphides include pyrite, pyrrhotite, sphalerite, arsenopyrite and chalcopyrite. Oxides include columbite, rutile and ilmenite. Overall, lithium minerals are almost totally liberated. Especially spodumene free surface is in great level on all the samples (~97%), even in +125 µm fraction. Cookeite and sicklerite are also well liberated having a free surface of 82–96% in all the samples except for the +125 µm fraction where the free surface is around 68% for cookeite and 75% for sicklerite. Main associations for cookeite are with quartz (8%) and spodumene (10.6%) and for sicklerite respectively apatite (16.8%) and less quartz (2.5%), plagioclase (2.1%) and microcline (2.3%). Bityite free surface is varying from 50 to 80% depending on fineness except for preconcentrate where it is well liberated (94.5%). Main associations overall include quartz (12–28%) depending on size fraction and on +125 µm fraction biotite (10.4%) and amphibole (7.4%). Biotite is one of the main troublemaker minerals that are causing problems for the concentrate quality. In the grinding products, biotite is well liberated especially in the smaller particle fractions having 98% (−32 µm), 92% (32–125 µm) and 94% (bulk) free surface and 82% in +125 µm fraction. Main associations in the largest fraction include plagioclase (8.5%) and quartz (5.5%). In preconcentrate, biotite is fully liberated (97%). In the concentrate samples, biotite has around 93% free surface, which indicates that biotite is floating into the product because of its similar surface properties to spodumene and other floating minerals. Amphiboles are the other Mg-bearing minerals that are of interest. Like biotite, they are floating in some amounts to the last flotation product and reducing the final concentrate quality. Overall, amphiboles are well liberated in all samples having 77–98% free surface depending on fraction size. Main associations include silicates like quartz (5.1%), plagioclase (9.1%) and muscovite (3%) in coarse fraction. In preconcentrate, amphiboles are almost fully liberated like biotite having 94% free surface and in the final concentrate also having around 87% free surface with small associations with before mentioned silicates. Additionally, associations for apatite were determined. Apatite is the main P-containing mineral that is separated in the preconcentrate flotation. Of all the mineral categories that associations were determined in these MLAs, apatite has the greater associations. In bulk grinding product, apatite has around 84% free surface, but when looking at fractions, it has only 60% in +125 µm fraction and 71% in 32–125 µm fraction, while −32 µm fraction is almost fully liberated with 97% free surface. In preconcentrate, apatite is almost fully liberated with around 95% free surface but when looking at the final spodumene concentrate samples. Apatite that builds up into the spodumene concentrate is heavily associated with other minerals with around 60% free surface, which indicates that coarse mixed grains are the ones that end up in the final concentrate. Main associations of apatite in the concentrate samples include plagioclase (10–14%), quartz (6%), spodumene (4–8%) and biotite (4.5%). It is clear that most of the Mg-bearing minerals (biotite and amphiboles) are fully liberated particles floating into the spodumene concentrate and due to their similar surface properties cause a negative effect on concentrate quality. Those tend most likely to float into the concentrate because of the same kind of Al-O sites on the mineral surfaces that form during comminution when the minerals break through their cleavage planes. Al-O sites act as active sites for collector attachment in fatty acid flotation and those active sites compete with spodumene for collector adsorption. The target grade was reached in cleaning stages 5, 6 or 7 (CC5-CC7) depending on test conditions ( Mineral grade-recovery of spodumene and biotite were calculated with HSC Chemistry. The calculated modals show around 65–70% spodumene grade in the final concentrate, while the MLA measured grade was 55% for the reference test sample and 58% for the test 4 sample, showing significant differences in spodumene grade. For comparison, the Li The trend of MgO recovery is downward with an increasing grade similar to the Li Comparisons of measured Li Magnesium-bearing minerals like biotite and amphiboles were chosen as the minerals of interest because they have proven to be the most abundant gangue mineral outside of silicate minerals that build up in the final concentrate and deteriorate the final concentrate quality. Biotite is also one of the most unwanted impurities to end up in the final concentrate regarding the metallurgical process following up the flotation enrichment since it can cause problems by promoting partial melting of the concentrate during high temperature treatment when alpha spodumene is transformed into digestible beta spodumene. Formation of the partial melt can cause agglomeration during the lithium digestion procedure, which decreases the lithium recovery and makes the process more difficult to operate. On top of Mg-bearing minerals, apatite that contains the majority of the phosphorus in the deposit is also one of the more deleterious impurities to end up in the final concentrate. Apatite is readily digestible in same conditions with beta spodumene and the main cause of P-impurities in the final lithium carbonate product. Within this work, the test that used Na Water analysis showed that increasing amounts of metal ions in the process water affect the flotation result negatively as expected. Tests done with recycled waters and the GTK pilot pond water showed the worst results regarding spodumene recovery and grade in the final concentrate. A gradual build-up of different metal ions (Ca, Na, Mg), especially in the cleaning waters show steadily decreasing flotation performance. MLA results show that biotite contains the vast majority of the Mg between the minerals (80–90%). Also, Mg-bearing minerals are amphiboles and chlorite. Exact amphibole minerals cannot be determined with precision, but their structure is mostly of hornblende and edenite. Biotite and amphiboles that end up in the final concentrate are mostly fully liberated, which further strengthens the theory of similar surface properties with spodumene. MgO grade-recovery curve also shows the same behavior as spodumene, but with more emphasis on slimes and preconcentrate recovery. Overall flotation results show that MgO recovery behaves the same way with Li For future work, flotation tests could be performed with higher and lower reagent dosages to optimize their amounts, and surface adsorption study of starch should be further investigated, as it seemed to produce an activating effect instead of the depressing effect presented in the literature. Since the main difference between the spodumene and biotite recoveries is the greater recovery of biotite in slimes and preconcentrate, both still mostly build up in the final concentrate, some emphasis could be done in developing desliming and preflotation stage to possibly increase biotite recovery. In addition, surface studies on samples from recycled process water tests are suggested to determine what chemical species and mechanisms are causing the decreased recoveries and furthermore try to remove them efficiently since process water recycling will be almost mandatory in the future.  Thank to FAME project (EU H2020 project,