The occurrence of copper in the Chingola refractory ore (CRO) is such that it is chemically locked in cupriferous micas of predominantly phlogopite, chlorite and vermiculite within the mica lattice. This renders the copper refractory to conventional atmospheric leaching. A few technically feasible processing methods have been proposed but appear economically unfavourable. This study has proposed a hybrid leaching process consisting of ore agglomeration, acid curing and leaching in fixed bed columns to maximise the leach efficiency under ambient conditions. The experimental procedure involved characterization of the ore, agglomeration tests, acid curing and leaching experiments in fixed bed columns. The objective was to understand the conditions under which copper dissolution can be enhanced by specifically targeting the refractory cupriferous micas. The results showed that agglomeration and acid curing of the CRO material doubled the total copper dissolution from 32% Cu for the unagglomerated and un-cured material to about 60% Cu dissolution for the agglomerated material. Short bed heights yielded marginally higher leach efficiencies and also faster leaching kinetics than tall bed heights. More crucially, the hybrid leaching process successfully dissolved up to 90% of the total cupriferous mica in the ore, which is reported to be difficult to leach under ambient conditions. Towards explanation of the phenomenon, it is postulated that the acid curing step rendered the CuOH bonds chemically weak which enhanced copper dissolution from the mica matrix. This leads to partial acid decomposition of the silicate structure and dissolution of the metal cations, leaving a siliceous residue. However, sulphides, especially chalcopyrite was difficult to leach under the conditions employed, for which the use of acidified ferric sulphate solution or bioleaching is recommended. This is a significant step towards the development of a practical leaching process to treat the CRO material.The Chingola refractory ore (CRO) refers to over 150 million tonnes of low-grade copper ores found on old dumps in the proximity of open pits around the town of Chingola in Zambia. These have been stockpiled since the 1950s. The ores became known as CRO because they did not respond well to froth flotation and leaching processes. A mineralogical study revealed that most of the copper occurred in cupriferous micas in which copper was in exchange positions with potassium ions in the mica lattice. Further, the copper was chemically bound to hydroxyl groups of the interstratified phlogopite, chlorite, muscovite and vermiculite. Thus, the occlusion of copper in these micaceous minerals rendered dissolution process difficult. The micaceous ore also contains oxide-copper or acid soluble minerals (malachite, chrysocolla, cuprite) and sulphide minerals to make up to 1.2% total copper content. Although the largest deposit of cupriferous mica is found at Chingola, these minerals are found in nearly all oxide-copper ores of the Zambian Copperbelt ( Apart from poor flotation characteristics, it is difficult to solubilise copper from CRO minerals under conventional leaching conditions. The mineral grains in the CRO material are naturally slimy, friable and/or finely sized so that, in theory, it should require relatively little energy for further size reduction, in preparation for leaching or flotation. The slimy and finely sized nature of the ore with its plate-like mica particles meant that it was not suited to be treated by percolation leaching due to low percolation rates and channelling issues. Further, smelting was also discounted due to difficulties in obtaining a concentrate grade that could bear smelter costs. Thus, subsequent studies to develop a process for copper extraction from cupriferous mica involved direct agitation leaching. However, leaching was not an attractive option because of the high content of soluble Mg, Fe and Al in the mica. While it would be necessary to solubilise the mica in order to release the copper from it, it would also lead to a high acid consumption accompanied by slow kinetics of mica dissolution due to the strong Cu-OH bonding in the mica ( Alternative approaches to direct leaching were then explored. In an effort to reduce acid consumption, the ore was pretreated by desliming followed by flotation in order to reject acid consuming dolomites and non-copper bearing micas. However, 15–20% of copper was lost to the slimes fraction, and non-copper bearing mica minerals floated faster than the cupriferous mica (such as phlogopite and chlorite). Also, the oxide copper minerals floated poorly. This resulted in low concentrate grades and recoveries. On the basis of these challenges and from practical perspectives, preconcentration by froth flotation was discounted ( The treatment of refractory copper ore (TORCO) process originally developed by Anglo American Corporation between 1960 and 1966 was the earliest notable process to successfully recover copper from CRO. The ore was mixed with 1 wt% pulverized coal and 0.5 wt% NaCl (salt) and then heated in a fluidised bed at about 750–800 °C. The salt reacted with the silicates in the ore and water vapour of the ore to form HCl (Eq. Production of hydrogen chloride Hydrogen chloride gas is produced from sodium chloride (source of chlorine) at segregation temperatures by reaction with water vapour, silica or silicates. Chlorination of copper minerals Hydrogen chloride gas converts the copper in minerals to volatile cuprous chloride. Sulphides are converted to oxides. Reduction of cuprous chloride to metallic copper It was assumed that the reductant was hydrogen from the reaction of carbon and water and probably also from the coal volatiles. It also seemed certain that hydrogen chloride was also regenerated during the reduction step. Later laboratory studies and follow-up pilot plant trials by Anglo American Research Laboratories (AARL) involved a two-stage leach process to treat CRO material. The process consisted of primary leaching with sulphuric acid at ambient conditions (~30 °C) followed by secondary leaching at 65 °C and high acid strength to dissolve the refractory cupriferous micas. Leach efficiencies of 75–80% were attained but at the cost of high acid consumption (36–58 kg/t) (  SKM Consultants of South Africa reviewed the historical metallurgical testwork data and proposed de-sliming as the first stage of treatment followed by agitated acid leaching of the fines fraction using existing processing facilities at Konkola Copper Mines (KCM) Plc. The coarse material was to be treated by heap leaching via agglomeration step to increase the reaction kinetics and avoid percolation problems ( On the basis of results from earlier studies and the recommendations from SKM consultants, KCM Plc initiated further extensive studies towards extracting copper from CRO using a combination of agitation and heap leaching to not only sustain but also increase copper production from the abundant CRO resources. Furthermore, the CRO project was also driven by concerns of limited supply of the copper ore from the primary sources (Nchanga open pit and Underground mines) in the long term as well as under-utilisation of solvent extraction and electrowinning facilities ( Heap leaching is an economically attractive option for copper extraction from low-grade resources such as the Chingola refractory ore provided the ore possesses sufficient hydraulic conductivity and porosity in coarse particles. The agglomeration and acid curing steps were proposed as ore pretreatment steps to primarily improve the hydraulic conductivity and porosity because of the slimy, highly friable and plate-like nature of micas in CRO, whilst the issue of ore refractoriness was addressed by acid curing. Thus, the aim of the larger CRO project was to optimise the exploitation of the Mimbula CRO for copper recovery through a heap leach process. The objective was to determine the agglomeration and column leaching conditions that would enhance the dissolution of copper minerals from the CRO material. This paper provides new insights into the heap leaching behaviour of the cupriferous micas from the Mimbula CRO. The experimental procedure involved ore characterization followed by agglomeration tests, acid curing and leaching experiments in fixed bed columns to simulate heap leaching conditions. About 1.2 t of the copper refractory ore was sampled from the Mimbula CRO stockpile site for KCM Plc using a simple and relatively quick grid sampling method and then screened on a 25 mm sieve. In the grid method of sampling, the CRO dump site was divided into a square grid pattern of several cells of about 3 × 3 m each. A sample was collected from each cell by an excavator and combined to form a composite sample. The aim of compositing several samples was to obtain a representative sample and minimise variability. The oversize fraction (+25 mm) which constituted about 30 wt% was crushed to <25 mm and later blended with the −25 mm fraction. Using coning and quartering, a representative 20 kg sub-sample was split from the bulk sample for mineralogical and chemical analyses including total copper (TCu), acid soluble copper (ASCu), silica (SiO The agglomeration tests were carried out in an inclined agglomeration drum of 3 m in diameter and 9.1 m long, rotated by an electric motor as shown in Agglomeration refers to adhesion of fine particles to form larger particles due to attractive surface forces by addition of a liquid and binders to obtain stable and strong agglomerates. The objective of agglomeration prior to leaching is to produce relatively coarse particle sizes with a narrow size distribution ( About 60 kg of ore was split from the initial 1.2 t and further subdivided into thirty 2 kg lots using the grid method for the agglomeration experiments. To each 2 kg ore sample charged into the agglomerator, distilled water was added first, followed by the binder (Kempel 8201) and finally concentrated sulphuric acid through nozzle openings. The role of distilled water was to facilitate the formation of pellets, and the binder facilitated the growth and stability of the pellets. The Kempel 8201 is a synthetic, tailor made binder which is strong and does not degrade in the acidic heap leaching conditions. Finally, concentrated sulphuric acid (98%) was added to cure the ore. The residence time of the ore in the agglomerator was 3 min. The agglomerates formed were cured by allowing them to dry in open air for 24 h before being subjected to agglomerate quality assessment tests. The variation of agglomeration conditions was 2 kg ore/charge, 12–16 wt% terminal moisture content (polymer binder and water), 0–800 g/t dosage of Kempel 8201 binder (a registered trade mark of Kemira), 2–6 min residence time, 10–50 rpm drum speed and concentrated sulphuric acid dosage for curing fixed at 30 kg of acid per tonne of ore (30 kg/t). The acid dosage for curing was not varied but fixed at 0 kg/t (unagglomerated ore) or 30 kg acid/t of ore (agglomerated ore). The agglomeration conditions are summarised in One kilogram of agglomerates obtained from each of the agglomeration experiments carried out was subjected to the visual inspection/glove test, sieve analysis (for size distribution of agglomerates) and soak tests ( The soak test is commonly used to analyse agglomerate strength by submersion in solution or water. Furthermore, 1 kg of agglomerates was subjected to sieve analysis for about 3 min to determine the size distribution of agglomerates. The screen sizes used were 25.4 mm, 12.5 mm, 4.75 mm, 2 mm, 212 μm and 75 μm. The wt% passing 2 mm was determined as a further measure of agglomeration efficiency. A size analysis of the leached agglomerates was also carried out to measure the fines fraction using the 2 mm sieve size as the benchmark. Four PVC columns (0.150 m diameter by 6 m long) were each irrigated from the top using a peristaltic pump to supply a constant flux of 6 L/h·m The leach solution was sampled daily and sent to KCM Analytical services for the determination of copper by AAS, as well as the pH. The AAS values were used to calculate the copper leach efficiency using Eq. The various agglomerate sizes in the feed material to the column were also analysed for copper content before leaching at the targeted feed sizes (25.4 mm, 12.5 mm, 4.75 mm, 2 mm, 0.212 mm, 0.15 mm, 0.075 mm) using sieve analysis. The analysis of copper content was repeated at the same sizes for leached agglomerates, also determined by sieve analysis. The objective was to try to approximate the effect of various ‘agglomerate size fractions’ (in the feed to the column) on the copper leach efficiency. The total copper (TCu) in the CRO is about 1.2 wt%, of which 0.4 wt% is acid soluble (ASCu) and 0.8 wt% acid insoluble (AICu). Thus, the ore is a mixture of copper ‘oxides’ (malachite with minor pseudo-malachite and chrysocolla), sulphides (bornite and chalcocite with minor chalcopyrite) and cupriferous micas as given in Table 1(a). Approximately 34 wt% of the copper content is accounted for by copper sulphide minerals, 23 wt% by oxide minerals and 43 wt% by the cupriferous mica. Roughly, half of value minerals in the ore is contained in the cupriferous mica that is difficult to leach under normal conditions ( Previous mineralogical studies showed that the low-grade micaceous copper ores consist of primary cupriferous micas as major phases which are essentially K, Mg, Cu, Fe, Al_phyllo-silicates. This is in agreement with the results of Heap leaching relies on the passage of solution through the ore to deliver reagents and rinse the leached product and, therefore, heap permeability is a crucial factor that is partly a function of particle size. The proportion of fines fraction smaller than 75 μm in the ore was used as metric to determine whether agglomeration was necessary ( In In  It was observed that operating the drum at 20 rpm produced more coarse agglomerates than at any other speeds as indicated by size distribution. Below 20 rpm, agglomerates were finer because low speeds result in insufficient mixing of ore, moisture and binder for agglomerate formation and growth. Above 20 rpm, the particle sizes became finer due to agglomerate particles bumping into each other resulting in breakage and simultaneous formation of smaller fine agglomerates. Furthermore, at low speeds, agglomerates start to roll towards the discharge end of the inclined drum instead of cascading leading to fragmentation, and impeding growth of agglomerates. Excess speed also leads to sticking of particles to the drum walls due to centrifugal forces, which was also observed by The objectives of column leaching experiments were to establish the effect of bed height on the leach efficiency and kinetics, acid consumption and also to evaluate the extent of dissolution of the copper minerals within the ore. For all the column leaching experiments, the acid flow rate was fixed at 6 L/h·m From The data from the column leach experiments was also used to assess the leaching kinetics of the ore material as a function of bed height. The leaching kinetics were analysed as a function of the breakthrough period and overall leach efficiency (calculated by Eq.  From The effect of agglomerate size on leach efficiency was investigated to find the agglomerate feed size that produced the highest leach efficiency. The various agglomerate sizes in the feed material to the column were analysed for the copper content before and after leaching at the targeted feed sizes of 25.4 mm, 12.5 mm, 4.75 mm, 2 mm, 0.212 mm, 0.15 mm and 0.075 mm. The copper analysis was repeated at the same sizes for leached agglomerates. From The column tests were also carried out to estimate the total acid consumption that was incurred at different bed heights. The CRO at Nchanga Mine has been reported to exhibit high acid consumption because of the need to mainly breakdown the mica structure and solubilise the chemically locked-up copper. Also, the presence of gangue materials like carbonates contribute to acid consumption ( A detailed mineralogical analysis of the CRO feed and leach residue was conducted to evaluate the extent of dissolution of various copper minerals during agglomeration, acid curing and column leaching. As shown in By analysing the copper oxide minerals in The leaching behaviour of chalcopyrite in different leaching systems has been studied extensively. Many studies have noted that chalcopyrite is also a refractory mineral and thus difficult to leach under normal conditions ( The dissolution behaviour of gangue minerals in the CRO is given in In theory, acid leaching is expected to solubilise 100% copper in chrysocolla, malachite, pseudomalachite, 5–40% cupriferous iron oxides, 5–60% cupriferous clays, up to 20% chalcocite and 0% chalcopyrite and bornite ( The products of metal crystal salts from acid cure enhance bed permeability and crack propagation for improved particle diffusion. This increases the leaching rate, dehydration and CO An early mineralogical study by The sheet silicates such as mica are not readily decomposed in acids. Thus, acid leaching of these micas by conventional techniques proceeds slowly and incompletely.  The effect of agglomeration and acid curing on the column leaching behaviour of the Chingola refractory ore (CRO) is reported in this paper. About half of the valuable minerals in the CRO are cupriferous micas with a relatively large fines fraction. Consequently, this study proposed agglomeration and acid curing steps prior to column leaching for copper recovery. The agglomeration conditions were optimised to produce agglomerates with the least fines migration and also coarse and stable agglomerates that were suitable for leaching in fixed bed columns. The use of agglomeration and acid curing for the CRO material doubled the total copper dissolution and also shortened the leaching period from 32% copper dissolution for the unagglomerated material after 94 leaching days to about 60% copper recovery for the agglomerated and acid cured material after 12 leaching days. Therefore, the agglomeration and acid curing steps greatly improved the copper leach efficiency and kinetics. The acid consumption is relatively high for the agglomerated ore. However, the local availability of acid may offset costs of the acid requirement for agglomeration. Agglomeration and acid curing facilitated a significant dissolution of up to 90% of the total cupriferous mica in the ore under ambient solution conditions. It is evident that acid curing breaks down the mica structure to release the chemically locked up copper. The high dissolution rate of the refractory cupriferous mica reported in this study is a significant milestone towards the development of practical leaching process for the treatment of CRO material. It is recommended that the acid dosage rate during agglomeration be optimised, and further studies be done to improve the total copper recovery beyond 60% by targeting the residue, slow leaching copper sulphides. The authors would like to thank the