Industrially speaking, we measure the energy used in kilowatt hour per ton of ore. This energy increases very quickly with the desired fineness of the output exiting the machine.  From the definition for grinding energy (see For output sizes less than 0.1 Power called the comminution unit’s net power is the difference between: shaft power when the unit is a processing product; shaft power when the unit is working without a product. Net power is the sum of both terms: the power necessary to propagate cracks, that is useful power; the power lost that corresponds to stresses visible in the product that are not followed by cracks; this term breaks down as heat. Net power is not a strictly unique function of the nature of the product being processed and the rate of reduction, as it depends on the comminution mode, meaning ultimately the type of machine. We can write: As long as we define:  The work There is no reason for ΔS to be proportional to work To determine useful energy in a comminution unit, we just measure the number (n) of falls of a mass M required to obtain the same value of ΔS as an industrial unit. Under these conditions: Charles The useful power of a machine is the product of useful energy and the flow of product mass. It is absurd to try to evaluate useful energy by the relationship: γ: surface energy (J.m ΔS: increase in the bulk solid’s surface (m Basically, in this case, the yield of fragmentation is only a few percentage values.  In reality, we do not typically measure useful power. This is why industrial recovery can only be estimated.  log log Naturally: 1) The surface area of a solid sphere is: More generally, particles are not spherical. The non-sphericity coefficient must therefore be applied which is given by the following ratio:  The surface area of a solid particle is therefore: 2) Surface area of a bulk solid: Let us assume that this solid is distributed in n classes where each has a diameter d Let us assume, in addition, that each class represents the mass fraction m The surface area of the bulk solid (m 3) The net specific energy for grinding (J.kg where W: flow rate of mass in the processed ore (kg.s P: net mill power (J.s Let us make F the bulk solid fed and P the output from the machine. The solid’s surface created by the grinding procedure is in m Grinding productivity η We notice that this definition relates to easily measurable quantities and is hence practical as opposed to notions of industrial recovery where inaccuracy is a known factor from the fact that it is impossible to correctly measure the energy that is actually dedicated to fragmentation. Grinding productivity hence defined is measured in m During a collision, fragments carry a significant amount of kinetic energy with them which is dispersed as heat in the surroundings. The energy recovery in collision mills will therefore be less than that in slow compression units.  Efficiency in grinding a layer of grains depends on the granulometry of the layer. For mono-dispersed granulometry, this efficiency will be mediocre. Inversely, if the grains are flooded with fines, it will equally be bad, as grains will therefore be subjected to quasi-hydrostatic compression. However, it will be excellent if the diameter of fines is ¼ of the grains that will undergo grinding. Finally, everything depends on the number of stresses and the intensity of the pressure load placed on them. Yet, the more that these loads are increased, the less they are intense. By calculating Fairs’ The collision speeds required depends on the desired fineness of output coming out of the collision machine, as shown in  Power is expressed in hph.ton For a machine turning at pilot scale, we can estimate that 18% of the power shaft is lost during transmissions. This percentage is lowered to 14% for a machine of industrial size. Let us look at the volume of a very big solid and let us reduce it to n particles of unit size d according to Rittinger  according to Kick  Let us now report the energy of the true volume of the solid being processed, as n. d  Bond According to Bond and relative to grinding, a solid of infinite size has, per unit mass, a zero energy level. However, Bond suggests in an empirical way that every particle of a finite size d has per unit mass a level of energy in the following form: Finally, Bond introduces an energy level standard W Bond calls W Substituting K in both  According to Bond P: the machine’s “useful” power (kW) Q: mass of flow being processed (kg.s W In Table IIIA, Bond [ The concept of measuring W  P: electric power consumed (measured in Wattmeter) (W) τ: cycle duration (s). Assuming that the mass M In [ This requires a special laboratory grinder called “Bond’s jar”. The output to be processed is first reduced so that its grains are all of a size that is less than 3,360 Then, 700 The method consists of grinding the load for a short period of time (100–300 revolutions). We then sieve the load with a screen size x The length of time required for each operation must be determined by trial and error and the number of operations may, depending on the situation, vary from 7 to 15. The method is therefore not simple. The energy index is therefore: x x x G: grams of underflow obtained on the sieve for each revolution of the jar; G is Bond’s “grindability”.  We can express Bond’s index in kilowatt hour per metric ton by writing: 1) The rotation speed is expressed as a fraction of the critical speed, such that the centrifugal force balances the weight: The critical rotation speed in revolutions per minute is: or D: diameter of the rotational mill’s horizontal axis (m) N We characterize the rotation speed of a ball or a rod mill as the fraction φ of the critical speed N Bond’s Table II 2) Milled output with a size that is less than 70 The reference value W 3) Wet grinding and dry grinding: Dry grinding requires more energy than wet grinding. For dry grinding, we must multiply the reference W 4) Bond proposes an optimum reduction ratio for rod mills [ For a ball mill, if the reduction ratio becomes less than 3 (target grinding of concentrates), the energy index W If we want to reduce a very large compact solid (d Note that carbon is missing from Bond’s list. This issue was dealt with by Chandler In practice, it is very difficult to make use of a bulk solid when the size of all its particles is equal to d Bond According to the foregoing, we could proceed in the following way. The specific energy is given by: 1) 2) Open circuit coefficient: This coefficient depends on the mass fraction of the output that is less than 75 3) Size of mill coefficient: 4) Oversize coefficient of the feed: R: the desired reduction ratio (x x x – – for rod mills: 5) Output fineness coefficient: This coefficient must not be greater than 1 and is only applicable to: 6) Rod mill coefficient: where the optimum reduction ratio R L D: mill diameter (m) 7) Ball mill coefficient: This coefficient is only applicable when R   d ϕ : fraction of the critical speed J: L: mill length (m). This formula is Bond’s empirical formula.  The major portion of energy is used to raise balls against the weight of a height with a magnitude equivalent to the diameter of the mill. This energy is proportional to ρD D D: mill diameter (m) ρ For a given value of the filling rate of the bed of balls in the mill, the number of balls is proportional to mill. D  As such, the mechanical power at play P where: Austin [ We could use the same reasoning for a rod mill but the energy needed to raise a rod will be proportional to ρD The formula is the same for the rod mill and the ball mill, but that for ball mills is probably more reliable. The relationships assume that the reduced speed and filling parameters are constant.