An innovative technique for solvent free preparation of microparticles is described. Microparticles were prepared by a melt grinding technique which consists of three consecutive steps of melting in case of placebo microparticles or co-melting of polymer and drug in case of drug loaded microparticles, respectively, and pregrinding. In a final jet milling step the reduction of the particle size and smoothening of the microparticle surface occurred. Different polymers of PLA and PLGA type were utilised. The influence of the preparation parameters during the process were investigated according to microparticle properties like particle size distribution, habitus or surface morphology by executing a 2(5−2) factorial design. The minimum mean particle size distribution (x
                     50 value) reached 4–6 μm. Scanning electron microscopy revealed that non-porous microparticles with a smooth surface were prepared. The release pattern of estrioltriacetate loaded microparticles of Resomer® R 202H nearly followed a zero order release kinetic over a period of 21 days without an initial burst effect. The preparation process can be carried out in a reproducible manner. The results demonstrate that microparticle preparation is possible by the following unique melt grinding technique without using organic solvents.During the past two decades, interest in developing microparticles with the ability of a continuous drug release over a long period of time as modern parenteral drug delivery systems has obviously grown. Considerable interest has been focused on the use of biodegradable polymers for specialised applications such as controlled release of drug formulations. Meanwhile, microsphere drug-delivery systems using various kinds of biodegradable polymers have been extensively studied ( The used polymers Resomer® RG 502H (PLGA, hydrophilised), Resomer® R 202H (PLA, hydrophilised) or Resomer® R 202 (PLA) (see A laboratory batch of micronised estrioltriacetate was used as model drug in case of drug loaded microparticles. The raw substance was purchased from Jenapharm (Jena, Germany, Lot-No. 3005K1). The composition of the release medium for investigation of the release pattern of estrioltriacetate loaded microparticles was Pluronic® F 68 0,05g (ICI, Cleveland, GB), sodiumazide 0.04g (Merck KG, Darmstadt, Germany), HP-β-cyclodextrine 5 g (Encapsin®, Fa. Janssen, Olen, Belgium) and Sörensen buffer solution pH 7.4 ad 100 ml. The prepared buffer was sterilised at 121 Placebo and drug loaded microspheres were prepared by using a unique melt grinding technique. This technique is a combination of three consecutive steps, namely: melting of the polymer (if desired drug dispersing or solvation)—step 1, rotor speed milling of the congealed melt—step2, and jet milling for microparticle comminution and surface smoothening—step 3. Melting of polymer and dissolving or dispersing of drug substance in case of drug loaded microparticles was done in a beaker on a heat plate. The required temperature was dependent on the physicochemical behaviour of polymer and drug used. It was adjusted slightly higher than the melting point or the glass transition temperature of the chosen polymer. However, a low viscous solution or suspension had to be obtained. The melt was transferred into another tumbler to congeal. Several melting cycles were necessary to obtain a homogenous solution or suspension. After congealing of the melt a pregrinding step using a rotor speed mill was done in a FRITSCH Pulverisette 14 (Fritsch, Idar Oberstein, Germany) at 18 000 rpm. In a second step a breaker plate (500 μm) took place around the rotor. The microparticle forming step was done in a Jetmill Jet-O-Mizer 000 (Fluid Energy Aljet, Plumsteadville, US; see The microparticles were characterised according to particle size distribution, surface morphology, drug release and thermal properties. A 2 (a) number of grinding cycles in the rotor speed mill from one to four times, number of grinding cycles in the jet mill from one to three times, (b) pressure at the pushing inlet (see (c) pressure at the tangential grinding inlet A (see (d) pressure at the tangential grinding inlet B (see (e) milling cycles in the rotor speed mill, one or two times. Generally the pressure at the pushing inlet was adjusted to a higher level to avoid grist leaving the milling chamber through the feed hopper. The Particle size distribution was determined by laser diffraction in a HELOS laser diffractometer equipped with the RODOS Module, a dry measurement module, (Sympatec, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany). A Fourier lens with a focus of 50 mm was installed. Microparticle shape and surface morphology were analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Philips XL 20 scanning electron microscope (Philips, Kassel, Germany). The samples were fixed on a carbon fibre film and sputtered with gold in an argon atmosphere at a sputter current of 50 mA for 180 s using a SCD 005 Sputter coater (BalTec, Balzers, Liechtenstein). High tension in the SEM was set at 10–15 kV, to avoid softening of microparticles. Drug release behaviour of estrioltriacetate loaded microspheres (5% [w/w]) was investigated using a flow through cell apparatus (Ph. Eur. Nr X, SOTAX Dissotest CE 70, SOTAX, Allschwil, Switzerland) combined with reversed phase HPLC analysis. 50 mg of particles were transferred into implantate cells and fixed with a glass fibre filter (Whatman, Maidstone, GB). The release medium was pumped by a calibrated tube pump type Watson Marlow 205 C (Watson Marlow Bredel, Rommerskirchen, Germany). The temperature of the release medium was adjusted to 37 Thermal analysis was done by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC 7, Perkin–Elmer, Norwalk, US) and thermogravimetry (TGA 7, Perkin–Elmer, Norwalk, US). Differential scanning calorimetry was done by sealing 2 mg of microparticles or raw polymer into open pans. The samples were measured with a heating rate of 10 K/min followed by a fast cooling ramp at 40 K/min and a second heating ramp at 10 K/min related to an empty reference pan. The 2  For further investigations, Resomer® R 202H microspheres loaded with 5% [w/w] estrioltriacetate were prepared as described above. The microspheres showed a small particle size distribution ( This fact could be due to changes in thermal properties of superficial polymer of the microparticles. To investigate this phenomenon the thermal properties of Resomer® R 202 during the jet milling process were studied. A batch of Resomer® R 202 was melted, congealed and preground. Then jet milling with nitrogen pressures of 9 bar at the pushing nozzle and 8 bar at both grinding inlets was repeated five times. After each milling step a sample was taken and analysed according to particle size distribution and thermal properties by differential scanning calorimetry. Thermogravimetrics was done to assure that effects, which are seen in DSC curves are not due to evaporating residual water in the microparticles after the preparation procedure.  The results of the experiments revealed that the new melt grinding technique is a valid method for preparation of microspheres. The most important advantages are the absence of organic solvents as well as time and energy consuming drying steps. The method also provides the possibility of a very high drug load by solving it molecular disperse or simply dispersing in the polymer melt. The release pattern of the microparticles showed a zero order release kinetic behaviour. Properties of the resulting microparticles regarding particle size, surface morphology and release pattern will be controllable over a wide range by careful choice of polymer and co-grinding with modifiers. Thermal analysis showed that enthalpy relaxation is influenced by mechanical stress during jet milling. It can be presumed that this behaviour relates to the release pattern of manufactured microspheres loaded with estrioltriacetate by superficial sintering of the polymer and stabilisation of polymer chain conformation. I want to thank all colleagues who supported the investigations, especially Holger Scherließ (student of pharmaceutics, CAU Kiel) for his assistance with the release studies.