When ore characteristics such as mineral grain size distributions are quantified using measurements on particulate samples there is an error associated with the measured values. The magnitude of this error is a function of the grade of mineral of interest, the texture of the ore and the number of ore particles measured in the analysis.
                  In practice the desire to minimise the error due to sampling by increasing the number of particles measured must be balanced against the increase in time and cost of analysing this increased number of particles. A statistical method based on bootstrap resampling has been developed to estimate the error in measurements of textural characteristics which are quantified by automated mineralogy systems. An application of the method to estimate the error in measurements of mineral grain size distribution is presented; however, the method can equally be applied to estimate the error in other textural characteristics, for example mineral association.
                  By estimating how the error in the characteristic of interest reduces as particle sample size increases, the bootstrap resampling approach assists mineralogists to identify how many particles must be analysed to achieve the desired variance in the measured value. Examples from a copper porphyry ore are presented to illustrate the practical applications of this methodology in quantitative mineralogy programmes.With the growth in use of automated mineralogy systems, the production of quantitative mineralogical data has also increased both in amount and types of characteristics measured. In mineral processing, quantitative measures of ore textural characteristics are used as predictors of the processing behaviour of ores; for example, mineral grain size distribution data are a useful predictor of liberation in comminution and can be used to develop grinding strategies ( While statistical methods to estimate the error for measurements of mineral grade made on particles in polished section have existed for some time ( The bootstrap resampling method provides such an alternative approach to estimate the error in quantitative analyses of textural characteristics such as mineral grain size, mineral association ( While the main application of the bootstrap resampling method will be to estimate errors in the measurement of textural characteristics such as mineral grain size and mineral association it can also be applied to measurements of mineral grade and an example of such an analysis is provided for comparison with the previously published statistical methods of The ore analysed in this work formed part of a larger programme of work characterising ores for geometallurgical modelling. The samples to be analysed typically consisted of 2 The −3.36 Each polished block was measured using the MLA XBSE measurement type to quantify modal mineralogy and other characteristics such as mineral grain size, grain shape and mineral association. In order to maximise the amount of data available for analysis, all of the particle cross-sections exposed in each block were measured. The quantitative data from the MLA analysis of each block were generated using the MLA DataView software. The mineralogical data for each particle which are required for the bootstrap resampling analysis are located in the Grain Properties data table which is a standard output table from the MLA DataView software. This table, which can be exported to Microsoft Excel, includes the base level grain data which can be used to calculate characteristics such as grain size, particle composition and mineral association. Some examples of the data types available in this table are shown in The approach developed in this work uses the population of particle sections measured in one polished block and takes The bootstrap resampling methodology is readily implemented as a computer program to provide rapid calculation of the large number of bootstrap samples; in this work a Microsoft Excel macro written in Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) was created to perform the calculations. Each subset of For each subset of The choice of the value of The main application of the bootstrap resampling technique is as a means of estimating the error in measurements of textural characteristics such as mineral grain size, grain shape distribution, mineral association which are more difficult, or impossible, to estimate by other methods. This example demonstrates the application of the method to estimate confidence intervals on measurement of the size distribution of chalcopyrite grains in the porphyry copper ore sample. In this example, four polished blocks of −850 The grain size distribution of chalcopyrite was calculated for each sample set in terms of the proportion of chalcopyrite in each of the following grain size classes: +600 The measured proportions of chalcopyrite in these grain size classes are shown in The bootstrap approach was applied to the chalcopyrite grain size distribution data by randomly sampling the population of 3000 particle cross-sections created by combining the data from the four blocks measured for the porphyry copper ore. The number ( The change in coefficient of variation with increase in total particle cross-sectional area measured was as shown in In this ore the coefficient of variation values for the two coarsest grain size classes (+600 The effect of the large coefficient of variation observed for +600 The plot in The confidence intervals on mineral grain size measurements obtained by applying the bootstrap resampling methodology can be used to identify ores which have similar liberation potential. In the geometallurgical context of this work, this grouping of samples with similar liberation potential allows the number of physical comminution tests required to characterise an ore body for geometallurgical modelling to be reduced ( As discussed previously the main application of the bootstrap resampling approach is to estimate the error in a range of ore textural characteristics such as mineral grain size, mineral association, where it is not practical or possible to apply other methods to estimate this error. However, it is also interesting to apply the technique to analyse the error in measurements of mineral assay from particle polished sections. When used in this way the bootstrap resampling method provides the same information as the statistical approach to estimate errors in modal data from point- and particle-counting based on the binomial distribution as described by In the example described here the particle data from MLA measurements on one polished block of the porphyry copper ore which contained 752 particles totalling 298 The bootstrap resampling approach can also be used to assess whether it is worthwhile measuring further polished blocks to reduce the uncertainty in the chalcopyrite grade as indicated by the coefficient of variation. For example, the technique can use the data collected on one polished block to estimate how many more particle sections need to be analysed to achieve a coefficient of variation of 10% or less. To apply the bootstrap approach in this way the mean, standard deviation and coefficient of variation were calculated from the data measured on one block for a range of sample sizes A regression curve can be fitted to the relationship between the coefficient of variation and the area of particle sections in the bootstrap sample as shown in The model describes the data well ( As the comparison between the model predictions and measured values shows, the model based on bootstrap resampling of one polished block adequately predicts how the coefficient of variation reduces as more particle sections are measured. In this example if a coefficient of variation of 10% or less was required for the measurement to be acceptable the user would need to measure 540 Given the form of the relationship between the coefficient of variation for the chalcopyrite assay and the area of particles measured shown in Eq. The form of the model from the bootstrap resampling approach in Eq. This agreement between an accepted statistical method for assessing the error in particle counting and the bootstrap resampling approach described here, provides a level of confidence that the latter approach generates reasonable estimates of error in this application and, by extension, when applied to estimating the error in measurements of textural characteristics such as mineral grain size. The bootstrap resampling method has an advantage over the existing approach which uses the binomial distribution in that the bootstrap resampling method is assumption-free. The main application of the bootstrap resampling approach presented here has been as a tool to estimate the error in measurements of mineral grain size. However, as the extension to estimating the error in mineral assays demonstrates, the method is a generic tool which can be applied to estimate confidence intervals for a wide range of particle characteristics. The key requirement is that the raw data which are used to calculate the characteristic of interest must be available for each individual particle in the measured population. While the application of the bootstrap resampling methodology discussed here is in a geometallurgical context, the generic form of this approach means that it can be utilised wherever knowledge about the errors in measurements of ore particle characteristics is important. The bootstrap resampling methodology provides a technique which can be used to estimate the error in quantitative mineralogy measurements on polished sections of particulate materials without the need for replicate measurements. The methodology can be applied to a range of textural characteristics including mineral grain size distributions, and to modal mineralogy data. The bootstrap resampling statistics from one polished block can be used to predict how the error would reduce if more particle sections were measured. This information assists users to determine whether more blocks need to be measured to achieve the required level of uncertainty in the measurement and also indicates how many extra blocks need to be measured to achieve this. The example provided by the grain size distribution analysis confirms that the bootstrap resampling technique can provide useful information about the area of particle sections which needs to be measured to achieve the required level of error in measured textural data. The method provides a means to estimate the confidence intervals for textural data which is useful when comparing a range of ore samples as in geometallurgical programmes. While geometallurgical modelling was the driver for developing the bootstrap resampling methodology it is equally useful in any endeavour where quantitative mineral grain size measurements are key information, for example modelling liberation in comminution ( The ability to estimate the error and the resulting confidence interval in measurements of textural characteristics such as mineral grain size distribution is a useful addition to the tools available to users of quantitative mineralogical data. The bootstrap resampling methodology is a generic tool which can be applied to estimate confidence intervals for a wide range of particle characteristics, providing that the raw data are available to calculate that characteristic for each individual particle. The authors acknowledge the financial support received from sponsors of the AMIRA International P843 GEM