We study thermo-elastic behaviour of the hybrid materials with auxetic inclusions. To this end we analyse representative volume elements consisting of a large number of randomly positioned cubic inclusions using the finite element method and determine the effective coefficient of thermal expansion and the average thermal stresses in constrained hybrid materials developed as a result of a uniform temperature change. We study the effect of Poisson’s ratio, Young’s modulus and the coefficient of thermal expansion of the inclusions on the effective coefficient of thermal expansion and thermal stresses. We demonstrate that the auxeticity of the inclusions can reduce thermal stresses, which is controlled by the values of the Poisson’s ratio and the coefficients of thermal expansion of the inclusions and matrix.Particle reinforced composites are a common form of hybrid materials used in engineering structures. The particles are added to a matrix to alter the overall properties of the hybrid in terms of mechanical moduli, strength, electric and thermal conductivity and etc. Thermal deformations and thermally induced stresses play a critical role in many engineering applications ranging from microelectronic and optic devices Following this approach the control of the thermal properties of a multiphase composite can be carried out in two ways: (i) by designing the microstructure of the hybrid that would exhibit the desired thermal expansion behaviour at the macroscale level or (ii) by altering the effective thermal and mechanical properties of the phases. The first approach has been widely used to design hybrid microstructures leading to the negative thermal expansion (NTE) using periodical lattices, cellular structures and kinematic actuators. The NTE effect in these microstructures was achieved through various bimaterial elements at the microscale (the same scale as the microstructure). One of the popular designs was a lattice consisting of bimaterial cells composed of a lower CTE stiff frame and a higher CTE soft core The second approach to the design of multiphase composites with tunable thermal properties capitalises on the concept of particle-reinforced composites. In this case, the control over the thermal performance of the hybrid is achieved by introducing the inclusions of different shapes with special thermal and mechanical properties Here we consider the application of auxetic inclusions with negative and positive CTE. The auxetic materials have attracted vast research attention during last two decades. A range of auxetic systems that have been identified and studied included polymers and foams (e.g. This paper is structured as follows. First, we introduce a representative volume element with randomly distributed cubic auxetic inclusions Consider a hybrid consisting of an isotropic matrix with conventional material properties (positive Poisson’s ratio and positive thermal expansion coefficient) and auxetic inclusions. We assume that the auxetic inclusions have cubic shape and may exhibit both positive and negative thermal expansion. We also assume that the separation of scales exists implying that one can introduce a volume element (a representative volume element) with the dimensions that are much larger than the sizes of inclusions and distances between them, while still much smaller than the characteristic length of variations of the externally applied fields. Then the effective characteristics of the hybrid (e.g. effective moduli, effective coefficient of thermal expansion) can be calculated through the fields averaged over the volume element. To evaluate the continuum properties of the hybrid we model a representative volume element (RVE) of a volume We study the thermo-elastic behaviour of the hybrid by considering two cases: the free thermal expansion test for evaluation of the effective CTE and the confined thermal loading test for the evaluation of the thermal stresses. The computational models for the simulation of these conditions are outlined next. To determine the effective CTE we apply a uniform change of temperature Δ The effective CTE is calculated based on the deformations caused by the thermal expansion as follows. For each concentration of the auxetic inclusions, we generate 10 random realisations for the inclusion distribution and carry out the FE modelling. Based on the obtained solution, we evaluate the mean normal displacement at all free faces of the RVE for each distribution and calculate the average thermal strain in each RVE dimension by dividing the displacement with the respective RVE size. As we assumed the symmetric distribution of deformation, the same normal displacement appears at all free faces and therefore the average thermal strain is calculated with respect to the half size, To evaluate the thermal stresses, we apply the thermal loading to the confined volume element of the hybrid. The RVE geometry and boundary conditions are shown in The resulting magnitude of stress developing at each RVE face is evaluated for each distribution of the auxetic inclusions. We again use 10 random realisations for each level of the inclusion concentration. The constraining reaction forces are calculated for each realisation at three external faces of the RVE through the FE analysis. The normal stress is then defined as the obtained reactions over the corresponding area of the RVE face and averaged for all realisations. Note that here we also calculate the normal stresses as applied over a fourth of the face area, In order to verify the computational model presented above, firstly we compare the results with the existing models for prediction of CTE in two-phase composites. This topic has been a subject of many research studies. The constitutive response of two-phase composites subjected to a temperature change does not obey simple mixture rules One of the first formulas for prediction of the CTE in isotropic two-phase composites with arbitrary microstructure was proposed by Turner Levin It can be observed from Eqs. In this section, we present the quantitative study on thermal behaviour of hybrids with auxetic inclusions. In order to evaluate the effective CTE and the levels of developed thermal stresses, the computational models described in Sections The following symbolism is used to present the results. Subscripts of ‘ As discussed in Section To evaluate the bulk modulus of the hybrid, we use a procedure similar to the one described in Section Next we compare the effective CTEs predicted using the presented models with the experimental results available in the literature. To further study the influence of the auxetic inclusions on the thermal expansion we analyse the hybrids with inclusions of various negative Poisson’s ratios, CTE and Young’s moduli. Similarly considering the auxetic inclusions with higher positive CTE, we can observe the increase in the effective CTE of the hybrid (see Next, we investigate the effect of the Young’s modulus of the inclusions on the effective CTE of the hybrid. Since both mechanisms of auxeticity and negative thermal expansion are characterised by a relatively low Young’s modulus we focus here on the inclusions with the Young’s modulus lower than the one of the matrix. The effective CTEs for the hybrids with the highly auxetic inclusions of −0.99 NPR and low positive CTE are depicted in In order to study the effect of auxetic inclusions on the thermal stress in the hybrid, we normalise the average stress evaluated as described in Section  The influence of the Poisson’s ratio of inclusions on the thermal stress reduction however does not happen when we use auxetic inclusions with a positive CTE that is smaller than the one of the matrix ( This trend changes again when the auxetic inclusions have a positive CTE that is higher than that of the matrix as shown in  The influence of the inclusions’ Young’s modulus on the stress level is studied in In this paper, we have studied the thermo-mechanical behaviour of hybrid materials with cubic auxetic inclusions using the finite element method to determine the effective coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) and the magnitude of average stress developing in the constrained hybrid due to the temperature change. The study was based on considering representative volume elements consisting of a large number of randomly placed inclusions. The computational models were verified through comparisons of the obtained effective CTE with models available in literature. The findings of this study can be summarised as follows: Introduction of the auxetic inclusions with positive CTE in the conventional matrix with positive Poisson’s ratio can reduce the thermal stress developing in the hybrid. In the hybrids with auxetic inclusions with negative CTE, the negative CTE inclusions reduce the effective CTE of the hybrid and the average thermal stresses. However, the negative Poisson’s ratio of the inclusions weakens both effects. In the hybrids with auxetic inclusions with positive CTE that is smaller than the CTE of the matrix, the negative Poisson’s ratio has little influence on both the thermal expansion and stresses. In the hybrids with the auxetic inclusions with positive CTE that is higher than the CTE of the matrix, the auxeticity becomes the dominant effect leading to the reduction of both effective CTE and thermal stresses. The decrease in Young’s modulus of the auxetic inclusions can aid the thermal stress reduction. The authors acknowledge the financial support through In order to determine the bulk modulus of the hybrid with cubic auxetic inclusions, we simulate the uniform compression test in ABAQUS, a finite element commercial package The RVE is loaded in all three directions by uniformly distributed pressure