The integration of microbubbles (Sauter diameter: 80 μm) and macrobubbles (Sauter diameter: 0.9 mm) in a flotation system were proposed to enhance oil removal efficiencies. The role of the microbubbles as a secondary collector for macrobubbles was studied in the static bubble interaction studies in terms of attachment time, contact angle and visualization of contact area. Results showed that the presence of microbubbles could decrease the attachment time between macrobubbles and oil layer by 82%, and improve the contact angle and surface area of attachment by 40.3% and 54.5% respectively. Macrobubbles, on the other hand were able to improve the floatability of oil contaminant as suggested from the dynamic bubble interaction study. The presence of macrobubbles was able to increase the volumetric rate of micro-macrobubbles captured from 0.47 μL/s to 4.5 μL/s. The results demonstrated that the coalescence phenomena between bubbles could provide the necessary lifting force to further aid the oil flotation. The interaction between microbubbles and macrobubbles is particularly advantageous in an integrated bubble flotation system. Application of the integrated micro-macrobubbles demonstrated a significant increase in oil removal to 68.6% under oil-wet conditions while almost all of the oil contaminants were removed from water-wet sands. An increase of 28% was observed upon implementation of integrated micro-macrobubble flotation compared to the single bubble flotation for oil removal. Results indicated that the integration of microbubbles and macrobubbles in the flotation cell is a simple modification to a flotation system that would enhance the removal of oil contaminant from contaminated sand.Flotation technology is one of the remediation methods employed for the removal of oil from contaminated soil via a gas-liquid-solid system. This technology relies on the difference in surface properties of both contaminant and soil, and thus is capable of separating very small or light weight particles with low settling velocities. The success of flotation lies therefore depends on the generation of gas bubbles which attaches to the hydrophobic contaminants. The gas-contaminant bubble which is buoyant then rises to the surface of the liquid, creating a layer of separated particles which could be recovered ( As the flotation technology relies on the difference in surface properties of both contaminant and soil, the success of flotation depends on the generation of gas bubbles and their attachment to the hydrophobic contaminants. Typically, conventional sized bubbles which are larger are used to aid the flotation of oil contaminant. Large bubbles have a high bubble rise velocity, which provides sufficient lifting force to float the contaminant for better recovery efficiency. However, due to this characteristic, large bubbles have a lower probability of collision and attachment, and a greater probability of detachment which prevents efficient flotation despite the advantages as mentioned above. Studies were subsequently conducted on diminishing the size of bubbles for flotation applications, such as microbubbles and nanobubbles, as the decrease in bubble size provides a larger surface area available for a better bubble adhesion to the contaminants ( Therefore to improve this situation, the combination of tiny bubbles (microns or sub-microns) with flotation sized bubbles (milimeters) to improve flotation recovery were initially proposed in 1950s by Dziensiewiz and Pryor for the purpose of mineral flotation. The authors suggested a two-stage attachment model: a conditioning stage whereby minute air-bubbles were frosted on the mineral surface, followed by the attachment of bubble-frosted mineral with relatively large air-bubbles for transport to the froth ( In recent mineral flotation works, Fan et al. proposed the integration of two bubble size distribution for the application of mineral (phosphate) flotation, as the novel coupling of the nanobubbles (smaller bubbles) and microbubbles (larger bubbles) could improve the flotation efficiency. In an integrated bubble flotation system, the presence of nanobubbles would nucleate onto the contaminant due to their lower rising velocity, and higher surface area. When used in an integrated bubble system, the nanobubbles attached on the surface of the contaminant could promote the attachment of microbubbles, as the bubble-bubble attachment is more favoured than bubble-particle attachment. Therefore, smaller bubbles act as an enhanced collector to aid the bubble-particle attachment between macrobubbles and particles. This will then lead to enhanced flotation efficiency for the removal of the contaminant from soil ( The effectiveness of integrated bubble flotation in mineral flotation had also been confirmed by several other research groups. The effectiveness of combined dual-size bubbles was not only limited in mineral flotation but was also reported effective in wastewater flotation. Le et al. reported that the application of microbubbles (1–16 μm) combined with normal cyclone bubbles (NCB) (0.5–20 mm) for the removal of emulsified oil (D From existing literature, it could be seen that the combined dual bubble size distribution system had been implemented with great success for the froth flotation of minerals and oil removal in a wastewater system, showing an increase in flotation efficiency of up to 50%. In oil remediation applications, the usage of combined dual-bubble system was found to improve the oil removal efficiencies, as demonstrated by Zhou et al. The authors investigated on the effect of dynamic bubble nucleation in water utilizing autoclave at an air saturation pressure of 7 atm to generate gas nuclei for the flotation of Canadian oil sands. The gas nuclei generated in water were predicted to attach to the bitumen droplets through a two-step process. Firstly, the gas nuclei either attach itself on the bitumen or bridges several bitumen droplets together to form a gas nuclei-frosted bitumen droplet. This tiny bubble-bitumen droplet would then attach to a flotation-size bubble through coalescence. Since bubble-bubble interaction is much favoured compared to bubble-oil interaction; the presence of the gas nuclei does not only accelerate the bubble-oil attachment probability, but also decreases the detachment probability. Therefore, this improves the flotation efficiency of the oil contaminant as demonstrated from the flotation experiments. Depending on the type of oil sands, the presence of gas-nucleated water significantly improved the bitumen recovery by 50–170% under the same operating conditions utilizing supersaturated water instead of normal water ( As oil shoreline contamination are known to cause devastating impacts on many major sectors, there is therefore a need to investigate on technologies that could improve the oil removal efficiency. While works by Zhou et al. demonstrated a significant enhancement on the bitumen recovery up to 170% ( Therefore, this paper aims to explore the effect of bubble-bubble interaction in aiding both the attachment of bubble to oil and subsequent flotation phenomenon. The application of integrated bubble flotation for the flotation of high density oil from contaminated oil-wet sands would also be reported in this paper. Sand samples were obtained from a designated site from the shores of Port Klang, Malaysia. The density and sand composition of the sand sample used are listed in The bubble-particle attachment time measurements were conducted by initially preparing the bunker oil surface for bubble attachment. A thin layer of oil was spread evenly onto the surface of glass side and left to settle at room temperature and atmospheric pressure for approximately 15 min until it appears smooth shining with a mirror-like surface. The bunker oil coated slide was then transferred into a small cell filled with distilled water at room temperature, and allowed to equilibrate for half an hour in the solution. Bubbles of approximately 350 μm and 1.0 mm in diameter respectively were generated from a pre-determined volume using a micro syringe (Agilent Manual Syringe, Model 5190-0464). The distance between the bubble and the oil surface was adjusted using the translational plate. It is noted that bubbles smaller than 350 μm would cause the bubble to decompress and disappear back into the micro syringe. Therefore for this section, the result trends obtained for a bubble size of 350 μm was adopted to represent microbubbles; while results from bubble size of 1 mm were used to represent macrobubbles. The attachment of the bubble to particles was visually observed by using a CCD camera linked to a monitor, and the attachment process was recorded (100 frames/sec) and subsequently analyzed to evaluate the attachment times. The attachment times of three scenarios were obtained: microbubble-oil, macrobubble-oil, and macrobubble-microbubble-oil were captured. A total of 10 repetitions were performed to obtain an average attachment time per data. The oil-coated slide was prepared as per Section The overall rise velocities of microbubbles, macrobubbles and integrated microbubbles and macrobubbles were investigated. The experiment was conducted in a simple set up to capture the amount of air volume within a constant time frame. The test column was fully filled up with water, and placed in the water cell. Microbubbles were generated via a venturi, while macrobubbles were generated via a porous plate. The bubbles generated were captured into a column for a known time frame, and the volume of air collected was obtained per time. A total of 10 runs were conducted to obtain the estimate of error, and an average of the volume collected was plotted with respect to time. Oil-wet sands are defined as dry sand that is contaminated with oil. The oil-wet sand samples were initially prepared by mixing a known mass of bunker oil (200 g) into a 5 L beaker containing 500 g of dry sand sample with constant particle size ratio as per In the case of a beach contamination, the oil is swept to the shoreline due to tidal and wave action. This indicates that in an oil contaminated shoreline, the sand is effectively wetted with seawater before contaminated with oil. The presence of the water, or water-wet sands could affect the direct interactions between oil and sands. Thus, the flotation studies were also conducted at water-wet conditions under the same optimum operating parameters to investigate on the effect of water content in the sand sample on the oil removal efficiency. The sand sample were prepared by initially wetting the sand sample with known amounts of distilled water (2 wt% water content), before contaminated with oil.  Based on the previous works by Zhou et al., the bubble-particle attachment process can be modified to improve the bubble attachment on oil contaminant ( Microbubbles, with its small radius in nature, would preferentially attach themselves onto the oil layer first as compared to the macrobubbles. This mechanism proposes that the presence of the microbubbles that nucleates on the oil layer would improve the macrobubble attachment, due to several reasons ( The increase in Therefore, the subsequent section would explore the bubble-bubble interaction in both static and dynamic conditions that could improve the bubble attachment and subsequent aeration of oil contaminant. The role of microbubbles as a secondary collector for macrobubble would be investigated in the static bubble-bubble interaction, whereby the analysis of attachment time between bubble-bubble and bubble-oil, contact angle and visualization of contact area of integrated bubble attachment would be conducted. Inversely, the presence of macrobubbles to enhance the microbubbles' lifting force would be studied in the dynamic bubble-bubble interaction to understand the coalescence behaviour between bubbles. The experiment results would be used to further understand the bubble-bubble influence on the flotation efficiency. The probability of bubble-particle attachment was correlated to the bubble-particle attachment time, whereby the attachment time is defined as the time taken for the drainage of the wetting film between the bubble and particle. The successful drainage of wetting film enables the establishment of the attachment of air bubble to particle (in this case, either an oil layer/droplet or another bubble) in close proximity (  From the results, it was observed that the macrobubble firstly coalesce to the existing microbubble attached onto the oil layer in frame B (t = 2.6 s), followed by the attachment of microbubble to the oil layer in frame C (t = 3.5 s). In comparison, the macrobubble attachment onto the oil took the longest time to attach from the time of contact of bubble and particle in frame D (t = t Therefore, the results clearly demonstrate that the attachment time or coalescence between two bubbles is significantly lower as compared to the attachment of bubble onto an oil layer, despite the coating of oil films after oil-bubble contact. In comparison with the attachment time of a singular macrobubble to oil (t Results from the previous section showed that the interaction between bubble-bubble is highly preferred compared to interaction between bubble and oil. Therefore, microbubbles could enhance the attachment process between macrobubbles and oil layer, as the preferential attachment of microbubbles onto the oil layer could provide a platform for easier attachment of macrobubbles onto the oil as demonstrated from Section In addition, the coalescence of macrobubbles (1 mm) with the microbubbles (350 μm) does not only improve the attachment probability of macrobubble onto oil, but could also promote the macrobubble attachment strength with the oil layer. It was observed visually that the presence of microbubbles could visually increase the A ICA was adopted instead of the basic contact angle tool, to accurately obtain the contact angle of micro-macrobubble attachment. The ICA measurement would be able to show the immediate effect on how microbubbles could aid the macrobubble attachment at that instance. Subsequent quantitative analysis in The increase in the A The ICA was further investigated with respect to pH for macrobubble attachment onto oil in comparison with the contact angle of macrobubbles upon interaction with microbubbles as shown in Nevertheless, from The presence of microbubbles was said to improve the attachment of macrobubble onto the oil layer, which enhances the probability of bubble-oil attachment for latter flotation purposes. Macrobubbles, on the other hand, are expected to aid the flotation by providing a larger lifting force for aeration and flotation of the oil contaminant. Hence, this section aims to investigate on the effect of macrobubbles in an integrated dual bubble system that could benefit the flotation of oil contaminant. The study of the bubble-bubble interaction is largely governed by the coalescence phenomenon ( The results from the bubble rise velocity study are summarized in In The trend from the resulting bubble rise velocity rate could be used as a comparison for the integrated micro-macrobubble interaction. If the volume from the two different bubbles range continues to increase even after halting the generation of bubbles, this will show that the microbubbles did not interact with the macrobubbles in the dynamic context. Inversely, if the volume remains constant, a form of bubble-bubble interaction must have occurred. In the combination of microbubbles and macrobubbles rise experiment, the microbubbles were initially generated for 600 s, followed by subsequent generation of macrobubbles for 10 s. The purpose of the generation of macrobubbles after the generation of microbubbles is to ensure that the residual microbubbles interact with macrobubbles.   It was observed that the decrease in bubble size from macrobubbles to microbubbles showed an increase in the oil flotation efficiency from 40.7% to 56.0% in oil-wet conditions. However, the usage of integrated micro-macrobubbles in a flotation system further increased the flotation efficiency to approximately 68.6%, providing an increase of 28% and 13% over the single macrobubbles and microbubbles flotation respectively under oil-wet conditions. Inversely in water-wet conditions instead, the integrated micro-macrobubble flotation successfully removed almost all the contaminated oil at 96.6% in comparison with the macrobubbles or microbubbles water-wet flotation system alone at 81.2% and 89.5% respectively. In general, it could be seen from Nevertheless, the flotation experiments showed that the integrated micro-macrobubble flotation provides a better oil removal compared to single bubble size distribution oil flotation for both scenarios (oil-wet and water-wet) under the same experimental conditions. The results indicate that the usage of micro-macrobubbles within the flotation cell improves the removal efficiency of oil from contaminated sands. The success of the integrated micro-macrobubble distribution in a flotation system could also be attributed to the interactions between microbubbles and macrobubbles, which is apparent from the gas-gas interaction studies in the earlier part of this study. From the static bubble-bubble interaction study, the results clearly demonstrate that the attachment time or coalescence between two bubbles is significantly lower as compared to the attachment of bubble onto an oil layer. Results shown that the presence of microbubbles initially attached onto the oil layer decreased the attachment time of macrobubble to oil by 82%. The implication from these results demonstrates that the bubble-bubble interaction is highly favoured compared to bubble-oil interaction. This is especially significant in the integrated micro-macrobubble flotation, whereby the direct attachment of the macrobubbles onto the oil would be difficult without the microbubbles initially attached onto the oil layer. In addition, the preferential coalescence of macrobubbles with microbubbles, over macrobubbles attachment to oil would also improve the contact area of attachment which in return leads to a larger instantaneous contact angle. The increase in both the instantaneous contact angle and surface area of contact, improves oil removal as there is higher attachment force between macrobubbles and the oil layer. The dynamic bubble-bubble interaction study, on the other hand, demonstrated the importance of macrobubbles in the integrated micro-macrobubble flotation. The macrobubbles could provide a larger lifting force for flotation, which in turn increases the flotation efficiency. The bubble rise velocity after the interaction between microbubble and macrobubble showed an overall increase in bubble rise velocity for integrated micro-macrobubbles with a rate of volume captured of 4.5 μL/min, as compared to individual microbubbles and macrobubbles of 0.5 μL/min and 4.3 μL/min respectively. The increase in the rate of volume captured is attributed to the coalescence of microbubbles with the macrobubbles which created a slightly larger bubble. The coalescence of microbubbles with the macrobubbles increases the overall bubble rise velocity, which leads to an increase in the rate of bubble rise velocity. The interaction between microbubbles and macrobubbles was investigated based on both static and dynamic experimental conditions to understand the synergistic effects of each bubble size range on the flotation efficiency. The bubble-bubble interaction studies demonstrated that the presence of microbubbles could decrease the attachment time, and increase the bubble attachment strength onto the oil contaminant layer, while the presence of macrobubbles could provide a larger buoyancy force which would be important for the flotation of the oil contaminant. The symbiotic relationship between microbubbles and macrobubbles suggests that the micro-macrobubble flotation could enhance the flotation efficiency of oil contaminant in oil-wet and water-wet sand. Results demonstrated that the usage of integrated micro-macrobubbles in a flotation system increased the flotation efficiency to approximately 68.6%, providing an increase of 28% and 13% over the singular macro and microbubbles flotation respectively under oil-wet conditions. In water-wet conditions instead, almost all of the oil contaminant was effectively removed using micro-macrobubble flotation system at a water content of 2 wt% and above, as compared to 89% and 81% for singular microbubble and macrobubble flotation respectively. The high removal efficiencies of oil in water-wet conditions as compared to oil-wet conditions were attributed to the low attachment forces between oil and sand. The success of the integrated bubble flotation is therefore dependent on interaction of solid-liquid for the liberation of oil contaminant, and interaction between gas-gas for the attachment between bubble-bubble to produce a bubble with high attachment force with high lifting force. From the analysis, it is suggested that the liberation of oil from sand is important to facilitate the aeration and subsequent flotation of oil. Upon successful liberation, the presence of the microbubbles would therefore attach onto the oil layer, providing a secondary layer to enhance the attachment of macrobubbles. The macrobubbles would then increase the lifting force which would therefore aid the flotation of oil. The combination of these three mechanisms coupled in a flotation system leads to the success and subsequent implementation of integrated micro-macrobubble flotation for the removal of oil contaminant from sand.