In this paper, the three-dimensional large deformation frictional contact of powder forming process is modeled using a simple computational algorithm based on the augmented-Lagrange approach. The technique is applied by imposing the contact constraints and modifying the contact properties of frictional slip through the node-to-surface (NTS) contact algorithm. The Coulomb friction law is employed to simulate the friction between the rigid punch and the work-piece by the use of penalty and augmented-Lagrange approaches. It is shown that the augmented-Lagrange technique significantly improves imposing of the constraints on contact surfaces. The nonlinear contact friction algorithm is employed together with a double-surface cap plasticity model for highly nonlinear behavior of powder within the framework of large FE deformation in order to predict the non-uniform relative density and stress distributions during the large deformation of powder die-pressing. Finally, the numerical schemes are examined for accuracy and efficiency in modeling of a set of powder components.In powder compaction process, the friction between the powder and tools limits the performances of process and the mechanical characteristics of the parts. Friction can result in poor density distributions, which leads to differential retreat during compaction and sintering of the final properties of the component. Many aspects of the process are affected by friction, including: the density distribution, pressing forces, final shape, tool wear, residual stresses and cracks. A number of experimental and numerical investigations into frictional effects and its impact on the compaction process of powder have been reported in the literature. The coefficients of friction between the powder and die-wall were investigated by Tabata et al. The treatment of contact problem with finite element method dates back to 70’s. The early attempts were mainly towards the solution of small deformation frictionless problems The contact friction is generally simulated in accordance with the Coulomb friction law, which takes into account the dependence of friction forces on contact pressure, displacement jump and material properties of contact surface In the present paper, the 2D large deformation contact friction modeling recently proposed by the authors in Ref. In nonlinear elasto-plastic analyses, whether the displacements, or strains, are large or small it is imperative that the equilibrium conditions between the internal and external forces are satisfied. The equilibrium equation of a body can be therefore written in a standard form as In order to develop a finite element formulation, we need to solve Eq. (1) numerically for spatial discretization. Following the standard procedure of the finite element method, the initial domain Ω is divided into elements. If the displacements within an element are prescribed in the usual manner by a finite number of nodal values, we can obtain the necessary equilibrium equations using the virtual work principle. Thus, Eq. (1) can be written in the weak form as There is of little interest to write the nodal forces in terms of the nominal stress In order to obtain the tangential stiffness matrix, the finite element Galerkin discretization formulation (4) is appropriately taken variations with respect to For a set of virtual displacements, the corresponding d Substituting Eqs. (10) into (9) yields The above equation shows that the stiffness matrix In order to derive the material tangent stiffness matrix In order to derive the geometric stiffness matrix All the ingredients necessary for computing large deformation problems are now available. As a first step displacements There are various techniques established in literature for modeling of contact problems. One of these methods applied for imposing the contact constraint in normal direction is the formulation of non-penetration condition, as a purely geometrical constraint. For the tangential direction, the sticking and sliding states can be distinguished by the development of elastic–plastic constitutive laws. In sticking interfaces, either a geometrical constraint equation, or a constitutive law can be applied for the tangential relative displacements between the contacting bodies. In tangential sliding between bodies, a special constitutive equation must be employed for the friction. In this study, a simple and efficient algorithm is employed to model the frictional contact in powder-die interface. The contact constraints are implemented based on the penalty and augmented-Lagrange approaches. The normal and tangential springs are imposed at the contact interface, in which the stiffness of tangential spring is modified according to the Coulomb friction law. The method of augmented-Lagrange has been proposed in the context of mathematical programming problems based on the equality and inequality constraints, to provide important advantages over the more traditional Lagrange-multiplier and penalty methods The node-to-surface (NTS) contact element is one of the most commonly used discretizations in large deformation finite element simulation of contact problems. Consider that the discrete slave point The tangential vectors The vector The contact problem can be characterized by a set of constraints to be enforced on contacting surfaces. These constraints are generally categorized into the impenetrability constraints expressed as a set of complementarity conditions, and the frictional constraints typically taken as the Coulomb friction law. In order to enforce the normal or impenetrability constraints, various techniques have been accomplished, including: the penalty In order to perform the contribution of NTS element into the weak form of equilibrium equation, an approach is applied by introducing the contact constraints based on the potential energy of springs imposed at the normal and tangential directions. In this technique, springs are defined in the normal and tangential directions of contact interface between the slave node and master segment. The shape functions of the slave-master at the contact interface are defined as The relative displacement between the slave and master is defined by In the concept of penalty approach, the contact constraints can be incorporated into the equilibrium equation by decomposing the potential energy of contact interface into the normal and tangential directions as This method introduces no additional equations, and is readily close to original concept of contact constraint enforcing, however – it suffers from ill-conditioning due to large or small penalty numbers, and the constraints are satisfied in approximate manner. In order to overcome the ill-conditioning of penalty method, the augmented-Lagrangian technique has been proposed to compromise the advantage of both Lagrange-multiplier and penalty methods by involving an iterative procedure into the standard penalty method. This technique is based on the implementation of rebounding normal forces on the contact nodes, to make them return onto the contact surface when penetration happens. In order to incorporate the contact constraints into the equilibrium equation, the potential energy of contact interface (25) can be modified in the augmented-Lagrange method as In this section, an algorithm is presented based on the penalty and augmented-Lagrangian approaches for enforcing the constraints on node-to-surface contact elements. In the case of penalty method, a large value of For iteration In the case of penalty method, the tangential and normal forces are determined at each slave-master point by In the case of augmented-Lagrangian approach, the outbreak of penetration is first checked. If it is greater than the prescribed tolerance, the augmented-Lagrange rebounding force In powder forming processes, an appropriate constitutive model needs to describe the nonlinear behavior of powders. During compaction, powders exhibit strain or work hardening, the volume reduces and the material becomes harder. A number of constitutive models for the cold compaction of metal powders have been proposed during last three decades, including: micro-mechanical models In order to describe the powder behavior during the process of compaction, the double-surface cap plasticity is employed, as shown in The hardening rule for moving cap is related to the volumetric plastic strain In order to compute the powder elasto-plastic constitutive matrix, we need to calculate the plastic hardening/softening modulus and flow direction vector in the matrix For the fixed yield surface, the values of constants In order to evaluate the parameters of double-surface plasticity, it is necessary to obtain these values for the fixed, moving cap and tension cut-off surfaces. The fixed yield surface has an exponential form which is composed of an initial portion of the Drucker–Prager envelope joined smoothly to the subsequent Drucker–Prager line, as demonstrated in In order to determine the parameters of fixed yield surface It means that the intersection of the fixed yield surface, or the Drucker–Prager line I, with The above equation represents the Drucker–Prager yield criterion, which is shown by line II in In order to determine the parameters of moving cap surface In order to illustrate the capability and accuracy of proposed contact friction model together with the large FE deformation and powder constitutive model, presented in preceding sections, several practical examples of 3D powder die-pressing are modeled numerically. Due to significant changes in geometry of components, the capability of approach for handling large deformations under frictional contact behavior is verified. The first example is of a plane bush component chosen to demonstrate the efficiency and accuracy of computational algorithm by comparison with the experimental results The material parameters of constitutive model are obtained by fitting the data to a set of isostatic and triaxial compression tests performed by Doremus et al. The first example is the uniaxial compaction of a plain bush component, extensively used in mechanical engineering to construct the compacted ring. It is made of a mixture of different metallic powders with the material parameters given in The distribution of normal stress contours during the compaction process is presented in The second example is of the extrusion of an aluminum billet, which is applicable typically in metallurgy engineering. This example illustrates the capability of the proposed 3D node-to-surface algorithm in modeling of large deformation frictional contact. Two bodies with frictional surfaces are in contact, large deformations are expected, and considerable geometrical nonlinearity behavior is included in the mechanical description. The 2D numerical simulation of an aluminum billet extrusion is performed by Khoei et al. In the present simulation, the billet is forced to move upward with the total movement of 30 The next example demonstrates the performance of the proposed contact algorithm for 3D complicated die geometry of a connecting-rod. The compact specimen is a bearing used in the automotive industry. The numerical simulation of this component is performed by Khoei et al. This example is chosen to demonstrate the performance of present formulation in complicated die geometry and simultaneous high distortional and volumetric deformation of elements. The 2D numerical modeling of this component is performed by Bakhshiani et al. In The final example is of a shaped-charge liner, which is extensively used for civilian oil and steel sectors in geophysical prospecting, mining, and quarrying. Most liners used in the civilian sector have a conical shape, and are often made from a mixture of different metallic powders. In the present simulation, a conical liner is pressed from the iron powder with the material parameters given in In In the present paper, the influence of powder-tool friction was presented in 3D large deformation simulation of powder forming processes. The numerical modeling of frictional contact between a rigid tool and deformable material was performed by the use of a new computational algorithm in the concepts of the penalty and augmented-Lagrange approaches based on the node-to-surface algorithm. The frictional properties on the contact surface were performed using a simple and efficient method. A plasticity theory of friction based on a Coulomb friction law was incorporated to simulate sliding resistance at the powder-tool interface. The frictional contact formulation was performed within the framework of large FE deformation in order to predict the non-uniform relative density distribution during large deformation of powder die-pressing. A double-surface cap plasticity model was employed for description of powder behavior. Finally, the capability and efficiency of the proposed contact friction model together with the large FE deformation and powder constitutive model was presented in numerical modeling of a set of forming processes, including: a plain bush component, the extrusion of an aluminum billet, a connecting-rod, the tablet pressing and a conical shaped-charge liner. The distribution of stress and relative density contours are presented at different stages of compaction. The results of various contact conditions clearly present the effect of cohesion and friction coefficient at the powder-tooling interface on the punch reaction. The comparisons were performed between the experimental and numerical results reported in literature. It is shown that the augmented-Lagrange method improves significantly the implementation of contact constraints between the punch and powder. The numerical simulation results indicate that the proposed computational algorithm makes it possible to simulate the 3D complex phenomena of frictional contact in the powder forming problems efficiently and accurately.