A compact (75cm ht×7cm dia.) semi-batch type flotation column was developed for use as a convenient testing and research apparatus especially in laboratories that do not have sufficient headroom for a full-size experimental column installation. The design of the semi-batch column incorporated the Pachuca concept of pulp lifting and circulation to provide the necessary retention time for mineral recovery. The apparatus employed a porous gas sparger for bubble generation, featured a wash water sprayer, and had the ability to create a deep froth layer of variable thickness. The usability and performance of the column were examined and assessed through tests conducted on a magnetite ore. It is believed that with this device materials could effectively be tested for their amenability and response to column flotation.While bench-top laboratory devices have long been available for mechanical flotation test work, options for column flotation are limited due to insufficient headroom in most laboratories. Past attempts to resolve this issue have largely been based on external recycling of tailings to ensure adequate residence time in a relatively short column ( The design of the semi-batch column is based on column flotation practices and the concept of air lifting to keep solid particles suspended as in Pachuca tanks ( The semi-batch column may be equipped with various auxiliary devices such as peristaltic pumps, air flowmeter, solenoid valves, and pH meters as illustrated in Chemically pre-conditioned mineral pulp is poured into the column, and compressed air is turned on to commence the flotation process. Mineral particles that are captured by air bubbles enter the froth zone, while others keep re-circulating. The froth product formed is collected by vacuum through a suction tubing lowered and set to an appropriate level according to the froth thickness required. The pulp level (interface between the recovery and froth zones) is controlled by means of wash water spray and/or make-up water. The semi-batch flotation column was extensively tested to assess and evaluate its performance. The tests were carried out on the magnetite ore of Sherman Mine in Temagami, Ontario. This ore consisted of primarily magnetite and silica minerals and had a head grade of 29.15% Fe. It required grinding to 95% passing 44 For the magnetite ore used in this study, reverse flotation was applied whereby the gangue mineral silica was floated and recovered to the froth product, leaving the magnetite behind in the column. Arosurf MG-70, a cationic collector supplied by Sherex Chemical Co., and Dowfroth 250C were used as reagents at dosages of 25 The flotation products were evaluated on the basis of grades, recoveries and selectivity (SiO The main operating variables of the semi-batch column include froth thickness, pulp density, air flowrate, and wash water. The froth thickness was studied in the range of 5 Ten replicate tests were carried out under the same flotation conditions in order to assess the reproducibility of performance data obtained from the semi-batch column. The results, as shown in This study resulted in the development of a semi-batch flotation column which may serve as a suitable testing apparatus in laboratories for studying the amenability of ores to the column flotation process, rather than for fundamental research on column flotation behavior. The device allows for the investigation and optimization of a number of variables that influence the metallurgical performance of the column such as the froth thickness, air flowrate, pulp density and wash water addition, as well as the usual variables relating to reagent use. Tests performed with this device demonstrated a high level of consistency and reproducibility. The authors thank NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) for their financial contribution to this project.