There is an increasing demand to optimize performance and profit of comminution circuits. Research in this area has resulted in the development of numerous optimization tools, and recent research has shown that the quality aspects of the production have a great influence on the optimization results. The quality, cost, profit and capacity of a product are influenced by several parameters, and in order to control all of these parameters it is necessary to use some sort of optimization algorithm. In this paper, a novel approach to apply e.g. cost, revenue, capacity and quality in order to perform a multi objective optimization with the ability to handle dynamic variations of a comminution is presented. The problem with optimizations in general is that the objective function used for optimization is reduced in complexity in order to save computational time. In a comminution process performance varies with time and in order to perform a correct optimization the objective function used must be able to handle this type of dynamic behavior. The process has a given set of constraints that represents the conditions normal in these type of comminution applications. The first step in this paper is to identify if the range of the constraints can cause undesirable production costs when reaching for a given product property. In this step a dynamic response model is described that will be able to address the difficulties with optimizing dynamic systems. The next step in the optimization is the definition of the multi-objective optimization formulation including constraints for the optimization. Evaluating the result of the optimization in combination with a strategy for relaxing constraint can show how to increase overall productivity and still reach certain product properties. The conclusions made in this work are that multi objective optimization is essential when optimizing a comminution circuit against multiple objectives.The goal of crushing plants is the optimized production of certain sized rock fractions, and, in some cases, the achievement of a certain level of product quality. In order to control the yield and quality of the product as well as the production cost, it is necessary to use a set of several different crushers whose main purpose is to reduce the rock size to the wanted dimensions but have different impact on the quality. The operator or the control system must consider all relevant process parameters when controlling the plant. Some parameters influence the outcome to a great extent, while some parameters have a lesser effect on the outcome. The process settings can vary to achieve a certain product quality. The most common parameter to change is in the closed side setting (CSS) of the crusher, which enables the production of rock products in the desired size range. Crusher parameters, such as stroke or eccentric speed, are rarely changed on a daily basis due to the fact that changing them is a time consuming process. These parameters are set when the crusher is initially put into commission in the crushing plant. Material characteristics also influence the quality of the product, and include parameters such as feed size and distribution, which may be controllable. It is therefore suggested that a schematic protocol to be created for the dominant parameters that influence the product quality. This protocol would allow the operator of the plant to tune the process so that a desired product quality can be achieved. The problem with optimization models that focus on quality, capacity or cost is that there are few available models that can simulate how the crushing plant should be controlled in order to optimize process utilization. In addition, even if there are models available, it is unlikely that process operators or plant managers are using these tools to tune the plant. This paper aims to show how dynamic process simulations can be used in a crushing plant in order to optimize yield, product quality and process cost for a wide range of aggregate sizes. Simulations and optimization results are verified with measured data from a crushing plant. In this paper, a novel method of simulating and optimizing a crushing plants performance will be presented. This optimization considers both the economic and technical aspects of the crushing plant. In this paper the simulation will focus on predicting yield, product quality and process cost. This paper describes the benefits of using dynamic crushing plant models for prediction of size, shape, capacity and profit of products which has its origin from the work by In general, dynamic plant simulations include a number of different factors which affect the dynamic performance of the system. The process can be sensitive to startups, discrete events, wear, segregation, natural variations and other factors that commonly occur during operation. All depending on interaction between single production units, plant configuration, plant control loops and diverse events and disturbances that can influence the process, see The production unit models used have the capability to simulate product size distribution, particle shape, capacity and the cost of operation. The cone crusher model used in this simulation is a mechanistic model based the fundamental flow of material in a cone crusher as described by In this paper a cone crusher of hydrocone type is analyzed at different operating conditions. The model has been validated for three different eccentric speeds and a comparison has been made against particle size distribution, power, capacity and hydroset pressure. The result of the validation is shown in In this section the methodology presented by The production characteristic of the crushing plant is shown in Balancing investment costs versus circuit performance is a challenging task which relies on many different sources of information. One of these sources is process circuit simulations in which classification and screening models plays an important role. With a robust and reliable screening model different operating scenarios with varying capacities and feed size distributions can be studied. The consequences of overloading the screens can be evaluated. Overloaded screens leads to carry over of fines to the coarse screening product which in turn is send back in circulating load to be reprocessed resulting in increased production costs and reduced circuit capacity of fresh feed. If a simple process circuit with is considered as shown in From a production perspective a re-working of a product is always considered to be an undesirable action and to reduce throughput, however in crushing it is often necessary to maintain a certain quality of the product. The cost of reworking the material is a balance of the operating cost of the crusher, screen and the conveyors. Minimizing the recirculating load may reduce product quality since the average particle size becomes larger in the feed to the crusher ( The process described in the beginning of this paper can be analyzed in a similar manner from a steady-state perspective. The tertiary stage shown in In the traditional case process simulations are described as steady state equations where the mass preservation is kept constant and the mass flow into a system equals the mass flow out at all times. For the case presented in this section the equation for mass preservation can be written as in Eq. There is of course limitations with the use of Eq. Each unit is subjected to different mean time to failure (MTTF) ( The reliability of the production is usually estimated by taking into the consideration the different wear parts expected lifetime, the maintenance time for each component, the competence of the ore since the abrasiveness of a rock on a liners directly correlates to the crushing pressure according to If the failure rate is constant the probability can be expressed with a Weibull distribution, illustrated with Eq. The fatigue life of a mechanical system operating under varying loading condition can be described with Eq. How the crusher is controlled and operated will affect the crusher load level. In At 20% loading conditions with a wider feed distribution the relative yield for −22 products is in average 97% when operating at 360 By analyzing the table for expected lifetime the increase in maintenance cost can be calculated by looking at how the MTTF decreases. An increase in maintenance frequency can be calculated using equation. The same equation can be applied for all equipment’s in the process. When operating at 360 Since the quote between the circulating load varies depending on operating conditions, see The feeding conditions to the crusher is varied as well and spans from a fairly short fraction with the normalized standard distribution of .25 up to .67 which is a feed with lot of fines. Fines may cause packing and this will result in an increase in axial force and with that an increase in hydraulic pressure. In order to understand fundamentally the cone crusher’s ability to control the variation in feeding conditions a section of a crushing process is studied. In the particular case a cone crusher of type Hydrocone from Sandvik is studied. In this example both CSS and eccentric speed is varied. Previous research by The method for calculating production cost is applied in this example for two operating conditions. The general equation is shown in In An increase in eccentric speed results in lower hydroset pressure which means that the CSS can be set to a smaller value when operating at higher speeds. Depending on the crusher design and operating conditions the magnitude of how much CSS can be decrease may vary. For this particular application the change in CSS is shown in In If the relative yield of the desired products is calculated then the result becomes totally different. In In the work by The performance model must be setup for all products in the process in order to find a global optimum for the suggested process. The reason for this is to avoid sub optimal solutions, i.e. on product goal will be satisfied while others may not. In order to handle this there will be yet another trade-of between the various products in the process. This problem can be addressed in many ways but one way to solve this is to design a multi objective function that can incorporate all product objective functions by adding a penalty function on each objective function as shown in Eq. The estimated objective function is shown in Eq. Since the surface response model of the observed process is quadratic and continuous a gradient based optimization algorithm is used for estimating the optimum and the optimizer. The optimization result is presented in expression below (see In the work by All its eigenvalues are positive. All determinants of its leading principal minors are positive; that is, if A has elements All the pivots are positive when A is reduced to row-echelon form, working systematically along the main diagonal. For the particular function all criterias are fulfilled. The results from the section concerning crusher performance show clearly that existing steady state models of cone crushers has an extremely low resolution when it comes to understanding how process variations will affect the performance of crusher and the desired production capacity. The analysis of how variation in feed distribution affects the production yield is also an important factor when considering optimizing the crusher settings. The results in this paper supports the work previously conducted by other researchers where the conclusion is that optimal production is achieved by continuously changing CSS and eccentric speed. The cone crusher model itself is an important tool in the success of future process optimizations of comminution processes since it in combination with the generic cost function can suggest more suitable crusher settings. This paper shows the fundamentals of many different models and it is important to keep in mind that the exact simulation optimization result shown in this paper may be somewhat theoretical or deviate some from real measured data. All models used have been independently verified in lot of different scenarios both standalone applications and with measured data from process plants. The cone crusher model is a mechanistic model and it is designed for analyzing fundamentally the phenomena’s that occur in a specific crusher configuration. Some deviations may of course be expected but it can actually be equally comparable with the use of FEM or CFD simulations, it is always important to work within the domain where the model has been validated. If the models operating conditions goes outside that domain there would of course be relevant with experimental results to validate the model further. The generic cost model is described in its simplest form since the costs for all the equipment’s is considered to be constant with time. It is assumed that the wear rate is proportional to the mass flow passing the equipment, but in the case of the cone crusher it was shown that the size distribution affects the hydroset pressure so in that case a scenario with large variations in feed size distribution would decrease the MTTF and increase the maintenance cost. There is a difficulty to in detail determine the failure rate for certain components in a crusher since it depends on application and operating conditions. But a crushing plant will in deed possess this data since they are keeping regular records of the maintenance of the equipment. The crushing plant is a complex process, thus process control and optimization is challenging. In order to fully understand how changes of process, machine and design parameters affect the output it is necessary to use simulation software. The change in one parameter will result in process variations that cannot be foreseen by observing the process layout. This work shows that wear will have tremendous effect on both capacity and quality of the product. Furthermore can be concluded that that optimization of a wide range of products will result in a trade-of regarding yield and quality and therefore a multi object perspective must be defined in order to address this problem. The use of response surface methodology in combination with multi objective constraint based approach has proven to be suitable for optimizing the suggested process. The optimization algorithm used is gradient based which implies that the optimization is time efficient. The estimated objective function reveals that the analyzed crushing process is a convex function and therefor a it is possible to find a at least a local optimum. The use of fundamental models that can handle dynamic operating conditions is essential if optimization of a dynamic process is going to be successful. The possibility to calculate change in maintenance rate is very important in order to see how process changes affect the production cost. As can be shown in Eq. The continuation of this work will focus on the analysis of how MTTF can be determined more accurately and how it can be used as an input for cost optimization in production. The wear models used in this paper are linear and the continuation of this work will analyze the need for improving the wear models. This work is based on the research supported by the OPTIMORE, project number 642201, funded by the