The production rate of an ore crushing circuit depends on the amount of equipment in operation. If the amount of active equipment is less than the optimum level, the reduced ore flow paths restrict the production rate. However, if the amount of active equipment is greater than the optimum level, the excess circulating load ore and extra energy consumption reduce the circuit efficiency. In addition, the optimum amount of active equipment can change over time due to changes in the ore characteristics, such as hardness and particle size. In this paper, a decision support system is proposed for optimizing the amount of active equipment for maximum crushing production considering changes in the circuit feed rate. The proposed solution is based on a simheuristic approach in which a simulated plant model is used to evaluate the production rate. Real production scenarios at a Brazilian mining plant are used in computational experiments. The results show that the simheuristic solutions generate a higher production rate and result in less energy consumption. Production is increased by up to 9%, and energy consumption is reduced by up to 59%, demonstrating the efficacy of the proposal.Crushing circuits decrease the size of ore extracted from a mine until it is suitable for the next mineral processing steps. The sequential primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary crushing stages compose a crushing circuit. Each stage is composed of dozens of pieces of equipment, such as crushers, screens, and feeders. The processed ore size defines the type and position of each stage. For instance, the primary crushing stage receives the extracted iron ore directly from the mine, where the iron ore diameter may reach The flow of coarse ore retained in one stage of the crushing circuit is called the circulating load. The efficiency of a crusher is not 100%; hence, some of the ore crushed in one stage does not satisfy the size specification for proceeding to the next stage. This thicker material is retained in the screens and returns to the same crushing stage. The circulating load occupies space in silos and conveyor belts that should contain fresh new ore from the mine, which causes a decrease in production. The amount of active equipment at each crushing stage has a significant impact on production. A circuit that works with considerably fewer crushers than the optimum value limits the production flow rate by restricting the number of lines in which the ore can flow. However, an excessive and poorly distributed number of crushers can increase the circulating load. Generally, the plant operator in the control room decides the amount of active equipment in the crushing circuit. This decision is subjective and dependent on the experience of the responsible plant operator during the work shift.  An artificial-intelligence-based decision support system is required to address this problem. In the literature, several artificial intelligence methods have been applied in decision support systems, such as machine learning, fuzzy logic, artificial neural networks and deep learning ( To our knowledge, there have been no reports in the literature on the application of simheuristics or other artificial intelligence techniques to address problems involving decisions on the amount of equipment required in production processes. Thus, this work aims to fill this gap by presenting a simheuristic-based decision support system for choosing the optimal amount of active equipment in each stage of a crusher circuit. The solution is obtained by solving an optimization problem, in which the goal is to maximize the total production. Local-search- or population-search-based metaheuristics can be used for this purpose ( The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The crushing circuit is detailed in Section A crushing circuit typically consists of five types of equipment: crushers, feeders, conveyor belts, tripper cars, and screens. Sections Crushers are designed to reduce the ore size to a particle size that is suitable for the next stage of the circuit. The operation of a crusher is periodic. Each period consists of a nipping action and an opening action. During the opening period in the cycle, the material moves down the crusher, and a portion of the material exits the equipment. Meanwhile, a certain amount of feed enters the crusher.  As reported in The feeder is essentially a conveyor belt used for short distances. It regulates the rate of ore transfer from one piece of equipment to another. For example, in a crushing circuit, feeders commonly feed screens and crushers by transferring ore stored in silos. In this paper, the authors modeled the feeders as a constant that represents the transfer rate from one piece of equipment to another. Screens are responsible for segmenting the processed ore. A screen separates coarse material from fine material and redirects only the former to the crusher. The material retained by the screen is called oversize, and the material that passes through the screen surface is called undersize. Vibrating screens are the most important screens for ore treatment applications. The main reason for the use of such screens in crushing circuits is that the vibration increases the efficiency, as it reduces clogging and induces the segregation of the fed material. The classification function From the classification function, the particle size distributions of undersize and oversize streams are, respectively, Another essential type of equipment in the crushing process and mining is the conveyor belt . The conveyor belt continuously transfers the material under the influence of frictional force. The conveyor belt is composed of a simple structure, and it is easy to maintain. This transport mechanism is commonly responsible for carrying millions of tonnes of minerals at mining plants and ports (  Mineral processing plants often use trippers. The purpose of trippers is to distribute ore coming from previous stages of the process to a silo with several hoppers. A tripper consists of a movable metal structure that physically supports a discharge point of a conveyor belt. Steel wheels located under the structure of the tripper drive the car. Metal rails support and guide the tripper along with the silo, allowing it to distribute among all subdivisions. The positioning of trippers above the silos is a scheduling problem that determines the position of the equipment through the divisions of silos over time. The problem under study concerns the crushing circuit of Vale S.A. at the Conceição II plant, Itabira-MG, and has the following characteristics:  There is a set There are 3 sequential crushing stages to gradually reduce the particle size of the iron ore: secondary, tertiary and quaternary; The secondary crushing aims to reduce the material size to 63 The tertiary crushing aims to reduce the material size from the range of 63–50 The quaternary crushing is the last stage and aims to reduce the material size from the range of 50–38 There is a set There is a set The product generated must have a particle size smaller than 12 The efficiency of each cone crusher depends of the cavity level. That is, cone crushers that operate at low cavity are less efficient than crushers operating at super chocked or full cavity. Therefore, this behavior must be simulated. Section There is a circuit feed rate ( The objective of the problem is to maximize the production of the crushing circuit in a time cycle of Trucks transport ore extracted from the mine and unload it into the primary crusher. The primary crusher reduces ore blocks with sizes of up to 1 The buffer pile has an approximate volume of 56,000 There are three lines in the secondary crushing stage that operate independently. Each line has a silo division, a feeder, a sloped vibrating screen, and a standard cone crusher. The feeder extracts ore from the corresponding silo division at a controlled speed to maintain a stable load on the crusher. From the screen, the oversize stream feeds the crusher, and the undersize stream goes to a conveyor belt that feeds the silos of the screening stage. Similar to the secondary crushing stage, the tertiary and quaternary crushing stages have four and eight lines, respectively. These lines operate independently and are composed of a silo division, a feeder, a standard cone crusher for the tertiary crushing stage and a short head crusher for the quaternary crushing stage. The throughput of the tertiary and quaternary crushers flows to the screening stage silo. There are twelve lines within the screening stage, and each line operates independently. Each line is composed of a silo division, a feeder, and a sloped two-deck vibrating screen. The oversize stream of the upper deck proceeds to the tertiary crushing stage, the oversize stream of the lower deck flows to the quaternary crushing stage, and the undersize stream goes to the milling courtyard. The set of equipment that constitutes the crushing circuit consumes approximately 2534 MWh per month. In Brazil, hydropower generation systems provide 86% of the electrical energy consumed (  The cavity level has a strong effect on cone crusher efficiency. According to  It allows for interparticle crushing to begin at a higher level in the crushing chamber; The additional weight of the material above the particles receiving compression strokes enhances the downward flow through the cavity and increases particle density in the crushing zones; It increases the probability of nip and improves the mass flow rate and throughput. Moreover, Usually, low-level silo interlocks are applied to avoid crushers operating at half cavity level. That is, the feeder turns off while the level in the silo is under a low limit and turns on when the level in silo is above a threshold. However, this strategy leads to feeders turn-on and turn-off repeatedly switching, which still leads to temporary half cavity level operation. Thus, a correctly chosen number of active crushers is necessary for higher production in complex crushing circuits. In this section, the simulation results for the Conceição II crushing plant shown in The models of crushers and screens used are described in In the simulation, the conveyor belt was considered to be an ore flow adder. An essential conveyor belt feature in the simulation is its maximum load limit. The simulator discards any solution that violates this characteristic. In operation, the particle size of the material that feeds the crushing process varies. The simulation considers a random range of 3 mm in the size of particles that feed the circuit. This range is compatible with the crushing circuit addressed.  A condition was created to represent a  In this section, the proposed simheuristic algorithm is presented. The representation and evaluation of a solution are described in Section An array of six positions represents a solution. The first five positions identify the number of active feeders in each circuit stage. The feeders represent a complete line of equipment (feeder–screen or feeder–crusher). The last position represents the circuit feed rate. The objective function of the problem is to maximize the production of the crushing circuit. The evaluation of a solution is performed by the simulator.  The proposed algorithm is based on the ILS metaheuristic ( The proposed simheuristic algorithm, called SILS-SIM, uses the developed crushing circuit simulator to evaluate the objective function. The version of ILS used is Smart ILS (SILS) ( Algorithm 1 has two stopping criteria: a time limit and a maximum number of executions without improvement in the objective function. It has the following parameters: ( An initial solution      The local search procedure uses the first improvement strategy and a neighborhood structure based on upward or downward moves. If the analyzed position is one of the first five, then the move consists of increasing or decreasing the number of pieces of active equipment in the circuit stage by one. If the last position of the array is analyzed, the circuit feed rate is increased or decreased by  Because there are two possible values for each position of the solution, the size of the neighborhood can be defined easily. Each solution has The solutions The pseudocode of the local search procedure is presented in Algorithm 2. In Algorithm 2, the search starts from a solution  The SILS-SIM algorithm was implemented using MathWorksMATLAB® version R2016b. The software interface was generated in the App Designer tool. The parameters of SILS-SIM were empirically fixed to the following values: (   The simulation experiments are based on a set of typical production scenarios at the Conceição II plant. The SILS-SIM algorithm results were compared with the results of two other strategies. The first strategy is to allow all equipment to be active. The second strategy is based on the actions of a plant operator for a similar situation. The plant operator chooses the minimum number of feeders in each stage capable of operating the plant with the maximum circuit feed rate of ore (the maximum circuit feed rate at Conceição II is 4015 t/h). The feeder capacity in each stage is ( The tests were executed on a computer with an Intel Xeon E5-2670 2.3 GHz processor, 16 GB of RAM and the Windows Server 2012 operating system. The simulator considers a time cycle of 6 h. The following subsections show the results of the simulation experiments, an analysis of energy consumption and a convergence check of the algorithm. The simulation experiments illustrate some real situations of the crushing circuit that frequently occur, such as unavailable equipment, changes in particle size distribution, changes in type of minerals and variation in circuit feed rate. In all tests, the two versions of the SILS-SIM algorithm were each executed thirty times for each production scenario. The justification for executing the SILS-SIM algorithms thirty times is that the solutions they produce may vary among executions due to the stochastic components of the ILS metaheuristic and the simulator.  This production scenario describes a regular situation at the plant. All feeders are available in the crushing circuit, and the feeding ore has a  This figure shows that the best SILS-SIM solution results in greater production than the other solutions do. Although the production corresponding to the solution with all feeders is similar to that of the SILS-SIM solution, the proposed algorithm suggests a considerably smaller number of active feeders, thus allowing a reduction in the numbers of operating crushers and screens, leading to energy savings. The production rate suggested by the plant operator solution is the smallest for this scenario.  A scenario with fine fresh ore is described in this example. The input ore may be smaller for several reasons, such as extraction of less compact minerals or greater use of explosives in rock detonation. In this production scenario, all feeders are available, the range of the circuit feed rate is the same as in the previous production scenario, and the particle size is As in Example 1, the variability of production generated by the SILS-SIM-R algorithm is higher than that generated by the SILS-SIM-G algorithm, as seen in  This production scenario specifies a thicker fresh ore. This situation depends on the type of ore explored in the mines and the amount of explosive used. The input material has a particle size of In this production scenario, the solutions suggested by the SILS-SIM algorithms use fewer active feeders and generate more accumulated production. The variability of the SILS-SIM algorithm with a random initial solution is again larger than that with a greedy initial solution, as seen in This scenario presents a situation in which there is a limitation in the ore flow rate. This may occur when there is damage to the conveyor belt or an interruption in mine exploration. The simulated circuit feed rate is 3000 t/h, the particle size of the material is the same as in Example 1 ( It can be verified that the SILS-SIM algorithm again achieves better performance in accumulated production. Furthermore, the algorithm suggests that fewer feeders are activated. As shown in In this production scenario, five feeders are not available in the crushing circuit. Feeders may be unavailable for various reasons, such as maintenance stops in crushers or screens and interruptions in plant feeding. The particle size of the materials and the range of the circuit feed rate are the same as those in Example 1.    In Example 6, six feeders for screening are not available. The screening stage is divided into two parts. Therefore, during some types of maintenance, half of the screening stage is stopped. For this production scenario, the best results are shown in The solutions from SILS-SIM suggest a reduction by 10 feeders in relation to the solution with all feeders, that is, a 37% reduction. The solution generated by the proposed algorithm also achieves better accumulated production (a total of 1298 tonnes or 9.38%). As shown in The mineral industry is among the most energy-intensive sectors, mainly because of the comminution stage (  The solutions of the SILS-SIM algorithms incur considerably less energy consumption in most cases. The SILS-SIM-R algorithm leads to considerably less energy consumption in all cases; however, the SILS-SIM-G algorithm results in the same energy consumption as that with all feeders activated in Examples 3 and 5. In Example 6, there is a 59% savings in energy consumption with the SILS-SIM-R algorithm. These results are important and demonstrate the efficiency of the SILS-SIM algorithm. SILS-SIM is a heuristic algorithm; thus, there is no guarantee that the solutions found are optimal. To analyze the convergence of SILS-SIM, a brute force algorithm was implemented. This type of algorithm generates all possible solutions and returns the globally optimal solution to the problem.  The number of feasible solutions ( Thus, according to Eq. To obtain a measure of how far the solutions are from this optimal solution, the optimality gap was calculated for a set of thirty SILS-SIM algorithm solutions. The results showed a gap of 0.06% for the best solution and an average gap of 9.05% considering all executions for SILS-SIM-R. SILS-SIM-G also showed a gap of 0.06% for the best solution and an average gap of 0.83% considering all executions. For the best solution, the gap was the same, but in terms of the average gap, the execution of the SILS-SIM algorithm with a greedy initial solution yielded a better result.   In this paper, a crushing circuit operation problem at a Brazilian mining plant was investigated. The amount of active equipment in each crushing stage has a significant effect on production, and the choice of the optimal amount of active equipment is complex due to inevitable variations in ore features, such as hardness and particle size distribution. A simheuristic technique was used to address this problem. The optimization heuristic is based on the iterated local search metaheuristic. The developed simulator includes all aspects of the crushing circuit, such as mass balance, active equipment, and material particle size properties. It enables the simulation of various scenarios that differ in the quantity of active equipment. Hence, it is possible to determine the optimal relationship between production and the amount of active equipment. The results demonstrated the effectiveness of the method, showing that it is possible to increase production with less active equipment than is currently in operation, thus contributing to better crushing circuit efficiency, lower energy consumption, and reduced equipment wear. In Example 6, energy consumption was reduced by approximately 59%, and production was increased by 9% (109,870 tonnes/month). Future work should employ improved crusher and sieve models. The problem should be extended to consider not only productivity and energy consumption but also issues regarding maintenance and varying equipment performance. In this way, new practical concerns for industrial operations can be addressed using the proposed decision support system.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful for the support provided by the