Sodium Hexametaphosphate (SHMP) is widely used as an inorganic depressant of carbonate minerals. But little information if any exists on the proper mechanism of how SHMP depresses silicate minerals. In the study, flotation separation of rutile and its main gangue mineral almandine using a Sodium Hexametaphosphate is investigated. The study was conducted through micro flotation tests of single and artificially mixed minerals. Adsorption mechanism was analyzed through Zeta potential and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses respectively. The flotation tests for single and artificially mixed minerals show that SHMP is an efficient depressant in the separation of rutile ores from almandine as a possible gangue mineral. Zeta potential measurements and XPS analysis indicate that more SHMP was adsorbed on almandine surface as opposed to that of rutile. Fe ions on the surface of almandine were the main active sites for collector adsorption, while the P in (NaPO3)6 is central to the depression process. The adsorption mechanism of sodium Hexametaphosphate on almandine surface was mainly attributed to the electrostatic interaction and chemical bonding. While on the other hand, SHMP seems to have negligible effect on rutile surface.Rutile (TiO The main methods adopted in the industry for the beneficiation of rutile from its unwanted gangue minerals include flotation, gravity separation, magnetic separation, and electrostatic separation. Usually, heavy minerals from beach sands are concentrated by physical and conventional methods, such as Dredge mining of alluvial heavy mineral deposits, followed by gravity and magnetic separation techniques [ Many researchers have focused their energies on the development and choice of novel collectors to enhance the floatability difference between rutile and its unwanted gangue [ Almandine is a ferrous iron end member of the class of almandine (Fe Sodium Hexametaphosphate (SHMP) being an excellent dispersant, is also widely used as an inorganic depressant as well. There are some investigations on its depressing effect on various minerals. For example, in the carbonate ﬂotation of Magnesite from Dolomite, SHMP is used as an inhibitor as well as a regulator in the process, the results clearly revealed that SHMP had a good selective inhibition ability in pure mineral ﬂotations of magnesite and dolomite [ However, despite the above studies, very little information if any exists on the proper mechanism of how SHMP depresses silicate minerals. For instance, the depressing action mechanism of sodium Hexametaphosphate on the surface of almandine has not been systematically explained before, thus in this study, the flotation behavior of rutile and almandine using sodium Hexametaphosphate as a depressor (SHMP), SPA (Styryl phosphoric acid) mixed with octadecylaminepolyoxyethylene ether (AC1815) as the collector is investigated using micro-flotation tests for single and artificially mixed minerals. The adsorption phenomena and mechanisms of Sodium Hexametaphosphate on the rutile and almandine surfaces were clearly revealed by zeta potential measurements and XPS respectively. The above adsorption techniques offered ample information that can ascertain and establish the precise adsorption mechanism. The results in this study are expected to be useful in providing a fundamental understanding of the effects of depressants and will aid in designing, development, and selection of highly efficacious and powerful depressant for flotation of rutile ores from its associated mineral matter. The rutile sample for this study work was obtained from Hainan province, which was a tabling concentrate, with 98 % TiO Octadecylaminepolyoxyethylene ether (AC1815), with 99 % purity, was obtained from Haian Petrochemical factory in Jiangsu province, China and was mixed with SPA (Styryl phosphonic acid) of 98 % purity to make a mixed collector with rations being 1.25:1 respectively. Dilute solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were employed as pH adjustment agents. Analytical grade reagent potassium nitrate (KNO Micro-flotation experiments in this investigation were carried out in a 40 mL-Plexiglas cell. For single mineral flotation, the mineral recoveries were calculated based on the dry weights of the concentrates (m For artiﬁcially mixed minerals flotation, the concentrate was assayed for TiO The zeta-potential measurements of rutile and almandine were conducted with a Zetasizernano Zs90 (England). The measurements were based on electrophoresis technique; with the equipment being supplied by Malvern Zetasizer Nano (2000). The ambient temperature was normally maintained at 25 °C 0.5 μm rutile sample was added into 45 ml ultrapure water. This step was performed in the presence of desired reagent concentrations at a determined pH regulated through HCl or NaOH stock solutions and recorded. A 1 × 10 XPS is a technique employed to study the chemical state of elements on the different mineral surfaces, which provides adsorption information of the flotation reagents [  The above-increased recoveries could be attributed to promotion recovery of both minerals, and thereafter the adsorption quantity of collector on rutile surface came to a saturation point and loading any extra dosage of collector would not increase its floatabilities. The almandine case is different, as increasing dosage beyond the optimum, its recovery (%) kept on rising and the entire flotation process was becoming non-selective at the dosage above 10 mg/L. Therefore, the results in As shown in It should be also pointed out from the above flotation results, that the mixed collector seems to have a very strong collecting effect on almandine as well, as is being demonstrated on pH range of 4–6.78 where almandine recovery is very high, in range of 44.16 %–69 %. It is therefore imperative to argue that although the mixed collector has certain selectivity, between the rutile and almandine, this selectivity is fairly small as is clearly indicated in  In fact, the results are in the agreement with the theory that an ideal depressant should possess a low affinity to active sites of targeted minerals surfaces (rutile), while at the same time maintaining very high affinity for active sites of gangue minerals (Almandine) [ On the side of almandine, in the absence of SHMP, Almandine recovery was 47.99 %.Increasing (NaPO So, it can be concluded from the results above that, rutile and almandine can be successfully separated by the use of SPA-AC1815 as a collector and sodium Hexametaphosphate, as a regulator, as SHMP has a significant inhibition of almandine floatability, while its inhibition on rutile surface is very low. It is, therefore, suggested that the SHMP can effectively separate almandine from rutile, but an excessive SHMP dosage would depress rutile flotation as well ﬂotation. The pulp pH plays a very crucial role in the flotation process because any slight change of the pH value causes an alteration of the electrical characteristics of solids and flotation reagents at different interfaces [ As can be seen, with the increase of the pH, the floatability of rutile increases from 20 % at pH 2 to a maximum recovery of 91 % at pH 6.78. When pH is above 6.78, its floatability decreases significantly and reaches 46 % at pH 10. Peak floatabilities of rutile are observed at pH range 4–6.78. Any pH values below or above that, a decrease in floatabilities is depicted. For almandine, the recovery remained below 10 % in the entire pH range from 2 to 8, above pH 8; the depressant inhibitory effect of SHMP was negligible. From the experiments of single mineral flotation tests, it clearly revealed that SHMP could offer excellent selecting performance. To further establish the efficiency of (NaPO The influence of Sodium Hexametaphosphate concentration on the grade and TiO SHMP is a poly-phosphate salt which consists of hexameric units forming charged rings. It represented as a kind of flocculant polymer chain derived by the process of polymerization from various basic structural units [  Zeta potential (ζ) is a measure for quantifying the magnitude of the electrical charge at the double layer and also can be used to measure the charges carried by particles that are suspended in an electrolyte solution [ The above flotation pH of interest say, around pH 6.2 SHMP, can make zeta potential of almandine significantly different from that of rutile. A similar case was observed by [ In the presence of both the depressant and the collector, the same  It could be further argued that both the rutile and almandine could react with the depressant, but adsorption of depressant on rutile surface is weaker, this is in good agreement with micro - flotation results as the recovery is only reduced to 87 % from 94.48 % at a higher depressant concentration of 6 × 10 It should be inferred that the depressing effect of SHMP on the surface of almandine can be attributed to two main action mechanism: The first explanation could be due to formation of a stable hydrophilic complex of sodium Hexametaphosphate with metal ions from the surface of almandine such Fe Secondly, SHMP can adsorb on the surface of almandine, thus changing the electrical properties of its surface. The assumption here is the fact that Fe The above reactions cater for a possible reaction between the iron ions (Fe In conclusion, the adsorption of [Na In order to further validate the adsorption mechanism of SHMP on almandine, the XPS analysis test was carried out.The XPS results of almandine and rutile treated with and without (NaPO The survey spectrum in The high-resolution XPS spectra of O, Ti, from The binding energy peaks of iron (Fe), aluminium (Al), oxygen (O) could be detected on almandine surface respectively. Some of O and C present in the Almandine surface could be attributed to external pollution of instrument and atmosphere [    It can clearly be noticed that the largest peak shifting of Fe2p from binding energy(723.37 eV–723.69 eV) with a difference of +0.44 eV binding energy confirms the adsorption of SHMP on the surface of almandine by chemical bonding [ Further to the above explanation, aP2p peak(134.18 eV) is found in the spectra of almandine sample after SHMP treatment, which is not the case with untreated almandine sample suggesting that SHMP could be absorbed on the almandine surface in some formations [ It can further be argued that the binding energy of P2p on the almandine surface shifted to lower energy (-0.42 eV) after SHMP adsorption on the almandine surface from the original SHMP reagent ( Sodium Hexametaphosphate (SHMP) being an excellent dispersant, is also widely used as an inorganic depressant as well.However,very little information if any exists on the proper mechanism of how SHMP depresses silicate minerals.The results of single mineral flotation tests clearly show that almandine and rutile have similar floatability characteristics when SPA-AC1815 is employed as the collector. Similarly, zeta potential results on the other hand, have demonstrated that adsorption of anions ((HPO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial supports for this work from the