 This edition includes additional chapters on stirrer mills and magnetic separation. The stirred mills for ultrafine grinding of minerals which were developed in the last three decades are described and discussed in detail. These are now being extensively used in large-scale operating circuits for enhanced recovery of minerals from their ore body. Magnetic, conductive and electromagnetic forces for the recovery of minerals with natural or induced magnetic, conducting and semi-conducting properties are a common beneficiation technique particularly in the mineral sands and iron ore industries. The basic elements of atomic theory that help to understand magnetic forces in minerals are explained and the designing of equipment as well as separation processes of magnetic from non-magnetic minerals based on these theories are described. The objective of the book remains the same as that of the first edition which is to help students interested in processing minerals to economically liberate and concentrate them for down-stream extraction processes. To understand the unit as well as the integrated processes the subject has been treated somewhat mathematically with the view to apply them in actual process designs and operations. In so doing it is expected that the book would suit students from the disciplines of Metallurgy, Chemical Engineering, Process Engineering and to a limited extent Electronics Engineering, who are engaged in the beneficiation of minerals and who are at under-graduate, graduate and post-graduate levels of study. Some data provided in the appendix is expected to aid in calculations of designing and plant operations. Solutions to simple and common plant problems are provided. In writing this second edition of the book we offer our thanks to the reviewers who offered help and guidance to improve on the first edition. Also our renewed thanks to Dr Lutz Elber and Dr Halit Eren for their help and contribution in writing Perth, Western Australia, November 2015