A chelating ion-exchange resin, Amberlite IRC 748 which carries an iminodiacetate acid functional group has been investigated for its adsorption properties towards Ni, Co, Mn and Mg from aqueous solution. Experiments were conducted through batch adsorption by varying the resin volume at three different pH values. It was observed that the amount of metals adsorbed by the resin increased with increasing pH. The applicability of both the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were analyzed on the equilibrium data obtained. In all cases, the Langmuir isotherm shows an excellent fit to the experimental data while the Freundlich isotherm failed to predict the data at higher loadings. The resin exhibited high selectivity towards nickel (K
                     =58,000) and cobalt (K
                     =16,800), which can be easily separated from magnesium and manganese at pH 4 and 5. The obtained values of the equilibrium constant K (l/mol) matched the expected order of selectivity of this resin which is Ni>Co>Mn>Mg. The results also showed that the adsorption mechanisms of these metals onto the resin follow a combination of monolayer and multilayer adsorption.Nickel is one of the most important metals consumed by the stainless steel industry, which has been growing at the rate of 5–6% per annum in the last 20 years. It is extracted from both sulfide and lateritic oxide ores in about 20 countries around the world. In 1968, laterites supplied 28% of global nickel demand, rising to 42% in 2003 which is expected to increase to 51% by 2012 ( The four major commercial routes that have been used for processing nickel laterite ores are ferronickel smelting, matte smelting, the reduction roast/ammoniacal leaching process known as the Caron process and pressure acid leaching (PAL). Among those processes, PAL is the only existing laterite process which exhibits good cobalt recovery ( In the previous work, the authors have established the technical feasibility of applying ion exchange to recover the nickel and cobalt from the CCD underflow. Chelating resin IRC 748 was chosen for the work which covered small scale batch tests, to the continuous six-stage mini plant and pilot plant. Chelating ion-exchange resins which are also known as complexing or specific ion resins are designed to have high specificity for an ion or groups of ions. These types of ion-exchange resins adsorb metal ions through a combination of ionic and coordinating interactions instead of the simple electrostatic interactions in conventional cation or anion ion exchange ( The aim of the present study is to investigate the fundamental aspects of loading metal ions on the resin. The loading behavior of the four metal ions involved in the PAL system namely Ni, Co, Mg and Mn were examined at various pH values. The equilibrium data obtained were than analyzed using the two of the most frequently used adsorption models. In addition, the coordination behavior of the metal ions on the resin was also considered in this study. The information gained from this study increases the understanding of the resin behaviour and selectivity. Synthetic solutions of nickel sulfate, cobalt sulfate, magnesium sulfate and manganese sulfate were prepared with deionized water and employed for the study. All chemicals were of analytical grade. The solutions were adjusted to the required pH 3, 4 and 5 using dilute sodium hydroxide or sulfuric acid. A commercial weak acid chelating resin IRC 748 (formerly known as IRC 718) supplied by Rohm and Haas was used in this study. This resin is characterized by iminodiacetate acid functional group as shown in The resin was subjected to a titration procedure in order to establish various degrees of protonation and to calculate the total exchange capacity of the resin. The result showed that there were three equivalent points at pH values of 6.3, 8.0 and 10.6 at which the three protons are being neutralized. This observation is in agreement with the result obtained by other researchers related to the iminodiacetic type chelating resin ( This study was conducted using the automated titration set-up. This equipment maintained the desired pH by the addition of sodium hydroxide to neutralize the protons released by exchange of metal ions on the resin. It was used in a combination with a data acquisition computer utilizing Labview software. Typically, 250 ml of each metal ion solution was repeatedly equilibrated with different calculated volumes (8–60 ml) of wet resin based on the resin capacity. The resin was then filtered, washed and stripped of the loaded metal ion. In this study, the resin was observed to reach its equilibrium after 4 h. Elution of the loaded resin was carried out using 1 M sulfuric acid. Both the equilibrium solution and the eluate solution were sampled and analyzed using AAS or ICP which determined the amount of metal loaded onto the resin at the equilibrium. Each pair of equilibrium solution and loaded resin values was used as an equilibrium point on the isotherm for each metal at each pH. Langmuir and Freundlich models are the two frequently used isotherms to describe the adsorption equilibrium ion exchange relation between the solid phase and liquid phases ( The Freundlich isotherm is an empirical equation that describes adsorption based on heterogeneous surface energy ( The constant The adsorption isotherm coefficients obtained from the slopes and intercepts of the linear plots are listed in The value of Langmuir equilibrium constant The resin exhibited high selectivity for nickel ( An alternative approach to the development of an adsorption isotherm is by expressing the equilibrium involved in the adsorption reaction on the resin. By assuming at this stage that the number of protons exchanged by one metal ion adsorbed is not specified, one can write a general reaction for the uptake of divalent metals by an iminodiacetic resin as Equilibrium constant can be written for this general adsorption equation as As the pH is maintained constant, the above equation can be simplified to produce a second constant Introducing the maximum concentration of functional group on the resin as [ This equation has the same form as the Langmuir isotherm in Eq. Two limits can then be considered depending on the concentration of metal ions. Thus, the extent of loading of metal on the resin is linearly related to the equilibrium concentration in solution. This condition is satisfied if the resin has a low affinity for the metal (low The second limit arises if This corresponds to a fully loaded resin which results from a large An alternative method of analyzing selectivity data was suggested by The result of such an analysis is presented in The derivation of the equilibrium constant for metal ions in Eq. Thus, if The results show that The results in It is possible that the time allowed for the equilibration at pH values below about 6 was not sufficient. This resulted in higher apparent equilibrium pH values for these points. Typical behavior for a polyfunctional weak cationic ion-exchange resin with respect to the iminodiacetic species present at different pH values is given in From the figure, it is apparent that the resin is fully protonated at pH value below 2.21. On the other hand, the resin in this study has been washed with water to pH about 3.3. As the pH increases the first proton is neutralized by pH 3.99. Thus, at pH values between 2.21 and 4 the resin is composed of functional groups RHH and RH. This explains the average number of protons of 1.5 in this pH range as shown in Another observation made was that the total of the amount of NaOH added to neutralize the protons released should correlate to the nickel loading at equilibrium. It is expected that the amount of NaOH added would be identical with the amount of nickel loading. This is, however, not the case. It was observed that the equilibrium NaOH added corresponds to a higher nickel loading than was obtained especially at higher pH values and at lower metal loading. It appears that at higher pH values and lower metal loading, sodium was also loading onto the resin and this resulted in higher additions of NaOH to neutralize the extra protons released into the solution. The adsorption equilibrium of Ni, Co, Mn and Mg on the iminodiacetic acid chelating resin IRC 748 has been discussed in this report. Modeling of the equilibrium adsorption isotherms of metal ions on the resin showed that the Langmuir isotherm provided an excellent fit while the Freundlich isotherm failed to predict the loading at high loading. The resin proves to have high selectivity for nickel and cobalt which suggests that these metals can be easily separated from magnesium and manganese at pH 4 and 5. The magnitude of the Langmuir equilibrium constant of each metal ion was found to follow the order of selectivity of the resin which is Ni The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the