The relationship between the electrolysis voltage and the other variables (such as inter-electrode spacing, electric conductivity, current density, pH, bubble void fraction etc.) of an electro-flotation (EF) process using a Ti based anode is analyzed. The Nernst equation, Tafel equation, Fick’s model, and Ohm’s law are applied to determine the Nernst potential, activation overpotential, concentration overpotential and ohmic overpotential respectively. The simulation results are compared with experimental data of the present study as well as with data obtained from the literature. The good agreement of the comparison indicates that the models derived can be used to calculate the total electrolysis voltage required for an EF cell under different operating conditions. The effect of void fraction between electrodes on the electrolysis voltage of EF is experimentally investigated. The Bubble volumetric fraction between the electrodes was estimated to be 25%–35%, which significantly increases the cell resistance and hence overall cell potential.Electro-flotation (EF) is an electrochemical technology that is effective in separation of solids and liquids, such as fine slimes of low grade ores, domestic and industrial waste water, by means of hydrogen and oxygen gas bubbles generated from water electrolysis. Bande et al. The operating cost is one of the primary concerns for the performance of an EF system. Operating cost depends on the power consumption that is strongly reliant on the electrolysis voltage and current. The electric power of an EF cell can be obtained by multiplying the cell voltage with current. For a higher current, which is more likely applied for electro flotation, any small raise of the cell voltage can cause a severe rise in the power demand. Therefore, the prediction of electrolysis voltage under desired operating conditions is very important for industrial applications. Although EF has been practiced since 1900s The objectives of this study is to derive the theoretical models regarding the electrolysis voltage required in an EF process and to verify the simulation results by comparing with experimental data from both this study as well as data obtained from the literature. When an electrolyte solution is brought between two electrodes with opposite electric charges, a direct current (dc) is passing through from the positive pole (anode) to the negative pole (cathode), and an electric field is established. As a result of electrolysis reactions, hydrogen and oxygen gases are formed and liberated at cathode and anode, respectively, in the form of gas bubbles. The oxygen evolution reaction at the anode is The hydrogen evolution reaction at the cathode is The overall electrolysis reaction is expressed as The operating current in an EF cell must exceed the equilibrium potential difference, anode overpotential, cathode overpotential, and ohmic overpotential of the solution in order to maintain electrochemical reactions The equilibrium voltage of an EF cell can be expressed by the Nernst equation: At anode: At cathode: The equilibrium potential difference between the anode and the cathode is Thus, The activation overpotential is related to the electrode kinetics at the reaction site, which represents the overpotential incurred due to the activation energy necessary for charge transfer The concentration overpotential is caused by the resistance to the transport of reactant species approaching the reaction site, and the transport of product species leaving the reaction site Within the diffusion layer adjacent to the electrode surface, non-reactive ions coming from electrolyte (e.g. Na Under the assumption that the H Usually, at anode, [C The concentration overpotential at anode is: Replacing [C Eq. Similarly, assuming the OH At the cathode, usually C The concentration overpotential at the cathode Where, C Hence, Therefore Eq. Eq. According to the Ohm’s law, the ohmic overpotential of an EF cell can be expressed as Therefore, Eq. and the Bruggeman equation Therefore, by replacing the cell resistance, R by the modified electrochemical cell resistance R Now, combining Eqs. (8)–(10), Eq. Iridium (Ir) coated titanium (Ti) plates (ELTECH System Co), were used as the anodes for the study. In this study, the solution used in the test was prepared by dissolving Na As mentioned earlier, the Iridium (Ir) coated Titanium (Ti) anode and SS316-cathode combination were selected to fabricate electrode modules in the present study. According to Eq. The effect of bubbles on the electrical resistance of an EF unit can be established by studies of the relationship between resistance and inter-electrode spacing. If bubbles have no effect, then the resistivity of the electrolyte should be constant and independent of the inter-electrode spacing As mentioned earlier that the bubble coverage and the volume fraction of bubbles change the conductivity of the electrolyte/air bubble mixture within the bubble layer thickness. Therefore, it is very important to know the reduction of the conductivity, σ The Tafel slope for Ti/IrO The developed model (Eq. The Current density and Cell voltage relationship is widely used to validate different types of electro-chemical cell models, such as electro-coagulation The activation overpotentials for the anode and cathode were calculated using Eqs. The anode and cathode overpotentials (activation Overpotentials at anode and cathode have significant contribution to the total cell voltage. However the contribution at the anode and cathode, respectively, varies under different operating conditions. For a current density of 150  An electrochemical model is developed to represent the relationship between the total cell voltage and variables such as the equilibrium potential difference for water split, anode activation overpotential, anode concentration overpotential, cathode activation overpotential, cathode concentration overpotential and ohmic overpotential in an electro flotation process, based on the Nernst equation, Tafel equation, Fick’s model, and Ohm’s law. The simulation results are compared with experimental data of the present study as well as data obtained from the literature, and good agreement was found. Therefore, the model can be used to calculate the total required electrolysis voltage for an EF cell under different operating conditions. The effect of bubbles between electrodes on the electrolysis voltage of EF is investigated. The Bubble fractions between anode and cathode were estimated to be 30% to 35%, which significantly increase the cell resistance and hence the overall cell potential. The Overpotentials at anode and cathode have significant contribution to the total cell voltage. However the relative contribution on the anode and cathode varies under different operating conditions. The Anode and cathode overpotentials were measured experimentally and the results were within 10% of that predicted by the model equations. Among all the approaches used to measure the cell resistance in the present study, the Bruggeman Equation is found to be best suited for electro flotation. The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of Mr. Xinwei Chen during the experiment. This research is funded by a research grant from the natural science and engineering research council of Canada.