The effect of quartz particles on the flotation of pyrite depressed by serpentine has been investigated through flotation tests, adsorption tests, zeta potential measurements and DLVO calculation. The results show that the presence of hydrophilic serpentine slimes on pyrite surface reduces collector adsorption and results in lower recovery of pyrite. The finer the serpentine slime is, the lower the pyrite recovery will be. Quartz particles do not interfere with pyrite flotation. However, the addition of quartz particles increases the adsorption of collector on pyrite surface and limits the detrimental effect of serpentine on pyrite flotation. The fine-grained quartz is more effective. Zeta potential measurements and DLVO calculation illustrate that the zeta potential of quartz is more negative than that of pyrite and the attraction force between serpentine and quartz is stronger than force between serpentine and pyrite, thus some serpentine slimes were transferred from pyrite surface to quartz in the process of attrition.Jinchuan concentrators process sulphide ores using froth flotation to produce a concentrate averaging 8.8% Ni, 4.8% Cu, 15.26% S, 28.16% Fe and 6.8% MgO. This concentrate is then further upgraded at the Nickel Smelter by burning off excess sulphur and removing the iron and MgO as a slag phase to produce a nickel sulphide rich matter. Serpentine is the main magnesium-rich phyllosilicate mineral in Jinchuan nickel sulphide ore. Due to its low hardness, serpentine is easily slimed. The fines or slimes possess an opposite charge to the coarse sulphide particles. This creates an electrostatic attraction force which results in the slimes forming a coating over the surface of the coarse particles The pioneering work of Gaudin shows that the adsorption of colloidal species is selective and the selective adsorption of colloidal species is relative to mineral surface potential The serpentine (lizardite) used for all experiments was obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province, China. Mineralogical and X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the serpentine sample was of high purity with trace amounts of chlorite and amphibole. The sample was dry ground and screened. Serpentine minerals with size of −150 The pure quartz sample was obtained from Changsha, Hunan Province, China. The sample was dry ground and screened. The −74 Pyrite was obtained from Yunfu, Guangdong Province, China. The result of chemical analysis showed that the composition included Fe 44.96% and S 52.98%. The samples were dry ground and screened. The −150 PAX (Potassium Amyl Xanthate) and MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) were used as collector and frother respectively. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength and HCL (hydrochloric acid) and KOH (potassium hydroxide) were used as pH regulators. All the reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Deionized double distilled water was used for all tests. Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical agitation flotation machine (XFG). The impeller speed was fixed at 1800 Zeta potential measurements on pyrite, quartz and serpentine were carried out using a Coulter Delsa440 SX zeta potential meter. The working principle of the apparatus is Doppler electrophoresis effect and the zeta potential value was given by the zeta potential meter directly. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength at 10 For the adsorption tests, 1 The effect of pH on the floatability of pyrite, serpentine and quartz is shown in The effect of serpentine and quartz on the flotation of pyrite at pH 9 is shown in The effect of quartz on the flotation of pyrite depressed by serpentine at pH 9 is shown in  The use of quartz to improve the flotation of sulphide minerals is well known. However, there are different interpretations about the reason. Chander found that the flotation recovery of chalcopyrite increased with the increase of the proportion of quartz particles contained in a chalcopyrite quartz mixture. He thought that the removal of oxidation products from a sulphide mineral surface by quartz seems to indicate that attritioning is the mode of surface cleaning by quartz What is the main reason for the removal of serpentine slimes from pyrite surface? To ascertain this, the effect of minerals addition order on pyrite flotation is studied and the result is shown in The effect of conditioning time on pyrite flotation in the presence of serpentine and quartz is studied and the result is shown in The formation of slime coatings is controlled by the interaction energies between the slime and mineral particles and involves the process of aggregation. Aggregation between sulphide mineral particles and serpentine slime species is generally controlled by double layer interactions as van der Waals forces existing between dissimilar particles are generally attractive forces As a direct surface chemistry investigation of the different minerals, individual electro-kinetic studies of pyrite, serpentine and quartz particles as a function of pH in 0.001 Particle interaction energies in aqueous solution are commonly described through application of DLVO theory, which allows quantitative prediction of the interaction energy. The interaction energy at constant surface potentials is often used and can be described by: The van der Waals interaction energy is The Hamaker constants for both serpentine/pyrite/water and serpentine/quartz/water are not available in literature. For pyrite, Chen lists a value of the Hamaker constant acting through vacuum as The zeta potential values for the serpentine, quartz and pyrite surface can be obtained from the electro-kinetic results in  The presence of hydrophilic serpentine slimes on pyrite surface reduces collector adsorption and results in lower recoveries of pyrite. The finer the serpentine slimes is, the lower the pyrite recovery will be. Quartz particles do not interfere with the flotation of pyrite and can be used to limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on pyrite flotation; if so the fine-grained quartz is more effective. The zeta potential value of quartz is more negative than that of pyrite and the attraction force between serpentine and quartz is stronger than that between serpentine and pyrite, thus some serpentine slime was removed from pyrite surface and transferred to quartz in the process of flotation. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors acknowledge the