The aim of this paper is developing a new hierarchical model to evaluate and rank the sawability (power consumption) of carbonate rock with the use of effective and major criteria, and simultaneously taking subjective judgments of decision makers into consideration. The proposed approach is based on the combination of Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP) method with TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) methods. FAHP is used for determining the weights of the criteria by decision makers, and then rankings of carbonate rocks are determined by TOPSIS. The proposed method is applied for Iranian ornamental stone to evaluate the power consumption in rock sawing process. A variety of two groups of carbonate rocks (7 types) were sawn, using a fully-instrumented laboratory cutting rig at different feed rate (200, 300, 400cmmin−1) at constant peripheral speed (1770rpm) and depth of cut (35mm). During the sawing trials, the ampere and power consumption were monitored and calculated as performance characteristics of the saws. The results of the sawing trials (power consumption) were used to verify the result of the applied approach for ranking the carbonate rock sawability. It was concluded that the sawability of carbonate rocks can reliably be ranked, using the developed approach.Circular diamond saws have been widely used in stone factory. The performance prediction of circular diamond saw is very important in the cost estimation and the best planning of the plants. The performance of circular diamond saw is affected by the complex interaction of many effective parameters. Various attempts have been made to determine these parameters. Generally, these parameters can be divided into three distinct parts: Characterization of the work piece or stone. Sawing characterization including saw operating and design characterization. Operating skills and working condition. Up to now, many studies have been done on the relations between sawability and rock characteristics in stone processing. The most famous and important studies that have been presented until now have been reviewed in Sawing mechanism (chip formation) can be defined as the destruction of a work-piece material, using diamond circular saw. The saw rotates about the saw centre, with an angular speed, passing throughout the workkpiece at a constant traverse rate. The diamond particles on the segment surface remove the material through scratching and cracking the work-piece surface. During these processes, a cut is formed in two mechanisms. In front of a grain that is engaged in the process, stresses are affected by tangential forces. Swarf is processed by tensile and compressive stresses. This mechanism is called primary chip formation. The swarf is forced out through groove in front and beside the grain. It is usually small in size but could be abrasive. While the rock shows elastic characteristic up to its ultimate stress, it is necessary for cutting to reach a certain minimum grinding thickness. The rock cut is deformed by the compressive stress carried below the diamond. As the load is removed, an elastic revision leads to critical tensile stress, which causes brittle fracture. This process affected by tensile stresses is described secondary chip formation. This is given in In this paper, it was aimed to develop a new hierarchy model for evaluating of carbonate rock sawability. By this model, carbonate rocks were ranked with respect to sawability. This model can be used for cost analysis and project planning as a decision making index. To make a right decision on sawability of carbonate rock, all known criteria related to the problem should be analyzed. Although an increase in the number of related criteria makes the problem more complicated and more difficult to reach a solution, this may also increase the correctness of the decision made because of those criteria. Due to the arising of complexity in the decision process, many conventional methods are able to consider limited criteria, and may be generally deficient. Therefore, it is clearly seen that assessing all of the known criteria connected to the sawability, by combining the decision making process, is extremely significant. The major aim of this paper is to compare the many different factors in the sawability of carbonate rock. The comparison has been performed with the combination of the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) and Fuzzy Logic, and also the use of TOPSIS method. The analysis is one of the multi-criteria techniques that provides useful support in the choice among several alternatives with different objectives and criteria. FAHP method has been used in determining the weights of criteria by decision makers, and then ranking the sawability of rocks has been determined by TOPSIS method. The study was supported by results that were obtained from a questionnaire carried out to know the opinions of the experts in this subject. This paper is organized as follows: in the second section the applied theoretical concept is illustrated. In this section, a review is done on the concept of fuzzy sets and fuzzy numbers, FAHP method and TOPSIS method. In the third section, after explanation of effective parameters in rock sawing, the FAHP method is applied for determination of the weights of criteria given by experts. Then the ranking of sawability of carbonate rocks is carried by TOPSIS method. Eventually, in fourth and fifth sections, the results of the application are reviewed. These sections discuss and conclude the paper. According to the authors’ knowledge, ranking the rock sawability using the FAHP-TOPSIS, is a unique research. To deal with vagueness of human thought, Zadeh Each TFN has linear representations on its left and right side, such that its membership function can be defined as: The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is an approach that is suitable for dealing with complex systems related to making a choice from among several alternatives, and which provides a comparison of the considered options, firstly proposed by Saaty In this study, the extent FAHP is utilized, which was originally introduced by Chang The value of fuzzy synthetic extent with respect to the As The degree of possibility for a convex fuzzy number to be greater than Via normalization, the normalized weight vectors are TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) is one of the useful MADM techniques to manage real-world problems Decision matrix is normalized via Eq. Weighted normalized decision matrix is formed: Positive Ideal Solution (PIS) and Negative Ideal Solution (NIS) are determined: The distance of each alternative from PIS and NIS are calculated: The closeness coefficient of each alternative is calculated: By comparing The purpose of this paper was to rank the rock sawability, with the help of effective factors. Firstly, a comprehensive questionnaire, including the main criteria of effective factor, is designed to understand and quantify the affecting factors in the process. Then, five decision makers from different areas evaluated the importance of these factors with the help of the mentioned questionnaire. FAHP is utilized for determining the weights of the main criteria, and finally TOPSIS approach is employed for ranking. In this way, the ranking of carbonate sawability, according to their overall efficiency, is obtained. Carbonate rock sawability depends on non-controlled parameters related to rock characteristics and controlled parameters related to properties of sawing tools and equipment. In the same working conditions, the sawing process and its results are strongly affected by mineralogical and mechanical properties of rock. Taking into consideration the reviewing of previous studies that have been done up to now, the most important rock characteristics that affect sawability are the rock’s texture, grain size & shape, matrix type & cementation, quartz content, hardness, abrasiveness, weathering, density, Schmidt hammer rebound, uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength and Young’s modules. These parameters are shown in Because different groups have varying objectives and expectations, they judge on rock sawability from different perspectives. So, affecting criteria have different level of significance for different users. For this reason, five decision makers are selected from different areas and these decision makers evaluate the criteria. FAHP is proposed to take the decision makers, subjective judgments into consideration, and to reduce the uncertainty and vagueness in the decision process. Decision makers from different backgrounds may define different weight vectors. They usually cause not only the imprecise evaluation, but also serious persecution during decision process. For this reason, we proposed a group decision based on FAHP, to improve pair-wise comparison. Firstly, each decision maker ( One of these pair-wise comparisons is shown here as example: After forming fuzzy pair-wise comparison matrix, weights of all criteria are determined by the help of FAHP. According to the FAHP method, firstly synthesis values must be calculated. From An important problem in rock ranking is selecting the parameters of greatest significance. Thus, in attempting to present a ranking system for assessing rock sawability, using all the mentioned parameters is difficult from a practical point of view. In this ranking system, three following rules have been considered: The number of parameters used should be small. Equivalent parameters should be avoided. Parameters should be considered within certain groups. Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS). Schmiazek Mohs Hardness (MH). Young’s Modulus (YM). Abrasiveness influences the tool wear and sawing rate seriously. Abrasiveness is mainly affected by various factors such as mineral composition hardness of mineral constituents and grain characteristics such as size, shape and angularity Hardness can be interpreted as the rock’s resistance to penetration. The factors that affect rock hardness are the hardness of constitutive minerals, cohesion forces, homogeneity and water content of rock According to the rock behavior during the fracture process, especially in sawing, the way that rocks reach the failure point has a great influence on sawability. The best scale for rock elasticity is Young’s modulus. Based on ISRM suggested methods For laboratory tests, some rock blocks were collected from the studied factories. An attempt was made to collect rock samples that were big enough to obtain all the test specimens of each rock type from the same piece. Each block sample was inspected for macroscopic defects, so that it would provide test specimens, free from fractures, partings or alteration zones. Then, test samples were prepared from these block samples and standard tests have been completed to measure the above-mentioned parameters following the suggested procedures by the ISRM standards After determining the weights of criteria with FAHP method and laboratory studies, ranking the sawability of carbonate rocks is performed by TOPSIS method. Firstly, the amount of each criterion is filled in decision matrix for each criterion. Decision matrix is obtained with respect to important rock properties. Decision matrix is normalized via Eq. For validation of applied ranking system, experimental procedure was carried out. The power consumption was used as a major criterion for evaluating the rock sawability of studied rocks. This criterion can be used for predicting the energy cost of production rate. For this purpose, a fully-instrumented laboratory cutting rig was used ( The prediction of power consumption in rock sawing process is very important in cost estimation and the best planning of the plants. An accurate estimation of power consumption of ornamental stone helps to make the planning and managing of ornamental stone sawing projects more efficient. In this paper, a decision support system was developed for ranking the power consumption of carbonate rocks (one of most important families of ornamental stone). This system is designed to eliminate the difficulties in taking into consideration many decision criteria simultaneously in the rock sawing process, and to guide the decision makers for ranking the sawability of carbonate rocks. In this study, FAHP and TOPSIS methods were used to determine the sawability degree of the carbonate rocks. FAHP is utilized for determining the weights of criteria, and TOPSIS method is used for determining the ranking of sawability of carbonate rocks. For validation of the applied ranking system, experimental procedure was carried out. During the sawing trials, the power consumption was calculated. This factor was used as a major criterion for evaluating the rock sawability of the studied rocks. Three tests were carried out on the studied rocks, by a new fully-instrumented laboratory cutting rig. The relationship between power consumption and