Pre-ECAP solid-solution treatment combined with post-ECAP aging treatment has been found to be more effective than pre-ECAP peak-aging treatment in enhancing the strength of a 6061 Al alloy. An increase of ∼40% in UTS and yield stress was obtained in the post-ECAP aged material compared to the T6 treated commercial 6061 Al alloy.It has been well demonstrated that equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) is a method of producing very fine grain size (sub-micrometer or nano-meter) in ingot-processed metallic alloys In this study, another heat-treatment method linked with ECAP process has been proposed to enhance the strength of a commercial 6061 Al alloy. Before ECAP processing, the alloy was solid-solution treated, quenched into water, and after the ECAP process the material was aged at relatively low temperature. The solid-solution treated alloy has an advantage over the peak-aged material in viewpoint of lowering load and processing temperature for ECAP. This is because the former has lower strength and larger ductility than the latter. The current results are compared with those obtained by Ferrasse et al. For sample preparation, a 6061 Al billet was extruded to a diameter of 18 mm at 450°C and cut to the length of 100 mm. The bar was solution treated at 530°C for 4 h. and then quenched into water. The grain size measured after the heat treatment was 40–80 μm. ECA pressing was conducted using a solid die with an internal angle ( The microstructure of each sample was examined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Samples for TEM were cut from the TEM micrographs of the as-ECAP processed samples are shown in The effect of the number of pass on the hardness of the solid-solution treated materials is shown in The hardness data of the materials measured after aging treatment at 175°C for 2, 4 and 8 h are presented in To reduce the softening effect due to annealing, a lower aging temperature of 100°C was applied.  One interesting observation is that the spherical particles observed in the present study at 100°C are totally different in morphology from the precipitates commonly observed in commercial 6061 Al alloys The engineering stress–strain curves obtained by tensile testing on the peak-aged commercial 6061 Al alloy and four passed 6061 Al alloy with and without aging treatment at 100°C for 48 h are compared in A pre-ECAP solid solution plus post-ECAP low-temperature aging treatment is, therefore, more effective in improving the strength of 6061 Al alloy than the pre-ECAP peak-aging treatment. In the present study, an effective heat-treatment method combined with ECAP processing has been proposed to enhance the strength of a commercial 6061 Al alloy. Before the ECAP process, the alloy was solid-solution treated and quenched into water and after ECAP processing, the material was aged at 100°C. An increase of ∼40% in UTS and yield stress was obtained in the post-ECAP aged material compared to the peak-aged (T6) commercial 6061 Al alloy. The improvement of the strength observed in the present study is better than that obtained in the pre-ECAP peak-aged material. The effective strengthening effect of the post-ECAP low temperature aging is linked to (1) higher dislocation accumulation rate in the solutionized matrix; (2) avoidance of fragmentation of precipitates in the pre-ECAP peak-aged Al alloys after a few passes of ECAP; (3) suppression of recovery by precipitation on the substructure after ECAP and reduction of the aging temperature; and (4) accelerated aging kinetics space at low temperatures, induced by a high dislocation density. This work was supported by Grant No. 2000-1-30100-013-3 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation.