Background
                  The purpose of this investigation is to identify the in-hospital and 30-day postoperative complications for reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) performed because of proximal humerus fracture (PHFx) vs. cuff tear arthropathy (CTA), and determine whether acute fracture is associated with differences in complications after RTSA.
               
                  Methods
                  The National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database was queried for RTSA performed for PHFx and CTA. This database contains surgical outcomes within 30 days after the index procedure. Patients underwent a 1:1 propensity matched based on preoperative demographics and comorbidities. Outcomes included operative time, length of stay (LOS), complications, transfusion, readmission, and discharge destination.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 1006 patients (503 per group) were included. With a PHFx, operative time was longer (129.5 ± 54.2 vs. 96.0 ± 40.0 minutes, P < .001), and the patients were more likely to have an adverse event (19.0% vs. 8.2%, P < .001), require transfusion (15.71% vs. 3.98%, P < .001), have longer LOS (3.8 ± 3.6 vs. 2.2 ± 1.7 days, P < .001), and were more likely to be discharged to an extended care facility (27.2% vs. 10.3%, P < .001). PHFx was an independent risk factor for an adverse event after an RTSA.
               
                  Conclusions
                  RTSA to treat PHFx is associated with longer LOS, increased complications, and discharge to an extended care facility compared with RTSA for CTA. Patients with PHFx require more health care resources than patients with CTA. It is imperative for surgeons, patients, families, governments, hospital systems, and insurance payers to recognize the differences in resource utilization for RTSA in treating PHFx compared with CTA.Surgical management for proximal humerus fractures (PHFx) typically includes open reduction internal fixation (ORIF), hemiarthroplasty (HA), or reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA). ORIF can provide stable anatomic fixation with restoration of the neck shaft angle; however, it is associated with complications in nearly 40% of cases. In the fee-for-service payment model, hospitals and health care providers are reimbursed for each individual service. The purpose of this investigation was to identify the in-hospital and 30-day postoperative complications in patients undergoing an RTSA due to PHFx or CTA. We hypothesize that patients undergoing an RTSA due to PHFx have increased utilization of health care resources due to more challenging surgical procedures, longer hospital stays, increased risk of perioperative complications, and higher 30-day postoperative readmission rates in comparison with patients undergoing RTSA secondary to CTA. This study used a retrospective cohort from prospectively collected data as part of the American College of Surgeons-National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP). This registry contains demographics, comorbidities, lab values, and concomitant procedures with corresponding readmission and complication rates within 30 days of indexed procedure. Patients are identified through Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), and International Classification of Diseases Ninth and Tenth Revision (ICD-9, ICD-10). Patients who underwent isolated RTSA (CPT: 23472) for the diagnosis of rotator cuff deficiency (ICD-9: 726.1, 727.61, 840.4 and ICD-10: M75.101, M75.102, M75.121, M75.122, M75.111, M75.112) or closed PHFx (ICD-9: 812.00, 812.01, 812.03, 812.09, 812.11, 812.20, 812.21 and ICD-10: S42.201A, S42.202A, S42.202K, S42.202P, S42.242A, S42.252A, S42.291A, S42.292A) were identified through the ACS-NSQIP database from 2005 to 2016. An RTSA was confirmed if patients had a CPT code for an RTSA as well as an ICD-9/10 code for rotator cuff deficiency or closed PHFx in their record on the day of surgery. Patients with a diagnosis of glenohumeral osteoarthritis were not included because this diagnosis is not specific for RTSA. It was not discernible whether the procedure was primary or secondary for the pathology. Patient demographics, including age, race, gender, smoking status, comorbidities, functional status, operative time, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification score, and laboratory values, were collected. An ASA score greater than 3 corresponded to severe systemic disease (New Classification of Physical Status). History of diabetes was reported as either insulin-dependent, oral medication only, or no diabetes. Patients in each group underwent a 1:1 propensity match for age, body mass index, dependent functional status, bleeding disorders, comorbidities, and ASA status. Laboratory values are recorded in the NSQIP database; however, these values were not used for matching because they were not available for all patients and their inclusion may have resulted in a reduced sample size and potential bias. For each patient, length of hospital stay, readmission rate, and 30-day complications were collected. Complications that were queried included rate of infections (superficial or deep), dehiscence, pneumonia, reintubation, pulmonary embolism, postoperative renal failure, urine infection, stroke, cardiac arrest requiring cardiopulmonary resuscitation, myocardial infarction, transfusions, deep vein thrombosis, sepsis, and shock. Length of stay was defined as days from procedure and postoperative discharge. Minor complications included superficial surgical site infection, urinary tract infection, pneumonia, progressive renal insufficiency, or wound dehiscence. Severe complications included death, coma, placement on ventilator, unplanned intubation, stroke/cerebrovascular accident, thromboembolic event (deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism), cardiac arrest, myocardial infarction, acute renal failure, sepsis, septic shock, return to the operating room (OR), or extended hospital stay (>3 days). Statistical analysis was performed using Rstudio software version 1.0.143 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Propensity score matching was performed using the nearest-neighbor method. Outcomes with bivariate variables were compared with bivariate and multivariate Poisson regression with robust error variance. Statistical analysis was performed on the original cohort as well as the matched propensity cohort. Statistical significance was achieved with A total of 1262 patients who underwent an RTSA were included in this investigation: 759 patients were treated for CTA and 503 patients were treated for PHFx. After propensity score matching, 503 patients were included in each group for a total of 1006 patients included in the analysis of this investigation. Before matching, there was a statistically significant difference in age, race, operative time, sex, dependent functional status, ASA class distribution, operation within 30 days, and days between admission and OR ( There were differences in perioperative and 30-day postoperative complication rates for RTSA performed to treat CTA or PHFx ( When accounting for other variables, body mass index between 25-30 mg/kg In this investigation, we demonstrate that patients undergoing RTSA for PHFx had an increased risk of postoperative adverse events, including increased transfusion rate, length of stay, and discharge to inpatient facility than patients undergoing RTSA for CTA. Importantly, these differences were observed in a propensity-scored matched cohort analysis that controlled for age, race, and medical comorbidities. These findings underscore the concept that RTSA for PHFx vs. RTSA for CTA represent 2 fundamentally different patient care scenarios. The risk for adverse events and need for health care resource utilization are vastly different. As alternative payment initiatives focusing on episode of care, such as bundled payments, become increasingly pervasive across health care reimbursement models, differential risk stratification in patients and procedures based on expected health care resource utilization becomes progressively important. It has been previously described that hip arthroplasty secondary to hip fracture is associated with an increased risk of complications, non-homebound discharge, and readmission in comparison with patients undergoing arthroplasty due to osteoarthritis. Previous systematic reviews have quantified the complication rate after RTSA due to CTA or PHFx. Petrillo et al The Medicare Severity Diagnosis-Related Groups system does not indicate the diagnosis for which the procedure was performed. On the basis of our findings, hospitals and health care systems that have a higher percentage of fractures will be unfairly disadvantaged compared with those institutions that perform more elective arthroplasties because the former requires more resource utilization at the time of admission and in the postoperative period. Reimbursement is also dependent on regional and historical averages that may not reflect changes in case volume or type at individual hospitals. As health care transitions to alternative payment systems that share risk among the stakeholders, which rewards health care systems for optimal care and outcomes and do not provide adjustments for adverse events, Recently, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) altered reimbursement for total hip replacement secondary to proximal hip for fracture or osteoarthritis because these patient populations have significant differences in resource utilization. As health care spending is increasingly scrutinized, value in health care has become a prevalent discussion. Despite the significant findings of this investigation, the analysis should be analyzed within the context of its limitations. Because of the number of patients within the database, we were unable to match for variables that were not captured by the ACS-NSQIP database. Furthermore, patient selection in this investigation is subject to bias as the indication RTSA is limited by the diagnosis code and may vary between institutions as well as physicians within an institution. Presumably, patients selected for RTSA to treat a PHFx presented with more severe fracture patterns (3- and 4-part fractures) that were not amenable to reconstruction or had a high likelihood of poor outcome with another form of treatment. We were also unable to account for other factors that may influence postoperative complications such as the mechanism of injury, coexisting cuff tear, polytrauma, socioeconomic status, as well as the suitability of the patient's home to provide care for the patient in the postoperative period. It is possible that significant differences exist in the cost of each episode for RTSA due to PHFx or CTA. However, the cost associated with each procedure and hospital stay was unable to be queried from the database. Furthermore, the type of implant used in each patient was unable to be queried from the NSQIP database. It is possible that variations in types of implants may result in differences in the complication rates. Patients with a PHFx had a lower preoperative hemoglobin and hematocrit level. This may lead to more transfusions, which increase the number of adverse events accounted for in this investigation. Therefore, health care systems may prolong the duration of hospital stay in these patients to ensure that they have achieved adequate hemostasis. In the elective setting (ie, RTSA secondary to CTA), the patients' home and support can be optimized to care for the patient in a manner that cannot be performed for acute PHFx. Lastly, this investigation does not account for complications that extend outside the 30-day window and may miss complications that are within the 90-day global period. RTSA to treat PHFx is associated with increased complication rate, longer length of stay, and increased likelihood of discharge to post-acute inpatient facility compared with elective RTSA to treat CTA. Patients with PHFx require greater utilization of health care resources than patients with CTA. These differences were persistent despite propensity score matching of preoperative variables. It is imperative for all stakeholders in the health care delivery system to appropriately recognize the expected differences in resource utilization for RTSA in treating PHFx compared with CTA. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at