This paper presents the development of an analytical model which can be used to relate the structural parameters of coal to its mechanical properties such as elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio under a confined stress condition. This model is developed primarily to support process modeling of coalbed methane (CBM) or CO2-enhanced CBM (ECBM) recovery from coal seam. It applied an innovative approach by which stresses acting on and strains occurring in coal are successively combined in rectangular coordinates, leading to the aggregated mechanical constants. These mechanical properties represent important information for improving CBM/ECBM simulations and incorporating within these considerations of directional permeability. The model, consisting of constitutive equations which implement a mechanically consistent stress–strains correlation, can be used as a generalized tool to study the mechanical and fluid behaviors of coal composites. An example using the model to predict the stress–strain correlation of coal under triaxial confined stress by accounting for the elastic and brittle (non-elastic) deformations is discussed. The result shows a good agreement between the prediction and the experimental measurement.Young’s (elastic) modulus, MPa dimension of a given coal sample defined in width of the cleat (refer to width of the matrix (refer to cleat frequency or cleat density defined in Eq. number of cleats (face or butt) in a given sample coefficients defined in Eq. model parameters in Eq. strain, % critical strain (refer to   critical axial strains of cleat and matrix under the critical stress, % dimensional ratio of cleat to matrix Poisson’s ratio stress, MPa critical and residual stresses (refer to butt cleat cleat face cleat matrix the corresponding coordinate axis isotropic properties The mechanical properties of coal, despite its importance as the most important energy resource for humanity, still defeat a comprehensive description. The complexity arises from its origin: at a small scale the residual characteristics of the highly organized organisms which make up the fabric; at larger scales through the texture imparted by the way the plant material was laid down and the subsequent coalification processes. It is difficult to accurately determine the mechanical properties of coal with common experiments due to factors such as petrographical composition, micro- and macro-fractures, specimen size and shape, and anisotropy, amongst others Early models of the deformation behavior of rock took a continuum approach Traditionally the elastic parameters of coal are determined by dynamic or static methods, according to Hooke’s generalized law A relatively recent but important development is the recognition of coal as a reservoir for fluids. Coalbed methane (CBM) recovery now represents a significant energy source in the USA This paper describes an analytical model to relate important structural parameters of bulk coal and its mechanical properties such as elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio under confined stress conditions. This model is developed primarily to support CBM/ECBM modeling, but also likely has more general applications. In the model, coal is treated as a composite material and stresses acting on and strains occurring in the coal are successively combined to describe the overall behavior. The order of combination and the precise coordinate system that are used do not affect the outcome. The formulations implement a mechanically consistent stress–strain correlation, which can be used as a generalized tool to study the mechanical and fluid transport properties of coal or coal-like composite medium in a bulk scale under Coal presents a number of unique geological features, arising from its origin and formation. Many of these, in particular its geological structure, may significantly affect the mechanical and fluid transport properties. Coal seams are present in a form of layered lithological bands, having distinct petrological and geological structures Secondly, coal has fractures, defects and discontinuities in the form of cleats. Cleats are essentially shrinkage cracks brought about by the loss of moisture during coalification The existence of cleats and their particular combination of spacing and orientation is one of coal’s unique features A third structural element of the coal body or ‘matrix’, perhaps its most distinctive feature when compared to other rock-like materials, is an extensive network of tiny pores. These pores permit coal to adsorb large quantities of fluids, providing storage space for methane, carbon dioxide and other gases, and giving coal its fluid reservoir character.  The cleat arrangement can be characterized in terms of dimension and spacing, giving a statistical value for cleat frequency or cleat (number) density. Assume that The cleat frequency can be further used to relate the dimensions between cleat and matrix by geometry, giving Considerable efforts have been made related to characterization of coal cleat/matrix systems, particularly spacing identification In addition to the coal rank, there are many other factors that may affect the cleat spacing, e.g. lithotype and bed thickness In this study coal is treated as a composite material made up of a repeating assembly of representative units: in the simplest form described here each unit comprises a matrix block wrapped within cleats (refer to The assumption that a cleat has mechanical and structural properties requires some explanation. It may be understood by picturing a cleat as not just fluid space, but held open by physical contacts between asperities on adjacent matrix faces, sand or clay particles etc. In the horizontal plane, the coal is usually divided by bedding layers rather than ‘cleats’, but these are handled in the same way, though naturally the physical properties may be expected to be quite different from the face or butt cleats. Starting from the conceptual structure described above, the mechanical behavior of a composite element can be developed by a combinatorial approach, from the individual elements, i.e. cleat and matrix, by accounting for deformations in each. A successively joining procedure, subject to the mechanical and geometric constraints, is used to sum up the individual contributions to the net deformation of the unit composite. The details of the joining procedure and its implementation are presented later. Accordingly, using cleats and matrix as the elements making up coal, the structure-depended mechanical behaviors of the composite material (coal) is obtained by combination of their individual physical characters. The mechanical behavior of coal deals with both deformation and damage. The deformation is considered to be an accumulative process in which the elastic deformation and non-elastic damage occur sequentially as stress increases. Elastic deformation and non-elastic damage are physically induced, due to changes in micro-structure under the given stress state. These may lead to macro-faults in the coal, structural disintegration and non-linear, even step changes in mechanical and fluid behaviors. In many engineering problems elastic solutions can be used to model the behavior of a deformable solid, governed by a constitutive or stress/strain ( The advantage of this approach, which applies to many common mechanical materials, is that only two fundamental materials constants are required to completely describe the material response. For a jointed rock such as coal, however, Eq. The non-elastic damage i.e. irrecoverable deformation behavior of coal is also important, but more difficult to model. Different locations are usually subject to different stresses under The analytical model developed in this paper calculates mechanical properties, i.e. elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio, for a composite material - in this case coal. The main simplifying assumptions are the structure of the coal can be described using characterization parameters defined in cleat and matrix are treated as two distinct materials with different elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratios, which may be anisotropic; mechanical properties of the cleat and matrix are constant under different stresses before and after synthesis; only the normal stresses are considered, i.e. no shear stress exists; non-mechanical swelling/shrinking in coal is not included. Non-mechanical swelling/shrinking is the volumetric changes that occur in coal due to gas sorption or dissolution. This is a significant phenomenon in CBM extraction from and CO The model is based on the conceptual framework illustrated in The model is developed for the elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio separately. First the matrix and a given cleat (e.g. cleat 1) are chosen, with an assumption that only directional stress (e.g.  We commence the calculation with one cleat (e.g. cleat 1) and matrix. The initial stress is Substituting the following constitutive equations for any individual component A similar analysis can be made for The procedure to obtain the Poisson ratio for the coal is illustrated in To formulate the Poisson ratio of the coal, the stress–strain analyses are considered on cross sections of the coal unit. The analysis,   Similarly the stress–strain analyses on the Further from The analytical model described in this study provides a tool for the calculation of mechanical constants of composite materials, applied here to coal. This model involves multiple steps with staged results which finally allow to determination of the elastic modulus and Poisson ratio of composite materials. The order in which the calculation is done is not important. For example, one can consider cleat 1 and matrix first, and then include cleat 2 and then cleat 3, as above; or in the reverse or any other order, as shown in Appendix Eqs. In some circumstances the coal may behave as an isotropic material with a uniform directional dimension ratio of cleat to matrix, Similarly applying the approximation above to Eqs. Eqs. To investigate the impacts of the matrix and cleat constituents on the bulk dynamic stress–strain behavior, four samples from a selected coal block that was taken from coal seam No. 105 of Jingyuan coal mine, west China were tested in a triaxial cell  Both cleat and matrix contribute to the overall deformation. These play different roles with respect to the transport properties of coal, in particular the directional permeability required for modeling of coalbed gas reservoir. We use the following formula (refer to Appendix The result prompts decompositions of overall deformation into cleat and matrix contributions to dynamic permeability in coalbed gas reservoirs, in particular the directional permeability, see also Appendix In fact, deformations occurring in elastic and brittle zones follow distinct mechanisms which are related to both the mechanical and structural properties of the coal. For example, elastic deformation is dependent on not only their dimensional ratio, but also the individual elastic modulus of cleat and matrix, as shown in Eq. An analytical model is proposed to determine the mechanical properties of coal as a composite material using the properties of the major individual constituent components and their relative positions. This model sequentially includes stresses acting on and strains occurring in individual constituent components of the coal, ultimately providing the aggregated overall mechanical properties such as elastic modulus and Poisson ratio. The mechanical properties of coal can be regarded as the isotropic only if individual components are themselves isotropic, a simplified condition not generally likely to be found in nature. The formulations implement a mechanically consistent stress–strain correlation, which can be used as a generalized tool to study the mechanical and fluid transport properties of composite medium such as coal in This work was conducted with funding from the Australian Research Council (ARC). The authors acknowledge the contribution of Mr. Cheng-Sheng Wang, China University of Mining and Technology for provision of experimental data and other information. The order of calculation is shown here to have no influence on the result for the composite analysis of stress and strain using As an example, start with the matrix and cleat 1 only. This will result in the intermediate elastic modulus equivalent to that obtained from Eqs. Then substituting Eq. We use two constitutive questions to represent a general stress–strain correlation, in both elastic and brittle regions, giving Eqs.