Coal reserve estimation requires comprehensive spatial analysis of geologic and geochemical data. For determination of coal reserve uncertainty associated with tonnage and grade (quality), we present a new approach that stands on spatial modeling of seam distribution and coal quality. A multilayer coal deposit in East Kalimantan, Indonesia was selected as a case study site. Coal quality was evaluated by ash and sodium contents, total sulphur, and heating value. Their spatial models were produced by geostatistical methods, ordinary kriging and sequential Gaussian simulation, which were effective to evaluate local or global uncertainty by honoring spatial correlation structures. The seam distribution was modeled by a binary transformation of the geologic data and the three-dimensional optimization method. It is demonstrated that the lower seam sequence has the highest degree of uncertainty because of low average coal accumulation (tonnage) and the sparseness of sample data points in the north part of the study area. This study demonstrates that uncertainty of coal accumulation is related to the seam distribution and that spatial variability patterns of coal qualities are opposing between ash content and total sulphur: this difference might have been caused by geological controls.Mineral resource and reserve assessments are critical for mine design and planning. This is particularly important at the feasibility study stage, where major decisions, often involving large capital expenditures, are made regarding reserve optimization, mine method, cash flow projection, project financing, and mineral processing. Assessment of resource uncertainty at this stage is an important component in analysis of risks to mine development and production. There are recent reports of studies into uncertainty in coal resource and property assessments ( This study builds on the traditional applications of geostatistical methods used in the references above, but aims to develop a new procedure for assessing uncertainty of coal volume estimates by kriging and simulation. Most importantly, coal thickness is considered as an important factor in the uncertainty. In this paper, there are three different approaches for quantifying uncertainty. In the view of kriging estimation, conditional simulation, and 3D optimum interpolation method, uncertainty respectively is related to the estimation error of coal accumulation, spatial variability of simulated coal tonnage, and probability of the existence of seam distribution. Ordinary kriging (OK), a common spatial estimator, is used to map the general trend of spatial distribution of coal properties. In addition, a stochastic method, sequential Gaussian simulation (SGSIM), is adopted to generate equally probable spatial models that can be used in an assessment of risk in definition of tonnages. The obtained results are compared with the uncertainty provided by OK variance (standard error of the mean) to define confidence levels. These geostatistical methodologies for resources assessment are applied to a multilayer coal deposit in East Kalimantan (Borneo), Indonesia, by selecting the four prospective coal seams (zones). The continuity of seam distribution is also examined in order to correlate it with the uncertainty (variability) of coal accumulation. Finally, the uncertainties of coal thickness and quality produced from OK and SGSIM can be linked to the geological model. The study area, Lati Coal Mine, is located in the Tarakan Basin, East Kalimantan (Borneo), Indonesia ( Based on the local stratigraphy of the Lati area, 19 coal seams are present in the Berau Formation. Among the coals, the top four seams, T, R, Q, and P are the best candidates for exploitation because of favorable coal properties, large thickness and good continuity. These seams have been divided into three sub-units due to differences in quality. The top and bottom sub-units contain relatively high contents of ash and total sulphur, while these properties are low in the middle sub-unit. Because of this relatively high quality with low amounts of impurities, the middle sub-units of Seams T, R, Q, and P are selected for the study targets. A total of 3370 samples have been collected in an area of 12  Details of methodology used in this study including variographic analysis, uncertainty assessment by kriging variance, uncertainty assessment by stochastic simulation, and modeling of seam distribution, are presented in An OK estimate for both seam thickness and relative density was made using unit block sizes of 100 m In Next, the SGSIM results are presented.  It can be concluded that, from the similarity of general trends, OK and SGSIM are both effective for estimating coal tonnage and its global uncertainty. To be precise, SGSIM is superior to OK in that it can decrease the uncertainty by multiple equiprobable realizations which can reduce the effects of sample location, data variation, and the smoothing effect of estimation. In spite of the effectiveness of OK and SGSIM for the tonnage assessment as demonstrated above, there is a common problem that, in principle, they stand on the continuity of seam inside the searching radius, and cannot incorporate the local uncertainty on the seam. Heterogeneity of the seam should also be considered in the coal tonnage assessment, which is the next examination with OPTSIM. The unit grid size used for the seam modeling was set as 100 m, 100 m, and 0.5 m along the The OPTSIM results are shown in The correctness of the OPTSIM seam models can be confirmed by the spatial characteristics of the simulation, which reproduce the correlation structures apparent in the semivariograms. The semivariogram models in Table A1 in The OPTSIM model can be extended to quantify the degree of uncertainty in seam distribution. The degree of uncertainty of seam distribution is proportional to the inverse of probability of existence of the seam at any location. But as we used the seam thickness for modeling of the seam distribution, thus the uncertainty term is also related to a measure of variability of thickness. The maximum uncertainty degree is assigned to 1, which means the absence of seam due to local disappearance or thinning. This uncertainty degree,  Moreover, the relationship between the degree of uncertainty and the estimation error is illustrated in detail in This sub-chapter correlates the estimation and simulation results of coal geometry with coal quality properties. Seam thickness, bottom elevation of seam, ash and sodium contents, total sulphur, and heating value were modeled by OK and SGSIM. As an example of the modeling results,  As for the coal qualities shown in The 3370 sampling data were used in variographic analysis, ordinary kriging, sequential Gaussian simulation, and three-dimensional optimization method to evaluate the coal accumulations and tonnages and their uncertainty by considering three-dimensional seam distribution. By selecting the four major seams in the study area, the following main results were obtained: Although ordinary kriging (OK) and sequential Gaussian simulation (SGSIM) were different approaches, they lead to the equivalent spatial trends of the coal accumulations and also the similar values of coal tonnages for all the seams. The coal accumulations of all seams are largest on the western side of the basin or along the syncline axis. The differences in estimate of global coal tonnages of Seams T, R, Q, and P between the OK and SGSIM were 1.5%, 0.4%, 0.4%, and 6.2%, respectively. As for the uncertainty of the coal tonnage, SGSIM could decrease it by reducing the effect of bias in sample data location on the spatial estimation. The uncertainty of the coal tonnages was the largest in the lower seam, Seam P, due to the thinness of the seam in addition to the effect of data locations and data value variability. Discontinuous seam, including splitting into several sub-seams and local disappearance, can be reproduced using OPTSIM, a method based on a combination of the binary transformation and three-dimensional interpolation of the geologic data. For all the seams, the degree of uncertainty in the presence of seams shown by OPTSIM coincided with the estimate errors calculated from the OK variance. The general trends of the estimated and simulated thickness and the bottom elevation were probably controlled by the geological structures such as syncline and thrust faulting in the study area. In addition, the spatial heterogeneity patterns of the coal qualities such as ash content and total sulphur showed an opposing trend, which might have been caused by the different geological controls. The authors wish to express their sincere thanks to PT. Berau Coal, Indonesia for the permission to use the data set. We also thank M. Stewart for constructive checking of the manuscript. Finally we thank J. Weisenfluh, J. Hower, and one anonymous reviewer for their constructive and perceptive reviews.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at