The extraction of molybdenum from an aqueous solution by a tertiary amine extraction system was experimentally studied in this work. The organic phase is composed of trioctylamine (TOA) as the extractant, tributylphosphate (TBP) as the modifier, and kerosene as the diluent. The effects of various parameters including the concentrations of TOA and TBP, initial pH of aqueous phase, phase ratio of organic/aqueous, contact time of phases, type of diluent, and concentration of metal ions in the aqueous phase on the extraction of molybdenum were investigated. At the same time, stripping of molybdenum from the molybdenum-loaded organic phase using an ammonium hydroxide solution as stripping reagent was studied. The results showed that an extraction of 99.9% was obtained with the extraction system composed of 4vol.% TOA, 12vol.% TBP, and 84vol.% kerosene at a phase ratio of 1, initial pH=1, and contact time=600s. The difficulties in separating aqueous and organic phases were successfully obviated through addition of TBP to TOA extractant.Molybdenum is known as a strategic metal which has an extensive usage in the fabrication of radios, thermocouples, and anticathode of X-ray tubes. It is also used in the production of alloys of special steels. High contents of various metals such as U, V, W, Re, Al, Ni, Cu, and Co also exist in molybdenum resources ( The conventional method for the production of molybdenum involves the extraction from molybdenite (MoS Several authors have studied the extraction of molybdenum from the aqueous solutions by various methods including supported liquid membranes ( A number of extractants have been utilized for the extraction of molybdenum from aqueous solutions. The most commonly used extractants are organic phosphoric acids, such as PC-88A ( A number of extractants, including TBP, have been also considered as modifiers for the extraction of some metal ions such as zinc, cobalt, and nickel ( An inductive coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) model Liberty 220 from Varian, a pH meter from Precisa (pH Aqueous solutions of molybdenum at various concentrations were prepared by dissolving sodium molybdate (Na Appropriate amounts of sodium molybdate were dissolved in distilled water to prepare aqueous solutions of 11 The influence of TOA and TBP concentrations on the extraction of Mo ions was investigated at an initial pH of 1 and a phase ratio of O:A In order to figure out the required duration for the equilibrium extraction of Mo(VI), the effect of contact time (of aqueous and organic phases) on the extraction of Mo(VI) was investigated. An aqueous solution of molybdenum (11 To investigate the effect of initial pH of extraction medium on Mo extraction, the pH of the solution was varied in the range of 1–9. The concentration of TOA (4 According to The effect of initial concentration of Mo in the aqueous phase on the extraction of Mo is shown in The type of diluent used in the organic phase has a great impact on the extraction of metals from aqueous solutions. Since physical and chemical interactions occur between the extractant and diluent, the nature of diluent plays a crucial role in the solvent extraction of metal ions. The diluent can affect the economics of the solvent extraction due to its large consumption in an industrial scale. Therefore, a number of diluents were evaluated in this work to choose the appropriate one. For that reason, the pH of the solution was adjusted at 1.1. The extractants were 4 It is observed that the extraction efficiency of Mo is not significantly affected with either of the diluents. Among the aliphatic diluents, n-heptane was found to be superior with higher extraction efficiency (99.4%). The latter might be due to the high dielectric constant of n-heptane. However, there is no such significant variation on the Mo(VI) extraction with other diluents. The average variation in the extraction was within 3–5%. However, considering other criteria of diluents such as availability and cost, kerosene was selected as the most suitable diluent in this study. To study the formation of complexes among Mo ions and extractants, the FTIR spectra of the solution containing 4 To determine the number of theoretical stages required under certain conditions for the extraction of Mo, the extraction isotherm was obtained by contacting the aqueous solution with the organic phase at different O:A phase ratios from 0.1 to 1, and an initial pH of 1. The results are shown in The objective of this part of the work was to determine the optimum conditions for stripping of molybdenum from the organic solution, i.e. 4 The stripping of Mo from organic phase via various stripping reagents was investigated to determine the appropriate stripping reagent. The Mo(VI) in the TOA–TBP loaded organic phase can be stripped by an ammonia solution due to the dissociation of the extracted complex at alkaline conditions. The organic phase containing Mo was the result of extraction at optimum conditions. The loaded organic contains ∼ Since the ammonium hydroxide was chosen as the most appropriate stripping reagent, the rest of stripping experiments were conducted using the aqueous solution of NH Designing a stripping process is of vital importance for the recovery of metal ions from the organic solutions. In this study, the McCabe–Thiele diagram was drawn to determine the required number of theoretical stages in the stripping of Mo. The number of stages is needed in design and construction of mixer–settler units to reach the desired separation. The diagram was constructed assuming optimal operating conditions, as stated earlier. For this purpose, the equilibrium diagram for stripping of Mo from organic phase using NH Extraction of molybdenum using synergistic extractants of TOA and TBP in kerosene as the diluent was carried out in this work. It was shown that molybdenum extraction using TOA and TBP was rapid and dependent on the initial pH of the aqueous phase. The optimum conditions for the extraction of molybdenum were obtained as: initial pH of 1, an organic phase of kerosene containing 4