One of the most serious types of mining disasters in many countries, rockburst leads to injuries, deaths, and damages to facilities, which explains the need to study its prediction. However, due to highly non-linear relationship between the occurrence of rockburst and burst impact factors, traditional mechanism-based prediction methods cannot generate precise results. This paper employed a support vector classifier (SVC) to predict rockburst in kimberlite pipes at a diamond mine. We collected 246 groups of data based on real rockburst cases from all over the world as a supportive database. A novel dimensionality reduction method, t-SNE, helped to reduce relevance of original data attributes, and then, an unsupervised learning method (clustering) was adopted to relabel original data to determine relative intensity of these rockburst cases. After the processed prediction data was fed into the trained SVC model, the prediction results were obtained, which matched real rockburst cases that recently occurred at this mine. This data-driven prediction method can be easily conducted and does not rely on the discussion of rockburst mechanism, which has wide potential applications in rockburst prediction in engineering.Rockburst is a common geological hazard encountered in mining engineering and rock engineering that can damage equipment and lead to injuries and deaths ( Generally, it is supposed that the occurrence of a rockburst is controlled by some impact factors. These impact factors of rockburst including rock properties, stress regime, excavation method, and water condition are complicated mutually influenced. The relationship between rockburst intensity and rockburst impact factors is highly non-linear ( Traditionally, rockburst intensity can be ranked based on different indicators, such as mechanical properties, failure modes, damage degrees, and so on. A few researchers proposed various classification criteria. We extracted 246 groups of data (each group of data is from a real rockburst case) from previous studies ( In this study, original dataset is comprised of 247 groups and seven impact factors (features), but some impact factors are virtually dependent, such as  As a main unsupervised learning method, clustering is the task of grouping a set of objects in such a way that objects in the same group are more similar to each other than to those in other groups ( Python (with SK-learn module) was employed to implement clustering.  After clustering, the new labels were consistent since we only utilized original data features and disregarded original data labels. In order to figure out what the three types of new labels ‘0’, ‘1’, ‘2’ stand for, we counted the number of original rockburst rankings for each new label. The statistical data was shown in Before we determined the rockburst intensities for three clusters, a truth should be clarified that for any rockburst evaluation criteria, ‘No rockburst’ always reflects the weakest intensity and ‘High rockburst’ represents the strongest intensity. By contrast, the relative strength of rockburst intensity for ‘Low rockburst’ and ‘Moderate rockburst’ may be ambiguous among different criteria. Based on aforementioned truth, Cluster ‘1’ no doubt stands for the most serious rockburst intensity among three clusters since 62% cases are originally ‘high rockburst’. Rockburst intensity for cluster ‘0’ is weaker than cluster ‘2’ because 26% cluster ‘0’ cases are ‘No rockburst’ by contrast that ‘No rockburst’ cases in cluster ‘2’ is 18%. Also, this assertion could be evidenced by the proportions of ‘High rockburst’ which are ‘6%’ versus ‘7%’ for these two clusters. Hence, we obtained the relative rockburst intensity these three clusters stand for: cluster ‘0’ stands for the weakest, cluster ‘2’ stands for the moderate and cluster ‘1’ stands for the strongest rockburst. In this section, support vector classifier (SVC) ( We employed Python was employed to build an SVC model. We employed the mean square error (MSE) to measure the error between our prediction labels and labels of validation fold. Obviously, the lower the MSE is, the better performance of the model shows. We varified We used SVC model that trained in These data were fed into a trained SVC model after the same The prediction results demostrated that, of 12 samples, 11 belonged to cluster ‘2′ which refers to a moderate rockburst intensity. The remaining 1 belonged was classified as claster ‘0′ which refers to a low rockburst liability. The predition results can match the field investigation which recorded two dintinct rockburst events in the year of 2017. The first rockburst event happened in undercut of N9750 level which was nearby location 7. The second rockburst event happened in N9850 undercut close to location 12. Although SVC model plus More than two hundred rockburst cases from all over the world were collected as a data source. Each group of data includes seven rockburst attributes and a corresponding burst intensity. A novel dimensionality reduction method, Even though each rockburst case had an original corresponding label (burst intensity), it was not clear which rockburst intensity ranking criterion was adopted by each rockburst case. An unsupervised machine learning method (clustering) was introduced to relabel these rockburst cases based on their own attributes only. After clustering, three clusters were determined to reflect rockburst intensity. The distributution of the original labels was calculated to determine the relative intensity of rockburst among the three clusters. The relabeled data were used as training samples of an SVC, and then, which was optimized by 10-fold cross validation. The rock properties of kimberlite acquired from lab tests and a numerical model were employed as prediction data, which were fed into the trained SVC. The prediciton results could well match two observed rockburst events, which evidenced our model feasibility. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: