Metallurgical slags (granulated and air-cooled), are disposed as waste from the ferro-manganese and ferro-manganese–silicon alloys manufacturing plants. They find little use unlike blast furnace slags from steel plants. Investigations were carried out to explore the possibility of using high MnO and low MnO metallurgical slags on samples obtained from an alloy plant in India. Low MnO granulated slag was used in making blended slag cement with ordinary Portland cement (OPC). Addition of slag lowered the compressive strength of the blended cement as compared to that of OPC used. However, the composition of a 50:50 blend, ground to 3000 cm2/g (Blaine), was found to conform to IS 455:1989 for Portland slag cements and also to IS 269:1989, 33 grade OPC, with respect to standard consistency, setting times, soundness and compressive strength (22 MPa at 7 days and 33 MPa at 28 days) tests carried out as per IS 4031:1988. X-Ray diffraction analysis showed that low MnO granulated slag was non-crystalline, whereas the air-cooled slags were crystalline containing mainly quartz, MnO and Mn2O3. Chemical analysis showed that the slag samples were low in CaO and Fe2O3 contents and high in SiO2, Al2O3, MnO, MgO, Na2O and K2O, thus indicating pozzolanic reactions contributing to a great extent in the strength development of blended slag cement compositions studied. High MnO (>15%) and MgO (>8%) containing slags were considered unsuitable for blended cements because of their deleterious effects. Air-cooled lumpy slag was evaluated for use as aggregates in concrete. All the tests were carried out as per IS 2386:1963, methods of test for aggregate for concrete and to conform to IS 383:1990, coarse and fine aggregates from natural resources. The material passed all the tests viz. crushing strength, impact value, abrasion, alkali aggregate soundness, except for deleterious materials content. This slag could be used, with slight modification, for non-structural concrete. The results of the investigations provide a direction for profitable plans for making blended slag cements.With rapid growth of industrialization, there is pressure all over the world on available land, not only for housing and industrial complexes, but for land-filling as a means of disposing huge quantities of waste generated from industrial and mining-mineral processing operations. The problem of waste disposal has reached a stage where it occupies large tracts of land for storage of wastes, which can be much larger than that of industry. These waste materials are a significant source of pollution of air, water and streams. They also adversely affect growth of plant and vegetation Metallurgical slags, however, are obtained as waste/by-products in the manufacture of ferro-manganese, ferro-chrome and ferro-silicon alloys and in the smelting of non-ferrous metals such as lead, zinc and copper. India produces such slags in nearly 30 major alloy-steel plants besides those from foundries and mini-steel plants, and all that simply accumulate! In the past few decades, however, in other countries, considerable research and development on metallurgical slags has been carried out. In Canada, some steel alloy slags are being used as an additive in cement raw materials and the effects on cooling rate of structures in which the cements blended with those slags was used Prompted from the above background, samples of metallurgical slags from a ferro-manganese alloy plant in India were taken to study their suitability as a building material. The slag samples were of two types, i.e. granulated and air-cooled (lumpy). On the basis of chemical composition, both samples were of low MnO and high MnO varieties. Whereas the low MnO granulated slag was studied as an additive to ordinary Portland cement to produce Portland-slag cements, the low and high MnO air-cooled slags were evaluated as aggregates for concrete Metallurgical slag samples were obtained from Maharashtra Electrosmelt Ltd., Chandrapur, India. Two kinds of slag are being generated by this factory in the production of ferro-manganese and ferro-Mn-silicon alloys. During the production process, the molten slag, cooled in the air, is called ‘lumpy’ slag. When the molten slag is also cooled after passing thorough a Jet of water, the resultant material is called granulated slag. These two varieties are stacked separately from which a composite sample of each type was obtained. Approximately 800–900 kg of slag is generated per tonne of ferro-manganese alloy produced. Out of approximately 200 tonnes slags disposed per day, 140 tonnes is granulated slag and 60 tonnes is ‘lumpy’ slag. The annual quantity of the slags generated is approximately 50 Although physically granulated and lumpy slags are quite discernable, the samples had to be further sub-divided on the basis of chemical composition, into low MnO and high MnO slags. Thus, four samples were selected for the present investigations, and were marked as follows: Low MnO granulated slag High MnO granulated slag Low MnO air-cooled ‘lumpy’ slag High MnO air-cooled ‘lumpy’ slag In practice, however, considerable quality control and categorization may have to be adopted as for any waste material for its profitable application. Specific gravity and bulk density of the slags were determined using the standard methods (IS 4001 Part 11:1998). The specific gravity of both types of slag was found to be 3.20 g/cm Waste generated and its chemical analysis data, given in The trace elements were determined using atomic absorption spectophotometer and the range of the elements present was compared with those of IS 7017:1973, and found within the permissible limits ( X-Ray diffractograms were obtained ( The lumpy slag samples, i.e. (c) and (d) were in stone form of light greenish and blackish in color. The material was reduced in size to 10–15 mm for conducting engineering properties, tests. The results are given in The results ( Different compositions, having 20–60% of low MnO granulated slag with ordinary Portland cement, were prepared by grinding in a ball mill to a fineness of 3000 cm The results clearly show that by increasing the slag content, there is a fall in compressive strength, yet the 50:50 composition shows 22 MPa and 33 MPa at 7 and 28 days, respectively, of wet curing to conform to IS 455:1989. It is known that while using granulated blast furnace slag in slag cements a pseudomorphic layer of low penetration is formed. To reduce this effect it is usual to grind finer and work hard the slag cements when lime released from the OPC part acts as an activator for slag hydration and strength development. Unlike blast furnace slag, metallurgical slag is rather acidic and it is likely that its higher SiO The hardened blended cement paste of 50:50 composition was ground and tested for free lime. Since no evidence of free lime was found the set cement is unlikely to have a chance to chemically deteriorate, expand and crack for a long duration as a result of reactions with Ca(OH) Free lime was determined by the modified Franke's method The chemical and mineralogical compositions of metallurgical slags are the interesting factors requiring in-depth investigations on the role of MgO and MnO and the mineralogical make-up containing these constituents, to explain their hydraulicity, reaction products and overall long-range durability of cements using such slags. The above investigations showed that low MnO granulated metallurgical slag, like that coming out from the ferro-manganese alloy manufacturing plant of Maharashtra Electrosmelt Ltd., Chandrapur, India, could be used as a partial replacement for ordinary Portland cement to make Portland slag cements. The 50:50 composition meets all the requirements of IS 455:1989 for such cements. Increasing the slag content beyond 50% causes lowering of the minimum compressive strength specified in the Indian standard specification. High MnO slags could not be recommended for use in slag cements because of the deleterious effects of high MnO content. The crystalline and non-hydraulic nature of air-cooled ‘lumpy’ slag also restricts its use for slag cements. However, the role of MnO and MgO containing minerals in these slags needs further in-depth investigations. The air-cooled lumpy slag, however, meets all the requirements of IS 383:1990 for coarse and fine aggregates, except for deleterious materials content. Hence, this type of slag may require some beneficiation for upgrading. The air-cooled slag can be recommended for use in non-structural/unreinforced concrete work in foundation and flooring. The investigations reported in this paper are exploratory, drawing attention for further research and development in the use of metallurgical slags for manufacturing blended slag cements, and as a concrete aggregate like the use of blast furnace slags in integrated steel plants. The authors are grateful to the Executive Director, Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi for providing financial support, and to the Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhopal, India for providing laboratory facilities and encouragement in carrying out the investigations.