The influence of power ultrasound (20kHz) on the rate of attainment of saturation of sparingly soluble benzoic acid in distilled water and in 24% (w/w) aqueous glycerol was experimentally investigated at 30°C. The importance of proper temperature control of process vessel contents when it was irradiated with high ultrasonic power level settings was demonstrated. A method was proposed to calculate the volumetric mass transfer coefficient under non-isothermal conditions.interfacial area, m concentration of solute in aqueous solution, mol/m concentration of solute in aqueous solution at time concentration of solute in aqueous solution at any time saturation limit of sparingly soluble solute, mol/m saturation limit of sparingly soluble solute at 30 saturation limit of sparingly soluble solute in 24% (w/w) aqueous glycerol at 30 saturation limit of sparingly soluble solute in distilled water at 30 saturation limit of sparingly soluble solute at reference temperature saturation limit of sparingly soluble solute at a temperature intrinsic mass transfer coefficient, m/s volumetric mass transfer coefficient, s temperature pre-exponent in Eq. surface area, m time, s temperature, °C/K volume of solvent, m ultrasound Solid dissolution and its subsequent dispersion in a solvent are of particular interest in several industrial situations. It finds widespread applications in multi-disciplinary fields such as mineral processing The basic rate limiting issue viz. resistance to mass transfer is common to all these applications. It is difficult to dissolve sparingly soluble solids in a solvent even when they are dispersed as fine particles. The dissolution rate of a solute in a solvent is a function of its saturation limit in that solvent, state of aggregation, prevailing hydrodynamics created by the mixing device used, temperature and solvent characteristics. It is necessary to design innovative devices in which solid dissolution processes may be intensified. Acoustic cavitation induced through ultrasound (US), sound of frequency greater than 20 Based on the above it may be observed that solid dissolution in the presence of ultrasound is governed by enhancement in volumetric mass transfer coefficient and also by the phenomenon of supersaturation. It has to be seen whether supersaturation is also significant for the benzoic acid model test system used in this work. The objectives of the current work hence are Study the effect of ultrasound on the rate of attainment of saturation limit ( Estimate the volumetric mass transfer coefficient ( Sparingly soluble benzoic acid was chosen as the solute in this study. Benzoic acid particles as received from HiMedia, Mumbai (AR grade) were sieved to give an average feed particle size of 1800 Saturation limit studies were carried out in a jacketed cylindrical vessel, which was made of either perspex or stainless steel ( The saturation limit of benzoic acid in each solvent, in the absence of ultrasound, was measured experimentally at 30 In a typical run carried out in the presence of ultrasound, 10 The volumetric mass transfer coefficients were estimated from the initial rates for sonicated conditions after integration of Eq. The samples taken out at different times were diluted to the required extent and analyzed using a UV–vis spectrophotometer (model V-530, JASCO, Japan) by recording the absorbance value at 227 The amount of power absorbed by each solid–liquid system was measured using calorimetry Initially, the experiments on the rate of attainment of saturation were conducted in a process vessel made of perspex.  Hence it was decided to opt for the intermittent mode of sonication (5  It could be observed from To estimate the primary effect of temperature on saturation limit, separate studies were conducted in a constant temperature bath in which the saturation limits of benzoic acid in 24% (w/w) aqueous glycerol between 30 and 50 From Eq. In light of the above discussion, it is important to perform the saturation limit experiments with more accurate temperature control. In order to control the temperature inside the process vessel accurately at 30 Solubility limit experiments in presence of ultrasound with good temperature control (30 Thompson and Doraiswamy The supersaturation reported by Thompson and Doraiswamy A separate set of experiments was carried out to observe the effect of smaller average feed particle size and higher suspension density. A particle feed size of 58 Under isothermal conditions, Eq. In the case where the temperature rises during the dissolution process as shown in Let the temperature dependency of volumetric mass transfer coefficient be modeled according to For moderate temperature rises, a linear relation may be considered as follows: This procedure is demonstrated for the case illustrated in  Ultrasound had increased the rate of attainment of saturation limit rapidly in both the solid–liquid systems studied. Nevertheless, it did not induce any supersaturation in the two solid–liquid systems for the process conditions studied. Proper temperature control of process vessel contents is essential while treating them with ultrasound at higher power level settings. The volumetric mass transfer coefficient in presence of ultrasound was found to increase with increase in ultrasonic power level setting for both the systems studied. When the experiments are carried out under conditions where the temperature increases due to sonication, the increase in the saturation concentration ( The authors are grateful to Prof. Paramanand Singh, IIT Madras for providing the particle size analyzer facility. We also thank Mr. M. Subramanian, IIT Madras for assisting in photography.