A low-cost infrared temperature sensor module is developed for the detection of a concealed groove in an aluminum plate. The module, consisting of five infrared temperature sensors in a row, is used to scan the surface of the sample plate to measure the temperature variation while moving horizontally. A two-dimensional conduction equation is formulated and numerically solved to compare computational outcome with experimental results.
                  The measurement results demonstrate temperature decrease at the position of the groove, which is also shown from the numerical solution of temperature distribution. Though the temperature measurement with the proposed sensor module is not stable near to the top and bottom of the plate, a distinctive temperature variation at the concealed groove shows the application possibility of the module to the detection of defects in a metal plate.aspect ratio temperature (°C) horizontal coordinate (cm) width of sample plate (cm) vertical coordinate (cm) height of sample plate (cm) Defects concealed in metallic objects are difficult to find using common instruments. These are practically examined with the instruments utilizing radioactive material or X-ray in field applications. However, the instruments are expensive, and handling the hazardous material causes a variety of problems. The defect detection in process industries employing metallic equipment and structure is an important procedure of maintenance. In spite of the importance, the limitation of proper detection technique incurs restricted examination of the material in the industries. Recent development of thermographic defect detection helps to solve the problem. For instance, thermographic defect detection was applied to the inspection of composite materials In many applications, the temperature of metallic equipment is high and the thermographic technique can be employed for in situ defect detection. For example, vessels and pipes in chemical processes are in high temperature, and therefore, the process operation need not be interrupted for the defect detection of the metallic vessel and pipe when the thermographic detection is applied. This procedure saves a lot of expenses and time in the industry. However, the infrared (IR) cameras utilized in the technique are expensive and their limited imaging resolution keeps from detecting the defects of small size. Low-cost temperature measurement sensors, IR thermometers are useful replacement of the IR camera. Though their limited resolution and difficulty of dense arrangement of many sensors in a small area are obstacles, their cost benefit and ready availability are merits of the sensor application. In this study, the applicability of the IR sensors to the defect detection is examined by utilizing them in the detection of an artificial groove in an aluminum plate. The measurement results of temperature are compared with the temperature distribution of the plate surface computed from numerical analysis using a heat conduction equation. A square aluminum plate of 10 Considering the shape of the plate, heater and cooler, a two-dimensional rectangle is utilized in the development of a system equation. For the computation of temperature distribution, a conduction equation is formulated based on the following assumptions: steady-state temperature profile; negligible temperature difference in the direction of plate thickness; constant temperatures at the top and bottom of the plate; adiabatic at both sides and the concealed groove of the plate; constant thermal conductivity throughout the plate. The assumptions result in a two-dimensional conduction equation written in rectangular coordinate as For the computational simplicity, the plate is separated into four sections by halving in both For the simplicity of analysis, the equation is rewritten in dimensionless form. In the formulation of finite difference equation from Eq. From the upper left corner of the two-dimensional rectangular grid, Eq. The computed temperature distribution is of the upper left section having the boundary conditions of Eq. The infrared sensor (Heimann Sensor GmbH, Germany, Model 3129) used in this experiment has a circular window of 2.5 The sample plate described in the previous section is placed in the middle of experimental set-up shown in While the plate is stationary, the sensor module moves horizontally using a motor and a long screw. The location of the sensor is monitored with a wheeled 10-turn potentiometer as described in The experiment begins with supplying cooling water, and the heater is activated. In order to obtain a uniform temperature distribution on the sample plate in steady state, the heat supply and cooling are maintained with constant heat supply and cooling for 2 Two different settings of temperature distribution in the sample plate were examined in this study. These results of experimental measurement are compared with the computational outcome of temperature distribution illustrated in Though the measured temperature with the proposed sensor system of this study has some fluctuation, the distinctive variation with the sensor 3 at the location of the concealed groove indicates that the proposed sensor module is applicable to the detection of a concealed hole or defect in a metal plate. In practical applications, the temperature of a metallic object is often high enough, and therefore no external heating is necessary like this experiment. This gives convenience to utilize the proposed sensor system. Current techniques of nondestructive defect detection require total shutdown of a process to inspect vessels or reactors, which limits the application of the techniques. Other infrared thermographic system such as an IR video camera is also available, but its imaging resolution is inadequate for close observation of an object. In this respect, the proposed system is useful in spite that the system is built with low cost, readily available components. A low-cost thermographic device for the detection of a groove in metal plate is developed, and its performance is examined by comparing the experimental results with numerically solved temperature profile. The sensor module contains five infrared temperature sensors in a row and signal amplification circuits. The experimental measurements with two different settings of temperature distribution in the sample plate indicate the location of a concealed groove, which is also demonstrated by the numerical solution of the distribution. Though some deviation in the measurement is observed with two-end sensors of the sensor module, the groove location is clearly indicated to show the availability of further application of the proposed sensor system. Financial support from the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation through the CANSMC is gratefully acknowledged.