Biocompatible and antibacterial multi-layer coatings of hydroxyapatite (HA)-Ag/SiO2/TiN/Ti were obtained on the Ti-6Al-4V alloy, by means of the magnetron sputtering technique. During characterization of the coatings, the chemical composition was evaluated by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and the phase analysis was carried out by X-ray diffraction. The morphology of the coatings was observed by field emission scanning electron microscopy, while transmission electron microscopy was used to appreciate their structure. The adhesion of the coatings to the substrate was evaluated by micro scratch test. The in vitro biological response was evaluated in terms of cytotoxicity, adhesion and differentiation of mouse mesenchymal stem cells, as well as adhesion and bacterial viability of Staphylococcus aureus strain. Through the compositional study carried out, the deposition of the HA phase was verified, with a Ca/P ratio close to 1.67 and the characteristic diffraction peaks of this compound. The structural study of the coatings evidenced the obtention of multi-layer architectures. The use of an intermediate SiO2/TiN/Ti trilayer was found to improve adhesion between HA-Ag and the substrate by 84%. Finally, the in vitro biological tests carried out indicated a potentially non-toxic character in the coatings. Additionally, an antibacterial effect was registered at low concentrations of Ag (<0.25 mg/L).The combination of osseointegration and antibacterial properties in prosthetic implants such as microplates and fixation screws is widely desired, since adequate interaction between the incorporated material and the bone is essential for the mineralization process. In addition, the local action of antibacterial elements prevents the formation of bacterial infections that trigger major health problems and, in many cases, lead to removal of the implanted device [ In the present study, an intermediate SiO HA-Ag/SiO The elemental composition of the multi-layer systems was measured by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Oxford instruments X-Max 80), with resolution of 126 eV. Phases were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Panlitycal X'pert pro MPD equipment in reflection mode, with Cukα radiation λ = 1.540598 Å at 45 kV and 40 mA, analyzing from 20° to 68° (2ϴ) at a scanning speed of 1°/min. Additionally, the crystallite size was calculated according to the Scherrer equation [ The roughness of the coatings and the substrate was measured in triplicate by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (MFP-3D Infinity). The evaluated area was fixed at 5 × 5 μm The critical load (L To determine the Ag release from the coatings, three samples of each system were immersed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) medium at 37 °C as described in [ The coatings and the Ti-6Al-4V substrate were ultraviolet sterilized in a horizontal laminar flow cabinet for 50 min prior to cell and bacterial seeding. For cell viability, adhesion and differentiation assays, mouse mesenchymal stem cells (mMSCs) (C3H10T1/2 cells from RIKEN Cell Bank, Japan) were used. The strain used for bacterial adhesion and viability tests was Ag cytotoxicity was evaluated by MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) assay (Roche). mMSCs with a density of 10,000/cm The coatings cytotoxicity was evaluated in non-contact mode by MTT assay. For this, both the coatings and substrate (control) were incubated in cell culture medium at 37 °C for 72 h. After, this medium was taken to culture plates with previously seeded cells at density of 10,000/cm mMSCs were seeded at a density of 5.000/cm mMSCs were seeded at a density of 20,000/cm  Image acquisition for viability, adhesion and cell differentiation assays was performed at 10× and 40× with n = 20. Images were processed using the Fiji-Image J software. Bacteria quantification was performed with 10 images per sample at 100× using the NIS Elements Br software (Nikon Instrument Inc., NY, USA). The results obtained are shown as the mean ± standard deviation. The results of cell viability were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance using the GraphPad Prims 6 XML software.      The water contact angle values and the surface free energy calculated for the developed coatings and the substrate are shown in The results of the micro-scratch test carried out on the surface of the developed systems are shown in  The results of the Ag The cell viability of the developed coatings and the Ti-6Al-4V substrate, which was used as a control, are shown in  The results of the differentiation test of mMSCs on the substrate and the developed coatings are shown in  HA-Ag and HA-Ag/SiO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank the