With the increase in mining depths, support problems of anchor such as roof accidents and large deformation of soft rock are becoming more and more prominent. Whether the anchor is suitable for deep roadway support has been questioned. In order to explore this problem, this paper studies the ultimate support effect of super pre-stressed anchors. Based on current higher pre-stress support technology in mining engineering, a support scheme of super anchor is proposed and investigated. In this work, the super anchor scheme and the other two schemes were compared and analysed through a physical model test. The model’s displacement data was recorded by a high-speed camera. Meanwhile, the numerical model with the same conditions is calculated. The results show that, the super anchor scheme can improve the stress distribution of the surrounding rock; and this method contributes to the optimization of the support parameters and improves the roof bearing capacity. In addition, the super anchor scheme has a smaller scope of damage than the other two schemes. Third, the super anchor scheme reduces the number of anchors without reducing the strength of the support, which is beneficial to the rapid excavation of the roadway. However, it is worth noting that, the end of the super anchor will produce significant stress concentration in the support process, and this easily leads to the separation and crack of the roof near the end of the super anchor. In short, the physical model test shows that, using super pre-stressed anchors is promising for solving the extremely difficult deep roadway support problems.With the increase in mining depths, the support problems of high-stress roadways have become more and more prominent; long-term deformations have occurred in soft rock; roof-collapse accidents often occurred; the damage rate of rock mass was accelerated The typical characteristics of coal mine supports was that the length of anchor was shorter, the construction speed was faster, and the construction space was smaller, compared with those used in slope and hydraulic engineering. Therefore, the use of higher pre-stress technology from other fields was greatly limited in coal mines. Traditionally, it was difficult to apply higher pre-stress to an anchor in a coal mine support, and the main reasons included three aspects. First, the bond strength between anchor and surrounding rock was insufficient; Second, the material strength or breaking load of anchor was insufficient; Third, the mining construction machine was not strong enough to apply a higher pre-stress force. These reasons hinder the use of higher strength pre-stressed anchors in coal mines. In addition, the type of anchor structure was also an important factor limiting the application of the higher pre-stress anchor. In recent years, researchers focused on these problems and conducted extensive research. In order to solve the problem of insufficient bond strength, many new anchoring materials have emerged in recent years, as shown in Optimization of support parameters was critical to protecting roof safety and saving economic costs. Anchor support was the main way to secure coal mine roadways, used globally In this paper, the support scheme of super pre-stress anchor was studied by a physical model test, and compared with other two traditional schemes. First, the failure characteristics and support effect of the anchor, under the condition of ultimate pre-stress, are analyzed. In addition, model displacement was monitored by high speed cameras, and model stress is monitored by static resistance strain gauge. Its research result provides new ideas and reference for deep difficult surrounding rock support. As shown in Three different support schemes, comparison scheme 1, 2 and super anchor scheme, are designed, as shown in Several devices were designed and chosen to simulate the above pre-stressed anchor support schemes. These devices include roadway pre-embedded molds, similar anchors, pre-stressed springs, pre-stressed nuts and similar trays. As shown in Similar spring materials are selected and the corresponding preload is designed based on Eqs. For convenience of presentation in this paper, three concepts are prescribed, listed below: Super anchor refers to a longer and higher strength anchor that upgrades the breaking load from high to higher (Such as: from 500 kN to 2000 kN or more) by improving material or increasing the diameter or changing the structure of anchor in mining engineering. Super pre-stress refers to a higher pre-stress that upgrades the pre-stressed force from high to higher (Such as: from 200 kN to 1000 kN or more) by using a super anchor, in mining engineering. Super pre-stressed anchor support refers to a higher strength support method by using a super anchor and applying super pre-stress, in mining engineering. As shown in After the model test was completed, the broken shape of the three roofs showed different characteristics, as shown in Test model displacement monitoring points was captured by high-speed camera, and the position information of the monitoring points is obtained by MATLAB image recognition. Comparison scheme 1 and 2 belong to traditional type of uniform anchor support, and super anchor scheme 3 is a special type of non-uniform support that emphasizes the use of super pre-stressed anchors in the center of the roadway. The above physical model test compared the three schemes; the results shows that, the super anchor scheme has higher bearing capacity than the comparison scheme 1 and 2 in a specific stage, and the roof damage range of the super anchor scheme is smaller than that of the comparison scheme 1 and 2. It is worth noting that, the number of anchors in the super anchor scheme is only In the physical model experiment, the damage range of the super anchor support scheme’s roof is smaller than that of the high pre-stressed long anchor. But the tail end of the super anchor has a large stress concentration and a significant large-open crack, which is harmful for the roof. In addition, the pre-deformation displacement of super anchor’s roof is less than that of the high pre-stressed long anchor. When the roof is forcedly destroyed, the pre-stress of the super anchors is greatly reduced due to the loose deformation and damage of the roof, which greatly weakens the bearing capacity of the super anchor scheme. As a result, the deformation of the super anchor scheme is intensified, and the intensified deformation is almost the same as or larger than that of the comparison scheme 1 in the end. To graphically illustrate the differences between the three schemes, a numerical model of the same boundary condition as the physical model was calculated by finite element software. When the stress of the surrounding rock is taken into account, the results will be different. To sum up, the super pre-stressed anchor support has both advantages and disadvantages, using super pre-stressed anchor in a reasonable way will benefit more than harm. The essence of surrounding rock support is the mechanical balance. Generally, the greater the surrounding rock stress, the greater the imbalance force generated, and the higher the support strength required for the stability of the surrounding rock. Compared with traditional anchors, super pre-stressed anchors can greatly improve the support strength and significantly change the surrounding rock stress field. Therefore, the use of super anchors is one of the important methods to solve the problem of deep surrounding rock support.  This paper mainly studies the supporting effect of super pre-stressed anchor (scheme 3) through physical model experiments. And the reasons of different destruction patterns of the physical model are revealed in different schemes through the numerical calculation results. The following conclusions are formed: Using super anchor and applying a super pre-stress in the center of the roof can significantly improve the stress distribution of the surrounding rock. After applying a super pre-stress, the end of the super anchor will produce significant stress concentration in the support process, and this easily leads to the separation and crack of the roof near the end of the super anchor. In the test, the roof of the scheme 2 was first cracked, the scheme 1 followed, and the scheme 3 (super anchor scheme) ended. Therefore, the super anchor scheme (scheme 3) has a higher bearing capacity comparing with the scheme 1 and 2, and the scheme 1 has a higher bearing capacity comparing with 2. The three schemes have different damage patterns and characteristics. It is worth noting that there was a large-scale roof accident in scheme 2. In addition, scheme 1 had a wide broken range (586 mm/11.72 m) of damage, and the roof of scheme 3 (super anchor scheme) had a narrow broken range (395 mm/7.9 m); and the damage range of 1 is 1.48 times larger than range of 3. The deformation process of the super anchor scheme (scheme 3) can be divided into two stages. The first stage is slow deformation; at this stage, the super pre-stress of anchors play an important role in support, and the displacement change rate of scheme 3 is less than that of the scheme 1. The second stage is acceleration of the deformation; at this stage, due to deformation of the roof, the role of super pre-stress in the support is weakened, the displacement change rate of the scheme 3 is greater than that of the scheme 1. 2. Recommendations include: In the underground works, the roadway space is small; With the development of mechanized driving equipment, more and more auxiliary devices have been added; And the roadway space resources are increasingly scarce, which limits the number of anchor installation equipment, so it is impossible to construct multiple anchors simultaneously, affecting the driving speed. Super pre-stressed anchor technology reduces the number of anchors installed and is promising to resolve this conflict. Choosing the super anchor support can be enlarge the distance between the anchors without reducing the strength of the support. This advantage can be used for rapid excavation and can greatly improve the speed of excavation, because the current anchor support time takes up 60% of the total time. However, the main purpose of studying super pre-stressed anchor is not to reduce the number of anchors, but to solve the difficult roadway support. Enlarging the distance between the anchors will reduce the ability to protect the surface of the roof, making it prone to loose deformation and destruction, thereby deteriorating the stability of the roof. However, it is worth noting that this defect does not need to be considered in bottom-feeding governance. If super pre-stressed anchor is used for the bottom drum treatment, there may be a good support effect in the roadway. In addition, using super pre-stressed anchors in the roof, the deficiency can be remedied by large trays and steel mesh. The test results shows that the super anchor can significantly improve the roof support ability, so the using of super pre-stressed anchors in a reasonable way is promising for solving the extremely difficult deep surrounding rock support problems. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supported by joint Ph.D. program of “double first rate construction disciplines of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: