In this work, the mass transfer characteristics of two immiscible fluids were investigated in a rotating helical microchannel with hydraulic diameter of 932 μm. Aqueous phosphoric acid solution and 80% tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) in kerosene were selected for the investigation of mass transfer performance in quartz glass/high density polyethylene (HDPE) microchannel. High dispersion between the two immiscible fluids can be obtained in the microchannel due to the intensifying action of centrifugal force, and the majority of the droplets with average diameter of 20–100 μm were produced in the microchannel. The flow rate and rotation speed were found to have great effects on the extraction efficiency and average residence time. The empirical correlation of average residence time based on experimental data was developed by theoretical analysis and data fitting method, and a mathematical model of the mass transfer coefficient in dispersed phase was proposed.Liquid–liquid extraction as an important unit operation in the process of chemical separation plays a significant role, such as petroleum, hydrometallurgy, and food Microchemical engineering technology as a new technology has received great attention over the last two decades due to its tremendous advantages in the enhancement of heat and mass transfer The mass transfer performance shows extreme dependency on flow regimes. There are six different flow regimes such as slug, slug-drop, deformed interface, parallel/annular, slug-dispersed, and dispersed flow observed in microchannel for liquid–liquid systems Currently, mass transfer enhancement by dispersing one phase into another in microchannels has been paid more attention by many researchers On the basis of the idea that improving the hydrodynamics and contact of two immiscible fluids can achieve better mass transfer performance, a new rotating helical microchannel was proposed in our group. Because the interfacial tension as the dominant force in microchannels can be easily overcome by the inertia force due to the rotation of drum, highly dispersed droplets can be generated in the microchannel. Thus, it is not necessary to add a third medium into the system. Efficient extraction can be realized in the rotating helical microchannel and it is easy to operate and control. Moreover, it has good adaptability to liquid–liquid two-phase systems with high volumetric flux ratio. It is well known that the prediction of mass transfer performance for novel microreactor is necessary for its optimization design. Zhao In this work, aqueous phosphoric acid solution and 80% tri- TBP (purity ≥ 98.5%) and sulfonated kerosene were provided by Sichuan Xinruiyuan Technology Development Co., Ltd. TBP was saturated with water before use. Phosphoric acid (85%, AR grade), SUDAN III and methylene blue were obtained from Chengdu Kelong Chemical Co. Ltd. In the visualization of flow phenomena, minute amounts of Sudan III and methylene blue were dissolved in the organic phase and aqueous phase, respectively. De-ionized water (electrical resistivity   In this work, extraction experiments for investigating the mass transfer characteristics in the rotating helical microchannel were performed under ambient conditions ( The droplet size can be measured by a particle size analyzer (BT-9300S, BETTERSIZE INSTRUMENTS LTD., China) and an electron microscope (XDS-1B, Chongqing Photoelectric Instrument Co., Ltd., China). The droplet sizes were measured by the particle size analyzer under the condition of high rotation rate ( The measurement of average residence time was performed by a stopwatch (ZS-2B, Shanghai sasey clock &watch Co., Ltd). At first, feed pipes were filled with respective liquids in advance. Then, the peristaltic pumps and the stopwatch were started simultaneously. When the annular liquids were observed at the end of the drum, the timing was stopped. The time shown on the stopwatch was the average residence time of fluids in the microchannel. Relative measurement error of average residence time was 3%. The concentration of phosphoric acid in the organic phase or aqueous phase was analyzed by an automatic potentiometric titration instrument (916 Ti-Touch, Metrohm Switzerland Ltd., Herisau, Switzerland) which was designed on the basis of the principle of potential method. The concentration of phosphoric acid can be determined based on the neutralization reaction between the sodium hydroxide as a standard reagent and the phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase or phosphoric acid stripped from the organic phase. Relative measurement error was 1%. The extraction efficiency It was observed that in most cases the outlet streams from the microchannel were turbid and opaque, so it was predicted that water-in-oil droplets were presented in the microchannel. Furthermore, blue aqueous droplets in the experimental system of TBP/kerosene with SUDAN III dye/phosphoric acid with methylene blue can be observed by CCD camera, and a dispersed flow is shown in For a single droplet, the amount of solute released from the droplet is equal to the amount of solute deceased in the droplet in differential time (d Based on the double film theory, the interfacial concentrations of phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase and organic phase should meet the following equilibrium relation: A further assumption is that there is little change in the concentration of phosphoric acid in organic phase, which is approximately considered as a constant, then the equilibrium relationship of two phases can be approximated as follows: Combining Eq. Furthermore, Eq. On the basis of the following relations, Based on the content of The conventional agitation extraction was performed in a 250 ml beaker, where 40 ml of aqueous phase was mixed with 160 ml of organic phase; the two phases were stirred at a speed of 200 r·min In order to investigate the effects of flow rate on extraction efficiency, two rotation rates of 100 r·min At the rotation rate of 100 r·min At the rotation rate of 300 r·min In this section, 7 groups of different flow rates were chosen to investigate the effects of rotation rate on extraction efficiency as shown in The droplet size is a very important parameter in the study of dispersed flow. Therefore, the average diameter of droplets under different conditions of flow rate or rotation rate is measured in this work. As shown in In general, the average residence time can be changed primarily by changing the volume of the microchannel and/or the flow rate However, a turning point of the average residence time appeared with the increase of rotation rate as shown in Furthermore, the distribution range of average residence time became narrower with the increase of rotation rate. As shown in It was reported This extraction efficient zone map can be used to predict the extraction performance of the working system under certain operating conditions and achieve the control to the average residence time by the adjustment of operation parameters, so that the extraction of the working system can be always kept in the high efficient zone. It was clear that the average residence time was influenced not only by the flow rate but also by the rotation rate on the frontal discussions in For the vertical velocity, it can be defined by the following equation: For the tangential velocity, it can be normally defined as: where The correlation for the average residence time is defined by the following equation: In the rotating helical microchannel, the related structural parameters are as follows: Then, the fitting results by the software of 1stopt1.0 for Eq. Those values are taken into Eq. The experimental and calculated values of the average residence time were compared and the result was shown in Li In this work, the aqueous phase as dispersed phase has higher viscosity and lower diffusivity compared with the organic phase as continuous phase. It can be considered that the extraction process is controlled by diffusion in dispersed phase. Therefore, it is crucial to establish the model of the mass transfer coefficient in dispersed phase. Based on the modification of the classical Newman's full model for mass transfer in drops It is well known that the Reynolds number ( The formula of correction factor Based on the established mass transfer correlations Eqs. A new rotating helical microchannel that could intensify the mass transfer of two immiscible fluids was investigated. High dispersion between two immiscible fluids can be obtained by the intensifying action of centrifugal force. It was found that both the extraction efficiency and average residence time were influenced by flow rate and rotation rate, and low flow rate and high rotation rate can ensure high extraction efficiency (usually over 95%); a high extraction efficiency can also be achieved if the average diameter of droplets was controlled well within 100 μm; the extraction efficiency was not completely correlated with the average residence time in the rotating helical microchannel. An extraction efficient zone map associated with average residence time was obtained and it can be used to predict the extraction performance of the working system. An empirical correlation for the average residence time was developed on the basis of experimental data. Furthermore, a mathematical model of the mass transfer coefficient in dispersed phase was established. The relative deviations between the experimental and calculated values of  surface area of droplet, m concentrations of phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase, mol·L initial concentrations of phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase, mol·L interfacial concentration of phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase, mol·L concentrations of phosphoric acid in the organic phase, mol·L equilibrium concentration of phosphoric acid in the organic phase, mol·L initial concentrations of phosphoric acid in the organic phase, mol·L interfacial concentration of phosphoric acid in the organic phase, mol·L molecular diffusivity of phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase, m molecular diffusivity of phosphoric acid in the organic phase, m the external diameter of drum, m mass mean droplet diameter, m hydraulic diameter of microchannel, m droplet diameter, m average diameter of droplets, m correction factor height of drum, mass transfer coefficient of the dispersed phase, m·s correction factor length of micro helical channel, m correction factor total flow rate of aqueous phase and organic phase, m flow rate of aqueous phase, ml·min rotation rate, r·min Reynolds number Reynolds number of aqueous phase Reynolds number of two-phase mixtures velocity of fluid, m·s vertical velocity of mixed fluids, m·s tangential velocity of mixed fluids, m·s volume of the microchannel, m volume of droplet, m Weber number Weber number of aqueous phase  extraction efficiency, % viscosity, Pa·s density, kg·m interfacial tension, N·m average residence time, s gravity influence factor angular velocity of a drum, rad·s  aqueous phase mixture of the immiscible liquid–liquid two phases organic phase initial Project supported by the