The zinc plant purification cake (CINKUR Co., Turkiye) was leached with hydrochloric acid and main acidic leach solution containing Zn(II), Fe(II), Pb(II), Al(III), Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) ions was obtained. Except for cadmium, cobalt and nickel, the other metals were precipitated by adding various reagents and adjusting the pH of solution. After this separation process, cadmium was also separated by emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) process. The present investigation deals with carrier-facilitated membrane transport of cobalt from this acidic leach solution containing cobalt and nickel by ELM using as organic reagent 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester, PC-88A. The study has highlighted the importance and influence of membrane composition for maximizing the extraction of cobalt. The ELM consists of PC-88A as an extractant, commercial kerosene as a diluent, ECA 4360J as a surfactant and 0.5M hydrochloric acid solution as a stripping solution. The important factors studied which affect the ELM stability and extraction of cobalt are pH of the acidic leach solution, mixing speed, type and concentration of the stripping solution, extractant and surfactant concentrations, phase ratio and treatment ratio. The parameters mentioned were investigated and optimum conditions were determined. The results showed that it is possible to extract 99% of cobalt by using ELM from the acidic leach solutions, containing Zn(II), Fe(II), Pb(II), Al(III), Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) ions, at the optimum operating conditions.The separation of cobalt from nickel in aqueous solution has always been a problem in hydrometallurgy. Their adjacent positions in the transition metal series in the periodic table results in aqueous somewhat similar chemical behaviour but differences do exist. For example, although both cobalt and nickel preferentially exist as divalent hexahydrated ions in dilute aqueous solution, the rate of water exchange on the cobalt ion is very much higher than for nickel. Thus, complex ion formation often proceeds much more readily with divalent cobalt than with nickel. On the other hand, the trivalent cobalt ion is much less labile and forms in preference to nickel even though the redox potentials for the Co Cobalt and nickel are among the most important nonferrous metals. Certain raw materials such as laterite ores are the main sources for their production. Hydrometallurgical methods of leaching applying sulphate, chloride–sulphate, and chloride systems result in leach liquors containing mainly nickel and cobalt in company of some impurities, such as copper, iron, and aluminium. Usually, the majority of these impurities is removed by precipitation with lime, while the copper is cemented out with cobalt powder and recovered by filtration Afterward, the development of phosphonic and phosphinic acid extractants led to improvement in Co(II)/Ni(II) separation factors. Co(II) was successfully separated from Ni(II) from sulphate solutions using the 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC-88A) A survey of literature has reviewed the cobalt–nickel separation factors from sulphate media using phosphoric, phosphonic and phosphinic acids A limitation in traditional solvent extraction is that a large inventory of solvent is required, especially when processing dilute solutions. A other limitation in traditional solvent extraction is also high capital cost. The use of liquid membranes containing specific metal ion carriers offers an alternative method to the solvent extraction processes for selective separation and concentration of the metal ions from aqueous dilute solutions In the present work, the extraction and separation of cobalt from acidic leach solutions containing cobalt and nickel by ELM using PC-88A as extractant is reported. The effects of acidic leach solution pH, extractant and surfactant concentrations, mixing speed, type and concentration of stripping solution, phase ratio and treatment ratio on the extraction systems were studied. The effect of optimum conditions on cobalt and nickel separation studies has also been determined. The liquid membrane phase is composed of a surfactant, an extractant, and a diluent. The surfactant is a nonionic polyamine which is commercially known as ECA 4360J, supplied by ExxonMobil. The mobile carrier is PC-88A which is purchased from Daihachi, Japan. A commercial kerosene (density 830 In 250 The zinc plant purification cake (CINKUR Co., Turkiye) consists an average of 20% Zn, 10% Cu, 1% Pb, 0.1% Fe, 2.2% Co, 3.1% Ni, 3.0% Cd, and 1% Al on mass basis was leached with a 2 In 600 The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-6701F model, Tokyo, Japan) is used for the determination of metals (Co and Ni). All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at the ambient temperature of 20 The liquid membrane solution is that which separates the encapsulated drops in the emulsion from the acidic leach solution. ELMs ( The carrier, PC-88A, is known to dimerize in nonpolar aliphatic solvents. Therefore, the extraction of cobalt ions may be represented by Eq. Komasawa et al. Because PC-88A is an acidic extractant, the pH of stripping solution should be less than that of the acidic leach solution in ELM process. The pH of the acidic leach solution was changed in the range 4.5–5.5 using NaOH solution, water and acetic acid–sodium hydroxide buffer solution. The results obtained were shown in As known from the literature, the main factor of emulsion liquid membrane applicability is stability of emulsion. In addition to mixing speed, extractant, and surfactant concentration, another parameter is stripping agent types The influence of hydrochloric acid concentrations (0.25–0.75 The effect of extractant concentration on cobalt extraction is shown in Surfactant concentration is an important factor as it directly affects the stability, swelling and break up of ELM. Mixing speed during extraction is an important factor. Effects of mixing speed on the extraction of cobalt are shown in In separation and concentration of metal ions from acidic aqueous solutions by the emulsion liquid membrane process, the volume ratio of the stripping solution to the membrane solution ( It is known that the volume ratio of the emulsion to the feed solution ( To investigate extraction of cobalt ions in emulsion liquid membrane system, complexing agent in the stripping solution has been used and effects of them on extraction of cobalt ions were studied. Two complexing anions, EDTA and NH The optimum conditions were experimentally determined and are shown in Under the optimum conditions, the extraction of cobalt and nickel for two feed mixtures of about equimolar compositions are given in An emulsion liquid membrane process using 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC-88A) to separate and concentrate cobalt from the acidic leach solution has been investigated. From this study the following conclusions can be drawn: The optimum conditions have been determined experimentally as “surfactant concentration (2.5%), extractant concentration (10.0%), stripping solution concentration and type (0.5 The reduced of solvent amount required for selective separation and concentration of cobalt metal, account for the promising performance of this technology in practical applications. Loading capacity of the ELMs have been determined as approximate 7.5 Except for emulsions obtained with the highest mixing speed ( At the optimum conditions, the extraction of cobalt has been achieved with an efficiency of 90–99% from various cobalt–nickel mixtures within 30 For equimolar cobalt–nickel mixtures, when the cobalt concentration in the feed solution increases, the separation factor of cobalt also increases. Separation factors as high as 114 for cobalt have been achieved. Cobalt concentration could be increased about eight times in one stage, and using more stages the concentration of cobalt could be further improved. The experimental results obtained showed the validity of the ELM method. The author wish to express his sincere gratitude to the State Planning Organization of Turkiye (DPT), that supported this work, and Mehmet Yilmaz, coordinator of BAPK in Sakarya University.