A leaching process based on the use of a HCl–CaCl2 solution, with total chloride concentration 4M, was investigated for the removal of contaminant metals from fine acidic soils. The possibility to apply this treatment on piles constructed on-site was also examined as a low cost treatment option. The soil sample used in the study was fine in texture, i.e. clay loam, acidic (pH 5.6), and contaminated mainly with Pb, up to 16000mg Pb/kg dry soil, due to past mining activities. The experimental work comprised all the treatment stages, including agglomeration of fine soil particles to increase the permeability of soil, leaching of the agglomerated soil in a laboratory column, removal of metals from the leachate, regeneration and recycling of the leaching solution and final washing of the treated soil.
                  The initial agglomeration treatment resulted in the formation of coarse aggregates and the percolation of leaching solution through the soil column was maintained at high levels, i.e.75ml/cm2 per day, during the whole treatment. A low amount of HCl acid was required for the removal contaminants from this particular soil, i.e. 0.44mol HCl/kg soil, due to the absence of acid consuming minerals. The extractions achieved were 94% for Pb, 78% for Zn and more than 70% for Cd. The co-dissolution of soil matrix was very limited, with a total weight loss about 3.5%. The final pH of the soil after washing was found to be 5.15, i.e. slightly lower compared to the initial pH of the soil. The results of this study indicate that chloride leaching, in combination with agglomeration and pile leaching techniques, can be a cost effective option for the removal of metal contaminants from fine acidic soils.Removal of contaminant metals from soils using mineral processing and/or chemical extraction techniques are treatment options presenting numerous environmental benefits, in comparison with the most widely applied methods, such as dig-and-haul practices or solidification/stabilisation (SS) techniques. These techniques ensure the permanent removal of potentially toxic elements from the soil matrix, allow recycling of clean soil and provide improved future land-use options Chemical extraction (leaching) techniques, involving the addition of chemical reagents in aqueous solution, can be applied in combination with classical soil washing treatments, which are mostly based on physical separation processes. They can also be used as independent treatment options. The main categories of reagents used for metal extractions are acids, which are active through their proton activity, and chelating reagents, which are able to form water soluble complexes with metals. This study is focused on the use of acidic chloride solutions, which combine acidity and complexing properties. Removal of metals from contaminated soils using chloride solutions has been investigated by many researchers. Acidic chloride treatment has been tested on a wide variety of metal contaminants, as seen in Several mechanisms contribute to the removal of metal contaminants during extraction with HCl, including desorption enhanced by low pH, dissolution of discrete metal compounds, i.e. carbonates, oxides, etc., or dissolution of soil components, which are typical scavengers of metal contaminants, i.e. Fe and Mn oxides. Co-dissolution of soil components is a crucial parameter, affecting the cost effectiveness of the process, particularly for alkaline and calcareous soils. A characteristic example is given by Pitchel and Pitchel Several researchers investigated the use of neutral calcium chloride solutions, in order to remove metal contaminants, especially Pb, without destroying the soil matrix The combined action of acidity and excess chloride ions was investigated by Roche et al. Legiec Soil texture is a crucial parameter affecting the practical applicability of soil decontamination techniques. Amongst the known commercial processes, developed for the removal of metals from contaminated soils, only electroremediation is particularly adapted for the treatment of fine clayey and silty soils. The two other alternatives, i.e. soil washing and soil flushing, are mostly suitable for coarse sandy soils. The long industrial experience from the application of soil washing processes, since 1980, indicates that their applicability is restricted to soils containing less than 25% of fine particles The treatment of fine soils, using chemical extraction techniques, constitutes a particular technical challenge. When this treatment is applied in an installation of agitated reactors, the crucial step is the efficient separation of fine soil particles from the extracting solution. Several solid liquid separation techniques have been investigated by Tuin et al. Treatment in piles is another alternative for the ex situ leaching of soils and this option allows the continuous contact of soil with fresh extracting solution in order to maximise the removal of metal contaminants. In this method, the soil is excavated and placed on a treatment area, usually equipped with appropriate impermeable liners and leachate collection systems. In biological soil treatment processes this is called land farming or biopiling, and the piles are either thin layers of soil, i.e. 45 The major benefits of pile leaching are the lower capital and operation costs involved in this technique, compared to the alternative of slurry phase reactors. A pile is cheap to built and operate, whereas an installation of slurry phase reactors with the required solid/liquid separation units, involves a considerable capital investment and a high operational cost. Moreover, the pile can be constructed on-site reducing considerably the cost for transferring the excavated soil to a treatment unit and back to its original place. In pile leaching, the extracting solution is sprayed on the top of the pile and recovered from the bottom, through an appropriate leachate collection system. In order to obtain good percolation of the leaching solution through the pile, high permeability is required. This fact limits the applicability of the technique to sandy soils. To extend the applicability of pile leaching to fine soils a pretreatment can be applied, involving the agglomeration of fine particles to coarser aggregates. This technique was investigated in the current work. The experimental study presented in this paper, aims at the development of an integrated chloride leaching process for the removal of metals from fine soils, using pile leaching techniques. The laboratory testwork simulated as close as possible an integrated full scale process with all the required treatment stages, i.e.: Agglomeration of the fine soil, as a crucial pretreatment for the application of pile leaching. Leaching of the agglomerated soil material in a laboratory scale column, using an acidified CaCl Removal of heavy metals from the leachate by precipitation with lime. Regeneration and recycling of the CaCl Final washing of treated soil after the removal of heavy metals. Experiments were carried out on a soil sample originating from Montevecchio, Sardinia, Italy, where past mining activities during 150 years resulted in the widespread contamination of soils with Pb, Zn and Cd The soil is fine in texture, with the silt and clay fractions corresponding to 57% of its total weight. The pH was found to be slightly acidic, i.e. 5.6, and the CaCO Mineralogical analyses conducted on similar soil samples from Montevecchio site The major constraint for the application of heap leaching to this particular soil sample was its fine clay loam texture, which was expected to inhibit the infiltration of leaching solution. A possible mean to overcome this limitation is to apply a pretreatment, involving the agglomeration of fine particles to coarser aggregates. Small-scale agglomeration tests were carried out, using a rotating tire, in order to define the required amount of water and identify binders exhibiting good chemical resistance to the leaching solution. The materials tested as binders were sodium metasilicate, starch, paraffin and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). The small-scale tests were conducted on 10 The scaling up of the process, to prepare the soil material for column leaching, involved the use of bench scale mineral processing equipment. A barrel mixer was used to mix 12 Preliminary tests were carried out in test tubes to determine the amount of HCl, which is required in order to obtain the maximum removal of metal contaminants from this soil. During these tests the soil was treated with increasing quantities of HCl, maintaining the total concentration of Cl Column tests were conducted in a Plexiglas column, with dimensions of 1 The whole treatment consisted of 12 leaching cycles. Thirteen batches of 5 The 12 batches of the metal laden solutions were subjected to a precipitation treatment to obtain the removal of metal contaminants. The treatment involved the precipitation of metals in the form of hydroxides using calcium hydroxide. The calcium hydroxide was added to the solution as pulp, 20% (w/v), under continuous agitation, to obtain a final pH of 9.0. Preliminary experiments, carried out at variable precipitation pHs, indicated that the maximum removal of Pb and Zn is obtained around pH 9.0. Further increase of the pH to more alkaline values resulted in the partial redissolution of Pb and Zn due to the formation of soluble hydroxo-complexes. After 15 The filtrate from the precipitation stage was used for the preparation of a new leaching solution. Water, HCl and/or CaCl Following the completion of leaching tests, the soil was subjected to a washing treatment, using tap water, to remove the retained chloride solution and the residual metal contaminants. Wash water was supplied at a rate of 2.2 When the washing treatment was completed, the soil column was recovered in four sections representing different depths in the column. The four sections were dried at 100°C for 24 In common industrial heap leaching operations, the solution application rates range between 250 and 1000 The initial tests were carried out using only water. The amount of water required to obtain the agglomeration of fine particles to coarser aggregates was found to be approximately 0.3 The particle size distribution of the soil before and after agglomeration is shown in To prepare the soil material for column leaching, 12 The agglomeration pretreatment led to quite satisfactory results, regarding the percolation of leaching solution through the column The mean percolation rate was around 750 The concentrations of Pb and Zn in the successive leaching solutions as a function of time are shown in These oversaturation conditions resulted probably in the precipitation of PbCl Extracted Pb remained at elevated concentrations, between 3800 and 4650 Extraction kinetics for each leaching cycle was quite fast; the time required to obtain the maximum concentration of Pb in solution was found to vary between 3 and 7 days in the initial 7 stages. The percent extraction of contaminants during the 12 leaching cycles is shown in Amongst the major metals examined, only Mn dissolution achieved a considerable level, i.e. 86%, but this had a minor effect on soil matrix due to the very low initial concentration of this element, i.e. 0.14%. Magnesium dissolution reached 25%, while Fe and Al dissolution was no more than 5%. The final pH of the leachates ( The metal laden solution recovered from each leaching cycle was subjected to precipitation treatment. Precipitation was carried out with addition of slaked lime up to pH=9.0. The total amount of lime used during the precipitation in 12 cycles was 393 The amount and the chemical composition of solids, produced during the 12 precipitation experiments, are given in The total amount of dry solids recovered from the 12 precipitation experiments was 847 State of the art industrial filters, used in the dewatering of sludges, can provide a final cake with more than 45% solids. Using such equipment, the amount of solid wastes to be disposed off is expected to be approximately 170 Wash water was supplied at a rate of 2.2 As seen in the table, metal concentrations in drained water were reduced below existing guidelines for disposal of industrial effluents in natural receivers, using approximately 1.6 The distribution of metals versus depth in the soil column and the overall extractions based on the chemical analyses of soil before and after treatment, are shown in The whole treatment had a very limited effect on soil matrix. The dry mass of treated soil was 10.9 The relative contribution of the two mechanisms, i.e. acidic dissolution and cation exchange, can be estimated by comparing the amount of acid used in the process, i.e. 0.44 The effect of treatment on the particle size distribution of agglomerates is shown in The concentration of metals after treatment as a function of the size of agglomerates is also presented in Treated soil was submitted to the US EPA Toxicity Characterisation Leaching Procedure and the results are presented in The overall flow diagram of the process, as defined from the above experimental work, is presented in In the proposed process, leaching of the soil is carried out using a CaCl The amount of HCl required for the maximum removal of metal contaminants is closely related to the composition of soil matrix. This particular soil was acidic, without any inherent alkalinity, and this has resulted in a relatively low consumption of HCl. As an example, it is reported that an alkaline soil, containing 20% of calcite in its matrix, would have required at least 4 Considering the close treatment circuit, i.e. leaching-precipitation-filtration-recycling of the filtrate, the total water output is 0.5 The remaining 1.15 The estimated costs of reagents amount to 48 Capital and additional operational costs are expected to be low using the pile leaching treatment option. The results of this experimental study indicate that it is possible to apply this low cost treatment even in fine clayey soils. The current work however was carried out in a column not exceeding the height of 50 The results of this study suggest that chloride leaching can be a cost effective treatment option for the removal of heavy metal from soils poor in calcite. The soil sample used in the study was fine in texture, i.e. 57% below 63 The whole process is based on the use of low cost reagents, i.e. HCl and lime, and can be implemented on-site using the pile leaching technique which involves lower capital and operation costs compared to the alternative of slurry phase reactors. The results of the current study indicate that it is possible to use this treatment option even for fine clayey soils, following an agglomeration pretreatment. The authors would like to acknowledge the European Commission for the financial support of this study under the BRITE EURAM Programme, Contract no. BRPR-CT96-0297.