The normal velocity curve of a falling boulder with time is fitted by a logistic curve. Without considering the rotational velocity, a logistic equation is used to fit the normal velocity curve and to derive a formula based on the momentum theorem for the normal impact force and penetration depth. Then the tangential force and the tangential coefficient of restitution (COR) are calculated based on the friction theory. The results of the proposed method indicate that the normal COR increases and the tangential COR decreases with the increasing of the stiffness of the ground material. When the total impact velocity is a constant, the incident angle has a great influence on the tangential COR, whereas the normal COR is mainly controlled by the properties of the ground material. The results also indicate that the maximum impact force suggested in this paper is comparable with that by the ASTRA in Switzerland and Japan Road Association (JRA). The penetration depth calculated using the proposed method is close to the result of the test and BIMPAM, while it is far less than that predicted by ASTRA or Pichler et al. (2005). The proposed method has the advantage of allowing systematic and theoretical calculation of the coefficient of restitution, the impact force and the penetration depth from any incident angle. The result will be more accurate if the rotational velocity is considered.Impact problems have drawn the attention of researchers in astrophysics, robotics, engineering geology and other disciplines who are interested in developing a theory to accurately predict impact behavior. Impact assessment includes four main theories: classical mechanics based on the impulse-momentum theorem, Two parameters, the coefficient of restitution (COR) or rebound velocity and the maximum impact force, primarily determine the rockfall trajectory and the degree of damage, respectively. The COR, which is related to the physical and mechanical properties of the falling boulder and the ground material and to the incidence velocity, is an important parameter that reflects the dissipated energy during impact. A number of rockfall models represent the rebound in a simplified way using one or two overall coefficients, which are called the COR. The COR is a function of the amount of boulder energy lost during the impact process. A few models use only one restitution coefficient, quantifying the dissipation in terms of either velocity loss In theory, the normal and tangential CORs both should not be more than 1.0 when a spherical boulder impacts on a smooth ground surface. However, in the field and lab tests, the normal or tangential COR can be larger than 1.0. The rough ground surface or angular boulder would change the rebound angle and thereby alter the normal and tangential rebound velocities. In terms of the conservation of energy, the ratio of rebound velocity to incident velocity is never greater than 1.0 without considering the rotational velocity. Then according to the characteristics of CORs, the rebound velocity could be distributed in three zones as shown in Rockfall protection is an another important subject of study in rockfall impacts, and the impact force is the key parameter in designing protection structures. Investigations are essential for collecting data regarding the action of rocks on protection structures and then calibrating the numerical codes. Several half-scale and full-scale experimental studies have been conducted to determine the damping abilities of the cushion covering rockfall protection galleries (often called rock sheds) for design purposes. ASTRA expressed the maximum force formula as follows: The JRA also suggested a formula to calculate the impact force, as follows: where the unit of each variable is as follows: Lame's parameter for cushion materials, The last method is recommended by JTJ013-95. The impact force is expressed as follows: Penetration depth is another significant index addressed by researchers and engineering protection designers. Labiouse et al. where Hertz When carefully calibrated based on the experimental data, numerical modeling of the impacts can help researchers better understand and quantify the energy diffusion and dissipation inside the absorbing cushion. This modeling can also contribute to assess the effects of various parameters that cannot be studied directly, and to improve the design of protection structures. During the last decade, many efforts have been devoted to the numerical modeling of the impact on rockfall, such as the finite element (FE) and discrete element (DE) methods. Assumed that the ground is smooth and the boulder is a ball, this paper is organized as follows: first, we introduce the characteristics of the boulder motion parameters during impact and demonstrate that the normal velocity of a falling rock with time complies with a logistic curve; second, we present a new method that fits the velocity versus time function of the normal velocity using a logistic curve and then derive the penetration depth and the impact force. Moreover, assuming that the tangential impact force does not affect the normal impact, the velocity vs. time function of the tangential impact force is established, and an expression for the tangential COR is derived. Finally, we discuss how the impact force, the COR and the penetration depth vary with the incident angle. During this collision process, the rock impacts the ground with considerable force which is much greater than the weight of the rock. Pichler Based on the relationship of each normal direction at the contact point between two bodies, this impact can be divided into frontal impact and oblique impact. Frontal impact occurs when the directions of motion of the two colliding particles coincide with the line of impact or when a moving body travels at right angles to the surface of a stationary body as As shown in where During the rebound phase, the velocity increases gradually from zero to where where Consider an imperfectly elastic impact between one boulder and the ground. The mass of the boulder is where Similar to the compression phase, the time of the rebound phase can be expressed as Therefore, the following equation yields the entire impact time: According to Eq. The acceleration, Then, we can use the following relation: However, we know the normal acceleration of rockfalls equals zero at Rearranging Eq. Then, Eq. where the second part is added in the base of Eq. This formula can be regarded as a quadratic equation with one unknown of which can be transformed to yield the following relation: Eq. Because the impact velocity increases with the impact time (the upward vector is positive as mentioned above), according to the characteristic of a logistic curve, the parameter Neglecting the gravitational acceleration causes an underestimation of the normal impact force, Because the displacement at Frontal impacts rarely occur in rockfalls. The vast majority of impacts are oblique impacts; therefore, the studies of oblique impacts are more realistic and significant. The incident angle, In oblique impacts between a boulder and the ground, we assume that the normal characteristics (e.g., velocity and impact force) are not affected by the tangential characteristics; thus, an oblique impact can be separated into a normal impact and a tangential impact. The normal impact is not affected by the tangential impact, whereas the latter is controlled by the former. The first formula for the tangential force, By ignoring the lateral pressure of the ground material on the boulder during impact and assumed that the ground is a smooth surface, the tangential velocity of the falling rock always tends to decrease to zero, and this velocity never becomes negative (the rock never moves in the opposite direction). The vector of the initial tangential velocity is set as positive, then the tangential velocity of the rock, where The tangential COR can then be derived as follows: where The total impact force, The field tests and BIMPAM, which was proposed by Calvetti et al., In addition, Pichler's method and test As shown in Moreover, the penetration depths calculated by various methods are very different. The penetration depths are nearly the same according to the ASTRA, Pichler The majority energies of granite boulders in Pichler's tests were dissipated, and in According to Hertz's elastic theory or the Landarani damping-elastic model, the maximum impact forces should coincide with the zero-normal velocity or the maximum penetration depth. However, the maximum impact force appears before the penetration depth reaches the maximum value from these figures as our proposed method, which conforms to the observations. In this section, the influence of the incident angle on the COR, impact force and penetration depth will be discussed. Pichler's No. 2 test in To test the accuracy of the COR derived from the logistic curve, the granite boulder with a spherical radius of 0.965 The study demonstrates that both the normal and tangential coefficients of restitution increase as the incidence angle increases. The growth of the normal COR with the incidence angle is a gently concave-downward curve. The tangential COR is not sensitive to low incidence angles until it reaches a certain value; then, it increases as the hardness of rock and soil increase. Beyond the lower limiting value, the In this work, the boulder is considered to be a sphere. However, in field or lab tests, the ground surface is often rough, and the shape of boulders is angular. Each of these factors can alter the rebound angle. Consequently, the CORs are changed, and the COR can sometimes be greater than 1.0. Based on the No. 2 test of Pichler, The analysis indicates that the impact force gradually decreases and the COR increases with increase in the incident angle. The maximum normal impact force and the tangential COR are particularly sensitive to the incident angle, while the normal COR is sensitive to the inclination only for high Penetration depth is a very important parameter when designing the thickness of a cushion layer to control rockfalls. The penetration depth varies with the incident velocity and incident angle. Taking the data of Pichler et al.  Rockfalls are a major hazard for highways and railways in mountainous terrain. Although rockfalls do not pose the same level of economic risk as large-scale slope failures, which can interrupt major transportation routes for days at a time, the number of people killed by rockfalls tends to be of the same order of magnitude as those killed by all other forms of rock slope instabilities. The rockfall impact process directly controls the boulder trajectory, which determines the size of the boulder runout zone. This paper presents an analytical method for studying the impact process of rockfalls on the ground, particularly the variations in the boulder motion parameters as a function of the impact time. Based on fitting the travel–time curve in the normal direction using the logistic function, we derived an analytical expression of other rockfall parameters, such as the COR, impact force and penetration depth. The theoretical method presented in this paper is systematic and can be applied to calculate most of the movement parameters for a whole impact process. Finally, we discuss the effect of the incident angle on the aforementioned rockfall parameters. The results can be summarized as follows: When the total impact velocity is constant, the normal and tangential coefficients of restitution both vary similarly and are affected by the incident angle and the properties of the ground surface materials. The larger the incident angle, the greater the COR. The COR increases with an increasing elastic modulus of the ground material. Moreover, the incident angle significantly affects the tangential COR, whereas the normal COR is controlled by the properties of the ground material. In theory, the COR of a spherical boulder that impacts a smooth surface should be less than 1.0, whereas normal or tangential COR values in the field or lab tests may be greater than 1.0 because of rough ground surfaces or angular boulders. However, the ratio of the total impact velocity to the total rebound velocity should always be less than 1.0 when the rotation motion is neglected. The impact force is an important parameter in the design of rockfall protection structures. The new proposed method for characterizing the rockfall parameters is accurate. The maximum impact force is comparable to the forces calculated by ASTRA and JRA. The proposed value is closer to that of the JRA when the ground material is stiff while it tends to that of the JRA when the ground material is soft. The JTJ013-95 method is low accuracy and is not suggested to be applied in engineering. The theoretical penetration depth obtained using Eq. The process of rockfall impact is, in fact, a three-dimensional problem involving diverse styles of rock movement, including bouncing, sliding and rolling. Lateral deviation and rolling are not considered in this paper and remain as topics of future study. In addition, we think the normal impact is independent of the tangential impact, which simplifies the analysis process. The coupling effect should be considered in the further. There are many issues to be resolved in the analysis of rockfalls, and the combination of kinematics and mechanics with probability theory offers advantages for the development of future analytical methods. Their effective combination could resolve the difficulties associated with the characterization of the runout zone and the potential hazards posed by rockfalls and thereby permit the development of effective protective measures. Financial assistance from the