The feasibility of dewatering coal tailings slurry by forward osmosis (FO) membrane process was investigated in this research. A prototype cell was designed and used for the dewatering tests. A cellulosic FO membrane (Hydration Technology Innovations, LLC, Albany, OR) was used for the dewatering studies due to its high fouling resistance. Representative samples of coal tailings slurry were collected from the thickener outflow at American Coal Company (Galatia, Illinois). Characterization studies were conducted to obtain particle size distribution (PSD), total dissolved solids (TDS) and the solids content of the slurry. The impact of the slurry properties such as solids weight percent, osmotic pressure, and particle size on the dewatering rates was determined. Furthermore, the impact of slurry conditioning by the addition of flocculant and gypsum on the rate and extent of dewatering was also investigated. Dewatering to a total solids content of more than seventy weight percent from an initial solids content of approximately thirty percent was achieved in all cases. The dewatering rate and extent were found to be a function of particle size, particle shape, TDS content, and mixing. The membrane material was shown to withstand repeated use over a period of thirty trials without deterioration of performance. The results obtained from this research suggest that osmotic dewatering of coal refuse slurry is feasible.As-mined coal contains non-combustible impurities, sulfur containing minerals, and hazardous trace elements that need removal prior to use. The removal of impurities – coal cleaning or preparation – is predominantly carried out by water-based processes. The resulting waste streams in coal preparation plants are categorized by particle size distribution (PSD). The larger particle size fraction can be readily dewatered and disposed of in waste piles or used for backfilling. It is the fine size fraction that poses the greatest challenge due to the presence of clays, slimes, and other mineral impurities. This fine refuse stream typically constitutes only two to three percent solids. It is thickened to about thirty percent solids content before being discharged to impoundments ( Several options for dewatering fine coal and refuse are available to coal preparation plants ( Forward osmosis (FO) refers to net water flows driven by an osmotic pressure gradient arising from the separation of a feed solution of low solute concentration from a draw solution of a higher solute concentration when separated by a selectively-permeable membrane. Osmotic pressure ( This research investigates the potential for dewatering of coal tailings slurry by forward osmosis. Additionally the robustness of the membrane material in terms of cleanability and reusability was examined for a limited period. Super-Q water with a resistivity greater than 18.3 Sample C2 was analyzed for total solids, total dissolved solids (TDS), ionic composition, and particle size distribution (PSD). The total solids of the original and dewatered samples were determined in-house by method SM 2540B (dried at 103–105  The membrane was oriented with the active layer facing the draw solution while the support layer faced the feed solution. Each membrane was tested for absence of defects before use for coal tailings dewatering. This was achieved by obtaining the DI water flux and the MgSO Feed slurries of varying solids content were prepared using the separated solids fraction of sample C2. The solid content of C2 was separated from the sample using a centrifuge (Model j2-21m, Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). Fine solids remaining in the supernatant were filtered and added to the settled solids. In order to remove the dissolved solids, DI water washes were utilized until conductivity reading was below 100 The TDS of the C2 sample was adjusted by adding washed and dried solids to obtain a solids content of 30% (w/w) with a saline solution that corresponded to 100%, 50%, and 25% of the TDS in the original C2 sample. The solid content of 30% was selected for these experiments as it reflects the solids content of the as-received coal tailings samples. The as-received coal tailings samples were conditioned by the addition of polymer flocculants or gypsum to explore the effect of change in slurry properties such as particle size and heterogeneity in particle size and morphology. The AQUAMARK’s AQ587 and AQ200 polymers were applied at optimal dose of 40 Membrane cleanability and reusability was evaluated by using the same membrane in thirty dewatering runs. The membrane was cleaned using a water rinse during the first twenty-four tests. The membrane was then cleaned by osmotic backwashing achieved by switching feed and draw solution flows. Osmotic washing was carried out for three hours; then the membrane was rinsed with DI water until conductivity was below 10  The solids content of C2 was 30% w/w. This represents the solids fraction in the refuse stream currently obtained by chemical addition and thickening in the coal preparation plant. Results presented in this section can be qualitatively explained using phenomenological relationships for flow through packed beds. Typically, flow through packed beds is described by a Kozeny–Carman type relationship. In an undisturbed bed, the resistance to flow is dictated by particle size, PSD, porosity, and bed height in addition to properties such as viscosity. The resistance is inversely proportional to the square of the particle size. As the PSD gets broader, a lower porosity is obtained due to closer packing. This increases resistance to flow. Irregularly shaped particles also tend to pack more tightly compared to spherical particles and this too increases resistance to flow. Dewatering of coal refuse slurry with a solids content of 20% was conducted under both mixed and non-mixed conditions.  A comparative illustration of the rate of dewatering of sample C2 with three different solids content (20, 30, and 50 It was also of interest to this study to determine the effect of the feed slurry osmotic pressure, as measured by TDS, on the dewatering rate. The instantaneous flux (J) (equivalent to dewatering rate in This suggests that lowering the osmotic pressure of the feed solution while keeping the draw solution osmotic pressure fixed will lead to an increased driving force and greater dewatering rate. This increase is not necessarily linear due to accumulation and depletion of ions at the membrane interface – a phenomenon termed concentration polarization and the variability of the proportionality constant. It is clear in this study that an increase in driving force results in greater dewatering but not necessarily linearly. For example, while a halving of the TDS from 100% to 50% results in a significant increase in the dewatering rate, a further halving does not result in a proportional decline (see The PSD of the solids content of slurries have a direct impact on the rate and extent of dewatering. Increasing the particle size of the coal tailings slurry increases the amount of free water available to ready dewatering. A larger particle size is also beneficial due to the higher permeability of the filter cake. The addition of the two polymer flocculants to sample C2 resulted in an increased particle size, an increased water flux and a higher dewatering rate compared to the control sample. The average water flux and the achieved solid content of the flocculated and the control C2 is given in Sludge dewatering enhancement by the addition of physical conditioner is well documented in the literature ( When mixed with coal tailings slurry as in this study, it increased the hydraulic conductivity. The morphology (size, shape, and/or surface) of solid particles in sample C2 and of gypsum were obtained using an Energy FEI/Philips XL30 FEG scanning electron microscope (SEM). It is clear from the SEM images in In summary, the results presented indicate that it is possible to dewater coal tailings slurry to above 70% solids content without the application of mechanical pressure. Moreover, the rate of dewatering can be increased by manipulating factors such as particle size through flocculation, through the addition of external materials such as gypsum, and by reducing the feed osmotic pressure. The robustness, cleanability, and reusability of the membrane are very important economic parameters. Membrane fouling is a major obstacle to the efficient application of membrane technology in various applications; however, the low risk of membrane fouling is one of the strengths of FO. The same piece of membrane was used repeatedly to evaluate the impact of irreversible fouling. In Dewatering of coal tailings slurry can be accomplished using an osmotic gradient without application of any external pressure. Dewatering to a solids level well in excess of 70% can be routinely achieved. Mixing of slurry increases dewatering rates due to intimate contact between water and membrane and provisioning of channels for water flow. The dewatering rate is dependent on the total dissolved solids (TDS) level of the slurry. The higher the TDS level, the lower the driving force and the lower the dewatering rate. The solids content had less of an impact on the dewatering rate until the formation of a network and initiation of consolidation. The larger the particle size in the feed stream, the higher the dewatering rate. Increasing particle size through agglomeration or flocculation increases dewatering rates. The mixing of spherical particles such as gypsum into the thickener underflow results in a disruption of the cake structure thereby promoting improved dewatering rates. The robustness of the membrane was tested by using the same membrane coupon repeatedly over thirty trials. No deterioration in performance was noted over these trials. Most importantly, the membrane was easily cleaned by the use of a water rinse This work was partially supported by grants made possible by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity through the Office of Coal Development and the Illinois Clean Coal Institute. Any mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute endorsement or recommendation for use. We thank Dr. Joseph Hirschi of the Illinois Clean Coal Institute for his help with this project.