This paper focuses on the adsorption behavior and mechanism of the isopropanol amine collector as a novel collector on magnesite ore to expand the application of hydroxyl amine collectors and improve the efficiency of low-grade magnesite ore resource usage. Novel insights into the adsorption mechanism of the isopropanol amine collector on magnesite ore were proposed through a combined experimental and theoretical computational study. Flotation tests showed that the collector exhibited different flotation behaviors to three minerals (quartz > dolomite > magnesite). Adsorption was achieved due to the electrostatic and hydrogen bond affinities by Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and zeta potential measurements, and the exposed O on the surface was involved in the adsorption interaction. Molecular dynamics simulations confirmed the same rules of the flotation behaviors and illustrated that a compact inner layer of N-dodecyl-isopropanolamine (DIPA) formed on the quartz surface. The hydrogen bonds played a significant role in the different flotation behaviors of DIPA to quartz (OS··HOR and OS··HNR), magnesite (only little OS··HOR), and dolomite (OS··HOR). Additionally, the results indicated that the flotation behaviors of DIPA were closely related to the O sites density and charge of the surfaces of three minerals. Furthermore, the results reveal some straightforward mechanisms of introducing isopropanol groups at the molecular scale, which is vital for screening the functional groups and guiding the design of the novel collectors for minerals.Magnesite ore is the primary sources of magnesium, and is still the rawest refractory material [ The reverse flotation is usually used to obtain higher-grade magnesite, which often utilizes cationic collectors such as amines (dodecylamine, and ether amine). Despite a series of novel cationic surfactants, such as tertiary amines, amides, ester amines, polyamines, quaternary ammonium salts and organosilicone, having been synthesized in laboratory for the flotation separation of the iron ore and silicate minerals with the excellent separation results [ The selective separation flotation of useful minerals (magnesite) and gangues (quartz and dolomite) is mainly achieved using the distinctions of the surface of the mineral in physical and chemical characteristics [ In this work, considering the insufficient of the traditional cationic collector, DIPA was introduced to the reverse flotation of magnesite ore as a novel collector for simplifying the technological process, lowering the cost, and improving the efficiency of the resources usage. The distinctions of the minerals' surface and the characteristics of DIPA were studied using surface tension measurements and a theoretical computational simulation. The adsorption behavior and mechanism of DIPA on the surfaces of quartz, magnesite, and dolomite were investigated using single mineral flotation tests, FTIR spectra studies, zeta potential measurements, and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The adsorption mechanism of DIPA/minerals on the molecular scale can be clearly understood using MD simulations. The roles that the functional groups (expecially, introducing the second groups) played in these adsorption processes are vital for understanding the adsorption of the cationic collector on the surface of minerals and guiding the design of the novel collector for minerals. Representative samples of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz were obtained from Haicheng in Liaoning Province, China. Hand sorted minerals were crushed using a hammer and then were grounded in a laboratory porcelain ball mill to obtain −0.074 mm fractions. High purity silica samples were prepared by leaching with dilute hydrochloric acid. Magnesite and dolomite samples were further purified using a magnetic separator and the shaking table. The chemical compositions of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz are shown in DIPA which has one hydroxypropyl amine, was used as a collector and synthesized in the laboratory with a purity of 98%. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as the pH adjustment. KCl was employed as the background electrolyte solution. All chemicals for the experiments were analytical grade and obtained from Sinopharm. Deionized water was used in all tests. The flotation tests were carried out in an XFG Surface tension measurements were conducted by JK99B type automatic tensiometer (Shanghai zhongchen digital technic apparatus co., Ltd). The measurements were performed using a platinum plate method at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C). Deionized water was used to calibrate the instrument and prepare the solution with different concentrations of the reagents. Each surface tension value was the average values of more than three measurements. The zeta potentials of minerals before and after interacting with the collector were measured using a Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd. Britain). Finely ground minerals (20 mg) below −5 μm were added to a 50 mL aqueous solution containing 1 × 10 FTIR spectra of the samples were measured using a Nicolet 740 FTIR spectrometer at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C) in the wavenumber ranges from 400 to 4000 cm The selective adsorption behaviors of DIPA on the surfaces of quartz, magnesite, and dolomite were studied using the methods of molecular dynamic simulation using the Materials Studio 8.0 software package. Models of the minerals and reagents were established and optimized using the Dmol The adsorption systems of quartz (29.20 Å × 29.46 Å × 76.36 Å), dolomite (30.07 Å × 28.84 Å × 81.22 Å) and magnesite (28.39 Å × 27.82 Å × 87.54 Å) were constructed and consisted of three layers. The mineral surfaces were the frozen bottom layer and were built from the (101) surface of quartz, magnesite, or dolomite. 500 water molecules constructed the frozen top layer, which did not have periodic boundary conditions. The medium layer was relaxed and composed of 1000 water molecules and 15 DIPA. Based on the solution chemical calculation, the DIPA was predominantly in ionic forms. The initial surfactants were verticality positioned and the polar head groups of DIPA faced the negatively charged mineral surfaces ( The flotation performances of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz using DIPA were investigated at the natural pH of the slurries (8.25, 9.06, and 7.14, respectively) and the corresponding results are shown in The surface activity, which is often regarded as one of the most important factors in the flotation process, was studied using surface tension measurements [ For further exploring the adsorption behavior and mechanism of DIPA in the flotation of magnesite ore, the zeta potentials and flotation behaviors of the minerals as a function of the pH with or without 30.00 mg/L DIPA were conducted and are shown in  Meanwhile, The distribution diagram of the DIPA solution as a function of the pH is illustrated in Form  The quantity and type of surface-exposed elements after mineral liberation causes the differences in surface wettability, surface electrical properties, and adsorption characteristics [ The Mulliken atomic partial charges of DIPA and DDA are shown in To further the exploration of the adsorption characteristics of DIPA with minerals, the adsorption behavior of DIPA on the surfaces of quartz, magnesite, and dolomite were investigated, and the results are showed in The adsorption energy value of the mineral surface with a reagent is known to characterize the interaction intensity of the mineral surface with reagents. Therefore, the adsorption energy could quantify and assess the flotation performance of the reagents [ The relative concentration of oxygen and nitrogen in DIPA on three minerals' surface are shown in The adsorption of DIPA on magnesite surface was investigated through a combined experimental and theoretical computational study. The flotation tests indicated that, DIPA exhibited different collecting abilities for the three minerals (quartz > dolomite > magnesite), and thus, the flotation separation of magnesite ore could be conducted successfully at a wide range pH (4.18–9.17). FTIR spectra and zeta potential measurements indicated that adsorption behavior was achieved by electrostatic and hydrogen bond affinity. The MD simulation results showed that the adsorbability of DIPA on dolomite surface was lower than that on quartz surface with forming a compact inner layer but higher than that on magnesite surface with forming an incompact inner layer. Meanwhile, the amount of hydrogen bonds formed between DIPA and dolomite surface was less than that of quartz surface but more than that of magnesite surface. These results indicated that the exposed atom of O on mineral surface was involved in the adsorption, meanwhile, the O sites density and charge of the three minerals' surfaces affected the formation of hydrogen bonds and the electronegativity on surface, which resulted in different adsorption behaviors of DIPA on the surfaces of quartz, magnesite, and dolomite. This work was supported by the