Leaching of the hazardous electric arc furnace (EAF) dust containing mainly zinc ferrite and zinc oxide, accompanied by minor concentrations of arsenic compounds, was investigated using sulfuric acid. In order to reach the maximum recovery of zinc, the leaching solution was adjusted to recover both iron and zinc at their maximum possible values. To obtain a high recovery value of zinc and iron, analyzed by AAS, the optimum leaching condition was found to be the temperature of 90 °C, the sulfuric acid concentration of 3 M, the particle size of 75 μm, the S/L ratio of 1:10 g/mL and the leaching time of 2 h. The percentages of the zinc and iron recovery under the optimum condition were ca. 98.6% and 99.1% respectively, which were verified by a confirmation test and were very close to the predicted values of 100% based on the optimized model, obtained through the software. From the thermodynamics’ point of view, it has been found that Zn2+ is the predominant species (90%) under the leaching condition applied. Moreover, the predominant species of iron are FeSO4
                     +, FeHSO4
                     2+, Fe(SO4)2
                     - and Fe3+ in the magnitudes of 65.8%, 25.6%, 4.4% and 4.0%, respectively. According to the kinetic results, the controlling step in the leaching was the chemical reaction at the most of the operating temperatures and times. In order to purify the zinc solution for electrowinning, iron and arsenic were removed through the jarosite formation process as confirmed by the XRD results. The speciation of arsenic in the precipitated jarosite was explored by XPS. Finally, the low concentrations of arsenic (less than 0.1 ppm) and iron (less than 50 ppm) were determined by the ICP analysis.The electric arc furnace (EAF) dust is a waste by-product of the steel production. The EAF dust is considered as an environmentally hazardous waste due to the presence of heavy metals such as Zn, Pb, Cd, Mn, Cr, and Fe. Moreover, during the years, the usage of galvanized steel in the automobile industry has increased which has led to the increment of the zinc content in the EAF dust. It contains 2–46% Zn which is in the form of both zincite (ZnO) and franklinite (ZnFe The majority of the zinc metal in the EAF dust is in the form of franklinite (ZnFe Hydrometallurgical processes such as acid leaching ( Leaching of the EAF dust is influenced by the temperature, the acid concentration, the leaching time, and the solid to liquid (S/L) ratio ( The thermodynamics of the EAF dust leaching in sulfuric acid has been studied and the reaction of zinc ferrite, which is the predominant phase, is suggested as follows ( By plotting E-pH diagrams of Zn–Fe–S–H The kinetics of the zinc ferrite leaching in sulfuric acid was studied by The pre-treated EAF dust was provided by Khalessazan Company. In the pretreatment process the chloride in the sample was removed through washing and adding sodium carbonate. The sample was homogenized before the leaching experiments. The sample was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) using a GBC 932, (Australia) instrument. The chemical composition of this sample is presented in Sulfuric acid (H Before the main leaching process and design of the experiment, a series of initial tests were conducted to maximize the amount of the zinc recovery while suppressing the iron content in the leach solution. According to the literature, a high efficiency zinc recovery from a zinc-and-iron-containing complex source takes place when the leaching condition provides a situation in which the recovery of both iron and zinc is maximal. In other words, the zinc recovery does not reach its maximum value when the iron content in the leach solution is determined to be minimized. The results revealed that the zinc content in the leaching solution was below 30%. Thus, the design of experiment was utilized to maximize the recovery of both zinc and iron ( To minimize the number of experiments and optimize the parameters involved in the leaching process, the design of experiment was applied using the central composite design (CCD) based on the RSM method. The CCD needs a total of (2 All experiments were conducted in a 500 mL three-neck Pyrex reactor equipped with a glass condenser for reducing the loss of water caused by evaporation. Based on the S/L ratio a predetermined amount of the EAF dust sample was leached in 500 mL of an acidic solution at a specific temperature, sulfuric acid concentration, particle size, S/L ratio, and leaching time ( The leach solution, which was obtained under the optimum condition, contained a great amount of zinc and iron. Iron is known as a troublesome element in the zinc electrowinning process and should be removed. The jarosite precipitation is considered as an effective method for the elimination of iron from a zinc-rich leach solution. In this regard, first, the filtrated leach solution, obtained under the optimum condition, was heated to 95 °C. Then, 180 mL of 7 M sodium hydroxide was added to this solution gradually, and the acidity of the solution increased from below zero (3 M sulfuric acid) to a level with the pH of 1.5–1.8 through this process. The mixture was stirred at 500 rpm, and after about 9 h the brown solution turned to a colorless one in which iron was eliminated in the form of the jarosite precipitate. Finally, low concentrations of arsenic (less than 0.1 ppm) and iron (less than 50 ppm) were determined by the ICP analysis. Leaching tests were performed at the optimum ranges designated by the DOE method. In order to achieve the highest recovery of metal ions, RSM was used to optimize effective parameters involved in the leaching process. Considering the analysis of variances (ANOVA), the following linear equation was obtained for evaluating the zinc recovery as a function of independent parameters: A quadratic polynomial was formulated for the iron recovery: where A is the sulfuric acid concentration, B is the temperature, C is the particle size, D is the S/L ratio and E is the leaching time, which are the coded values of the experimental variables. To transform a real test value into the related coded one the following equation was utilized: Furthermore, the regression coefficients (R The chosen S/L ratio was in the range of 0.3 to 0.1 g/mL. As it can be seen in Eqs. The effect of the particle size on the zinc and iron recovery is presented in The interaction between the S/L ratio and the particle size is shown in The effect of the temperature was investigated over a range of 60 °C–90 °C for both zinc and iron recoveries and is shown in Although the aforementioned reactions (Eqs. The effect of the sulfuric acid concentration on the zinc and iron recoveries is presented in The leaching time, as an effective parameter, was investigated over a range of 1–2 h. Increasing the leaching time from 1 to 2 h, enhanced both zinc and iron recoveries ( After leaching under the optimum condition, the leach solution was filtered. The chemical composition of the leach residue is presented in  To show the predominant dissolved species under the applied leaching condition, the Pourbaix diagrams were used to determine stable dissolved species. This section aims to provide the thermodynamic data for various aqueous species of Zn, Fe, and Mn, and determine which species are the most stable ones under the EAF dust leaching condition. All calculations were done for the optimum condition, obtained in section Based on the species mole percentage in The following reactions could be proposed to explain the leaching of zinc and iron compounds in 3.0 M H As a result, the thermodynamic aspect of the EAF dust leaching showed a close correlation between the various stable species in 3.0 M sulfuric acid at different temperatures. More detailed thermodynamic calculations will be discussed further, based on the dominant species, in the next section. The thermodynamic values for reactions (6) to (9) are shown in Kinetic experiments were conducted under the optimum leaching condition of the sulfuric acid concentration of 3 M, the S/L of 0.1 g/mL, the particle size of 75 μm, and the leaching time of 2 h. Based on the particle size analysis (  To identify whether or not the controlling mechanism remained unchanged during the whole leaching period, the equations of either the mass transfer control or the chemical reaction control can be plotted against time. A change in the slope, if any, indicates a variation in the leaching mechanism at the breakpoint. The equation for the chemical reaction control is (  The controlling steps for the leaching of each metal compound at different temperatures were determined by evaluating how they fitted the procedure proposed by The activation energies of the leaching process before and after the 60th min were calculated by fitting the data shown in As mentioned earlier, the leaching solution contains a high concentration of iron which negatively affects the electrowinning process of zinc ( The XRD pattern confirms the formation of jarosite, leading to the elimination of iron from the leaching solution ( In the zinc electrowinning, some impurities such as arsenic, even at very low concentrations, cause a substantial negative effect on the zinc production ( The arsenic mobility in the Fe-containing solution is greatly controlled by its co-precipitation and/or adsorption on crystalline iron compounds ( In order to confirm the removal of iron and arsenic, the leach solution was analyzed by ICP after the formation of jarosite. The ICP results showed that the iron and arsenic contents dropped to less than 50 and 0.1 ppm respectively, while the zinc concentration was 17500 ppm. The concentration of Cd, Mn, Pb, and Cu were 135, 1100, 4.8, and 209 ppm respectively, after the jarosite precipitation. The chemical composition of the jarosite precipitate is presented in Leaching of the EAF dust as a hazardous waste was performed in a sulfuric acid media to recover the zinc and iron compounds, and a model was developed to optimize the leaching parameters. In both zinc and iron leaching systems, the most effective parameter was the S/L ratio and the least operational parameters were the particle size and the temperature. The experimental data showed that the S/L ratio had interactions with the temperature, the sulfuric acid concentration, and the particle size in the iron recovery; while no interaction was detected among the effective parameters in the zinc recovery. The optimum condition for the zinc and iron recovery was determined to be the temperature of 90 °C, the sulfuric acid concentration of 3 M, the particle size of 75 μm, the S/L ratio of 0.1 g/mL, and the leaching time of 2 h. The Zinc and iron recoveries were obtained as 98.6% and 99.1% respectively, under the optimum condition. Based on the thermodynamic calculations, the dominant species for zinc and iron ions were Zn According to the kinetic results obtained from a shrinking sphere model, two steps are involved in both zinc and iron leaching, before and after the time period of 60 min. At all studied temperatures the rate-controlling step is a chemical reaction, with higher kinetics before the time period of 60 min related to the zinc oxide leaching and slower kinetics after the time period of 60 min connected to the zinc ferrite leaching. The XPS and ICP results confirmed the removal of arsenic, as an environmental hazard, from the leaching solution by the jarosite formation, leading to an extremely low concentration of iron (50 ppm) and arsenic (less than 0.1 ppm). Parsa Khanmohammadi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Visualization, Saeid Karimi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing, Project administration, Fereshteh Rashchi: Conceptualization, Validation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Saeed Sheibani: Methodology, Validation, Resources, Data curation. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at