A novel method to limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on the flotation of pentlandite is described in this paper. Flotation results show that the presence of hydrophilic serpentine slimes results in lower recoveries of the valuable pentlandite while quartz particles do not interfere with the flotation of pentlandite. The addition of quartz particles can limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on the flotation of pentlandite. Zeta potential measurements illustrate that quartz is more negative than pentlandite and the attraction force between serpentine and quartz is stronger than that value between serpentine and pentlandite, thus serpentine slimes adsorb selectively on quartz surface in preference to the surfaces of pentlandite.Serpentine is a common gangue mineral encountered in complex sulfide ores ( The pioneering work of Sun showed that the slime coating was dense when the zeta potentials of slimes and minerals are dissimilar in magnitude and sign ( In this investigation, a method that uses the adsorption selectivity of serpentine slimes was used to limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on the flotation of pentlandite. Quartz, being hydrophilic with a negatively charged surface was selected as the mineral to remove serpentine slimes from pentlandite surface. The serpentine used for all experiments was obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province, China. The mineral composition of the serpentine selected for experiments as determined by XRD was as follows: serpentine 98% and chlorite 2%. The sample was dry ground and screened. The particle size distribution determined using a Malvern Instruments Mastersizer was 100% — 10 The pure quartz sample was obtained from Changsha, Hunan Province, China. Mineralogical and X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the quartz sample was of high purity. The sample was dry ground and screened. The (− The pentlandite sample was prepared using “pentlandite rocks” from Jinchuan, Gansu Province, China. This sample was passed through a magnetic separator three times to remove the magnetic pyrrhotite fraction. The non-magnetic fraction containing the pentlandite was dry ground and screened. The (− PAX (potassium amyl xanthate) and MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) were used as collector and frother respectively. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength and HCL (hydrochloric acid) and KOH (potassium hydroxide) were used as pH regulators. All the reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Deionized double distilled water was used for all tests. Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical agitation flotation machine. The impeller speed was fixed at 1800 Zeta potential measurements on pentlandite, quartz and serpentine were carried out using a zeta potential meter. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength at 10 The effect of PAX concentration on the floatability of pentlandite, quartz and serpentine at pH When fine serpentine particles were added prior to collector addition, the recovery of pentlandite decreased with increasing pH from a maximum recovery of 86% to 8% when 2.5  The formation of slime coatings is controlled by the interaction energies between the slime and mineral particles and involves the process of aggregation. Aggregation between sulfide mineral particles and slime species is generally controlled by double layer interactions and van der Waals forces and is quantitatively predicted by the DLVO theory. The electrostatic interaction is the decisive force that controls the aggregation between minerals as van der Waals forces existing between dissimilar particles are generally attractive forces. Most studies on the formation of slime coatings on minerals have confirmed that it is the electrostatic attraction between slime particle and mineral substrate that induces contact and adhesion of slime particles to the surface ( For the same flotation system, the presence of slimes on mineral surfaces is dependent on the surface charge of the particles. The results in The use of quartz to improve the flotation of sulfide minerals is well known. Chander found that when the proportion of quartz particles contained in a chalcopyrite or pyrite quartz mixture is increased, the flotation of chalcopyrite and pyrite is improved. They have attributed this behavior to the preferential adsorption or precipitation of metal hydroxides (formed in solution following iron dissolution from the corresponding metal sulfide mineral) on the quartz surface rather than on the sulfide surface ( Chander thought that the removal of oxidation products from a sulfide mineral surface by quartz seems to indicate that attritioning is the mode of surface cleaning by quartz ( The serpentine slimes adsorb selectively on quartz surface in preference to the surfaces of pentlandite as quartz has more negative surface charge than that of pentlandite and the attraction force between serpentine and quartz is stronger than that value between serpentine and pentlandite. Thus, the detrimental effect of serpentine slimes on the flotation of pentlandite is limited by the addition of quartz. The authors acknowledge the support of the