The phenol derivatives 3-methylcatechol, 4-methylcatechol, 4-ethylcatechol and m-cresol were polymerized through their ability to reduce gold ions. 3-Methylcatechol has the highest susceptibility to oxidation by gold ions, indicating that the location and number of OH groups and hydrophobic groups adjacent to the OH groups in phenol derivatives are crucial. Twenty-five millimoles of trivalent gold ion were completely reduced to the zero-valent state by catechol derivatives in approximately 4h, with precipitation of gold particles. The oxidized phenol derivatives produced by the reduction of gold ions formed water-insoluble polymers with molecular weight approximately 1000gmol−1. The polymerization of phenols using a redox reaction between phenol derivatives and gold ions holds possibility as a novel synthetic method for polyphenols.Polyphenols, which are commonly found in fruits such as persimmon and grape, are composed of monomer units of catechol and pyrogallol with multiple hydroxyl groups, showing high affinity to metal ions and proteins. In the food industry, polyphenols function as antioxidants in living organisms, and have been intensively studied as functional food components. In hydrometallurgy, metal ions in wastewater are removed with adsorbent-containing polyphenols, via adsorption and reduction reactions. Nakajima reported that Cr(VI) and V(V) were reduced to Cr(III) and V(IV), respectively, on adsorbents prepared from persimmon tannin Conventional syntheses of polyphenols are classified into chemical and enzymatic methods. In the chemical methods, phenol reacts with formaldehyde in acidic or alkaline media, forming Novolac and Resol resins Inoue et al. prepared a novel adsorbent from the peels of fruits to selectively capture gold ions, using the ability of tannin and catechin as components of polyphenol to selectively reduce gold ions to elemental gold in acidic media In the present study, a novel polyphenol synthesis was performed using the redox reactions of various phenol derivatives and gold ions. Some reports of the use of cobalt, iron, and copper catalysts to oxidize phenol to quinone 3-Methylcatechol, 4-methylcatechol and 3-Methylcatechol, 4-methylcatechol, 4-ethylcatechol, and Fifteen milligrams of 3-methylcatechol, 4-methylcatechol, 4-ethylcatechol or The change of gold ion concentration on changing the concentration of the phenol derivatives is shown in The time course of the percent reduction by phenol derivatives is shown in The yield of polyphenol formed by the polymerization of phenol derivatives is shown in The FT-IR spectra of the polyphenols formed are shown in Size exclusion chromatograms of the polyphenols are shown in The recovery method following the polymerization of the polyphenol is also important. Polyphenol polymerized from 3-methylcatechol, for instance, was dissolved to the solution above at pH 12. The composite of the polyphenol and the generated gold particle was dissolved in the solution at pH 12. The mixture was filtered to recovery the reduced gold element, and the filtered solution containing the polymerized polyphenol was obtained. Though gold is expensive, the high ORP of the gold ion enables us to polymerize the polyphenol efficiently, and the reduced gold element particles permitted recovery of the obtained polyphenol and gold particles. From the HCl solution containing some metal ions, the gold ions were selectively recovered using this method. The phenol derivatives 3-methylcatechol, 4-methylcatechol, 4-ethylcatechol and This research was supported financially by Iketani Science and Technology Foundation.