In this study, the equilibrium and dynamic surface tensions of sodium chloride and potassium chloride solutions have been measured as a function of concentration up to saturation (5.2M for NaCl and 4.1M for KCl) using sessile bubble tensiometry. The experimental results show that the surface tension of these and other salts significantly increases with increasing concentration due to negative adsorption of ions at the air/brine interface, regardless of their structure maker and breaker nature. Furthermore, the effect of these salts on the surface tension of aqueous solutions of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was also studied. These results show that the salts increased the surface activity of SDS and MIBC. In the case of SDS, KCl increased the surface activity of SDS more significantly than NaCl did. In the case of MIBC, the effect of NaCl on MIBC surface activity was more significant than that of KCl.Potash ores are a mixture of a sylvite (KCl) and halite (NaCl) with water-insoluble minerals such as clay and carbonate minerals. Potash is widely used as fertilizer in the agriculture industry. Potash is also used in glass manufacturing, soaps, plastics and pharmaceuticals ( There have been many models proposed to explain the flotation behavior of soluble salts in their saturated solutions such as an ion exchange model ( Unfortunately the surface charge theory could not answer the question of why negatively charged KCl particles are also floated with 12C anionic collectors such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Subsequently research by Hancer showed that consideration of hydration phenomena at salt crystal surfaces provides a better explanation for the flotation of alkali halide salts even when the collector is charged the same as the salt ( The presence of salt ions in solution not only changes the properties of solid/water interfaces but also the air/water interfaces, thus additionally affecting the interaction between particles and bubbles during flotation. It is important to understand how these electrolytes behave at the interfaces. In particular, their effect at the air/brine interface must also be analyzed to determine if they are a structure maker or breaker with respect to their flotation behavior. The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of soluble salts on adsorption and surface tension which might indicate a possible water structure effect. We measured the surface tension of these soluble salts up to their saturation points and investigated their effects on the surface tension of aqueous solutions of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) as a collector and frother, respectively. Finally, the Gibbs adsorption isotherm was applied for these salts in the absence of chemicals in order to obtain Gibbs surface excess. Alkali halide sodium chloride and potassium chloride salts (EMD Chemicals and Mallinckrodt) used in this study were of reagent grade. All salts were used without further purification. The anionic collector, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, C The needle and syringe used in measuring surface tension were cleaned using 6% (by volume) Deconex 15E solution (Borer, Switzerland) and rinsed with distilled water several times. Before and between measurements, the surface tension of the de-ionized water was measured and compared with the available data to ensure that no contamination was present in the system. All glassware and the other components used in the experiments were soaked for several hours in the Deconex 15E solution, rinsed in the Milli-Q water, and dried in a cabinet to protect them from dust. The experiments were carried out at room temperature (∼23 The apparatus and procedures used for the surface tension measurements have been described in a previous paper ( In this method, first a sessile bubble was generated, then, the bubble profile was captured, digitized, and finally, the image data processed. The digitized bubble profiles were fitted numerically with the solution of the Young–Laplace equation to obtain the surface tension value. The shape of a bubble is governed by the Young–Laplace equation, which relates the pressure drop across a curved interface by The numerical solution and fitting were carried out for each bubble image and the surface tension corresponding to each bubble image at a given time was found, giving the dependence of surface tension on time (bubble age). With the salts studied, the surface tension at equilibrium was established very quickly (when the surface tension versus time reached a constant level). The best fits with the Young–Laplace equation and the highest accuracy of the measured surface tension were found with the largest, most stable bubbles having maximum deviation from the spherical shape. The experimental surface tension data obtained with the sessile bubble method for aqueous NaCl and KCl at room temperature at different concentrations are depicted in The surface tensions at equilibrium for NaCl and KCl solutions were obtained by averaging the data and are tabulated in The increase in surface tension with the addition of electrolytes has been explained by negative adsorption of ions at the air/water interface. According to the Gibbs adsorption equation, any solute that increases the surface tension of water must show a negative total adsorption at the air/water interface. The Gibbs surface excess (adsorption), The activity used for the brine solutions can be related to concentration using the Pitzer theory ( The Pitzer coefficients for NaCl and KCl are described in   In addition to NaCl and KCl, the surface tension of aqueous solutions of other salts such as KI, KNO The surface tensions of these salts are also presented in terms of saturation ( The Pitzer coefficients for the given salts are presented in The increase in surface tension of electrolyte solutions was first confirmed theoretically by Further efforts have been focused on developing a theory which accounts for the individual effects of the ions. According to Randles there is an “ion free layer” in the subsurface vicinity ( Mahanty and Ninham introduced the dispersion theory in the interpretation of negative adsorption ( Later on, Jungwirth and Tobias conducted MD simulation for alkali halide salts ( In flotation, sylvite is floated from halite using amine collectors along with frothers ( In this part of the study, we will show the surface tension of aqueous solutions of SDS and MIBC in the absence and presence of NaCl and KCl. First, the dynamic surface tension of aqueous solutions of SDS in the absence of the salts was measured. The results are presented in The initial and equilibrium surface tension values of aqueous solutions of SDS as a function of concentration at 23 The surface tension of SDS in NaCl and KCl saturated solutions was measured as a function of concentration to explain the flotation of these alkali halide salts. Each point was obtained from the dynamic surface tension measurements for a given SDS concentration (at equilibrium). These equilibrium surface tension data are plotted in It is known from the literature that the surface activity of the surfactant is increased by adding a salt since the counteracting electrostatic free energy is being reduced. In addition to this, at high salt concentrations (>0.1 As seen from Since potash flotation takes place in a saturated solution, the behavior of MIBC in the presence of dissolved ions such as Na The aim of this study was to understand the effect of salts on adsorption and surface tension of their aqueous solutions up to saturation concentration. The results showed that NaCl increases the surface tension more than KCl due to its bulk (higher activity coefficient) and surface properties (negative adsorption larger in absolute value as compared to KCl). The studies with other salts (KI, KNO In addition, the surface tension of aqueous solutions of ionic (SDS) and nonionic surfactants (MIBC) in the presence of salt ions was investigated. Based on these results, the presence of NaCl and KCl decrease surface tension of aqueous solutions of SDS which makes SDS a significantly stronger surfactant in brine than in water. In the case of MIBC, these salts show a similar effect. However, the effect of NaCl on MIBC is slightly stronger than KCl. The Australian Research Council is gratefully acknowledged for financial support (AVN). In addition, this collaborative research was supported by NSF under Grant No. INT 0227583 and DOE Basic Sciences Grant No. DE-FG02-93E14315.