Sasol raw gas liquor emanating from the gasification plant is contaminated by trace amounts of silicon, iron and aluminium which can crystallize or precipitate from gas liquor to form synthetic clay during either: (1) gas liquor transportation from the gasification plant to the phenosolvan plant or (2) during the liquid–liquid extraction process. Phenol is a major high value component of gas liquor which can be selectively recovered by diisopropyl ether (DIPE) from gas liquor during a liquid–liquid extraction process. A colloidal alumina/silica precipitate readily occurs on the heat exchanger plates during the liquid–liquid extraction process. This gelatinous precipitate formation is an operational problem which results in a severe blockage of the heat exchanger plates and eventually needs to be unblocked with hydrofluoric acid, a toxic and corrosive chemical. The precipitate formation can be attributed to the presence of the aluminium, silicon and iron species in the gas liquor.
                  Characterisation studies identified metal ions such as Al3+, Ca2+, Fe3+, Mg2+, Si4+ and K+ in all liquid samples analysed in this study. Major anions detected in the liquid samples are sulphate, fluoride, chloride, bicarbonate, carbonate and nitrate. Thermodynamic modelling of inorganic compounds in the gas liquor sample indicates that Al(OH)3, CaCO3 and Fe(OH)3 are dominant precipitates between pH 8 and 10 and a temperature of 40 °C.
                  In this study, various purification processes such as: (1) desilication, (2) flocculation, and (3) selective precipitation were evaluated to selectively remove silicon, aluminium and iron species from the phenol-containing gas liquor. In addition a complexing of Al (III) and Fe (III) ions with citric acid was investigated to retain both aluminium and silicon species in the phenol-containing gas liquor during the extraction of phenol. The concentration of phenol present in the gas liquor must not be affected during the removal of aluminium, silicon and iron ions from the gas liquor. The preliminary results obtained indicate that in terms of removing the aluminium and silicon species from the gas liquor, the addition of seed crystals such as alumina, gibbsite and silica to gas liquor coupled with flocculation proved superior to all hydrometallurgical processes evaluated in this study. The availability of this technology to eliminate or substantially reduce silica and alumina fouling would reduce expensive maintenance and down time requirements and also enhance the plant efficiency.The Phenosolvan process operated at Sasol Synfuels in Secunda currently utilises a liquid–liquid extraction process to selectively recover phenol from the phenol-containing gas liquor. This gas liquor emanates from the coal gasification plant and typically contains 0.35% phenols, 10 g/l N, 10 ppm Si, 10 ppm Al, 1 ppm Fe, and trace quantities of S, K, Na, Ca and P. In the Phenosolvan plant, carbon dioxide is bubbled through gas liquor in order to drop the pH of the gas liquor from 9.5 to 8.3 prior to it being sent to the extraction column for the extraction of phenol from the gas liquor. In the process, diisopropyl ether exhibits a high degree of selectivity for phenol against metal ions from the gas liquor. The chemical reaction between phenol and diisopropyl ether takes place at 50 °C and pH 8.3. The heat exchangers normally operate at temperatures in the range 40 °C to 110 °C. After the extraction of phenol from the gas liquor by diisopropyl ether, the extracted phenol is recovered from the loaded organic phase using distillation. The recovered organic solvent is recycled into the extraction column. Nitrogen remaining in the aqueous phase obtained from the solvent extraction step is converted into ammonia prior to release of this aqueous phase to a water treatment system. A flow sheet of the existing process of recovering phenol from the phenol-containing gas liquor is shown schematically in A colloidal silica/alumina precipitate readily occurs on the heat exchanger plates during the solvent extraction process. This gelatinous precipitate typically contains ultra-fine solid particles, which settle out of suspension very slowly. The liquid–solid separation of this colloidal material is very problematical. The resultant blockage of heat exchanger plates takes typically over 2 weeks and eventually needs to be unblocked with a solution of hydrofluoric acid, a toxic, corrosive and difficult to handle chemical. The formation of this precipitate can possibly be attributed to the presence of aluminium, iron and silicon species in the phenol-containing gas liquor. It is assumed that the origin of these species is from the coal gasification process. Based on the literature results (summarized below) obtained from seeding and desiliconization tests, it is known that the addition of seed crystals to a supersaturated solution enhances the crystallisation rate of salts. Also the addition of CaO or Ca(OH) Many researchers studied the nature of aluminium species in solution. In their studies, they found that some aluminium ions exist in solution as monomers [(Al(OH)(H Seeding is extensively used in industrial crystallisation processes to selectively enhance the crystallisation rate of both organic and inorganic salts from the leach liquor. In the alumina industry (the refining of bauxite to alumina), aluminium hydroxide (gibbsite—the precursor to the product alumina) is produced by an extremely sophisticated seeding process. Dissolved silica from the digestion of bauxite with sodium hydroxide is a process poison, and has to be removed as a sodium aluminosilicate from the supersaturated sodium aluminate liquors which are the lifeblood of the process.  Extensive research has also been conducted on crystallisation of salts from aluminium and silicon species-containing leach liquor. The researchers revealed that seeding can be used, involving a process of adding crystals (alumina or aluminium hydroxide) to the substance to be crystallised into a supersaturated solution of the same substance ( During the leaching of alumina with sodium hydroxide from non-bauxite minerals contaminated with trace amount of silicon, some of the silicon and aluminium species dissolve in the solution. In the desiliconization step, the first method involves the precipitation of sodium aluminosilicate by increasing the temperature of the solution from 420 to 480 K ( The precipitate of tricalcium hydroaluminate formed in the above reaction reacts with silicate to yield calcium aluminium silicate. A complete desiliconization of aluminate solution explicitly depends on the quantity of free carbonate in the solution that can readily react with tricalcium hydroaluminate to form calcium carbonate and sodium aluminate. In order to produce sufficient tricalcium aluminate for reacting with almost all of the silicon ions, all carbonates present in the solution must react with calcium ions to form calcium carbonate. Reactions between tricalcium aluminate, SiO The information obtained from this research could possibly be applied for the substantial reduction or elimination of the ongoing silica/alumina fouling problem at the Phenosolvan plant. Mitigation of the silica/alumina fouling in the heat exchangers would reduce expensive maintenance and down time requirements and also enhance the plant efficiency. Samples of deposits formed on the heat exchangers from the Phenosolvan plant, commercial aluminium hydroxide, alumina, quick-lime and silica were submitted to Sasol Infrachem, Setpoint, and Van Alphen Consultancy (VAC) laboratories for XRF analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Computer Controlled Scanning Microscope (CCSEM) analyses respectively. A sample of gas liquor was submitted to Setpoint laboratories, Precipitation and Crystallisation Research Facility University of Cape Town and ARC: Institute for Soil laboratories for elemental, thermodynamic modelling of inorganic compound and ions analyses using ICP (Inductively Coupled Plasma) and IC (Ion Chromatograph) respectively. 100 g representative samples of a commercial alumina and silica were added to different 250 ml beakers and heated to 35 °C. The first 1 m diameter-glass column was subsequently packed with 100 g of either aluminium oxide (a commercial alumina labelled as Puralox SCCa2/150) or a commercial aluminium hydroxide from Kynochem, a member of the AECI group of companies. The second column was packed with 100 g of commercial silica. A 500 g aliquot of the gas liquor containing 11 ppm Si,  5 ppm Al, 5 ppm Fe and 0.2% phenol obtained from the gasification plant was heated to 35 °C and subsequently transferred to the first column packed with aluminium oxide. The liquid was allowed to pass through the first column at a slow flow rate. The residence time of this solution was recorded to be in the range from 20 min to 120 min. The resulting solution recovered in this way, was then transferred into the second column packed with silica after it was conditioned at 35 °C. The residence time was recorded to be in the range from 20 min to 120 min. The recovered final solution as well as a sample of the original gas liquor was submitted to Sasol Infrachem Inorganic and GC Laboratories for Si, Al, Fe, Ca and phenol analyses using ICP-AES (Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry) and GC analyses (Gas Chromatograph with a Hewlett Packard 59214 Atomic Emission Detector). Due to the high cost for chemically pure aluminium hydroxide, as well as its limited availability in South Africa, it was decided not to evaluate this chemical as a seed in this study. The experiments were also conducted at different liquid-to-solid ratios (in the range 5:1–20:1) in order to determine the effect of the amounts of adsorbents (alumina and silica) on the extraction efficiency of Si, Al, and Fe species from the phenol-containing gas liquor during the desilication step. The packing of the glass columns as described in In parallel, an aliquot sample of gas liquor containing 11 ppm Si, 5 ppm Al, 5 ppm Fe and 0.2% phenol was allowed to pass through a glass column seeded with 5% to 20% alumina based on the mass of the gas liquor in order to remove the dissolved aluminium, iron and silicon species from gas liquor. The residence time of the gas liquor was measured to be 20 min. The settling time for suspended solids during the purification of the phenol-containing gas liquor was recorded to be 30 s. The resultant aqueous solution recovered from both columns, as well as a sample of the original gas liquor was submitted to Sasol Infrachem laboratories for Si, Al, Fe, Ca and phenol analyses. A 500 g representative sample of gas liquor (before extraction) containing 11 ppm Si, 5 ppm Al, 5 ppm Fe and 0.2% phenol was bubbled with carbon dioxide until its pH value reached 8.3. Different stoichiometric amounts of citric acid ranging from 20% to 200% based on the total mass of Al and Fe were added to the gas liquor to form complexes with Al and Fe species. The sample was allowed to stand overnight and observations regarding the precipitation of the metal species from the phenol-containing gas liquor were made the following day. After a proper mixing of the resultant mixture, a turbidity analysis was performed in order to measure the suspended solids present in the solution. A 500 g aliquot of gas liquor (before extraction) containing 11 ppm Si, 5 ppm Al, 5 ppm Fe and 0.2% phenol was transferred into a one-litre beaker and heated to 50 °C. The gas liquor was then bubbled with carbon dioxide in order to drop the pH value of the gas liquor from 9.5 to 8.3. Subsequent to the addition of carbon dioxide, the solution was filtered. Different stoichiometric amounts of commercial CaO based on the mass of Si present in the gas liquor were added to the filtrate and finally heated to 50 °C with continuous stirring for 2 h. CaO could react readily with silicon species present in the filtrate to form calcium silicate. The mixture was conditioned for 2 h., after which the precipitate formed was subsequently separated from the solution by a normal filtration. Upon filtration, the filtrate was submitted to Sasol Infrachem Inorganic and GC laboratories for Si, Al, Fe, and Ca and phenol analyses. Due to the high cost for chemically pure CaO, as well as its limited availability in South Africa, it was decided not to evaluate this chemical as a precipitating agent in this study. Approximately 800 ml of the gas liquor containing 11 ppm Si, 5 ppm Al, 5 ppm Fe and 0.2% phenol was transferred into a 1000 ml beaker and slowly stirred with an overhead stirrer. 0.1% cationic polyelectrolyte flocculant (low molecular weight compound (< The analytical results for samples of gas liquor, seeds and precipitating chemical used in this study are discussed in this section. Also the results obtained during the removal of silicon, iron and aluminium species from the phenol-containing gas liquor by desilication, selective precipitation, complexing of the ions and flocculation methods are presented in From the results given in The elemental composition of the deposit samples are given in The deposit samples collected from the Phenosolvan plant have spherical Al-oxide/hydroxide particles and a complex network of Al-silicates with variable concentration of K ( It is clear from the results given in The ICP results indicate that almost all of the silicon and aluminium species originally present in the phenol-containing gas liquor were successfully removed from the phenol-containing gas liquor during the desiliconization step using a liquid-to-solid (gas liquor: Al In this study, hydroxide ions from phenol could react with the commercial aluminium hydroxide used as a seed to form a soluble aluminate complex. But the results given in In order to remove the dissolved aluminium, iron and silicon ions from gas liquor, a sample of gas liquor was allowed to pass through a glass column seeded with 5% to 20% alumina based on the mass of the gas liquor. A residence time of the phenol-containing gas liquor was measured to be 20 min. The settling time for suspended solids during the purification of gas liquor was recorded to be 30 s. From the results given in In conclusion, this step could be used to selectively remove the Al and Si species from the phenol-containing gas liquor when using either alumina or silica as a seed prior to a liquid–liquid extraction process. The phenol content is not apparently affected. It is clear from the results given in From the results given in In conclusion, the significant quantities of residual suspended solids that are still contained in the phenol-containing gas liquor produced after complexing the Al (III) and Fe (III) ions with citric acid, render this method unsuitable for the stabilization of soluble ions in solution. Upon the addition of carbon dioxide to gas liquor containing aluminate ions, amorphous aluminium hydroxide precipitated out. The pH value of this solution was also decreased from 9.5 to 8.3. The chemical reaction for the formation of aluminium hydroxide from the aluminate containing gas liquor is as follows: The precipitation results are presented in The retention of calcium phenol oxide in the CaO seed resulted in a low content of phenol in the purified phenol-containing gas liquor. In addition calcium phenoxide present in the purified phenol-containing gas liquor could not be extracted by diisopropyl ether during the solvent extraction step. In conclusion, the selective precipitation method, using either commercial CaO or chemically pure CaO as a precipitating agent, cannot be used as alternative chemical process for the removal of aluminium and silicon species from the phenol-containing gas liquor. Visual observation indicated that fine solid particles from gas liquor having a turbidity of 444 NTU (Nephelometric Turbidity Units) agglomerated during the flocculation step to form heavy flocs. These could be readily filtered and resulted in an efficient separation when using cationic polyelectrolyte flocculant. The significant decrease in the turbidity value of the gas liquor from 444 NTU to 99 NTU also indicated that the cationic polyelectrolyte successfully achieved efficient separation of the suspended solid particles obtained from the gas liquor. However, the suspended solid particles from the aqueous gas liquor arising from the liquid–liquid extraction process were flocculated with difficulty when using cationic polyelectrolyte. The ICP results on the filtrates from the flocculation experiments indicated that all of the dissolved Al and Si species present in the original phenol-containing gas liquor are still contained in this gas liquor after the flocculation experiments. This technique is not recommended for the removal of dissolved Al and Si species from the phenol-containing gas liquor. The main objective of this investigation was to evaluate alternative methods for the removal of silicon, aluminium and iron species from the phenol-containing gas liquor originating from the gasification process. Purification methods such as: (1) desiliconization, (2) selective precipitation of ions, (3) flocculation and (4) complexing of Al (III) and Fe(III) ions were evaluated. The IC analysis of the gas liquor sample shows that major anions detected in this sample are sulphate (97 ppm), fluoride (31 ppm), chloride (161 ppm), bicarbonate (18,300 ppm), carbonate (2124 ppm) and nitrate (32 ppm). The gas liquor also contains 11,844 ppm NH The following methods proved unsuccessful for the purification of the phenol-containing gas liquor: selective precipitation of silicon, iron and aluminium species with calcium oxide flocculation of the aluminium and silicon species complexing of Al(III) and Fe(III) ions with citric acid desiliconization of the gas liquor by aluminium hydroxide. The following method proved successful for the purification of the phenol-containing gas liquor: desilication of gas liquor by alumina and silica The ICP results indicate that the concentration of silicon species originally present in the gas liquor decreased from 11 ppm to 1 ppm when using a solid-to-liquid ratio of 1:5 in one desilication step. The content of aluminium species that was contained in the phenol-containing gas liquor also decreased from 5 ppm to < In conclusion, the information obtained from this research could possibly be applied for the substantial reduction or elimination of the ongoing silica/alumina fouling problem at the Phenosolvan plant. Mitigation of the silica/alumina fouling in the heat exchangers would reduce expensive maintenance and down time requirements and also enhance the plant efficiency. Future work will be conducted on the phenol-containing gas liquor, spent seeds and purified gas liquor using the desilication method in order to determine the mechanisms that take place during the desilication step. The authors would like to thank the management of Sasol Technology Research and Development and Sasol SynFuels for the permission to conduct these studies. The assistance provided by the personnel of Sasol Infrachem laboratories, Van Alphen Consultancy laboratories, Precipitation and Crystallisation Research Facility University of Cape Town and ARC: Institute for Soil laboratories is acknowledged.