Rare-earth elements (REEs) are essential metals for the design and development of sustainable energy applications. Recycling these elements from waste streams enriched in them is crucial for securing an independent future supply for sustainable applications. This study compares the mechanisms of mechanical activation prior to a hydrometallurgical acid-leaching process and a solvometallurgical mechanochemical leaching process for the recovery of REEs from green lamp phosphor, LaPO4:Ce3+,Tb3+. After 60 min of processing time, the REE leaching rates showed a significant enhancement of 60% after cycled mechanical activation, and 98% after the combined mechanochemical leaching process. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) imaging disclosed the cause for the improved REE leaching rates: The improved leaching and leaching patterns could be attributed to changes in the crystal morphology from monocrystalline to polycrystalline. Reduction of the crystallite size to the nanoscale in a polycrystalline material creates irregular packing of chemical units, resulting in an increase in defect-rich grain boundaries in the crystals, which enhances the leaching process. A solvometallurgical method was developed to combine the mechanical activation and leaching process into a single step, which is beneficial for operational cost. This results in an efficient and simple process that provides an alternative and greener recycling route for lamp phosphor waste.Rare-earth elements (REEs) are essential metals for the design and development of sustainable energy-related applications such as renewable energy technologies (e.g., solar, wind, and thermoelectric converters), lighting, and magnetic materials Several studies have been conducted on recycling REEs from waste, with a particular focus on permanent magnets and lamp phosphors The recycling of rare-earth phosphates or aluminates requires high amounts of energy and harsh chemical conditions. Therefore, the use of mechanical stresses to enhance (leaching) reactions has been postulated as a green alternative reaction route. This nonconventional reaction route, commonly named mechanochemistry (MC), has gained the attention of several researchers for the recovery of critical metals. MC techniques were successfully applied to Li-ion batteries, tungsten carbide tool waste, indium tin oxide (ITO) glass, and lamp phosphor waste In our previous study, it was proven that mechanical activation (MA) by grinding as a pretreatment step prior to leaching is a valuable method for improving the recovery of REEs from lanthanum phosphate (LAP) lamp phosphor waste In this study, two activation-leaching procedures are studied for the recovery of REEs from LAP lamp phosphor. MA and subsequent chemical leaching are applied during the first procedure to determine the effect of the milling and leaching time and to propose an optimal cyclic milling/leaching procedure. The effect of the milling operation on the crystal structure is determined using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM). With the second procedure, MA is combined with the leaching operation (mechanochemical leaching) in a single step and compared with the previous activation-leaching procedure, in order to provide more insight into the importance of short- and long-lived states, and the advantages of a mechanochemical recycling process. LAP lamp phosphor (LaPO Quantitative analysis of the leachates was performed by ICP-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) (Optima 8300; PerkinElmer, USA) or by ICP-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) (Elan 9000; PerkinElmer, USA) for concentrations lower than 10 µg·L The powder crystal defects and morphology were investigated using HR-TEM. The powder sample was deposited on carbon tape, and a layer of 20 nm of carbon was deposited using a carbon coater. A Helios Nanolab 650 dual beam scanning electron microscope (SEM)/focused ion beam (FIB) system (FEI, Eindhoven, the Netherlands) was used to prepare lamellar cross-sections on the particles in several steps, starting with the deposition of a 2 μm thick platinum (Pt) layer (2 μm × 12 μm) using ion-beam Pt deposition. Final thinning was performed with an FIB energy of 2 kV and a current of 23 pA. Bright-field TEM (BF-TEM) images and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were performed using an FEI Tecnai G2 electron microscope (FEI, Eindhoven, the Netherlands) operated at 200 kV. High-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy mapping were performed on an FEI Tecnai Osiris electron microscope (FEI, Eindhoven, the Netherlands) operated at 200 kV. The activation of the phosphor powder was conducted using a planetary ball-mill (Pulverisette 7 premium; Fritsch, Idar-Oberstein, Germany) in air. Phosphor samples were mixed with zirconia balls ( The leaching yield (%) was calculated by Eq. The expressed leaching yield represents the average yield of the individual REEs in the phosphor, as leaching percentages are similar for all REEs (lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), and Tb). Measurements of the concentrations of Ce(III) and Ce(IV) for the oxidation experiments were obtained using UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy. Calibration solutions containing 2.0 × 10 A correlation coefficient above 0.999 was obtained. The oxidation yield for Ce(IV), the so-called Rare-earth phosphates (e.g., LaPO A common strategy to increase the reactivity of solids includes the introduction of physicochemical changes, such as changes in particle size, specific surface area, crystal lattice, and chemical composition. Elongated milling causes changes in the crystallite size and induces strain in the crystal lattice To visualize the changes in the crystal structure, the formation of defects, and the increase in amorphous content, HR-TEM imaging was performed during different milling stages (0, 5, 15, and 60 min). The unmilled LAP powder was shown to be a strongly crystalline material characterized by a monoclinic crystal structure. The high level of crystallinity is shown in Within the first milling stage, grinding results in a reduction of particle size. However, with extended milling, particles become more reactive, resulting in the formation of aggregates. The formation of these aggregates is observable within 5 min of milling time, as visualized in The surface of the powdered sample started showing some small degree of amorphization of the surface after 60 min of milling time ( In addition to causing physical changes, high-intensity milling may induce chemical changes in the crystal lattice. In this case, the oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) under the influence of MA was studied, and a visual color change from colorless Ce In order to compare the mechanochemical leaching of LAP lamp phosphor powder with its mechanically activated counterpart, separate experiments were performed. During these experiments, concentrated H Comparative studies were performed with mechanochemical leaching (i.e., simultaneous milling and acid leaching) and sequential leaching of both cycled mechanically activated samples and cycled wet-milled samples (i.e., simultaneous milling and wetting) ( MC is an established technique for the recovery of critical metals from waste streams. The results indicate that both MA and mechanochemical leaching have a positive influence on the acidic leaching of REEs from LAP in lamp phosphor waste. The recovery of REEs increased 200 times as a result of MA before leaching in a 2 mol·L This research is supported by Steff Van Loy, Koen Binnemans, and Tom Van Gerven declare that they have no conflict of interest or financial conflicts to disclose.