This paper provides a further investigation of the role of vein structures in the ease of mineral liberation by random masking simulation of breakage. A copper porphyry ore with vein-type mineralisation underwent different methods of sample preparation for liberation analysis. A selected core was cut into semicircular slabs and another core underwent crushing. The slabs and the crushed particles were analysed in the MLA and subjected to simulated breakage from which the liberation of sulphides was determined. The result was linked with the liberation measured from particles of the same ore that have undergone actual breakage. The analysis further provided an indication of the significant contribution of veins in liberation. This information points out to a proper approach of texture and liberation analyses, and the better use of textural data from core scale logging relevant to mineral processing.Earlier simulation works of This paper investigates further the role of veins in mineral liberation. In this research, the simulated liberation obtained from semicircular slabs with vein structure was linked with the simulated liberation obtained from crushed particles. The simulated liberation both from the slabs and crushed particles was also assessed with measured liberation from ground particles that have undergone actual breakage. Two HQ half-core with evident veining structure were selected to generate the samples. One core was further cut to semicircular slabs (63.5 The other half-core was stage-crushed to −4000 Another subsample underwent grinding in a laboratory rod mill to flotation feed size (P The random masking approach was applied to the MLA images to simulate the breakage of the slabs and the crushed particles. Random masking approach involves overlying square grids on the images and breaking into progeny particles along the grids of the mask ( In this work, masking was done at four sizes of square grids to simulate fragmentation to approximately 150, 100, 75, and 50 The liberation was plotted as cumulative curves of the liberation distributions. Particles in the 90–100% liberation class are referred to as the high grade particles and highly liberated sulphides in this work while those in the 0–10% liberation class are the highly unliberated. The simulated liberation of sulphides from the veins is illustrated in The simulated liberation of copper sulphides from crushed particles for all simulated fragmentation sizes is shown in The liberation of copper sulphides in each size fraction from the ground particles as measured by the MLA is shown in The outcomes from the simulated breakage were compared with the measured characteristics of particles that have undergone physical breakage. It can be observed in The particles used to generate simulated progeny particles that represented flotation feed by random masking underwent crushing. The result from simulation of slabs suggests that the vein structures were destroyed during crushing and it is probably that liberated particles that originated from the veins reported to the finer size fractions ( The results can be validated by physically breaking the slabs (with vein structures) into flotation feed and measure the liberation. The measured liberation in the broken slabs could be compared with the simulated liberation from random masking. This is the future work for this research. Nonetheless, the work in this paper further highlights the influence of mesotextural features of the ore on mineral liberation. In most published works it is the ore microtexture that is classified and/or quantified to have significant effect on mineral processing but the influence of mesotexture is poorly understood ( This paper further highlights the potential influence of vein structures in the ease of mineral liberation. The presence of veins could contribute to a higher degree of liberation and could allow the start of liberation at coarser particle size. The scale at which detailed measurement of ore texture for liberation analysis are undertaken is therefore important and should be taken into consideration. The authors would like to thank the staff of MLA facility and pilot plant at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC), Xstrata Copper (now Glencore), Australia Awards (DFAT) and most especially to Dr. Cathy Evans.