A novel poly(vinyl alcohol) modified with thiourea adsorbent (TU–PVA) was successfully prepared and characterized. The spectrum of FT–IR implies that the thiourea group has been modified on the primary hydroxyl of PVA in TU–PVA. The adsorption behavior for Ag(I) ions on TU–PVA follows the Langmuir model, and the adsorption kinetic data are fitted with the pseudo–second-order model. The maximum adsorption capacity for Ag(I) ions on TU–PVA calculated by the Langmuir model was 66.93mg·g−1. Thermodynamic parameters indicate that the adsorption process for Ag(I) ions on TU–PVA is spontaneous and endothermic in nature. The selectivity coefficient of Ag(I) ions and other metal cations onto TU–PVA indicated an overall preference for Ag(I) ions, and the selectivity and adsorption capacity was much higher than that of poly(vinyl alcohol). The selective adsorption mechanism of Ag(I) ions on TU–PVA was coordinated. The study of repeating and selectivity adsorption indicates that TU–PVA exhibits good durability and selectivity for Ag(I) ions. Thus, the adsorbent has potential application in recycling of Ag(I) ions in complex wastewater.Silver has significant industrial uses and plays an important role in daily life because of its superior malleability, ductility, electrical and thermal conductivity, photosensitivity, and antimicrobial properties. However, the earth resources of silver are extremely scarce and are mainly found with lead, copper, and antimony deposits. Substantial amounts of silver are lost in effluents discharged from various industries, requiring the removal and recycling of Ag(I) ions from wastewater ( Numerous polymers and their derivatives as adsorbents have drawn considerable interest because of their potential for application in the removal and recycling of heavy metal ions. These polymers and their derivatives include chitosan ( Numerous studies indicate that materials containing sulfur radical have a special affinity for Ag(I) ions. In accordance with the hard and soft acids and bases (HSAB) concept, their coordination is highly strong when Ag(I) ion (soft acid) reacts with sulfur radical (soft base). Therefore, a polymer adsorbent modified with a sulfur radical can also adsorb Ag(I) ions. However, there are few reports on the PVA polymer material-modified thiourea. In the present study, we synthesized a new PVA adsorbent modified with thiourea (TU–PVA). The TU–PVA adsorbent was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT–IR), thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). In addition, the selectivity and reusability of the sorbent toward Ag(I) ions. as well as the isotherms and kinetics during adsorption, were investigated. Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA, 1750 Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT–IR) was used to characterize and analyze the adsorbent. Their spectra were recorded on a Thermo Scientific Nicolet iS5 spectrometer with an attenuated total reflectance accessory, in the wavelength range of 4000–400 PVA solution (10%) was prepared by dissolving the PVA powder in deionized water at 363 Batch adsorption experiments were conducted in 100 In this study, Ni(II), Cu(II), Pb(II), and Zn(II) ions were chosen as competitive metal ions to prove the Ag(I) specificity of TU–PVA and PVA. Mixed solutions containing Ag(I), Ni(II), Cu(II), Pb(II), and Zn(II) ions (100.0 Desorption experiments were conducted in 100 SEM-EDX images of TU–PVA, TU–PVA-loaded Ag(I), and TU–PVA-desorbed Ag(I) are presented in To further determine the components of the TU–PVA adsorbent before and after the silver ion elution, XRD analysis of PVA, TU–PVA-loaded Ag(I), and TU–PVA-desorbed Ag(I) was conducted. As shown in The FT–IR spectra of TU–PVA, TU–PVA-loaded Ag(I) and, and TU–PVA-desorbed Ag(I) are presented in In accordance with the SEM, XRD, and FT–IR results, the formation mechanism of the TU–PVA material is shown in After the adsorption of the Ag(I) ions, the peak is shifted from 946 The thermogravimetric curve can reflect the thermal stability of the material. The thermogravimetric curves of TU–PVA are established by thermogravimetry in the 25 An appropriate pH is important for the adsorption and selectivity of the Ag(I) ions. To obtain the optimal pH, the effect of pH on the adsorption of Ag(I) ions was evaluated over the pH range from 1.0 to 7.0. The results are shown in Static equilibrium testing was conducted to evaluate the adsorption isotherms of PVA and TU–PVA. In The Freundlich model is applied to describe the heterogeneous system characterized by a heterogeneity factor 1/n. This model describes reversible adsorption and is not restricted to the formation of the monolayer. The Freundlich model is expressed as follows ( The results obtained from adsorption isotherms for Ag(I) ions on the PVA and TU–PVA absorbent are summarized in The adsorption of Ag(I) ions on the PVA and TU–PVA adsorbent was evaluated at varying temperatures: 298 The negative values of △G The kinetic study of adsorption is highly significant in wastewater treatment because it provides valuable insights into the reaction pathway and the mechanism of sorption reactions ( To investigate the mechanism of adsorption kinetics, the following kinetic models were tested, and the data obtained from the batch experiments were interpreted: The data in The mixed solution prepared by solving the nitrate salts of Ag(I), Cu(II), Ni(II), Pb(II), and Zn(II) was used to perform a competitive adsorption experiment. The results in Ag(I) ions is soft acid, and the ( Compared with other metal ions, Ag(I) ions can be more efficiently separated and recovered on the TU–PVA from the solution. Therefore, the TU–PVA material could be applied in the separation or concentration of Ag(I) ions in the aqueous system containing various metal ions. The study on the possibility of desorbing the metal ions adsorbed on TU–PVA is important for their potential application. Five cycle runs on adsorption/desorption were conducted for Ag(I) ions on TU–PVA. The mixed solution (1.0 The study shows that Ag(I) ions are successfully adsorbed on TU–PVA from simulated wastewater. SEM, XRD, FT–IR, and TGA were conducted to investigate the microscopic morphological characteristics and the functional group information of TU–PVA. The results indicate that the adsorption behavior of Ag(I) ions on TU–PVA obeyed the Langmuir model and that the adsorption kinetic data fitted with pseudo–second-order model. The maximum adsorption capacity for Ag(I) ions on TU–PVA are 66.93 The authors are grateful for the support provided by Preresearch Fund of