Introduction
                  This study determined outcomes after temporary joint-spanning external fixation before internal fixation of open intra-articular distal humeral fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective case analysis was done of all patients who were treated between 2000 and 2008 in 3 level I trauma centers with temporary joint-spanning external fixation before internal fixation of an open intra-articular distal humeral fracture. Healing rates, complications, Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH), and Smith and Cooney outcome scores were documented.
               
                  Results
                  The study included 16 patients. Mean follow-up was 35.2 months. Fractures united after an average of 5.2 months. No complications specifically related to the external fixation occurred. The DASH outcome score averaged 15.1. Although complications occurred in 12 patients (9 patients requiring surgery), 10 of 16 had an excellent/good outcome score.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Temporary joint-spanning external fixation before internal fixation of open intra-articular distal humeral fractures is a safe adjunct.Open intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus are often the result of a high-energy injury and are frequently associated with other skeletal or systemic injuries. They also tend to have a more complex type of fracture (more type C vs B fractures) and a higher Injury Severity Score (ISS). In complex fractures around the knee (eg, Schatzker IV-VI tibia plateau fractures) and ankle (eg, high-energy pilon fractures), joint-spanning external fixators are used to allow the soft tissue to recover before open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). One of the main reasons not to apply a splint in these fractures, but rather an external fixator, is that the distal aspect of the humeral shaft tends to protrude through the posterior wound (retroflexion or extension) if not stabilized with an external fixator. This can be seen as a limited form of damage control orthopedics and has been referred to as “limb damage control orthopedics.” We are aware of only 1 report specifically discussing the outcome and complications of open distal humeral fractures treated with initial external fixation, followed by internal fixation. Four fellowship-trained orthopedic surgeons (1 [D.R.] in hand and 3 [P.K., D.L. D.L.H.] in trauma) reviewed their surgical logbooks covering the period 2000 to 2008. All 4 have extensive experience with the operative treatment of complex distal humeral fractures. Surgical strategy and techniques were comparable: 2 of the authors (P.K., D.L.) were fellowship-trained by one of the remaining authors (D.L.H.), and the fourth operating surgeon (D.R.) was trained in the same residency program as one of the authors (P.K.). Two of the hospitals are part of the same trauma service. Postoperative radiographs reflected this general similarity in surgical approach, technique, and implant choice. We did not look if variations in surgery or care—if any—had an effect on outcome. All adult patients who underwent temporary external fixation across the elbow and subsequent internal fixation for an open intra-articular distal humeral fracture were included. All patients who were treated with external fixation went on to internal fixation. Through medical records, clinical follow-up, operative notes, and radiographs, the following parameters were retrospectively studied: demographic data, ISS, Demographics of the 16 patients (10 men) are reported in There were ten 14-C3 fractures, four 13-C2, and one 13-C1 fracture. Bone loss was noted in 13 patients. Associated fractures included the ulna in 8 patients, a nondisplaced radial neck fracture in 1, a nondisplaced radial head fracture in 2, and an ipsilateral distal radial fracture in 4. All distal humeral fractures were open. There were 3 Gustilo grade I, 6 grade II, 3 grade IIIA, and 4 grade IIIB injuries. Four patients had a known preoperative ulnar nerve deficit. One patient was intubated at the scene, and there was no information on the preoperative nerve status of her arm. When she was extubated in the intensive care unit a few days after injury, she was felt to have suffered a traumatic brachial plexopathy with a combined ulnar and median nerve deficit. One of the 4 patients with a known preoperative ulnar nerve deficit had an associated radial nerve deficit. Patients with a known preoperative nerve deficit did not undergo specific nerve exploration during the initial surgery. Temporary external fixation was done on the same day for 14 patients. Two patients came as referrals from another hospital and underwent external fixation after 2 and 4 days, respectively, after their injury. They had an ISS of 9 and 16 and a Gustilo IIIB and II open fracture, respectively. Their families had requested transfer to one of us for definitive treatment. All traumatic wounds were irrigated and debrided in the operating room within 6 hours after the injury. A second-look irrigation and debridement was done in 6 patients and an additional third look in 5 patients. Each additional irrigation and debridement (after the initial one) was done at the discretion of the surgeon planning the definitive fixation based on the aspect of the wound. We could not detect from the records the specific indication for each additional irrigation and debridement. All patients were evaluated by the trauma team upon arrival at the hospital. Intravenous antibiotics (cephalosporin) were given for all open fractures, and tetanus prophylaxis was updated if needed. All patients with acute injuries were taken to the operating room for formal irrigation and debridement of the arm in addition to other emergency procedures as dictated by their injuries. Patients who were referred had received intravenous cephalosporin at the initial presentation and underwent formal irrigation and debridement in the operating room within 6 hours at their referring institutions. Open fractures were irrigated copiously in the operating room with 9 liters of normal saline. External fixation across the elbow was done by placing two 5-mm Schanz pins in the proximal humerus and 2 in the ulnar shaft in 15 patients, and 2 additional pins were placed in the radius in 1 patient. Pins were placed using a semiopen technique with blunt dissection to the bone after a 1-cm incision. The most proximal pin was placed posterior above the spiral groove where the radial nerve and arteria profunda brachii cross. The distal pin was placed posteriorly below the course of the radial nerve. The 2 pins in the ulna were placed on the posterior side (crista) between the extensor carpi ulnaris and flexor carpi ulnaris muscles. All external fixators were placed by the attending surgeon or by the resident under direct supervision of the attending surgeon. The position of the external fixator pins was chosen to avoid compromising later surgical exposures. The position of the elbow joint in the external fixator was approximately 90°. Fluoroscopy was used to confirm adequate pin placement and gross alignment of the fracture and the elbow joint. All patients received intravenous antibiotics postoperatively for 48 to 72 hours. Pin care varied according to hospital protocol between twice-daily normal saline pin care (n = 12) to no formal pin care (n = 4). There was no correlation between pin care and infection rate. Definitive internal fixation was done after the patient’s general systemic condition or local soft tissues had recovered. This generally meant that the traumatic wounds needed to be clean, swelling grossly resolved, and blisters re-epithelialized. Definitive internal fixation was done at an average of 7.1 days after injury (range, 2-22 days). All definitive operations were done by the attending surgeon. Formal internal osteosynthesis was performed through a posterior approach that incorporated or extended the traumatic wounds, if possible. The surgical approach did not incorporate the previous pin sites. A formal olecranon osteotomy was done in 9 patients. In 6 patients, the fractured olecranon allowed access to the distal humeral fracture site. The fracture in 1 patient was approached, reduced, and fixed through medial and lateral windows. The ulnar nerve was formally exposed and protected at the time of definitive internal fixation in all patients, and 12 of the 16 patients (75%) underwent anterior ulnar nerve transposition because hardware was impinging on the nerve or there was a known ulnar nerve deficit. There was no worsening of neurologic deficits after the external fixation or conversion to internal fixation in the patients with a known nerve deficit. Seven patients received bone graft (autologous bone graft, n = 6; allograft bone chips, n = 1) at the first internal fixation. Three patients underwent split-thickness skin grafting. Various types of internal fixation were used. Thirteen patients underwent orthogonal (“90-90”) plating with 1 plate posterolateral and 1 plate medial: 2 received standard 3.5-mm reconstruction plates, 7 received 3.5-mm locking compression plates (LCP), and 4 received distal humerus LCP (Synthes, BV, Zeist, The Netherlands). Three patients underwent parallel plating with Acumed Mayo congruent plates (Hospital Innovations, Herzele, Belgium and Acumed, Hilsboro, OR, USA). Fixation in 4 patients included additional lag screws or Herbert screws or Kirschner wires, or both. Associated olecranon or proximal ulna fractures, or both, were plated with Acumed Mayo plates in 2 patients, 3.5-mm LCP reconstruction plates in 2 patients, and a tension band and 2 Kirschner wires were used in 2 patients. Olecranon osteotomies were fixed in 9 patients using 2.4-mm recon LCP plates in 2 and a tension band with a single screw or Kirschner wires in 7. Postoperatively, arms were kept in a splint for a few days to allow for wound healing. Once the wounds were dry, elbow mobilization was actively assisted in a comparable program under supervision of a physical therapist. Patients were monitored until bony healing. Average follow-up was 35.2 months (range, 12-108 months). All fractures united at an average of 5.2 months (range, 3-16 months) after internal fixation. Patients were also seen at regular intervals depending on their associated injuries and complications. Fracture healing (time to union) was determined by the treating surgeon, the senior author (P.K.), and 2 of us not involved in the patient’s care. One patient presented with ankylosis of the elbow joint, and 1 patient underwent a formal arthrodesis because of chronic osteomyelitis and a persistent nonunion of the distal humerus. In the other 14 patients, range of motion averaged 116° of flexion (range, 100°-130°) with an average 30° lack of extension (range, 0°-85°), 80° pronation (range, 10°-90°), and 70° supination (range, 10°-90°). At the latest follow-up 5 patients complained of mild (n = 3) to moderate (n = 2) ulnar nerve symptoms, which was new onset after definitive internal fixation in 3 of these 5. The 4 patients who had a known ulnar nerve deficit at their initial presentation had undergone an ulnar nerve transposition during internal fixation. Of these 4 patients, only 1 had residual ulnar nerve symptoms at the latest follow-up despite a later external ulnar nerve neurolysis. Functional outcome score according to DASH averaged 15.1 points (range, 7-64.5 points). The Smith and Cooney rating system showed results were excellent in 6 patients, good in 4, fair in 4, and poor in 2. A representative patient is shown ( Complications were seen in 12 patients. Additional surgery was done in 9 patients. No complications were specifically related to the external fixator. A superficial infection needing local debridement developed in 1 patient. There were 2 infected nonunions. The first developed a deep wound infection, followed by chronic osteomyelitis of the distal humerus. The infected hardware was removed before bone healing during the attempts to eradicate the infection. This ultimately led to an infected, unstable nonunion of the distal humerus for which a salvage elbow arthrodesis was performed. The infection subsided after consolidation of the arthrodesis. The second infected nonunion was diagnosed during bone grafting and exchange of 3 loose screws for a delayed union at 5 months after injury. Although at that time this patient had no obvious signs of infection, our routine intraoperative cultures grew Stiffness necessitating an open operative release was seen in 5 patients. In all 5, this was combined with ulnar nerve neurolysis, excision of heterotopic ossification (HO), or (partial) hardware removal. In 1 of these, a proximal olecranon resection was done with advancement of the triceps tendon for severe post-traumatic arthritis and deformity of the humeroulnar joint. His olecranon fracture was severely comminuted with extensive bone loss at the time of injury. One patient developed an ankylosed elbow, resulting in a poor outcome. Hardware removal was done in 7 patients (in 2 of these only the olecranon tension band was removed) because of pain. Three of 4 patients (75%) with a documented preoperative ulnar nerve deficit (present before external fixation) had full spontaneous ulnar nerve recovery within weeks. These 4 had undergone a formal ulnar nerve release and anterior subcutaneous transposition at the time of definitive fixation. The remaining patient had a formal external neurolysis with incomplete improvement. The patient with the brachial plexopathy that was first diagnosed 4 days after injury and external fixation (when she finally awoke in the intensive care unit) underwent anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve at definitive fixation. She later underwent a second formal external ulnar neurolysis for residual symptoms of ulnar neuropathy, again with some improvement. Her median nerve deficit did not improve. New-onset postoperative (after definitive fixation) ulnar nerve symptoms were seen in 4 patients. In 3 of these 4 patients, a formal external ulnar neurolysis and anterior subcutaneous transposition was done at a later stage with improvement of symptoms. In the remaining patient, the ulnar neuropathy symptoms resolved spontaneously. One patient had new-onset radial nerve palsy after definitive internal fixation that recovered completely within a few days. HO was noted in 4 patients and was removed surgically in 2 patients. Only 1 of these 4 patients had received oral HO prophylaxis. We could not determine retrospectively what the reason for oral HO prophylaxis in this patient was. None of us currently use a protocol whether to use oral HO prophylaxis in the treatment of complex open distal humeral fractures. Evidence-based guidelines for HO prophylaxis do not currently exist in the literature. Open intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus are a major reconstructive challenge. Complications associated with these injuries are stiffness, infection, HO, nerve injury, pain, weakness, nonunion, and neurovascular damage. Outcome data of this strategy for open distal humeral fractures are relatively scarce. In our series of patients with open distal humeral fractures, we found that the conversion of external fixation bridging the elbow to plate fixation was well tolerated. The complication rate seemed high, but this was more likely due to the underlying high-impact mechanism of injury. Our experience is that it allows easier transfers, wound care, hygiene, and frequent inspection of soft tissues. We also think it will limit additional soft tissue injury and may lead to a quicker resolving of swelling than when the fracture is merely stabilized with a posterior splint. Iatrogenic damage to nerves and vessels is obviously a concern, and knowledge of the safe zones for pin placement is extremely important. The best pin position is in an area of a thin muscle cover to minimize local irritation of the muscle caused by motion against the pin. Proximally, this is the anterolateral margin of the deltoid insertion. Distally, there is a wide safe zone posterior as the radial nerve crosses the posterior aspect of the humerus from an average of 20.7 ± 1.2 cm proximal to the medial epicondyle to 14.2 ± 0.6 cm proximal to the lateral epicondyle. Few authors have reported external fixation of distal humeral fractures. Kömürcü et al Chaudhary et al Stavlas et al Our combined experience suggests that a bridging fixator across the elbow to temporarily stabilize a complex or open distal humeral fracture is a safe strategy that allows time for optimizing the patient’s general and local condition. The complication rate in our combined patient group might seem high but can be explained by the complexity of the injury. Of note is that all definitive procedures were done by fellowship-trained orthopedic surgeons with large experience in the operative treatment of complex distal humeral fractures. Most preoperative ulnar nerve deficits improved after definitive fixation combined with anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve. In the 4 patients who developed new-onset ulnar neuropathy after definitive fixation (also including anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve), 3 needed an external ulnar neurolysis with only partial resolution of symptoms. No long-term or large-outcome studies are available specifically on open distal humeral fractures. However, various authors have observed that open distal humeral fractures showed a worse result than closed injuries. The weaknesses of the study are its relatively small numbers and its retrospective nature. Also, there was heterogeneity in the fracture type, Gustilo type, and definitive fixation technique. Although the current study is only descriptive based on a small heterogeneous group, we believe that some conclusions can be drawn. Our data show that our infection rate is low, with a relatively good range of motion at final follow-up. In this group, definitive internal fixation appears not to be impaired by previous external fixation. Others might argue that splinting for these injuries is sufficient and causes fewer complications. However, we believe the external fixator is a stronger construct and seems less cumbersome than splinting for the patient as well as the caregiver. A clear advantage of staged reconstruction is that irrigation and debridement of the open fracture and temporary external fixation can easily be provided by the general (trauma) orthopedic surgeon on call, followed by referral for staged reconstruction to a colleague or center with a special interest in these complex intra-articular fractures. Advantages of acute definitive management are a decreased risk of pin tract infection, and—if successful—a decreased number of operative procedures, lower costs, and a shorter hospital stay. A large prospective trial comparing fractures that will undergo delayed definitive fixation managed prior by splinting or by an elbow-spanning external fixation is needed to answer further questions regarding what treatment is best. Temporary bridging the elbow with an external fixator for open intra-articular distal humeral fractures as a “staged protocol” in anticipation of formal plate fixation is a useful adjunct. Clearly, not all open intra-articular distal humeral fractures need a staged protocol as described in this report. It is only when acute definitive internal fixation is not feasible due to the general condition of the patient, the soft tissues, or the experience of the treating team, that a staged protocol with delayed definitive fixation might be better. The high complication rate is more likely a reflection of the underlying high-impact mechanism of injury rather than of the surgical treatment.