Five types of ion exchange resins (Amberlyst 15, Ambertlyst-36, Dowex 50Wx2, Dowex 50Wx4 and Dowex 50Wx8) have been compared in glycerol acetylation carried out at 378K and atmospheric pressure. The glycerol:acetic acid molar ratio was set to 8:1. In these conditions the best performances were exhibited by Amberlyst-36 and Dowex-2. The effects of catalyst loading and the pre-treatment were also studied for the latter catalysts, showing that the use of 6.25g of dry catalyst/l of glycerol resulted in the optimal conditions for our reaction. The catalytic performances of the resins were unaltered after washing with distilled water in a Soxhlet apparatus, showing that sulphonic species were not removed by leaching. Recyclability tests showed that these solids are directly reusable up to 4–5 esterification runs. No homogeneous catalysis was detected in the filtered liquid media obtained after contact with the solids. Resins are not deactivated by the presence of water in the reaction medium.The manufacture of first generation biodiesels (fatty acid alkyl esters) by transesterification processes has been growing continuously during the last years. This is principally due to the benefits of the biodiesel in comparison with the conventional fuels derived from petroleum The revaluation of glycerol has become a necessity, as the manufacture of first generation biodiesel produces a large glut of this organic compound (which represents the 10 Among all the existing possibilities to tackle glycerol overproduction, the present work focuses on the esterification of acetic acid with glycerol in order to form new molecules or species which could be used as bio-fuels or raw materials for the production of biodegradable polyesters Several type of catalysts such as functionalised mesoporous silica-type SBA-15 Esterification is an equilibrium reaction. Thus, to direct the reaction equilibrium towards the products a reagent is always used in excess. This reagent is generally the carboxylic acid whose cost is lower compared to alcohol An ion exchange resin can be defined as an insoluble polymeric matrix containing labile ions, capable of exchanging these ions with others present in the surrounding medium Common uses of ion-exchange resins include water softening, environmental remediation, wastewater treatment, hydrometallurgy, chromatography, biomolecular separations, biomass conversion, metal recovery and separation, ion substitution, acid–base catalysis, removal of impurities from aqueous and non aqueous media, as sensors or as solid electrolytes in chemical, food, and beverage industries, and in power, nuclear, semiconductor, and pharmaceutical industries The main disadvantages of ion exchange resins are their low thermal stability and their deactivation by irreversible adsorption of metals and cations In conclusion, in this work, the catalytic performances of different crosslinked ion exchange resins in glycerol acetylation are presented. In order to shift the reaction towards the products and to revaluate glycerol, the limiting reactant is the acetic acid. The effects of catalyst loading, of the pre-treatment, and presence of water in the reaction medium are also studied for the best catalyst of each family (Amberlyst and Dowex). Finally, the recyclability of the solids is also tested. For our study, two Amberlyst resins were chosen, Amberlyst-15 and Amberlyst-36 (A-15 and A-36 respectively). Amberlyst resins are co-polymeric ion exchange consisting primarily of styrene and di-vinylbenzene produced exclusively by Rohm and Haas. These resins are in the form of small macro-reticular beads (mm) with a brown and gelatinous appearance. In addition, three Dowex resins were also selected to participate in the esterification of acetic acid with glycerol (Dowex 50Wx2, D-2; Dowex 50Wx4, D-4; and Dowex 50Wx8, D-8, with respective crosslinkage equal to 2, 4 and 8%). Similarly, Dowex resins are constituted of styrene and di-vinylbenzene copolymers functionalised with sulphonic groups forming gel beads (mm). Dowex is a registered trademark of Dow Chemical Co. Amberlyst and Dowex type resins were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. Specifications supplied by the manufacturer and reference The esterification reactions were carried out at 378 The test procedure was as follows: the catalyst dried overnight at 378 The influence of the mass of the resin used was checked by varying the mass of solid dried at 378 The influence of different pre-treatments was also analysed. Solids were used as received using in all cases the same mass of dried catalyst (0.25 In order to check the influence of the water content in the reactants over the catalytic performances of ion exchange resins Amberlyst-36 and Dowex-2 additional experiments were conducted. Similarly to standard test, the resin dried overnight at 378 The main objective of these experiments was to determine if the solids were recyclable in our reactions conditions and if the catalytic activity observed was solely due to heterogeneous catalysis, or to homogeneous catalysis due to leached species. Homogeneous catalysis tests aim at verifying if the catalytic activity is the result of the presence of active sites on the solid surface (heterogeneous catalysis), or of species leached from the solid towards the reaction medium (homogeneous catalysis). Homogeneous catalysis is an undesirable phenomenon as it leads to the contamination of reaction product and disables the reuse of the solid. The homogenous and recyclability tests were carried out in the same conditions as the standard catalytic tests, but after an adequate period of time to achieve a total acetylation yield of approximately 50–60% the catalyst was separated from the liquid medium by centrifugation and then put in a fresh reaction medium without further pre-treatment. In order to verify the presence of homogeneous catalysis, the used liquid medium was filtered (paper filter Whatman No 6, filtration threshold To compare the activity rate from the liquid media separated and the fresh liquid medium (blank), the initial reaction mixture of both systems should have the same composition of reactants and products. The reconstruction of the starting point of the homogeneous catalysis test is quite laborious as pure monoacetin is only available as a mix of several compounds (dimonoacetin, triacetin and glycerol), making that the reconstituted mixture is more rich in diacetin and triacetin than the separated reaction mixture, where the proportion of these esters is quite low. Therefore, the comparison of the activity rate from the liquid media separated and the fresh liquid medium (blank) is performed by shifting the first point of the curve in homogeneous catalysis reaction to the point of the blank with similar composition, that is to say, with similar acetic acid conversion. This is indicated in the figures by horizontal arrows. Recyclability tests were conducted in conjunction with homogeneous catalysis tests. For this, the solids recovered by centrifugation and still wet (no further treatment was applied) were employed in a new esterification run. The amount of remaining liquid was approximately ≤2  Ali and co-workers No remarkable difference was noticed in the conversion of acetic acid developed by each catalyst, as this distribution is determined by the equilibrium of the reaction depending on the reactants concentrations and the temperature Based on the initial esterification rate, Amberlyst-36 and Dowex-2 were the most active solids of each family (macroreticular and gel resins, respectively), therefore, they were selected for further studies. Generally, the higher the amount of catalyst loaded the higher the esterification rate with which the reaction equilibrium is achieved. This phenomenon is explained by the higher availability of active sites which allows the simultaneous protonation of more numerous acetic acid molecules. The use of lower quantities of catalyst would lead to longer reaction times. Nevertheless, an overloading of catalyst results in a waste of solid which would not promote an increase in the reaction rate. These are the reasons why it is important to determine the optimal amount of solid to employ in our reaction conditions, maximising the esterification rate but avoiding solid waste. As it can be seen in In the case of the ion exchange resin Dowex-2, the same behaviour is observed ( In summary, for both solids (Amberlyst-36 and Dowex-2) the increase of the catalyst loading from 0.1 to 0.25 In general, gel and macroporous resins present very different catalytic performances before and after drying even if the mass of dry sample used in each reaction test remains constant  The use of a Soxhlet step before the catalytic reaction does not have a significant influence on the catalytic performance of the Amberlyst-36 and Dowex-2 resins ( In conclusion, the catalytic tests carried out by varying the treatment of the resins allow optimising the performance achieved during the catalytic reaction. Drying the resin is necessary in the case of Amberlyst-36 and preferable for Dowex-2 in order to avoid hydrolysis of ester and/or slow esterification rate. Using a washing step by Soxhlet extraction before the catalytic reaction did not alter the catalytic performances of the resins. This suggests that sulphonic species remain unaltered after washing and that they are resistant to leaching. Thus the resins can unambiguously be regarded as insoluble in the reaction medium. In esterification reactions, both water as well as ester additions decrease the esterification rate. However, the addition of water in the feed exerts a more detrimental effect than ester. Firstly, the presence water can promote ester hydrolysis and secondly water competes with the reactant for the active sites and can attach itself on four sulphonic groups leading to a reduction in the number of the effective active sites  Concerning the recyclability test for Amberlyst-36, Therefore, from the data presented in Similarly, homogeneous catalysis tests with Dowex-2 showed that there was no leaching of sulphonic species ( Amberlyst and Dowex ion exchange resins have shown very satisfactory catalytic performances on the glycerol acetylation carried out in an excess of glycerol. The different catalytic activities are related to the amount of acid sites of the resins but also to their compositions and crosslinkages, precisely the lower the crosslinkage the higher the esterification rate. Among all the catalysts analysed, Amberlyst-36 and Dowex-2 where the most active of each family of resins and then were chosen for further tests aiming to determine the optimal catalyst loading and pre-treatment steps. For both solids (Amberlyst-36 and Dowex-2) increasing the catalyst loading from 0.1 In the case of Amberlyst-36, a drying step before its use promoted the catalytic performance in the esterification reaction. The use of wet catalyst resulted in a slightly lower reaction rate mainly because the presence of water prevents the adsorption of acetic acid and the glycerol access to the pores. Moreover, water can also promote the hydrolysis of esters formed. Dowex-2 presented an excellent catalytic performance even without undergoing any pre-treatment before testing. However, a drying step is desirable and avoids hydrolysis of formed esters. The catalytic performances of both catalysts remained unchanged when washing with distilled water and dried overnight at 378 Water initial addition causes a lower acetic acid conversion at the equilibrium of the reaction; nevertheless resin remained catalytically active presenting higher initial esterification rate than the blank reaction. For Dowex-2 resin, the decrease in the esterification rate when adding water was lower than for Amberlyst-36. This could be due to a lower competition of water and glycerol in the core of the Dowex resin beads. The experimental results of the recyclability tests showed that both solids are directly reusable without any loss of their catalytic performances. Concerning the homogeneous catalysis, once the solid is separated from the liquid medium, the esterification reaction presented the same esterification rate as the blank reaction, confirming the absence of leaching of active species. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the “