We present the synthesis and characterization of poly(ethyl 2-(imidazol-1-yl)acrylate) (PEImA) using free radical polymerization in various solvents with and without acids as additive. In addition, PEImA was also prepared using anionic polymerization with KOtBu as initiator in DMF and in THF at different M:I ratios. The resulting polymers of moderate dispersity were characterized by 1H-NMR, solid state 13C-NMR, and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) both in water and DMAc. PEImA is an interesting highly substituted polymer as it can be modified by methylation to poly(ethyl 2-(methyl imidazolium-1-yl iodide)acrylate) PEMeImA, via ester cleavage into the polyzwitterion poly(2-(imidazol-1-yl)acrylic acid) (PImAA), and – finally - to poly(2-(methyl imidazolium-1-yl)acrylic acid) (PMeImAA) if both modification steps are carried out. We also investigated structure and solubility of these different polyelectrolytes using potentiometric titration in aqueous media.Polyelectrolytes are macromolecules containing ionizable groups along the polymer backbone or within the side chain If both cationic and anionic charges are present within a macromolecule, such materials are termed polyampholytes and these examples are of interest for sewage treatment, metals binders ( Possible starting materials for the preparation of polyampholytic materials based on imidazole are shown in Herein, we present the preparation and modification of poly(ethyl 2-(imidazol-1-yl)acrylate) (PEImA), both using conventional free radical polymerization and anionic techniques. The resulting PEImA is a weak polyelectrolyte and can be converted into a strong polycation by alkylation of the imidazole group. Furthermore, the cleavage of the ester moiety results in the formation of a polyzwitterion, where the charge density depends on the pH of the solution. The resulting materials are characterized by size exclusion chromatography (SEC, SEC-MALLS), solution and solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Additionally, we use potentiometric titration to access the pH-dependant charge density of different modifications of PEImA. Our main motivation for the synthesis of PEImA is that the resulting polymer can be multiply functionalized: it can either be converted into a poly(ionic liquid) using alkylation of the imidazole moiety or turned into a polyampholyte/polyzwitterion After purification of the crude product EImA was yielded as yellowish oil, which crystallized at −25 °C overnight. The crystals were analyzed by solution NMR spectroscopy ( At first, PEImA was synthesized Based on these facts, EImA was polymerized with 0.5 mol% AIBN and 5 equivalents of acetic acid in various solvents such as water, methanol, hexafluoroisopropanol, 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol or 2-methoxyethanol, which so far only afforded oligomers in low yields between 20% and 40%. The polymerizations were repeated with 1.1 equivalents of concentrated hydrochloric acid instead of acetic acid and also oligomers were observed, but the overall yield increased up to 99% ( The combination of an increased overall polymer yield and decreasing molar mass for PEImA obtained using free radical polymerization in the presence of HCl in comparison to HOAc or without any acid suggests transfer ( Moreover, we also investigated the anionic polymerization of EImA using KO We carried out a comparable proton exchange experiment with EImA in D At first, anionic polymerization was attempted at 50 °C for 24 h in bulk, and in DMF or THF as solvent with a 0.1 M KO In order to assess the possibility to control the molar mass of the resulting PEImA using anionic polymerization we carried out different reactions at varying M:I ratios and a reduced polymerization time of 2 h ( In comparison with the anionic polymerization in THF, PEImA prepared by free radical polymerization reaches higher molar masses but with broader dispersities. The These data show that both aqueous SEC and SEC in DMAc with the respective calibration underestimate molar masses of PEImA as distinctly higher values are obtained using SEC-MALLS for both samples investigated. We were further interested in the modification of PEImA by either alkylation of the imidazole moiety or hydrolysis of the ethyl ester. By this, the material will be changed from a weak polyelectrolyte into a polyzwitterion poly(2-(imidazol-1-yl)acrylic acid) (PImAA) or poly(2-(3-methylimidazolium-1-yl)acrylic acid) (PMeImAA) or a poly(ionic liquid) poly(ethyl 2-(3-methylimidazolium-1-yl iodide)acrylate) (PEMeImA) ( The transformation of PEImA into a polyzwitterion and strong polycation was carried out by cleavage of the ester moiety with lithium hydroxide and alkylation with methyl iodide starting from anionically polymerized PEImA (for details see As an alternative pathway, first the ester moiety of PEImA was hydrolyzed with lithium hydroxide to afford poly(2-(imidazol-1-yl)acrylic acid) (PImAA) as polyzwitterion with a tunable charge and, depending on the pH value, a polyanion, polyzwitterion, or polycation could result. Based on calculations by Afterwards, alkylation of PImAA using methyl iodide was used to prepare PMeImAA following the second pathway. Therefore, PImAA was dissolved in methanol/water (v/v 1/1) under Ar atmosphere and methyl iodide was added. The biphasic mixture was heated up to 65 °C and merged to a single-phase reaction mixture. The degree of alkylation of 83% was determined by After successful modification of PEImA, we also investigated the resulting polyelectrolytes and polyzwitterions using potentiometric titration in aqueous solution. Whereas PImAA and PMeImAA were titrated with 0.1 M HCl starting at high pH. Both PEImA and EImA were titrated with 0.1 M NaOH starting under acidic conditions to prevent ester hydrolysis occurring already during the measurement ( The thermogravimetric analysis of PEImA and its derivatives shows the release of water and in case of PEMeImA probably methanol up to temperatures of 120 °C ( We describe the homopolymerization of PEImA Ethyl propiolate (99%), triphenyl phosphine (ReagentPlus SEC measurements in DMAc were performed on an Agilent (Santa Clara, CA, USA) system equipped with G1310A pump, a G1362A refractive index detector, and both a PSS GRAM 30 Å and a PSS GRAM 1000 Å column in series (PSS Polymer Standards Service, Mainz, Germany). SEC measurements in water were performed on a Jasco (Groβ-Umstadt, Germany) system equipped with a PU-980 pump and a RI-930 refractive index detector. Water with 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.1 M sodium chloride was used as solvent at a flow rate of 1 mL min SEC measurements (PSS, NOVEMA Max column) were performed on an adapted AF2000 MT System from Postnova Analytics GmbH (Landsberg, Germany), equipped with a tip pump used to control the mobile phase flow rate (PN1130), an autosampler (PN5300), and a column oven unit (PN4020). The column was coupled to a multi-angle laser light scattering (MALLS) detector (PN3621) equipped with a 532 nm laser. A mobile phase of 0.1 M NaCl + 0.3% TFA was used as sample and run solvent. The oven temperature was set to T = 25 °C and the injection volume was 50 μL. The polymer was dissolved in the running mobile phase at a concentration of 2.5 mg mL Values of the refractive index increment   Proton decoupled TGA measurements were carried out from 30 °C up to 800 °C under nitrogen atmosphere with a heating range of 10 K min The intensity data were collected on a Nonius KappaCCD diffractometer, using graphite-monochromated Mo-K The structure was solved by direct methods (SHELX  The titrations were performed with a titrator TitroLine An Alpha 1–2 LDplus from Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH (Osterode am Harz, Germany) were used for freeze-drying of aqueous solutions. The precipitated polymer was centrifuged with a Thermo Scientific Heraeus Megafuge 8 Centrifuge at 8000 rpm for 5 min. To a solution of imidazole (10.093 g; 148.25 mmol) in DCM (350 mL) ethyl propiolate (15 mL; 148.01 mmol) was added at −15 °C and cooled to −30 °C. A solution of triphenylphosphine (38.701 g; 147.55 mmol) in DCM (80 mL) was added dropwise and the reaction mixture was allowed to warm up to room temperature over 2 h. After 20 h the mixture was concentrated and purified by column chromatography (DCM, followed by EtOAc) to afford 18.706 g ethyl 2-(imidazol-1-yl)acrylate (75%) as yellow oil, which crystallized at −25 °C.    To a flask charged with EImA under Ar atmosphere were added solvent (1.75 M EImA) and AIBN (0.5 mol%). The mixture was degassed by three cycles of freeze-pump-thaw and heated up to 65 °C for 48 h. The polymer was precipitated in EtOAc (45 mL), centrifuged and dried under vacuum.   A microwave vial charged with EImA under Ar atmosphere was introduced into a glove box and dry solvent was added. The monomer solution was added to a second microwave vial with solvent and KO   In a microwave vial PEImA (299.5 mg) was dissolved in methanol (5 mL) and purged with Ar for 5 min. Methyl iodide (0.56 mL; 9.0 mmol; 5 eq. per monomer unit) was added to the polymer solution and stirred at room temperature for 48 h. The polymer was precipitated in EtOAc (175 mL), centrifuged and dried under vacuum to afford 456.4 mg PEMeImA as yellowish solid.   In a microwave vial PEImA (101.7 mg) was dissolved in methanol (2 mL) and a solution of lithium hydroxide monohydrate (162.3 mg; 3.87 mmol; 5 eq. per monomer unit) in water (2 mL) was added. The reaction mixture was heated up to 65 °C for 48 h and dialyzed against water. The aqueous solution of the polymer was freeze-dried and afforded 75.7 mg PImAA as white solid.   In a microwave vial PEMeImA (250.5 mg) was dissolved in methanol (2.5 mL) and a solution of lithium hydroxide monohydrate (178.8 mg; 4.26 mmol; 5 eq. per monomer unit) in water (2.5 mL) was added. The reaction mixture was heated up to 65 °C for 48 h and dialyzed against water. The aqueous solution of the polymer was freeze-dried and afforded 142.2 mg PMeImAA as yellowish solid.   In a microwave vial PImAA (97.6 mg) was dissolved in methanol (2 mL) and water (2 mL). The solution was purged with Ar for 5 min and methyl iodide (0.25 mL; 4.02 mmol; 5 eq per monomer unit). The biphasic mixture was heated up to 65 °C for 24 h and the yellow solution was dialyzed against water, 50% methanol and again water. After freeze-drying 83.4 mg PMeImAA was yielded as white solid.   We would like to acknowledge the NMR-platform at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena for support in NMR spectroscopy and Steffen Weidner (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, BAM) and Jan Steinkönig (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, KIT) for attempted MALDI-MS or ESI-MS measurements of PEImA or the corresponding oligomers. Further support of this study was obtained from the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at