Background
                  Proximal humeral fractures occur frequently, with fixed angle locking plates often being used for their treatment. No current quantitative evidence for the effect of different screw configurations exists, and the large number of variations makes biomechanical testing prohibitive. Therefore, we used an established and validated finite element osteosynthesis test kit to quantify the effect of variations in screw configuration on predicted failure risk of PHILOS plate fixation for unstable proximal humerus fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-six low-density humerus models were osteotomized to create malreduced unstable 3-part fractures that were virtually fixed with PHILOS plates. Twelve screw configurations were simulated: 6 using 2 screw rows, 4 using 3 rows, and 1 with either 8 or 9 screws. Three physiological loading cases were modeled and an established finite element analysis methodology was used. The average peri-screw bone strain, previously demonstrated to predict fatigue cutout failure, was used to compare the different configurations.
               
                  Results
                  Significant differences in peri-screw strains, and thus predicted failure risk, were seen with different combinations. The 9-screw configuration demonstrated the lowest peri-screw strains. Fewer screw constructs showed lower strains when placed further apart. The calcar screws (row E) significantly (P < .001) reduced fixation failure risk.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Screw configurations significantly impact predicted cutout failure risk for locking plate fixations of unstable proximal humerus fractures in low-density bone. Although requiring clinical corroboration, the result of this study suggests that additional screws reduce peri-screw strains, the distance between them should be maximized whenever possible and the calcar screws should be used.Proximal humeral fractures occur frequently and with an increasing incidence, in part due to the rising rates of osteoporosis and increasing life expectancy. The PHILOS plate has 9 proximal holes available for fixation ( A previously developed Twenty-six low-density left-sided virtual humerus models were selected from the database of digital bone samples available in the virtual test kit. These specimens originated from 14 female and 12 male elderly donors (age range: 64-98 years, mean ± standard deviation: 83.9 ± 8.1 years). The bones had been previously scanned with high-resolution peripheral quantitative computer tomography (HR-pQCT, XtremeCT; Scanco Medical AG, Brüttisellen, Switzerland). The clinical method of Krappinger et al Finite element (FE) models of the bones were built based on the HR-pQCT scans, distinguishing the cortical and trabecular bone compartments. The models were osteotomized to mimic an unstable 3-part fracture AO/OTA 11-B3.2 with medial comminution and malreduced proximal fragments, simulated with a 1-mm gap left between the latter ( All statistical tests were performed with “R” software, v3.3.3 Significant differences in the peri-screw strain values, and thus predicted failure risk, were registered with different combinations of proximal screws ( The configuration of proximal screws within the PHILOS plate significantly affects the predicted risk of cutout type fixation failure of unstable 3-part proximal humerus fractures. With the 9-screw configuration generating the lowest peri-screw strains, a benefit from inserting more screws is demonstrated. The different role of each row of screws is indicated with these results. A key finding is the role the spread of the occupied screw rows plays; the greater the distance between the used rows, the less the predicted failure risk. This is likely due to the principles of locking plate fixations, with the increased moment arms created with greater distances between screws reducing bone strain around the screws. Locking plates act as internal “external fixators”; thus the principle of “near-far” should be, and indeed appears to be, valid. When investigating screw rows, we considered the screw head locations in Comparisons of 4 and 6 screw constructs highlight the importance of where screws are sited and how constructs are assembled. The best 4-screw construct, with the screws in rows A and E, was associated with a significantly lower predicted failure risk than the poorest 6-screw construct combining screws in rows A, B, and C. Again, this is likely due to the reduced spread of screws and the absence of calcar screws. Indeed, the presence of calcar screws was an important finding in the current study, with their use considerably reducing failure risk compared with configurations where they were absent. Thus, the hypothesis of the study could be accepted. Their use within a construct also consistently generated substantial reductions compared with when absent within fixations with the same total number of screws. In line with our findings, the importance of calcar screws in these configurations has been previously shown biomechanically These results suggest that the best surgical approach is to ensure fixation with maximal distance between the inserted screw rows. They also imply that calcar screws should be used and potentially prioritized. The benefits from ensuring calcar screw usage for these more complex fractures have been reflected in the literature, in reducing complications and enhancing patient-reported outcomes. With minimally invasive techniques, using an aiming arm, the surgical guide advises against placement of screws in rows C-E to reduce the risk of nerve injury and the aiming arm does not provide the possibility of using screw holes other than rows A and B. Clinical evidence critiquing the effects of different screw configurations is limited. In the 19 failures seen within their 161 patients, Padegimas et al Previous biomechanical attempts to investigate the effects of screw configuration have been limited in part due to the numerous variables associated with testing and the number of samples needed for appropriate power. Donohue et al Finite element analysis complements existing biomechanical research methods. Although reliant on biomechanical validation, FE simulations answer questions that are practically unanswerable with any other currently available research techniques. Because of the small differences in results, and the large variations in confounders such as surgical techniques and BMD (even between contralateral pairs There are limitations associated with the study. Although highly predictive of biomechanical cyclic fixation failures, Screw configurations have a significant impact on predicted cutout-type mechanical failure risk for locking plate fixation of unstable proximal humerus fractures in low-density bones. Although these findings are predicted by a virtual osteosynthesis tool and require clinical validation, maximization of the spread of the sited screw rows and the use of calcar screws is suggested to reduce predicted failure risk. All authors contributed to study design. P. Varga acquired the data. P. Varga, J. W. A. Fletcher, and M. Windolf interpreted the data. J. W. A. Fletcher wrote the manuscript. P. Varga, M. Windolf, R. G. Richards, and B. Gueorguiev provided critical revision. All authors have read and approved the submitted version. This study was performed with the assistance of the The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.