Two acid imidazolium-based Ionic liquids (ILs) were evaluated for use in the leaching of a real non-concentrated chalcopyrite ore in an aerated system at different temperatures, monitoring copper recoveries in aqueous solution and in the presence of sulfuric acid. When ILs were used contemporaneously with the acid, synergic effects were found; these effects were mainly related to the IL action of decreasing the solid-solution hydrophobic resistance to electron transfer, thus enabling continuous acid leaching of the solid surface.
                  Temperatures higher than 60°C trigger high increases in copper recoveries (up to 70% copper recovery); this could occur due to the promotion of the parallel chemical decomposition of metal sulfide intermediates and the decrease of mass transfer limitations.
                  In light of the obtained results, it is proposed that ionic liquids could be considered as catalyst or leaching additives rather than leaching agents itself.Ionic liquids (ILs) are salts comprising highly asymmetric ions consisting of an organic cation with an organic or inorganic anion that remain in the liquid state at temperatures of less than 100 These properties include low vapor pressure (expanding the liquid state operating temperature range), tunable water miscibility, high solubility of both inorganic or organic solutes and high chemical, thermal and electrochemical stability ( Among the myriad of IL applications that have been suggested and tested, some are relevant for the field of extractive metallurgy; indeed, in some cases, these chemicals have been used even before their identification as ionic liquids (for example, the use of Aliquat® 336 as hydrophobic media in the liquid–liquid extraction of gold ( In the case of the oxidative leaching of sulfides ores, which is one of the main issues currently facing the metallurgical industry having the challenge of continuous adaptation to lesser oxidized, more refractory, and lower grade sulfides ores, the studies of ILs remain scarce. The most relevant works were published by an Australian group ( The first report describes an increase in copper recovery from chalcopyrite (CuFeS The aim of the present work was to evaluate a similar leaching method using ILs to that used by the previous mentioned groups apply to a real non-concentrated chalcopyrite ore and to evaluate the use of this new solvent as a leaching agent or as an additive for the leaching of this refractory mineral. The mineral was received from Codelco (the Chilean state mining company) at Division Andina (located more than 3000 The recovered samples were digested in acid for total copper and soluble copper analysis by atomic absorption spectrometry. The total copper content was 0.552%, and the soluble copper content was 0.015%; thus, less than 3% of the copper content was soluble. The mineral particles comprised 4.25% of sulfides, of which pyrite and chalcopyrite were the main constituents. The remainder included 94% gangue and 2% non-copper metal oxides. In this study, the studied ILs included that considered in the main reference works (BminHSO The latter compound (designated IL1) was synthesized by mixing methyl–imidazolium (mim) (SIGMA-ALDRICH, CAS# 616-47-7, purity ≥ BmimHSO Mineralogy was assessed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscope (EDX) (JSM 6380LV–JEOL microscope) and automated using QEMSCAN. The ultrasound equipment used for agitation included a HILAB Model SK03GT and a KUDOS Model SK221OHP. A Thermo Electron Corporation Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS) Model M5 AA System was used to analyze copper content. pH was measured using a pH-meter IONALYZER® Digital, Model 601 A, Orion Research Incorporated. Oxidation–Reduction Potential (ORP) was measured using a Hanna, HI 991003N extended range potentiostat. Viscosity was measured using a Fungilab VISCO BASIC All leaching tests were run in 20-mL uncapped glass tubes containing 10 In order to no modify the volume of the leaching medium by the continuous sampling, thirty six tubes with same original content were considered for each experimental condition corresponding to the twelve data points in triplicate. The tubes were withdrawn periodically from the ultrasound bath and then were immediately filtered and analyzed the Copper content by using atomic absorption spectroscopy. Copper recovery was calculated regarding the total copper content in the sample. Leaching solutions were assayed by comparing to a 1 A series of leaching tests was carried out using the described leaching media. The results are summarized in The results show in general copper recoveries below 20% and lower than H According to Higher temperatures clearly improved copper recovery, and the increase in recovery was most effective at 50% This high dependence on temperature has also been reported for concentrated copper ores by The measured solution acidities are presented in In the analysis of the overall leaching kinetics, the process exhibited certain differences when IL1, IL2 and sulfuric acid solutions were used, especially at low temperatures; representative behavior is presented in While testing the ability of IL aqueous solutions to leach non-concentrated copper ores, further leaching runs were performed to assess the possibility of promoting a synergic effect between the ILs and sulfuric acid in the leaching process. The methodology was the same as that described earlier for the IL aqueous solutions. However, in this case, IL1, which presented better results in aqueous solution and was easier to synthesize, was dissolved in a 1 The results obtained at temperatures below 60  The appreciable differences exhibited by the more concentrated IL1 acid solution can be ascribed to the oxidizing potential of the solution. To support this assumption, the oxide-reduction potential (ORP) of the solutions were measured, and the results are presented in The value of ORP increased with the amount of IL1 in the solution; but the obtained potentials were all lower than that obtained in the 1 In addition, the ORP differences between IL1 contents of 20% and 50% were negligible; consequently, the increase in copper extraction al 50% IL is not explained by ORP measurements. The obtained experimental evidence noted various important aspects, such as the strong effect of temperature on performance apparently not related with the reduction in viscosity, rather, seems to influence more in chemical related processes, such as the decomposition of a sulfidic intermediate promoted by the presence of the IL. On the other hand, the importance of the oxidizing potential of the solution and the initial acidity was minor. A decrease in the solution potential might have a positive effect on preventing the formation of metal polysulfur compounds or iron oxyhydroxides, such as jarosite, which can hinder dissolution ( These findings are consistent with those of  Acid ionic liquid, when used solely as leaching agent in aqueous solution, do not present clear advantages over sulfuric acid leaching. High temperature (60 When ionic liquids are used in combination with sulfuric acid, a synergistic effect is observed. The main action of the ionic liquid could be a decrease in the solid-solution hydrophobic resistance to electron transfer, thereby enabling a continuous acid leaching on the solid surface. Therefore, the ionic liquid could be considered a catalyst or a leaching additive rather than a leaching agent per se. The authors are grateful to “Dirección de Investigación” of the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso for assisting with manuscript editing and to “División Andina” of Codelco (Chilean Copper Company) for providing the mineral samples.