The amenability of a low-grade Egyptian phosphorite to flotation for separation of both calcareous and siliceous gangue minerals by just pH control was investigated. The ore, assaying 19.39% P2O5, 16.1% L.O.I. and 12.41% A.I. is mainly composed of francolite and hydroxy apatite minerals consolidated into three different phosphatic varieties according to texture and origin, i.e. coarse phospho-chem, sharp-edged phospho-clast and fine cementing phospho-mud. This was endorsed by microscopic investigation of thin sections. X-ray diffraction analysis of the ore sample showed that the main gangue minerals are calcite and quartz with minor dolomite and some gypsum.
                  Anionic flotation of calcite, under pH4.5, was successfully conducted on the −0.25+0.074mm phospho-chem fraction without any use of phosphate depressants. This was followed by direct flotation of phosphate after raising the pH to 9. Mechanical cleaning of the phospho-concentrate was carried out, without any addition of the collector to get rid of the entrained silica. About 3kg/t of oleic acid was required for the whole process which was added step-wise 0.5kg/t each except for the first step which was 1.0kg/t to activate the flotation pulp. Phospho-concentrate assaying 30.54% P2O5, 8.7% L.O.I. and 5.76% A.I. with a P2O5 recovery of 64.34% was finally obtained without the use of expensive depressants, e.g. phosphoric acid or sodium silicate.
                  A trial to explain the results in view of others’ findings and in terms of the ore mineralogical characteristics was shown.The flotation of siliceous sedimentary phosphate is becoming a common-place practice after the Florida “Crago” technology paved the road to fatty acids reverse or direct flotation circuits. The process has been become a conventional technology worldwide and a number of important references that summarize the history and the associated chemical reagents combination base are reported ( On the other hand, the processing of calcareous siliceous sedimentary phosphate still represents a continuous industrial worldwide challenge ( The application of phosphate depressants, particularly phosphoric acid, while floating carbonates in acidic media (pH below 5.5) has been successfully conducted by so many workers to achieve good selectivity ( However, not all calcareous siliceous sedimentary phosphorites are the same to achieve the same amount of Ca In this respect, the following article is another different case study of a calcareous siliceous phosphorite which will be subjected to flotation without the use of any chemical depressants looking for some savings in the production costs of the process. The sample under investigation was an East Mediterranean sedimentary phosphate rock of Egypt. After coning and quartering methods, a batch of it was finely ground to less than 0.074 Wet size distribution analysis SDA of the original sample was also carried out and accompanied by chemical analysis of the different size factions. Oleic acid obtained from Riedel-de Haen (Germany) was used as the flotation collector after mixing with kerosene at 1:1 ratio by volume. High-grade sodium carbonate and hydrochloric acid were used as pH regulators. The ore sample was crushed using gyratory crusher in a closed circuit with 0.6 The “Denver D12” flotation cell employed in this investigation was a simulation of the commercial sub-aeration types. Flotation experiments were conducted under the following pre-determined optimum conditions: Pulp temperature 23 Soft water usage (tap water). Collector added as 1:1 kerosene/oleic acid solution. HCl and Na Surface conditioning of 250    Sink–float tests, using pure bromoform with density 2.89 Mineralogically, the phosphate mineral was shown in different shapes and types in addition to calcareous shells as the major accompanying phase, (P) Phosphatic pellets in rounded and elliptical shapes (brown in color in ordinary light (A&C) and isotropic between crossed nicols. (L) Phosphatic lithoclastic in irregular shape (brown to whitish brown in color in ordinary light (A&C) and isotropic between crossed nicols (B&D). (OF) Phosphatic bone fragments which appear white in ordinary light (A&C) and show gray first order interference color between crossed nicols (B&D). (F) Calcareous shells. (C) Carbonate cement by which phosphate components cemented.  The following conclusions could be reported: It was easy to float calcite at pH 4.5, without chemical depression of phosphate. Actually, the depression of this latter mineral at this pH was so strong, sometimes, to clog the performance of the cell impeller. The mode of addition of the collector plays a detrimental role on the flotation sequence, e.g. by increasing the collector consumption from 0.5 It was also possible to float phosphoconcentrates at pH 9 assaying 29.26% and 30.87% P High-grade silica tailing, assaying 66.1% A.I. and just 9.16% P A combined phospho-concentrate (Nos. 16 and 17). assaying 30.54% P Most workers, in this field, are sure of phosphate depression in acidic medium, below pH5. Nevertheless, all of them recommended the application of phosphoric acid as a depressant during calcite flotation, ( FIPR suggested that the ionization of HCl acid in low pH might enhance the formation of an electronegative film on the phosphate particles by the chloride ions leading to the hindrance of oleic acid adsorption on the phosphate particles and hence their depression ( Besides, at low pH, oleic acid is essentially present as neutral molecules ( In addition, the higher solubility of calcite than apatite, ( However, it does make sense that the mineralogical characteristics of a sample make a difference in flotation processes. Simply, the behavior of a free phosphate particle might differ from that of a binary or tertiary particle. The extremely high degree of liberation of the different minerals of the current sample, reaching about 83%, ended up with the accumulation of the carbonaceous gangue minerals in the +22.4 Anionic flotation of calcite from a calcareous siliceous sedimentary phosphorite was successfully conducted at pH 4.5 after natural depression of phosphate without any addition of phosphoric acid. Raising the pH to 9, flotation of phosphate proceeds leaving silica in the bottom of the flotation cell without using silica depressant. Correlation of what happened in this case study with others’ finding and with the mineralogical composition of the sample was carried out.