This paper demonstrates the advantages of using inclined stereographic projections in kinematic analysis of rock blocks in discontinuous rock masses. Some examples of limiting cases are presented. The application of inclined projections is illustrated by its use in a mine slope in Brazil. It is clear from the discussion of these examples that inclined hemisphere projections provide better results than horizontal projections. It is also demonstrated that horizontal projections can lead to incorrect results in limiting cases.Stability analysis of rock blocks in discontinuous rock masses depends mainly on the spatial arrangement and strength of the discontinuities. The success of an evaluation of the stability of these blocks depends basically on the knowledge of these discontinuities and on the assessment of the failure mechanisms that can take place. All subsequent analysis, such as the stability analysis or the support system design, will be meaningless if the failure mechanisms are not well defined. Stereographic projection methods are very useful for defining failure mechanisms in discontinuous rock masses. These methods have been widely used in many fields, such as structural geology, crystallography and rock mechanics. They are very functional for solving problems that require the measure of angular relations, with the advantage of simplicity. Moreover, they yield a clear representation of the spatial arrangement of the discontinuities, facilitating the understanding of the problem. Many authors have explained how to use horizontal projections to define failure mechanisms in jointed rock In spite of the widespread use of horizontal projections, there are some situations where they do not provide clear insight on failure phenomena. In most of failure mechanisms involving discontinuities, there are at least three surfaces defining the potentially unstable blocks. These surfaces can be all discontinuities or not. One of them can be, for example, a tension crack in a slope or even a free additional face in an excavation. If horizontal projections are used in these cases, it will be impossible to consider all the planes that delimit the block because the analysis is limited to failure mechanisms involving only two discontinuities. The third plane causes no effect on the results of the analysis. It implies in adopting a simplified geometry of the potentially unstable block, leading to the assumption of arbitrary rules to define the failure mechanism, as it will be shown in this work. This paper demonstrates that the alternative approach originally proposed by Some examples of the application of the inclined hemisphere projection in kinematic analysis in a slope in Brazil are presented to show the accuracy of this approach. Only sliding of rock blocks made up of three discontinuities will be considered in this paper to illustrate the differences between the use of horizontal and inclined hemisphere projections. Although this assumption is very limited, the analysis presented here provides strong arguments in favor of the use of inclined hemisphere projection methods in kinematic analysis. Kinematic feasibility can be generally referred to as the freedom of rock blocks to move under the action of a set of forces. A kinematic analysis is the procedure for defining failure mechanisms through the use of stereographic projection methods. It is vital for analyzing the stability of blocks in a rock mass and must precede any subsequent analysis. Once failure mechanisms are established, it is possible to perform a complete analysis of stability or to design an adequate support system for the loosened blocks. Failure mechanisms in discontinuous rock masses are usually associated with the relative spatial position of the discontinuities and the excavation face. During geologic–geomechanical mapping of outcrops, and sometimes during the description of borehole data, it is possible to identify the orientation of the most relevant discontinuities. Other important features of the discontinuities, such as spacing, persistence and frequency, are also very important to define which discontinuities delimit potentially unstable blocks. Unluckily, these features are hardly mapped with the desired accuracy, even in outcrops or along the walls of underground excavations. Moreover, there is the problem of sampling bias imposed by the mapping of planar surfaces that can introduce errors during the measure of these variables, as discussed by The difficulties associated with the mapping of discontinuities influence the data used in the kinematic analysis. In the majority of the situations, beyond the problem of sampling bias, sufficient data are hardly available because there are not many outcrops to get information. Some assumptions have been made to overcome these problems. It is common, for example, to assume that the size of discontinuities is sufficient to form rock blocks required for kinematic analysis. Another common assumption is that the average values of discontinuity orientations, measured in very large areas, are valid inputs for kinematic analysis. As a matter of fact, these values should be used only in case of lack of another option. Sometimes they must be used, for instance, in the beginning of a project because of the lack of surfaces to be mapped. Local values of discontinuity orientations throughout the zone of interest are the ones that really control failure mechanisms. So the importance of discontinuities in failure mechanisms is not related to their frequency in large areas. Even a discontinuity that occurs randomly in large areas but is locally persistent is important because it can be one of the discontinuities that delimit potentially unstable rock blocks. This subject has been discussed by Blocks identified in kinematic analysis have the freedom to move. It does not mean that these blocks are unstable, since the discontinuity strength has not been considered yet. Only a complete stability analysis can define if the block will move. When using inclined hemisphere projections, it is not necessary to set any arbitrary rules to identify failure mechanism, as it has to be done in the case of horizontal projections. Sliding of rock blocks, either single or double plane, takes place in the sliding surface associated with the maximum shear force, which requires the knowledge of the resultant force acting on rock blocks. Falling of blocks from an inclined excavation face is a failure mechanism that can only be defined if inclined hemisphere projections are used. It occurs when the resultant force does not keep any discontinuity plane in a state of compression. This approach is much more reasonable than the analysis based on horizontal projections, as the failure mechanism is associated with normal and shear forces on sliding surface. The relative positions of discontinuity planes on the excavation face define the physical existence of potentially unstable blocks. To find out the correct position of the blocks, it is necessary to establish the conditions for kinematic congruence. According to the plane of projection must be parallel to the excavation face; the hemisphere of projection must be convex towards the free air of the face. The conditions above are shown in During the construction of the inclined projection, by rotating the excavation face and the discontinuity planes in the correct way, it is necessary to find out the position of the resultant force on the projection. The resultant depends on the various forces that act upon the block, like the weight of the block, the forces due to water pressures, etc. Methods for determining the resultant force have been explained by The resultant force must be plotted on the inclined projection because failure mechanism depends on its orientation, sense and magnitude. The potential sliding direction is given by a line located in one of the discontinuity planes where the shear component of the resultant force reaches its maximum value. It is represented in In a non-overhanging face, when the angle between the resultant force and the possible sliding direction is less than 90°, the block is stable, as it can be seen in Many authors have been discussing procedures for defining the failure mechanism using horizontal projections, especially in limiting cases, where single- or double-plane sliding can occur  In limiting cases, the results of kinematic analysis can be different when using horizontal or inclined hemisphere projections, even though the block is subjected to simple gravitational loading, which is the situation usually considered when horizontal projections are used. An example of such a situation is presented in In In  Stereographic projections, both inclined and horizontal, were used for identifying failure mechanisms. A common situation in this slope was the presence of potentially unstable blocks delimited by three nonparallel discontinuities. In these cases, inclined hemisphere projections were used. During the analysis, it was considered that rock blocks were subjected to only gravitational loading. Limiting cases are very common. One of them is presented in The orientations of the discontinuities used to plot the inclined hemisphere projection in S Both double- and single-plane slidings are possible in The horizontal projection of these discontinuities, which is presented in Another limiting case is presented in S Again, both double- and single-plane slidings are possible in The geometry of the potentially unstable blocks in the domain can be visualized from The horizontal projection of these discontinuities is presented in Double-plane sliding is a common failure mechanism in this domain and it is a definitive argument for using inclined hemisphere projections in limiting cases. Kinematic analysis of rock blocks in discontinuous rock masses is a very important step in the analysis of the stability of blocks in excavations. A mistake in this step influences the subsequent stability analysis. Inclined hemisphere projections warrant the accuracy of the kinematic analysis, as there is no need to assume any arbitrary rules to establish failure mechanism. Limiting cases can be analyzed undoubtedly with the aid of inclined projections, as it has been clear from the discussion presented in this paper. Inclined hemisphere projection methods are completely general, independently of the type and the geometry of excavations and the kind of problem being analyzed. Overhanging and non-overhanging excavation faces, planar or not, can be considered. General polyhedral blocks can be analyzed. Moreover, different types of failure mechanisms can be considered, such as falling of blocks, for example. General loading conditions are also easily introduced in the analysis.