A study of froth liquid transport in flotation cells with very low bubble loading was performed in a two-dimensional flotation cell using a two-phase (air–water) system. The prototype represents a radial section of an industrial flotation cell (130 m3) and was operated at steady state.
                  The experimental tests consisted of adding a small amount (0.02 mL) of radioactive liquid tracer I131 (in a NaI solution) on top of the froth (TOF) or near the bottom of the froth (interface). Eight collimated sensors located along the froth and collection zones allowed the evaluation of liquid transport and drainage in the froth after tracer addition at different distances from the discharge lip.
                  Longer distances to the overflow discharge lip promote higher water drainage from the froth to the collection zone. For the liquid content near the top of the froth, the liquid drainage increased gradually from almost nil to approximately 50% when the distance to the lip level was increased from 5 to 98 cm. In contrast, the liquid content in the froth near the interface was almost fully drained for distances larger than 15 cm from the discharge lip. This information was complemented by froth surface velocity measurements using the Visiofroth system and showed a good agreement with the liquid transport velocity measured near the discharge lip wall. The increase in the frothcrowder angle (40–50°) also showed a significant effect on the froth liquid transport velocity and similar drainage characteristics.Froth flotation is a complex process where a pulp flow rate containing a population of particles of different shape, size and composition are contacted with a bubble swarm, consisting of a bubble size distribution, to promote the collision of particles and bubbles and the selective attachment of particles with the formation of particle-bubble aggregates. After aggregate formation, it is required that bubbles be effectively separated from the pulp before entering into the concentrate. For the first purpose, mechanical flotation cells are provided with a collection zone where particles and bubbles are contacted under turbulent conditions generated by a rotor. For the second purpose, a froth zone is created in the upper part of the collection zone, which allows the transport of particle-bubble aggregates from the pulp to the concentrate. The froth zone has two objectives: recovery of particles which enter the froth as particle-bubble aggregates and rejection of particles that reach the froth by non-selective entrainment. These two process stages, collection and separation, are both critical to reach an effective flotation performance. The effect that typical operating variables (gas rate, pulp rate, froth depth, solid percentages and reagent dosages) have on the collection and froth zones is different and, in some cases, opposite. In this sense, the liquid transport in the froth is a key variable because it promotes water recovery and consequently fine particle entrainment. The liquid content in the froth is responsible of fine minerals entrainment. Typically, particles of less than 50 µm starts to be entrained, and particularly recovery of finer particles (5–10 µm) by entrainment increases significantly ( Due to the large increase in cells size during the last few decades, froth transport has become more critical because of the larger distances the froth must travel to reach the concentrate. For this reason, new arrangements have been incorporated in mechanical cells to decrease the distance to the discharge lip and to facilitate the froth discharge, such as the frothcrowder and internal radial launders. The study of froth transport in large flotation cells became critical. Flotation cell design and operation must be properly selected to optimize mineral recovery. In industrial flotation cells, especially in rougher circuits, the mineral recovery by true flotation is very high in the first cells while decreases significantly along the bank ( Development of theoretical froth transport models has been fundamental for the knowledge and understanding the motion of each component (liquid, gas and solids) inside the froth. For example, On the other hand, Experimental results from a rougher flotation cell of 130 m Previous studies at laboratory scale in a two-dimensional flotation cell with a two-phase system (air-water) have shown the bubble mobility along the foam (froth), air recovery, probability of bubbles recovery and mean residence time as a function of the distance from the lip launder ( The present work addresses the study of liquid transport in the last cells of industrial rougher flotation cells, where the solids content in the froth is very low, e.g. less than 4% in volume, so that the impact of solids on the rheological properties is less significant. To study the froth behavior under these particular conditions, a two-dimensional cell was operated with a two-phase system (air-water), as a first approach for estimating the froth performance. For the experimental testing, the operating characteristics of the prototype cell, such as superficial gas rate (1.5 cm/s), bubble size (1.5–2.5 mm), froth depth (4–6 cm), and froth discharge velocity (4–8 cm/s) were maintained inside the range typically used in three phase flotation froths in industrial cells. Under these conditions, the liquid transport to the concentrate and the fraction of liquid draining back into the collection zone, were evaluated as a function of the distance from the discharge lip wall, as well as for two spatial conditions inside the foam (representing the froth): (a) liquid near the top of the froth and (b) liquid near the interface. The flotation cell, representing a slice of the upper radial section of an industrial flotation cell, which is from the frothcrowder to the discharge lip, was used to evaluate the transport and drainage of liquid while moving in the froth to the concentrate overflow. The two-phase system represents the limiting conditions of very low charged froths (similar to foams), which has been observed in the last cells of industrial flotation banks. The prototype cell consisted of two plates with an area of 140 cm × 140 cm and a width of 15 cm, as shown in The volume of water in the cell for all the experiments was approximately 210 L. The froth depth was maintained at 4 cm below the lip level, and the superficial gas rate was 1.5 cm/s. Also, a constant frother concentration (Flottec, F-150) of 10 ppm was used for each experiment. Under these experimental condition, a stable froth discharge was achieved (2.5–3.8 L/min) for the two frothcrowder angles (40° and 50°). To operate in a continuous way, a 200-L agitated tank with the same conditioned water was used, which allowed to keep the pulp level constant using a Materflex pump (Cole-Parmer, Catalog 2010). This arrangement creates a pseudo-steady state, which showed a short residence time response for the liquid transport in the froth (approximately 5–40 s), and a long-term response for the liquid draining into the collection zone. The liquid became fully mixed in few seconds and then was slowly released because of the large mean residence time in the collection zone (>1 h). These conditions allowed the evaluation of short-term froth transport into the discharge lip, almost independent of the tracer concentration that increase in the collection zone because of the liquid drainage. For the pseudo-steady-state conditions, the tracer injection allowed the observation of two phenomena: liquid froth transport to the discharge lip and liquid drainage into the collection zone, which rapidly became well mixed and temporarily increased the collection zone radiation background. Experimental tests consisted of adding a small amount (0.02 mL) of radioactive liquid tracer I Ten collimated sensors were used for evaluating the tracer response in the two-dimensional flotation cell, four located along the froth zone, four located in the collection zone and two in the discharge pipe, as shown in This arrangement was used to evaluate the liquid transport in the froth and the liquid drainage from the froth to the collection zone, after tracer addition at different distances from the discharge lip. Additionally, the tracer was introduced at two locations in the froth (near the top and near the interface). The sensors were specially collimated for these tests by using a narrow vertical window of 2 × 0.2 cm with an area of 0.4 cm  Nine tests were carried out by tracer injection at two different levels: near the top-of-froth (TOF) and close to the bottom of froth, near the interface (INT), and at different distances from the discharge lip (5, 21, 36 and 98 cm). Also, two frothcrowder angles α, 40° and 50°, were evaluated, as shown in In the first four tests (1–4), the liquid tracer was injected on the froth surface (TOF), and the distance from the lip was increased from 5 to 98 cm. On the other hand, in tests 5, 6 and 7, the liquid tracer was injected near the pulp/froth interface level (INT), and the distance from the lip was increased from 5, 21 and 36 cm, respectively. Finally, for a frothcrowder angle of 50°, tests 8 and 9 showed a comparison of the tracer injection near the top of froth and near the interface level at 36 cm from the lip. These conditions were similar to tests 3 and 7, where a frothcrowder angle of 40° was used. Note that the prototype cell has two parallel walls, which can affect the drainage and froth stability.  To validate the froth liquid transport measurements, regarding the evaluation of liquid drainage and entrainment, a comparison with the froth velocity measured by the Visiofroth Reasonably good agreement between both measurements is shown in   From On the other hand, tracer injections near the bottom of the froth (interface) showed that the effect of increasing the distance from the lip became more significant at 21 cm (test 6) and 36 cm (test 7), where almost all the tracer was drained into the collection zone with a minimum presence of tracer in the froth. Also, the injection near the interface at 5 cm from the discharge lip showed that liquid (tracer) drainage was significantly lower. These results are also in good agreement with previous findings reported by  For a frothcrowder angle of 50°, tests 8 and 9 ( A new methodology based on seeding a liquid radioactive tracer in froth to evaluate the froth liquid transport and drainage was developed and successfully implemented. The liquid transport and drainage in flotation cells with very low froth loading, i.e. the last cells of industrial flotation banks, was estimated from tests developed in a two-dimensional flotation cell operating with a two phase (air-water) system. The froth liquid transport in the froth was evaluated in terms of the distance (5–98 cm) from the discharge lip. Tests were performed starting at two levels: (a) near the top of froth and (b) near the pulp-froth interface. The results showed that the liquid (tracer) starting near the top of froth has a high probability of reaching the concentrate for distances of 5–98 cm from the discharge lip. On the other hand, the liquid (tracer) starting near the pulp-froth interface at distances of less than 10–15 cm from the discharge lip has a high probability of recovery. However, for distances larger than 15 cm from the discharge lip, the liquid (tracer) recovery became almost nil because of significant liquid drainage to the collection zone. This observation confirms the previous results on measurements of froth residence time in industrial flotation cells, showing that entrainment of fine solids occurs very close to the discharge lip. Good agreement between the froth liquid velocity measured by the radioactive tracer and froth bubble velocity, measured by the Visiofroth The effect of increasing the frothcrowder angle α from 40° to 50° by tracer injection at a distance of 36 cm from the discharge lip was quantified. The results showed an increase in the froth mean liquid velocity from 4.77 ± 1.07 cm/s (α = 40°) to 7.8 ± 1.25 cm/s (α = 50°), which corresponds to an increase of 49.4% in the liquid overflow rate from 2.55 to 3.81 L/min. The present study has shown that a tracer seed in froth is a good tool for froth liquid transport estimation in low froth loading systems, and there is a good potential for tracing floatable and non-floatable minerals in froth both at the laboratory and plant scales during the next stage of this research. The authors are grateful to CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1160547, and Federico Santa María Technical University for providing funding for process modeling and control research.