As an important material for ironmaking, oxide pellet may break and disintegrate due to the strength decrease during reduction, which will cause significantly adverse impacts on field production. Strength decrease in the initial reduction of oxide pellet was researched in this paper. Results indicate that the strength of pellets drops sharply from 2973.3N/pellet to 742.0N/pellet (strength loss reaches 75.04%) when reduced for 1min. Microstructure investigation of the pellets reveals that the increase of porosity and generation of particles defect in periphery lead to the strength loss. And those inducements gradually shift to the inner part of pellets with the reduction proceeds. In addition, the effects of iron oxide phase transition on strength change were studied. The largest strength loss (about 75.85%) occurs as hematite is reduced to magnetite. Then with magnetite reduced to wustite, strength continues to decrease slightly. Finally strength improves with the formation of metallic iron phase.Oxide pellets with advantages of uniform size, high strength and good permeability in furnace are widely used in shaft furnace smelting Strength of pellet is closely related to the change of internal structure. In high temperature reduction process, the strength changes are led mainly by two reasons In this work, the phenomenon that strength of pellets firstly decreased and then increased during reduction process is consistent with most previous studies The chemical composition of iron ore pellets in the present study is shown in According to previous researches Reduction tests were carried out in an electric furnace as shown in The strength of pellets before and after the reduction tests was measured by employing an equipment of compression strength measuring (ZQYC). Pellets were also analyzed by optical microscopy (Leica DMRXP), scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta-200) and digital micro hardness tester (HVS-1000). Reduction tests were performed according to the operating conditions described previously. For all tests the reduction degree and compressive strength were analyzed. As shown in In each pellet sample three different regions viz., periphery, mantle and core (shown in The micro hardness was about 820 The porosity of periphery, mantle and core during reduction was measured respectively using image analysis (shown in As can be seen in The optical micrographs of the reduced pellets were examined to investigate the changes during reduction, as shown in In oxide pellets well crystallized hematite was the predominant phase. As reduced for 1 In order to study the effect of phase transition on strength, the hematite in oxide pellet was reduced to hematite accompany with magnetite, magnetite, magnetite with wusite, wusite, wustite with iron and completely iron respectively under certain thermodynamic conditions according to the previous study The strength decreased rapidly from 2973.3 As can be seen, oxide pellets were well sintered without any grain defect ( From the result shown in The effects of reduction on particle hardness, porosity and morphology were researched. As shown in As shown in The principal findings of the study can be summarized as follows: The compressive strength of oxide pellets drops sharply from 2973.3 In periphery of pellets, the increase of porosity causes damage to bond phase between particles. And generation of cracks in particles leads to grain defects. Both of which result in the strength loss in the initial reduction. And those determinants of strength gradually shift to the inner part of pellets with the reduction proceed. As reduced for 1 Fine pores and cracks form widely in the whole pellet as hematite is reduced to magnetite, which causes the largest strength loss of 75.85%. With further reduction of magnetite to wustite the pores and cracks expand to be larger and strength drops slightly. Finally, cracks heal gradually with wustite reduce to iron and strength improves. The author would like to acknowledge the financial support from the