Hazardous jarosite residues contain abundant valuable minerals that are difficult to be recovered by traditional flotation process. This study presents a new route, roasting combined with sulfidization-flotation, for the recovery of anglesite and silver from jarosite residues of zinc hydrometallurgy. Surface appearance and elemental distribution of jarosite residues was examined by scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry analysis, respectively. Decomposition and transformation mechanisms of jarosite residues were illustrated by differential thermal analysis. Results showed that after roasting combined with flotation, the grade and recovery of lead were 43.89% and 66.86%, respectively, and those of silver were 1.3kg/t and 81.60%, respectively. At 600–700°C, jarosite was decomposed to release encapsulated valuable minerals such as anglesite (PbSO4) and silver mineral; silver jarosite decomposed into silver sulfate (Ag2SO4); and zinc ferrite (ZnO·Fe2O3) decomposed into zinc sulfate (ZnSO4) and hematite (Fe2O3). Bared anglesite and silver minerals were modified by sodium sulfide and easily collected by flotation collectors. This study demonstrates that the combination of roasting and sulfidization-flotation provides a promising process for the recovery of zinc, lead, and silver from jarosite residues of zinc hydrometallurgy.Jarosite process is of great importance for iron (Fe) removal from zinc (Zn) leaching solution In jarosite process iron is precipitated from the hot acid (pH 0.5–2.0) leaching solution at elevated temperatures (95–97 Great research effort has been made to develop clean processes to treat such jarosite residues. Ju et al. Flotation process is recognized as one of the most efficient and cost-effective processes. However few flotation researches with regard to recovering valuable minerals from jarosite residues were studied. This study presents a new route, roasting combined with sulfidization-flotation, for the recovery of Zn, anglesite, and Ag from jarosite residues in zinc hydrometallurgy. Jarosite was decomposed to hematite, sulfur (S) dioxide, and some sulfates by roasting; valuable metals were released from jarosite lattice or jarosite inclusions and then collected by sulfidization-flotation. Surface appearance and element distribution of jarosite residuals were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) analysis, respectively. Decomposition and transformation mechanisms of jarosite residues were illustrated by differential thermal analysis (DTA). The results were discussed to improve fundamental understanding of the mechanism of the new process. Jarosite residues were obtained from Zijin Smelting Plant (Neimenggu, China), one of the largest smelters of Zn in China. The iron precipitation is carried out in a modified jarosite process, and the modification consists a pre-neutralization of the hot acid solution with zinc calcine. The calcine which is not solubilized is recycled to the hot acid leaching step and the leach solution at pH 1.5–1.7 is sent to the jarosite precipitation stage. Such pre-neutralization reduces the necessity of adding zinc calcine in the precipitation stage. Jarosite precipitation is carried out at 90–95 A series of roasting experiments were conducted to find out the optimal roasting conditions. Each 20 Washing was carried out in an agitator bath at the solid-to-liquid ratio of 1:5. Roasted jarosite residues were soaked in washing water for 15 After washing, the flotation procedure was carried out in a Denver D-12 flotation machine (cell volume, 1.5 The residue samples were subjected to quantitative analysis with XRF and phase analysis with XRD. The leaching liquor was diluted for elemental composition analysis. Surface appearance of jarosite residues was examined by SEM analysis. Element distribution of jarosite residues before and after roasting was illustrated by EDS analysis. Decomposition and transformation mechanisms of jarosite residues at different temperatures were explored by DTA. Line 2 of  Line 5 of  Roasting helped to break the capsule structure and expose the valuable minerals, as shown in  According to the XRD patterns, the decomposition reactions of jarosite residues at 600–700 At 600–700  The differential thermal patterns were generally consistent with the XRD patterns ( In jarosite residues, zinc ferrite, anglesite, and silver minerals were encapsulated or wrapped by jarosite precipitates. This situation seriously hampers selective flotation because of similar surface properties of the minerals. Roasting helps to break the jarosite capsule and expose the valuable minerals. At 600–700