Cyanobacterial blooms continue to be a serious nuisance to water quality managers, and remedial measures that are ecologically sound, economically feasible, and efficient in responding to the scale and intensity of the problem are required for their control. Here, we evaluated the potential of a new technique to adequately mix the water column and control cyanobacterial blooms, employing a surface-mounted solar-powered water mixer (SWM). Flow dynamics, thermal structure of the water column and phytoplankton photo-physiology were compared before and during operation of the SWM in Falling Creek Reservoir to determine whether the device helps weaken thermal stratification, deepen surface mixed layer, and entrain surface cyanobacteria into deeper water to light-limit their growth. Water circulation generated by the SWM resulted in weak velocity fields to a lateral distance of 5m from the device, to a depth of 1.5m from the surface. Moreover, the mixing minimized the surface water temperatures by approximately 2°C and deepened the surface mixed layer by 1m up to a lateral distance of 3m from the SWM, but little change occurred beyond this distance even after continuous operation of the device for more than a week. Photo-physiological observations also suggested light-limitation in cyanobacterial growth up to a lateral distance of 5m from SWM during intense sunlight conditions. The results showed that the SWM has limited zone of influence and is unable to adequately mix lakes and reservoirs to effectively control cyanobacterial blooms.Harmful cyanobacterial blooms are now a global problem, as their occurrence and intensity is increasing and some species are expanding geographically ( A number of ecological engineering techniques have been used to successfully control cyanobacteria, for example, by using chemicals such as hydrogen peroxide ( Measures that target thermally stratified conditions in water bodies by inducing artificial mixing are being increasingly used for controlling cyanobacterial blooms ( The fluorescence ratio is the 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU) sensitive chlorophyll Although several techniques employing a range of mechanical devices are in use to induce artificial mixing in lakes and reservoirs as means to control the blooms, energy associated with continuous operation of these devices is a substantial cost for water utilities. A new generation of technique being used widely to control cyanobacterial blooms is a solar energy driven water mixing device, in an apparent attempt to reduce the costs of energy. However, the mixing capacity of such technique for blooms control is not widely proven in the literature. In this study, we present and discuss results from a full scale, in situ study to evaluate the mixing ability of a surface-mounted solar-powered water mixer (SWM) to control cyanobacterial blooms by investigating flow dynamics, the thermal structure of the water column, and phytoplankton photo-physiology. Fieldwork was undertaken at Falling Creek Reservoir, which is located northeast of Roanoke (37°18′12″ N and 79°50′15″ W), in Bedford county, Virginia in the United States at an elevation of 509 The SWM is an up-flow water circulator that pumps water to the surface through an intake hose, and transports it away radially in all directions ( A Workhorse Rio Grande 1200 Depth-temperature profiles were measured using a Sea-Bird Electronics SBE-19 The vertical structure of the water column in the reservoir during operation of SWM was characterized using temperature profiles, temperature gradients between the surface and bottom layers of the water column (Δ The fluorescence ratio was used as an indicator of previous light history and mixing of cyanobacteria. Water samples were collected from the surface and at depths of 0.3 The three-dimensional velocity flow field was measured in a radial transect away from the SWM. No obvious structure was evident in the near field velocity profiles before operating the device, and the recorded velocities were very low, typical of calm and quiescent conditions. After the SWM was switched on, water was drawn radially toward it and weak velocity fields were detected within a lateral distance of 5 Water temperatures were typically warm in Falling Creek Reservoir, exceeding 25 On 29 July, a day after switching on the SWM, stratification intensified during the afternoon, and the impact of the SWM decreased to a distance of less than 3 Calculated values of cRTRM and C.V. over the top 4 Even after more than 10 days of continuous operation, thermal stratification continued to persist near the SWM, although somewhat weaker than at distant sites. After 11 days of its operation, near-complete mixing of the reservoir was observed on 7 August but this loss of stratification coincided with a decrease in minimum air temperature by more than 5 The hypothesis for the use of artificial mixing devices for cyanobacterial control is that they increase the depth of mixing and light-limit the growth of phytoplankton. The PAM-fluorometer sampling conducted a day before operating the SWM, on 27 July at 13:00 p.m. and 15:00 p.m., showed increasing depression in variable fluorescence ratio, Fv/Fm, with increasing stratification and light exposure. At the location of SWM, Fv/Fm was around 0.3 at the surface and more than 0.5 at a depth of 2 Several forms of artificial mixing devices have been tested and evaluated in field conditions for controlling cyanobacterial blooms with limited success ( While traditional methods of artificial mixing such as bubble plume aerators primarily focus on enhancing vertical mixing for deepening the surface mixed layer, surface mounted mixing devices such as the one used in this study are designed to pump waters from deeper layers to the surface and transport it radially away from the device. This action targets stratification at shallower depths by increasing epilimnetic circulation in order to break quiescent water conditions. Consequently, it follows that the strength of mixing and the depth of the surface mixed layer would be greater adjacent to these devices, and as a result, buoyant cells near the immediate zone of influence would be maintained in deep water intrusion in comparison to regions outside the zone of influence. During this study, SWM generated fairly low flows compared to traditional mixing devices. For example, In contrast, the mixing capacity of SWM during this study was significantly lower, only 0.28 One of the key theoretical correlations that can be attributed to control of cyanobacterial growth by artificial mixing devices is the resulting increase in the depth of the surface mixed layer with their use. Because Fv/Fm is sensitive to photon flux density, it shows promise as a parameter to offer insight into the immediate past light-history of phytoplankton as it can yield information on water column mixing, and entrainment and vertical migration of buoyant cyanobacterial cells ( One more plausible explanation can support the limitation of the SWM in inducing adequate mixing to light-limit the growth of cyanobacteria in large reservoirs. Many authors have used the ratio between the depth of surface mixed layer and the euphotic depth as an indicator to evaluate the potential for light limiting phytoplankton growth, and ratios of 2.5 or 3 are considered optimal for controlling cyanobacterial blooms ( The potential of the surface-mounted SWM for controlling the blooms was evaluated by determining whether it effectively mixed the water column to weaken thermal stratification and deepen surface mixed layer to an extent that could entrain surface cyanobacteria to light-limit their growth in Falling Creek Reservoir. We determined that the impact of SWM was highly localized, and therefore, a single SWM unit, at its current form, has insufficient mixing capacity to control cyanobacterial growth in larger lakes and reservoirs. We recommend future work to improve design and power of solar energy operated devices in order to improve their performance for effectively controlling cyanobacterial blooms. We are grateful to the Western Virginia Water Authority for providing access to the reservoir site, and equipment to conduct SWM trials and evaluation. We acknowledge the support of the