This paper describes the process of extraction of thorium and uranium from the sulfuric liquor generated in the chemical monazite treatment through a solvent extraction technique. The influence of the extractant type and concentration, contact time between phases, type and concentration of the stripping solution and aqueous/organic volumetric ratio were investigated. The results indicated the possibility of extracting, simultaneously, thorium and uranium from a solvent containing a mixture of Primene JM-T and Alamine 336. The stripping was carried out with a hydrochloric acid solution. After selecting the best conditions for the process, a continuous experiment was carried out in a mixer-settler circuit using four stages in the extraction step, five stages of stripping and one stage of the solvent regeneration. A loaded stripping solution containing 29.3g/L of ThO2 and 1.27g/L of U3O8 was obtained. The metals content in the raffinate was below 0.001g/L, indicating a thorium extraction of over 99.9% and a uranium extraction of 99.4%. The rare earths content in the raffinate was 38g/L of RE2O3.Of the 200 best known minerals containing rare earth (RE) elements, only three contain significant amounts – bastanite, monazite and xenotime, monazite being the second most important source of rare earths ( The recovery of mixed rare earths and the removal of thorium and uranium from monazite are accomplished through a variety of methods after chemically attacking the mineral with sulfuric acid or sodium hydroxide ( A novel method for the separation of thorium and uranium from RE elements has been devised by the authors and in the process, thorium and uranium are simultaneously extracted from the sulfuric liquor generated in the monazite process with the use of a mixture of Primene JM-T (primary amine) and Alamine 336 (tertiary amine). Studies involving discontinuous and continuous solvent extraction experiments have been carried out, in which the parameters required for the extraction of thorium and uranium were determined. The extractants used in this study included: Primene®JM-T (primary amine), Primene®81-R (primary amine), Alamine®336 (tertiary amine), Aliquat®336 (quaternary ammonium salt) and a mixture of Primene JM-T and Alamine 336. Both Primene JM-T and Primene 81-R were supplied by Hohm and Haas Company. Alamine 336, Aliquat 336 and tridecanol (used as modifier) were supplied by Cognis do Brasil Ltda. Exxsol® (purified kerosene) used as diluent was supplied by Exxon Química. Extractant solutions were prepared at the specified concentration plus 5% v/v of tridecanol and diluted in Exxsol. The sulfuric liquor from the chemical monazite treatment, containing 36.2 The extraction and stripping experiments were carried out in beakers under mechanical agitation (330 After selecting the best conditions for the process, two continuous extraction and stripping experiments were carried out. The continuous counter-current experiments were carried out in a sequence of mixer-settler stages, with mixers of 70 Metal extraction by amines depends on the capacity of the metallic ions to create anionic or neutral species in the aqueous phase; these species are then extracted through an anion exchange mechanism or by adduct formation, respectively. In sulfuric medium, thorium is extracted preferably by primary amines, while uranium is extracted by tertiary amines, especially Alamine 336 ( According to In the choice of the solvent composition to be used in the extraction study, extractant solutions were prepared at a concentration of 0.1 This paper reports selective extraction of thorium and uranium from a rare earth sulfuric liquor using a mixture of Primene JM-T and Alamine 336. The effect of the concentration of Primene JM-T and Alamine 336 on Th, U and RE extraction was investigated. The influence of the concentration of Primene JM-T was evaluated for the 0.05–0.30 The effect of the concentration of Alamine 336 was also investigated for the 0.05–0.30 Residual uranium in the aqueous phase (∼0.01 Another process variable investigated was the aqueous/organic phase ratio (A/O). This study was carried out with a mixture of Primene JM-T/Alamine 336, both at the concentration of 0.15 In the next step of the study, an extraction isotherm (equilibrium curve) was constructed and a McCabe–Thiele diagram was drawn to determine the number of theoretical stages and the volumetric feeding ratio of the liquor and type of solvent for continuous experiments (Merrit, 1971). The equilibrium curve was constructed according to the successive contacts technique for organic phase loading and aqueous phase depletion. The Primene JM-T and Alamine 336 concentrations of the solvent were 0.15 In preliminary experiments aimed to select the Th and U stripping agent some mineral acids and salt solutions were tested. The efficiencies of hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulfuric acid (H The stripping results are shown in The effect of the hydrochloric acid concentration was investigated from 0.5 As shown in Based on laboratory experimental results, the stripping isotherm (equilibrium curve) was constructed and a McCabe–Thiele diagram was drawn to determine the theoretical number of stages and the volumetric feed ratio of the liquor and solvent for the continuous experiments. The equilibrium curve was constructed according to the successive contacts technique using phase ratios of 1. The McCabe–Thiele diagram is shown in Two continuous experiments were used to optimize the extraction of Th and U. They were carried out using a mixture of extractants (Primene JM-T and Alamine 336), in a counter-current system using a sequence of mixer–settler units, with mixers of 70 Experiment 1 was carried out in four extraction stages and five stripping stages for 30 As can be noted in The objective of the continuous experiment 2 was to improve the uranium extraction process. The experimental set-up encompassed extraction, stripping and regeneration of the solvent with 1.0 The study presents the possibility of simultaneous extraction of thorium and uranium from sulfuric liquor generated in the chemical monazite treatment. For the mixture of extractants investigated, Primene JM-T preferably extracts thorium, while Alamine 336 preferably extracts uranium. The Primene JM-T concentration in the solvent may not exceed 0.15 After the process optimization, the extraction yield was higher than 99.9% for Th and 99.5% for U. In both experiments, the extraction of rare earth elements was below 0.1%. The authors would like to thank FAPEMIG and CNPq for sponsorship. The authors would also like to thank Indústrias Nucleares do Brasil S/A – INB for the supply of the sulfuric liquor used in this study. The authors are also thankful to the physicist João Batista Barbosa for the analytical support and to CDTN’s technicians who were involved in this work, especially José dos Santos Jorge Pereira and Wagner de Souza.