For small batch production. Has very wide application, is very adaptable and can be automated. Usually 2 to 4 pans, for medium size batch production. Very wide application, very adaptable, can be automated. For free-draining materials where very good washing is required with sharp separation between mother liquor and wash liquors. For free-draining materials where very good washing is required. Wide range of types and size available. Generally suitable for most slurries in categories B and C. Can usually be fitted with various mechanical devices to improve the washing and drying. Restricted to very free-draining materials not requiring washing. Restricted to very free-draining materials not requiring washing, but where the solids can be retained by vacuum alone. Allows use of high drum speed and is capable of very high flow rates. Large throughputs for small floor space. Suitable for almost any clarification and for handling materials which blind normal filter media. High solids concentration, normally greater than 20 per cent, having solids which are free-draining and fast settling, giving difficulty in mechanical agitation and giving high filtration rates. Rapid cake formation with reasonably fast settling solids which can be kept in suspension by mechanical agitation. Lower solids concentration with solids giving slow cake formation and thin filter cakes which can be difficult to discharge. Low solids concentration with solids giving slow cake formation and a filter cake having very poor mechanical strength. Very low solids concentration (i.e. clarification duty), or containing solids which blind normal filter media. Filtrate usually required. Slurries handled. 9 = the highest possible performance. 1 = very poor or negligible performance. The information given should only be used as a general guide, for slight differences in the nature, size range and concentration of solids, and in the nature and temperature of liquor in which they are suspended can significantly affect the performance of any filter. It should not be assumed the type of filter stated is the only suitable unit for each application. Other types may be suitable, and the ultimate selection will normally be a compromise based on consideration of many factors regarding the process and the design features of the filter. The handling rate (in kg/m The air volumes stated are measured at the operating vacuum (i.e. they refer to attenuated air).  In general, the pores of the medium are larger than the particles which are to be removed, and the filter works efficiently only after an initial deposit has been trapped in the medium. In the laboratory, filtration is often carried out using a form of Buchner funnel, and the liquid is sucked through the thin layer of particles using a source of vacuum. In even simpler cases the suspension is poured into a conical funnel fitted with a filter paper. In the industrial equivalent, difficulties are encountered in the mechanical handling of much larger quantities of suspension and solids. A thicker layer of solids has to form and, in order to achieve a high rate of passage of liquid through the solids, higher pressures are needed, and a far greater area has to be provided. A typical filtration operation is illustrated in Volumes of the suspensions to be handled vary from the extremely large quantities involved in water purification and ore handling in the mining industry to relatively small quantities, as in the fine chemical industry where the variety of solids is considerable. In most industrial applications it is the solids that are required and their physical size and properties are of paramount importance. Thus, the main factors to be considered when selecting equipment and operating conditions are: The properties of the fluid, particularly its viscosity, density and corrosive properties. The nature of the solid—its particle size and shape, size distribution, and packing characteristics. The concentration of solids in suspension. The quantity of material to be handled, and its value. Whether the valuable product is the solid, the fluid, or both. Whether it is necessary to wash the filtered solids. Whether very slight contamination caused by contact of the suspension or filtrate with the various components of the equipment is detrimental to the product. Whether the feed liquor may be heated. Whether any form of pretreatment might be helpful. Filtration is essentially a mechanical operation and is less demanding in energy than evaporation or drying where the high latent heat of the liquid, which is usually water, has to be provided. In the typical operation shown in The drop in pressure from the feed to the far side of the filter medium. The area of the filtering surface. The viscosity of the filtrate. The resistance of the filter cake. The resistance of the filter medium and initial layers of cake. In the second type of filtration, There are two principal modes under which deep bed filtration may be carried out. In the first, Equations are given in The mechanical details of the equipment, particularly of the flow channel and the support for the medium, influence the way the cake is built up and the ease with which it may be removed. A uniform structure is very desirable for good washing and cakes formed from particles of very mixed sizes and shapes present special problems. Although filter cakes are complex in their structure and cannot truly be regarded as composed of rigid non-deformable particles, the method of relating the flow parameters developed in In deriving this equation it is assumed that the cake is uniform and that the voidage is constant throughout. In the deposition of a filter cake this is unlikely to be the case and the voidage, For any filtration pressure, the rate of flow is greatest at the beginning of the process since the resistance is then a minimum. High initial rates of filtration may result in plugging of the pores of the filter cloth and cause a very high resistance to flow. The orientation of the particle in the initial layers may appreciably influence the structure of the whole filter cake. Filter cakes may be divided into two classes — incompressible cakes and compressible cakes. In the case of an incompressible cake, the resistance to flow of a given volume of cake is not appreciably affected either by the pressure difference across the cake or by the rate of deposition of material. On the other hand, with a compressible cake, increase of the pressure difference or of the rate of flow causes the formation of a denser cake with a higher resistance. For incompressible cakes e in  In Mass of solids in filter cake = (1 – Mass of liquid retained in the filter cake =    Filtration at constant pressure is more frequently adopted in practice, although the pressure difference is normally gradually built up to its ultimate value. If this takes a time  Typical values of the specific resistance r of filter cakes, taken from the work of Experimental work on the flow of the liquid under streamline conditions If the filter cloth and the initial layers of cake are together equivalent to a thickness For the period of For a subsequent The intercept on the ( Nearly all filter cakes are compressible to at least some extent although in many cases the degree of compressibility is so small that the cake may, for practical purposes, be regarded as incompressible. The evidence for compressibility is that the specific resistance is a function of the pressure difference across the cake. Compressibility may be a reversible or an irreversible process. Most filter cakes are inelastic and the greater resistance offered to flow at high pressure differences is caused by the more compact packing of the particles forming the filter cake. Thus the specific resistance of the cake corresponds to that for the highest pressure difference to which the cake is subjected, even though this maximum pressure difference may be maintained for only a short time. It is therefore important that the filtration pressure should not be allowed to exceed the normal operating pressure at As the filtrate flows through the filter cake, it exerts a drag force on the particles and this force is transmitted through successive layers of particles right up to the filter cloth. The magnitude of this force increases progressively from the surface of the filter cake to the filter cloth since at any point it is equal to the summation of the forces on all the particles up to that point. If the cake is compressible, then its voidage will decrease progressively in the direction of flow of the filtrate, giving rise to a corresponding increase in the local value of the specific resistance, It is usually possible to express the voidage For a compressible cake, In a compressible cake, the volume By comparison with Substituting from Thus: Comparing At any instant in a constant pressure filtration, integration of At any time  Thus:    The function of the filter medium is generally to act as a support for the filter cake, and the initial layers of cake provide the true filter. The filter medium should be mechanically strong, resistant to the corrosive action of the fluid, and offer as little resistance as possible In the previous discussion it is assumed that there is a well-defined boundary between the filter cake and the filter cloth. The initial stages in the build-up of the filter cake are important, however, because these may have a large effect on the flow resistance and may seriously affect the useful life of the cloth. The blocking of the pores of the filter medium by particles is a complex phenomenon, partly because of the complicated nature of the surface structure of the usual types of filter media, and partly because the lines of movement of the particles are not well defined. At the start of filtration, the manner in which the cake forms will lie between two extremes — the penetration of the pores by particles and the shielding of the entry to the pores by the particles forming bridges. The pore and particle size distributions might, however, be such that more than one particle could enter a particular pore. In this case, the resistance of the pore increases in stages as successive particles are trapped until the pore is completely blocked. In practice, however, it is much more likely that many of the pores will never become completely blocked and a cake of relatively low resistance will form over the entry to the partially blocked pore. One of the most important variables affecting the tendency for blocking is the concentration of particles. The greater the concentration, the smaller will be the average distance between the particles, and the smaller will be the tendency for the particle to be drawn in to the streamlines directed towards the open pores. Instead, the particles in the concentrated suspension tend to distribute themselves fairly evenly over the filter surface and form bridges. As a result, suspensions of high concentration generally give rise to cakes of lower resistance than those formed from dilute suspensions. There are two important effects due to particle sedimentation which may affect the rate of filtration. First, if the sediment particles are all settling at approximately the same rate, as is frequently the case in a concentrated suspension in which the particle size distribution is not very wide, a more rapid build-up of particles will occur on an In the filtration of a slurry, the resistance of the filter cake progressively increases and consequently, in a constant pressure operation, the rate of filtration falls. If the build-up of solids can be reduced, the effective cake thickness will be less and the rate of flow of filtrate will be increased. In practice, it is sometimes possible to incorporate moving blades in the filter equipment so that the thickness of the cake is limited to the clearance between the filter medium and the blades. Filtrate then flows through the cake at an approximately constant rate and the solids are retained in suspension. Thus the solids concentration in the feed vessel increases until the particles are in permanent physical contact with one another. At this stage the boundary between the slurry and the cake becomes ill-defined, and a significant resistance to the flow of liquid develops within the slurry itself with a consequent reduction in the flowrate of filtrate. By the use of this technique, a much higher rate of filtration can be achieved than is possible in a filter operated in a conventional manner. In addition, the resulting cake usually has a lower porosity because the blades effectively break down the bridges or arches which give rise to a structure in the filter cake, and the final cake is significantly drier as a result. If the scrapers are in the form of rotating blades, the outcome differs according to whether they are moving at low or at high speed. At low speeds, the cake thickness is reduced to the clearance depth each time the scraper blade passes, although cake then builds up again until the next passage of the scraper. If the blade is operated at high speed, there is little time for solids to build up between successive passages of the blade and the cake reaches an approximately constant thickness. Since particles tend to be swept across the surface of the cake by the moving slurry, they will be trapped in the cake only if the drag force which the filtrate exerts on them is great enough. As the thickness of the cake increases the pressure gradient becomes less and there is a smaller force retaining particles in the cake surface. Thus the thickness of the cake tends to reach an equilibrium value, which can be considerably less than the clearance between the medium and the blades. Experimental results for the effect of stirrer speed on the rate of filtration of a 10 per cent by mass suspension of clay are shown in  For a constant filtration rate dV/d An alternative method of reducing the resistance to filtration is to recirculate the slurry and thereby maintain a high velocity of flow parallel to the surface of the filter medium. Typical recirculation rates may be 10 In cases where a dilute solution containing small quantities of solids which tend to blind the filter cloth is to be filtered, cross-flow filtration is extensively used. This is the normal mode of operation for ultrafiltration using membranes, a topic which is discussed in If a slurry is dilute and the solid particles settle readily in the fluid, it may be desirable to effect a preliminary concentration in a thickener as discussed in Theoretical treatment has shown that the nature of the filter cake has a very pronounced effect on the rate of flow of filtrate and that it is, in general, desirable that the particles forming the filter cake should have as large a size as possible. More rapid filtration is therefore obtained if a suitable agent is added to the slurry to cause coagulation. If the solid material is formed in a chemical reaction by precipitation, the particle size can generally be controlled to a certain extent by the actual conditions of formation. For example, the particle size of the resultant precipitate may be controlled by varying the temperature and concentration, and sometimes the pH, of the reacting solutions. As indicated by Filter aids are extensively used where the filter cake is relatively impermeable to the flow of filtrate. These are materials which pack to form beds of very high voidages and therefore they are capable of increasing the porosity of the filter cake if added to the slurry before filtration. Apart from economic considerations, there is an optimum quantity of filter aid which should be added in any given case. Whereas the presence of the filter aid reduces the specific resistance of the filter cake, it also results in the formation of a thicker cake. The actual quantity used will therefore depend on the nature of the material. The use of filter aids is normally restricted to operations in which the filtrate is valuable and the cake is a waste product. In some circumstances, however, the filter aid must be readily separable from the rest of the filter cake by physical or chemical means. Filter cakes incorporating filter aid are usually very compressible and care should therefore be taken to ensure that the good effect of the filter aid is not destroyed by employing too high a filtration pressure. Kieselguhr, which is a commonly used filter aid, has a voidage of about 0.85. Addition of relatively small quantities increases the voidage of most filter cakes, and the resulting porosity normally lies between that of the filter aid and that of In some cases the filtration time can be reduced by diluting the suspension in order to reduce the viscosity of the filtrate. This does, of course, increase the bulk to be filtered and is applicable only when the value of the filtrate is not affected by dilution. Raising the temperature may be advantageous in that the viscosity of the filtrate is reduced. When the wash liquid is miscible with the filtrate and has similar physical properties, the rate of washing at the same pressure difference will be about the same as the final rate of filtration. If the viscosity of the wash liquid is less, a somewhat greater rate will be obtained. Channelling sometimes occurs, however, with the result that much of the cake is incompletely washed and the fluid passes preferentially through the channels, which are gradually enlarged by its continued passage. This does not occur during filtration because channels are self-sealing by virtue of deposition of solids from the slurry. Channelling is most marked with compressible filter cakes and can be minimised by using a smaller pressure difference for washing than for filtration. Washing may be regarded as taking place in two stages. First, filtrate is displaced from the filter cake by wash liquid during the period of The most suitable filter for any given operation is the one which will fulfil the requirements at minimum overall cost. Since the cost of the equipment is closely related to the filtering area, it is normally desirable to obtain a high overall rate of filtration. This involves the use of relatively high pressures although the maximum pressures are often limited by mechanical design considerations. Although a higher throughput from a given filtering surface is obtained from a continuous filter than from a batch operated filter, it may sometimes be necessary to use a batch filter, particularly if the filter cake has a high resistance, since most continuous filters operate under reduced pressure and the maximum filtration pressure is therefore limited. Other features which are desirable in a filter include The most important factors in filter selection are the specific resistance of the filter cake, the quantity to be filtered, and the solids concentration. For free-filtering materials, a rotary vacuum filter is generally the most satisfactory since it has a very high capacity for its size and does not require any significant manual attention. If the cake has to be washed, the rotary drum is to be preferred to the rotary leaf. If a high degree of washing is required, however, it is usually desirable to repulp the filter cake and to filter a second time. For large-scale filtration, there are three principal cases where a rotary vacuum filter will not be used. Firstly, if the specific resistance is high, a positive pressure filter will be required, and a filter press may well be suitable, particularly if the solid content is not so high that frequent dismantling of the press is necessary. Secondly, when efficient washing is required, a leaf filter is effective, because very thin cakes can be prepared and the risk of channelling during washing is reduced to a minimum. Finally, where only very small quantities of solids are present in the liquid, an edge filter may be employed. Whilst it may be possible to predict qualitatively the effect of the physical properties of the fluid and the solid on the filtration characteristics of a suspension, it is necessary in all cases to carry out a test on a sample before the large-scale plant can be designed. A simple vacuum filter with a filter area of 0.0065 m  Bed filters provide an example of the application of the principles of For the purification of water supplies and for waste water treatment where the solid content is about 10 g/m On integration:  C  λ is the filter coefficient. If Thus: The problem is discussed further by Bag filters have now been almost entirely superseded for liquid filtration by other types of filter, although one of the few remaining types is the Taylor bag filter which has been widely used in the sugar industry. A number of long thin bags are attached to a horizontal feed tray and the liquid flows under the action of gravity so that the rate of filtration per unit area is very low. It is possible, however, to arrange a large filtering area in the plant of up to about 700 m Bag filters are still extensively used for the removal of dust particles from gases and can be operated either as pressure filters or as suction filters. Their use is discussed in The filter press is one of two main types, the This type of filter consists of plates and frames arranged alternately and supported on a pair of rails as shown in The slurry may be fed to the press through the continuous channel formed by the holes in the corners of the plates and frames, in which case it is necessary to cut corresponding holes in the cloths which themselves act as gaskets. Cutting of the cloth can be avoided by feeding through a channel at the side although rubber bushes must then be fitted so that a leak-tight joint is formed. The filtrate runs down the ribbed surface of the plates and is then discharged through a cock into an open launder so that the filtrate from each plate may be inspected and any plate can be isolated if it is not giving a clear filtrate. In some cases the filtrate is removed through a closed channel although it is not then possible to observe the discharge from each plate separately. In many filter presses, provision is made for steam heating so that the viscosity of the filtrate is reduced and a higher rate of filtration obtained. Materials, such as waxes, that solidify at normal temperatures may also be filtered in steam-heated presses. Steam heating also facilitates the production of a dry cake.  Thus the time of filtration The time of dismantling and assembling the press, say  If the resistance of the filter medium is neglected, The application of these equations is illustrated later in   Two methods of washing may be employed, “simple” washing and “through” or “thorough” washing. With simple washing, the wash liquid is fed in through the same channel as the slurry although, as its velocity near the point of entry is high, erosion of the cake takes place. The channels which are thus formed gradually enlarge and uneven washing is usually obtained. Simple washing may be used only when the frame is not completely full. In For ease in identification, small buttons are embossed on the sides of the plates and frames, one on the non-washing plates, two on the frames and three on the washing plates as shown in A slurry is filtered in a plate and frame press containing 12 frames, each 0.3 m square and 25 mm thick. During the first 180 s the pressure difference for filtration is slowly raised to the final value of 400 kN/m A sample of the slurry had previously been tested with a leaf filter of 0.05 m In the leaf filter, filtration is at constant pressure from the start. Thus: In the filter press, a volume Thus:  When t = 300 s, Thus: That is: Hence:   For the constant pressure period: The total volume of filtrate collected is therefore given by: Thus: The final rate of filtration is given by: If the viscosity of the filtrate is the same as that of the wash-water, then: Thus the amount of wash-water passing in The recessed type of press is similar to the plate and frame type except that the use of frames is obviated by recessing the ribbed surface of the plates so that the individual filter chambers are formed between successive plates. In this type of press therefore the thickness of the cake cannot be varied and it is equal to twice the depth of the recess on individual plates. The feed channel shown in The second area of advance is in mechanisation which enables the opening and closing to be done automatically by a ram driven hydraulically or by an electric motor. Plate transportation is effected by fitting triggers to two endless chains operating the plates, and labour costs have consequently been reduced very considerably. Improved designs have  Because of its basic simplicity the filter press is versatile and may be used for a wide range of materials under varying operating conditions of cake thickness and pressure. Maintenance cost is low. It provides a large filtering area on a small floor space and few additional associated units are needed. Most joints are external and leakage is easily detected. High pressure operation is usually possible. It is equally suitable whether the cake or the liquid is the main product.  It is intermittent in operation and continual dismantling is apt to cause high wear on the cloths. Despite the improvements mentioned previously, it is fairly heavy on labour. A slurry containing 100 kg of whiting, of density 3000 kg/m The basic filtration equation may be written as: The slurry contains 100 kg whiting/m Volume of 100 kg whiting = (100/3000) = 0.0333 m Volume of cake = 0.0333/(1 - 0.4) = 0.0556 m  Volume of filtrate = (1 - 0.0222) = 0.978 m Thus: In the experiment: Inserting these values in From But: Thus: It is shown in For the washing process, if the filtration pressure is halved, the rate of washing is halved. The wash water has twice the thickness to penetrate and half the area for flow that is available to the filtrate, so that, considering these factors, the washing rate is one-eighth of the final filtration rate.  Hence: That is: Therefore: The filtration time Thus: The rate of cake production is then: For d Thus: Pressure leaf filters are designed for final discharge of solids in either a dry or wet state, under totally enclosed conditions, with fully automatic operation. Each type of pressure leaf filter features a pressure vessel in which are located one or more filter elements or leaves of circular or rectangular construction. The filter media may be in the form of a synthetic fibre or other fabrics, or metallic mesh. Supports and intermediate drainage members are in coarse mesh with all components held together by edge binding. Leaf outlets are connected individually to an outlet manifold which passes through the wall of the pressure vessel. The material to be filtered is fed into the vessel under pressure, and separation takes place with the solids being deposited on the leaf surface, and the liquid passing through the drainage system and out of the filter. Cycle times are determined by pressure, cake capacity or batch quantity. Where particularly fine solids must be removed, a layer of precoat material may be deposited on the leaves prior to filtration, using diatomaceous earth, Perlite, or other suitable precoat materials. Cake washing, for recovery of mother liquor or for removal of solubles, may be carried out before discharge of the solids as a slurry or a dry cake. Pressure leaf filters are supplied in a wide range of size and materials of construction. One typical design is the “Verti-jet” unit with a vertical tank and vertical leaf filter, as shown in In the “Auto jet” design, circular leaves are mounted on a horizontal shaft which serves as the filtrate outlet manifold. The leaves are rotated during the cleaning cycle although, in addition, extra low speed continuous rotation during operation ensures uniform cake buildup in difficult applications. The leaves are of metallic or plastics construction covered with fabric or wire cloth for direct or precoat operation, and rotation of the leaves during cleaning promotes fast efficient sluice discharge with minimum power consumption. As an alternative, the leaves may be rotated over knife blades which remove the cake in a dry state. Units of this type are used for handling foodstuffs and also for the processing of minerals and effluents. For the handling of edible oils, molten sulphur, effluents and foodstuffs, a Filtra-Matic unit is used in which either the bundle is retracted from the shell as a unit, or the filter tank is retracted leaving the filter leaves and filter cover in position. Such units are available in cylindrical, conical or trough shell configurations, and cleaning may be either wet or dry, manual or automatic. In the latter case, for dry discharge, vibration systems are used and for wet removal spray jets mounted in an overhead manifold sweep the entire leaf surface in an oscillating motion. In this design, the heavy duty leaves covered with cloth or screen are all interchangeable and, whether round or rectangular, are all the same size to give uniform precoat, cake build-up and filtration. In horizontal tray pressure filters, used in batch processes and intermittent flows, the trays are mounted horizontally with One particular design of pressure filter is the The bed is formed by feeding a dilute suspension of material, to the filter usually a form of kieselguhr, which is strained by the packs to form a bed about 3 mm thick. Kieselguhr is available in a number of grades and forms a bed of loose structure which is capable of trapping particles much smaller than the channels. During filtration, the solids build up mainly on the surface and do not generally penetrate more than 0.5 mm into the bed. The filtrate passes between the discs and leaves through the fluted drainage rod, and operation is continued until the resistance becomes too high. The filter is then cleaned by back-flushing, which causes the filter cake to crack and peel away. In some cases the cleaning may be incomplete as a result of channelling. If for any reason the spaces between the rings become blocked, the rings may be quickly removed and washed. The Metafilter is widely used for filtering domestic water, beer, organic solvents and oils. The filtration characteristics of clay-like materials can often be improved by the continuous introduction of a small quantity of filter aid to the slurry as it enters the filter. On the other hand, when the suspended solid is relatively coarse, the Metafilter will operate successfully as a strainer, without the use of a filter bed.  The relation between flow and head for a certain slurry pump may be represented approximately by a straight line, the maximum flow at zero head being 0.0015 m Using this pump to feed a particular slurry to a pressure leaf filter: How long will it take to produce 1 m What will be the pressure across the filter after this time? A sample of the slurry was filtered at a constant rate of 0.00015 m For constant rate filtration through the filter leaf: At a constant rate of 0.00015 m Substituting these values into  As the full-size plant is 10 times that of the leaf filter, then:  Substituting for (-Δ Since The time to collect 1m The pressure at this time is found by substituting in If in a horizontal filter both sides are open to atmosphere then, as slurry is introduced above the filter medium, filtration will occur at an adequate rate as long as the hydrostatic head of slurry above the filter medium is sufficient. The unit then operates as a gravity filter. If, however, the top of the vessel is enclosed and the slurry is introduced under pressure, then the unit operates as a pressure filter and the driving force is the amount by which the applied pressure exceeds atmospheric pressure below the filter medium. Greatly enhanced filtration rates may then be achieved. Similarly, if the pressure beneath the filter is reduced below atmospheric, the unit operates as a vacuum filter and the driving force may again be appreciably greater than that available with a gravity filter. The maximum theoretical driving force is then 101 kN/m Vacuum filtration has many advantages, not the least being the fact that the feed slurry, often containing abrasive solids in a corrosive liquid, can be delivered by gravity flow or by low pressure pumps which need only to overcome the resistance in the feed pipework. In addition, vacuum filtration equipment does not have to withstand high pressures Batch vacuum filters were developed from gravity filters and, in essence, Buchner funnels as used in laboratories and Nutsche type filters as used in industry are similar to gravity filters, except that they feature a vacuum pump or some other vacuum generating equipment to reduce the pressure under the filter medium, thereby increasing the driving force across the filter medium. Simple filters operating in this manner are often referred to as pan filters, and they incorporate certain features which are now being incorporated into continuously operating machines. These filters enable the initial cake formation to be made, either under gravity or at very low differential pressures, so that uniform distribution of the solids over the filter medium is obtained. Preferential settling occurs so that the heavier, and usually coarser, solids contact the filter medium first, thereby protecting it from the slower settling fine solids. Following this, the filtrate drainage section may be subjected to higher vacuum to give greater differential pressures, higher flowrates per unit area and greater total flows. A typical cycle for a batch type vacuum filter might be: Feeding of slurry, Cake formation and filtration, initially under gravity if required, followed by vacuum operation, Initial drying for maximum removal of mother liquor, Cake washing and drying, Manual discharge of solids, Cloth washing. The advantages of such units include simplicity in both design and operation, low cost per unit area and flexibility with regard to filtration, washing and drying periods. In addition, very sharp separation of the mother liquor and various wash liquors can be obtained due to the wash liquors being completely contained within the pan. The filter cakes remain in position between batches without the necessity for power to be used for their retention. In addition, the flow through the filter medium can be stopped or be restricted to a very low rate in order to obtain leaching from the solids in the filter bed.  Since the liquor flowrate decreases as filtration proceeds, facilities to cope with this must be incorporated in the feed and filtrate handling sections of the system and the discharge of solids must be a manual operation if the solids cannot be sluiced off. Equipment has been developed to overcome the disadvantages of manual discharge of solids from the simple batch pan type vacuum filter, and such equipment incorporates scrapers or rakes for the removal of the solids. Other pan type vacuum filters are arranged so that the pan is tipped over, when the solids are discharged, either under their own weight or sometimes with the assistance of blow-back air admitted to the underside of the filter cloth when the pan is inverted. Further developments eliminate, or reduce to acceptable proportions, the cyclic variations noted previously and one simple development which achieves this to a limited extent involves a number of individual tipping pans arranged in parallel. For example, with three pans discharging into a common slurry tank, the operation is arranged so that whilst one pan is being charged with feed material and, whilst solids-mother liquor separation is being carried out in it, the second pan is at the washing stage and third pan is at the drying and discharging stage. This arrangement obviously reduces cyclic variations though it necessitates diversion of the feed and wash liquor from one pan to another. The operation can, however, be carried out automatically by the use of a process timer or similar control unit. The disadvantages of cyclic operation, attributable to the need to remove the cake from batch filters, have been largely overcome by the development of a wide range of continuous vacuum filters as summarised in One way of limiting still further cyclic variations is to use vacuum filters of the horizontal continuous type, and many designs have been developed which in the main consist of pans arranged in line or in a circle so that each in turn goes through the same cycle of operations, namely: feeding, dewatering, washing, drying, automatic solids discharge and cloth washing. The pans move past the stationary feed and wash areas where the feed and wash liquors are continuously introduced to the filter. Alternatively, a plain filter surface may be arranged as a linear belt or as a circular table, in place of pans. All filters of this type have the distinct advantage of continuous operation and, as a result, the feed and wash liquors may be fed to the equipment at steady rates. Dense, quick settling solids can be handled, and the cake thickness—and the washing and drying times — can be varied independently between quite wide limits. The cake can be flooded with wash liquor, which can be taken away separately and re-used to obtain countercurrent The The A large filtration area, up to 85 per cent of which is effective at any instant. Low operating and maintenance costs and simple cloth replacement. Clean discharge of solids. Fabrication in a wide range of corrosion-resistant materials. Countercurrent washing. Operation at a pressure down to 15 kN/m The In the horizontal belt or band filter, shown in  An interesting development is the Band filters have several advantages over rotary vacuum filters which are described in the following section. These include: Some gravitational drainage of liquid occurs because the cake and the belt are vertically separated at all stages of the filtration operation. In addition, a vacuum is not needed to keep the cake in place and this simply supplements the effect of gravity on the flow of filtrate. Because the feed is from the top, it is not necessary to agitate the suspension in the feed trough.  Washing is more effective because of the improved structure of the filter cake. The fitting of an impervious cover over the cake towards its exit will reduce the loss of vacuum due to air flow through cracks in the cake. Another development by Pannevis in Holland, shown in Because of its versatility and simplicity, one of the most widely used vacuum filters is the Those where vacuum is created within compartments formed on the periphery of the drum, and Those where vacuum is applied to the whole of the interior of the drum. The most frequently used continuous drum type filters fall into the first category. These give maximum versatility, low cost per unit area, and also allow a wide variation of the respective time periods devoted to filtration, washing and drying. Essentially, a multi-compartment drum type vacuum filter consists of a drum rotating about a horizontal axis, arranged so that the drum is partially submerged in the trough into which the material to be filtered is fed. The periphery of the drum is divided into compartments, each of which is provided with a number of drain lines. These pass through the inside of the drum and terminate as a ring of ports covered by a rotary valve, through which vacuum is applied. The surface of the drum is covered with a filter fabric, and the drum is arranged to rotate at low speed, usually in the range 0.0016-0.004 Hz (0.1-0.25 rpm) or up to 0.05 Hz (3 rpm) for very free filtering materials. As the drum rotates, each compartment undergoes the same cycle of operations and the duration of each of these is determined by the drum speed, the submergence of the drum and the arrangement of the valve. The normal cycle of operations consists of filtration, drying and discharge. It is also possible, however, to introduce other operations into the basic cycle, including: Separation of initial dirty filtrate — which may be an advantage if a relatively open filter fabric is used. Washing of the filter cake. Mechanical dewatering of the filter cake. Cloth cleaning.  In order to achieve consistent performance of a continuous filter, it is necessary to maintain the filter medium in a clean condition. With a drum type vacuum filter this requires the complete and continuous removal of the filter cake from the drum surface, and the operating conditions are often influenced by the need to form a fully dischargeable cake. Again, in order to achieve high capacity and good cake washing and/or drying, it is very often desirable to operate with very thin cakes. Therefore, the cake discharge system of most drum type vacuum filters must be arranged so as to ensure the complete and continuous removal of extremely thin filter cakes. The most effective way of achieving this is determined to a large extent by the physical nature of the solids being handled.  In the string discharge system, the conveyor consists of a number of endless strings which are spaced at a pitch of approximately 12 mm over the width of the filter drum. The string spacing may, however, be in the range 6-25 mm depending on the mechanical properties of the solids. The advantages of the string discharge system are: Thin and sticky filter cakes down to about 1.5 mm of materials such as clay may be effectively discharged. The filter cloth is almost free of mechanical wear and tear so that thin and delicate cloths may be used, and these can be selected almost solely for their filtration properties. Such cloths are usually less prone to plugging than the stronger and thicker cloths required for other discharge systems. The cloth can be attached to the drum in a simple manner so that fitting and subsequent replacement can be carried out quickly. Normally, the cloth is loosely The use of compressed air, to loosen cake from the drum surface, is avoided and consequently there is no possibility of blowing back into the filter cake moisture which has previously been removed under vacuum. This is a possibility with knife discharge filters operating with blow-back. If required, the path of the discharge strings can be altered so that the filter cake is conveyed by the strings to a convenient point for feeding a continuous dryer-extruder, or other processing equipment. A typical string discharge mechanism is shown in The knife discharge system incorporates a knife which is arranged so that the surface of the drum runs on or near to the knife edge. The cake is dislodged from the cloth either by its own weight, with thick and heavy cakes, or by applying compressed air to the underside of the filter cloth. The blow-back air can either be admitted at low pressure for a long period, or at high pressure and instantaneously by means of a mechanical “blow-off timer”. With suitable solids it is possible to operate with the knife spaced from the drum With the roller cake discharge system, the cake is transferred from the drum to a discharge roll from which it is removed by a knife. This is a relatively simple method of removing thin and sticky filter cakes without having a knife rubbing against and wearing the filter cloth. Certain applications require facilities for washing the cloth either continuously or intermittently without dilution of the trough contents, and such a feature is provided by the belt discharge system where the filter cloth also acts as cake conveyor. In such a system, the cake is completely supported between the drum and the discharge roll so that thin cakes and cakes of low mechanical strength can be handled and higher drum speeds, and hence higher filtration rates, can be achieved. The performance of drum type vacuum filters for given feed conditions can be controlled by three main variables-drum speed, vacuum (if necessary with differential vacuum applied to the filtration, washing and drying zones) and the percentage of drum surface submerged in the feed slurry. Most drum filters have facilities which allow for easy manual adjustment of these variables, although automatic adjustment of any, or all, of them can be actuated by changes in the quality and/or quantity of the feed or cake. For maximum throughput, a drum filter should be operated at the highest submergence and at the highest possible drum speed. The limiting conditions affecting submergence are: Any increase in submergence limits the proportion of the drum area available for washing and/or drying. Drum submergence above approximately 40 per cent entails the use of glands where the drum shaft and valve hub pass through the trough. High submergence may complicate the geometry of the discharge system. Under all conditions, it is essential to operate with combinations of drum speed, submergence and vacuum, which, for the feed conditions that apply, will ensure that a fully dischargeable cake is formed. If this is not done then progressive deterioration in the effectiveness of the filter medium will occur and this will adversely affect the performance of the machine. Typical filtration cycles for drum filters are given in Drum type vacuum filters can be fitted, if required, with simple hoods to limit the escape of toxic or obnoxious vapours. These may be arranged for complete sealing, and for operation under a nitrogen or similar blanket, although this complicates access to the drum and necessitates a design in which the vacuum system and the cake receiving system are arranged to prevent gas loss. The cake moves through the washing and drying zones in the form of a continuous sheet and, because the cake and filter medium are adequately supported on the drum shell, it is possible to fit the filter with various devices that will improve the quality of the cake regarding both washing and drying, prior to discharge. Simple rolls, extending over the full width of the filter, can be so arranged that any irregularities or cracks in the cake are eliminated, and subsequent washing and drying is therefore applied to a uniform surface. Otherwise wash liquors and air tend to short circuit, or “channel”, the deposited solids. The cake compression system may also incorporate a Other devices which find varying degrees of success in the treatment of thixotropic materials include rotary beaters and pulsating valves to interrupt the air flow in the drying zone. Both of these result in movement of the cake, giving a reduction in moisture content. A drum type vacuum filter can easily be arranged so that the trough and hood, if fitted is thermally insulated. In addition, the filter can be equipped with heat exchange equipment, such as jackets for heating fluid or refrigerant, and electric resistance wires for heating. These features can be of particular significance in applications such as the dewaxing of lubricating oil which is normally carried out at temperatures below 263 K (—10°C), and for salt drying which may be effected at temperatures approaching 673 K (400°C) on a filter/dryer. In most applications, bottom feed drum filters, that is those where the drum is partially suspended in the feed slurry, must be fitted with agitators to keep the solids in suspension. Normally, pendulum type rakes, which are pivoted on or above the drum axis, are used so as to avoid the use of glands, although rotary paddles fitted at low level in the filter trough also find application. Solids suspension may also be improved by giving careful attention to the flow pattern within the trough such as, for example, by feeding slurry into the trough at low level and at a rate in excess of that at which the material can be filtered. With this technique a constant overflow is provided so that upward movement within the trough assists in conveying solids toward the filter surface. Air sparge pipes Top-feed drum filters are used for the treatment of very fast settling solids that cannot easily be kept in suspension. A drum filter may be preferable, rather than a horizontal pan or similar filter, because of its low cost, simplicity and reliability, and because of the relative ease with which it can be fitted with appropriate accessory features. A top feed drum filter incorporates multi-compartments, drainlines and a rotary valve identical to those in a conventional drum filter. The feed slurry is introduced at, or just before, top dead centre, and the cake is discharged from 90° to 180° from the feed point. The feed slurry can be distributed across the drum by sprays or a weir box, or it may be contained within a 3-sided head-box which is sealed against the moving drum at each end and across the back on the ascending filter surface. For materials which do not cake together sufficiently to be self-supporting on the drum surface, a hopper-type top feed filter may Modern plant utilises drums with surfaces of 60-100 m Recent developments in rotary filters include equipment marketed by Dorr-Oliver, illustrated in A slurry containing 40 per cent by mass solid is to be filtered on a rotary drum filter 2 m diameter and 2 m long which normally operates with 40 per cent of its surface immersed in the slurry and under a pressure of 17 kN/m At what speed should the drum rotate for maximum throughput and what is this throughout in terms of the mass of the slurry fed to the unit per unit time? For the leaf filter:   For the rotary filter,  Area of filtering surface = (2 Bulk volume of cake deposited = (4 If the rate of filtrate production = For a 40 per cent slurry: Thus: volume of solids deposited = (0.66w/1500) = 4.4 × 10 If one revolution takes Rate of production of filtrate = 0.001 Substituting Thus: A plate and frame press with a filtration area of 2.2 m If the operating cost during filtration is £10/ks and the cost of a shutdown is £100, what is the optimum filtration time for minimum cost? Substituting Substituting Solving Thus, for the plate and frame filter: Substituting for From The total cost is: Substituting for  Substituting for A slurry, containing 0.2 kg of solid per kilogram of water, is fed to a rotary drum filter 0.6 m long and 0.6 m diameter. The drum rotates at one revolution in 360 s and 20 per cent of the filtering surface is in contact with the slurry at any instant. If filtrate is produced at the rate of 0.125 kg/s and the cake has a voidage of 0.5, what thickness of cake is produced when filtering with a pressure difference of 65 kN/m The rotary filter breaks down and the operation has to be carried out temporarily in a plate and frame press with frames 0.3 m square. The press takes 120 s to dismantle and 120 s to reassemble and, in addition, 120 s is required to remove the cake from each frame. If filtration is to be carried out at the same overall rate as before, with an operating pressure difference of 175 kN/m  1 kg or 10 Since the cake porosity is 0.5, 6.67 × 10 Volume of cake deposited by unit volume of filtrate, Volumetric rate of deposition of solids = (1.25 × 10 The bulk volume of cake deposited per revolution  At constant pressure: Expressing pressures, areas, times and volumes in N/m Using a filter press with The volume of frames/volume of cake deposited by unit volume of filtrate, But: Thus: That is: Thus:  Thus a minimum of The sizes of frames which will give exactly the required rate of filtration when six are used are given by: Thus, 6 frames of thickness either 47 mm or 99 mm will give exactly the required filtration rate; intermediate sizes give higher rates. Thus any frame thickness between 47 and 99 mm will be satisfactory. In practice, In essence, The discs are arranged on the shaft about 0.3 m apart as shown in In general, disc filters have the advantages that, not only is the cost per unit filtration area low and large filtration areas can be accommodated in a small floor space, but the trough can be divided into two sections so that the different slurries can be handled at the same time in the same machine. The disadvantages of these units is that heavy filter cloths are necessary, with a great tendency to “blind”, and cake washing is virtually impossible due to the ease with which deposited solids can be disturbed from the vertical faces. In contrast to a drum type filter, in which all parts of the filter medium take the same path through the slurry, each part of a disc segment takes a different path, depending on its radial distance from the hub. Consequently, if homogeneous conditions cannot be maintained in the filter trough, then very uneven cakes may be formed, a situation which All the filters described previously have been in the category of cake filters for they all rely on the solids present in the feed slurry having properties which are suitable for them to act as the actual filter medium and to form cakes which are relatively easily discharged. Applications arise where extremely thin filter cakes, perhaps only a fraction of a millimetre thick, have to be discharged, where extremely good filtrate clarity is essential, or where a particularly blinding substance is present, and filtration through a permanent filter medium alone, such as a filter fabric, may not be satisfactory. A much more efficient performance is achieved by utilising a bed of easily filtered material which is After the precoat is established the solids to be removed from the filter feed are trapped on the surface of the precoated bed. This thin layer of slime is removed by a knife which is caused to advance slowly towards the drum. The knife also removes a thin layer of the precoated bed so that a new surface of the filter medium is exposed. This procedure allows steady filtration rates to be achieved. A  To obtain maximum economy in operation, a precoat type vacuum filter should have: Easy variation of the knife advance rate. Very accurate control of the knife advance rate. A very rigid knife assembly (due to the need to advance at extremely low rates over a face width up to approximately 6 m). Rapid advance and retraction of the knife. Mechanical and hydraulic systems for control of the knife are now used. The latter allows easy selection of the rate and direction of knife movement and the system is particularly suited to remote control or automatic operation. A sludge is filtered in a plate and frame press fitted with 25 mm frames. For the first 600 s the slurry pump runs at maximum capacity. During this period the pressure rises to 415 kN/m It is found that if the cloths are precoated with filter aid to a depth of 1.6 mm, the cloth resistance is reduced to 25 per cent of its former value. What will be the increase in the overall throughput of the press if the precoat can be applied in 180 s?  For constant rate filtration: For constant pressure filtration: Thus: Total cycle time = (900 + 4200) = 5100 s Filtration rate = Thus:  One of the major problems in coal preparation is the dewatering of fine coal to a moisture content sufficiently low enough both to meet market requirements and to ease the problems of handlability encountered at some collieries and there is an interest in different types of dewatering equipment in addition to the conventional rotary vacuum filter. As a result, a tube press built by the former English China Clays Limited, now Imerys, was installed at a colliery where it was used to treat raw slurry which was blended into the final product. As described by In essence, the tube press is an automatic membrane filter press operating at pressures up to 10 MN/m  The unique design of the tube press allows for this cycle to be amended, however, to include air pressing and/or cake washing. With air pressing, once the initial filtration is complete, air is introduced between the membrane and the cake. The pressure cycle is then repeated. Typically an air press will further reduce the moisture content of china clay by 2.5-8 per cent. The final moisture contents with other materials are shown in 