Double or multiple emulsions have been under study for several decades, due to the possibility of encapsulation and controlled release of various bioactive compounds. This contribution focuses on the decisive parameters for encapsulation and release in double emulsions by considering different amino acids at different environmental conditions. Laser diffraction analysis showed that the double emulsion average droplet size increased from 50 up to 90 µm after 32 days of storage. The emulsions at 4 °C showed a higher increase compared to 37 °C. Dilution in SDS solution revealed that this droplet size increase was due to aggregation rather than coalescence. The results showed that there was no significant change in the entrapped water volume fraction of the double emulsions during 2 weeks of storage.
                  Amino acids were encapsulated within the internal aqueous phase with an efficiency of at least 80%. Regarding the release of the entrapped amino acids, it was found that both the temperature and the hydrophobicity of the amino acid had a significant effect. Fastest release was found at the highest temperature studied (i.e. 37 °C), which was thought to be due to the higher solubility and faster diffusion rate of the amino acid in the oil phase. As hydrophobicity increased, the released amino acid concentration also increased. The pH, on the other hand, did not have a significant effect on the release within the pH range considered (i.e. 7–10). The constant internal water volume fraction, together with the significant effect of temperature and hydrophobicity, indicated that the main release mechanism of amino acids in double emulsions is by direct diffusion from the internal to the external aqueous phase.W/O/W emulsions have the potential to be used for the encapsulation, protection and release of hydrophilic components ( This is possible because the oil fraction acts as a membrane, separating the two aqueous phases. This membrane can be considered semipermeable or fully permeable, depending on the circumstances ( For encapsulation applications, the following advantages have been reported. First, the functional ingredients can be trapped in the internal phase and released at a controlled rate, e.g. in the gastrointestinal system. Also, functional ingredients can be protected from enviromental conditions by isolating them from other water soluble ingredients, with which they might react. Finally, water soluble functional ingredients that have undesirable sensory properties can be trapped inside the internal phase in a way that these properties are not perceived in the mouth during mastication ( Amino acids are affected by pH, temperature, and light exposure. Moreover, amino acids are prone to be degraded, e.g. by oxidation or maillard reactions ( In this work, different amino acids were chosen, which enabled to observe the hydrophobicity effect on their release. The internal water droplets of the double emulsions were stabilized by PGPR, as this is by far the most commonly used and effective food-grade low HLB emulsifier for W/O emulsions. The encapsulation efficiency of the amino acids in water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) emulsions was investigated through time, also considering the droplet size and entrapped water volume fraction of the double emulsions. Hereby, the influence of the amino acid physicochemical properties, as well as of enviromental conditions such as pH and temperature, on the release kinetics of the amino acids was evaluated. The hydrophobic emulsifier polyglycerolpolyricinoleate (PGPR 4150) was kindly provided by Palsgaard A/S (Juelsminde, Denmark), whereas the hydrophilic emulsifier polysorbate 80 (Tween 80) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, USA). Potassium chloride (AnalaR NORMAPUR, VWR Chemicals, Leuven, Belgium) solution was used as an osmotic agent in both internal and external water phases which also contained 0.02 wt% of the anti-microbial agent NaN The following amino acids were used to obtain a range of different hydrophobicities: L-leucine (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium), DL-alanine (UCB, Leuven, Belgium), L-valine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), glycine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and L-glutamine (Merck KgaA, Darmstadt, Germany). 5 wt% of the hydrophobic emulsifier PGPR 4150 was added to HOSO after which this oil phase was heated to 60 °C. To prepare the W/O-emulsion, an Ultra-Turrax (S25-10G, IKA-Werke, Germany) at 24000 rpm was used to prepare the premix W/O-emulsions (50/50, w/w) at 60 °C: 50 g of a water phase containing 0.1 M KCl, 0.02% wt NaN For the external phase, 0.1075 M KCl, 0.02% wt NaN The droplet size distribution and volume weighed average diameter (D The W/O/W-emulsions were diluted ten times with the internal water phase and observed under the microscope to get a visual proof of the fact that internal water was present in the obtained emulsions. Image acquisition was conducted using an optical microscope (Olympus Cx40) with 40-fold objective for the double emulsions and 100-fold objective for the primary emulsions, coupled with a digital camera (AxioCam ERc 5S). The entrapped water fraction is the proportion of the water originally present as dispersed phase in the primary W The quantification of the released amino acid concentration in the work of The double emulsions were centrifuged (Sigma 1-15P, SIGMA Laborzentrifugen, Osterode am Harz, Germany) at 10,000 g for 5 min. The serum phase was extracted using a syringe, then filtered (pore size: 0.25 µm with nylon membrane; VWR International, USA) and stored at 4 °C until analysis. 1 mL of a tenfold dilution of the internal (W The absorbance of the samples was measured at 340 nm in a spectrophotometer (UV-1600PC UV–VIS, VWR International, Radnor, PA). The blank consisted of a solution of the external phase without amino acids (W A mathematical model was used (equation In this equation, C is the concentration in the external phase (mM), C In case C Changes of droplet size of double emulsions were analyzed using linear regression analysis. Significant differences of double emulsions regarding droplet size change were determined based on the 95% confidence interval of the slope. The release of amino acids was analyzed in R Studio using a paired  From the microscopic observations, it was verified that all the samples were double emulsions during the 16 days of storage and all double emulsions presented a high amount of internal water droplets. To confirm that the shift in droplet size distribution of the double emulsions was due to aggregation, measurements were performed both in the absence and presence of SDS: when SDS was used in the measurements, the average droplet size and size distribution became similar to the results obtained directly after preparation. This indicates that coalescence between oil droplets was minimal, and the main reason of the droplet size increase was flocculation. This is a logical consequence of the large particle size and hence pronounced creaming effect, which forces the emulsion droplets to sit close together in the cream layer. Due to the strong van der Waals attraction between supermicron particles, these particles are not easily redispersed upon homogenizing and diluting the cream phase. Laser diffraction particle size analysis showed that the volume weighted average droplet size of the amino acid containing double emulsions was about 50 µm directly after preparation, irrespective of the amino acid (alanine or leucine) used (  Centrifugal photosedimentation enabled a clear separation of the cream layer, containing the oil phase and the internal water phase, from the external water. W/O/W emulsion destabilization over time occurred due to creaming as indicated in The entrapped water fractions are demonstrated in Only the main effects (type of amino acid, pH and temperature) without interaction were tested. As the amino acids are measured in the external phase which may be contaminated by internal phase by destruction of internal water droplets, we first verified whether the phase composition had an effect on the absorbance spectrum. To examine this effect, the absorbance spectrum of the internal and external phase was compared upon sample preparation according to the method of The value reported by From The main effects (type of amino acid, temperature and pH) and interactions were tested by using a paired Comparing similar experiments only differing in the type of amino acid (indicated by rectangles in A mathematical model was constructed to describe the data of the amino acid release by a limited number of parameters. In this model, the parameter C  It was observed that for all amino acids, the t  Statistical analysis regarding the released amino acid concentration at different time points showed that all the amino acids were significantly different at 4, 20 and 37 °C (p value ≤ 0.02), as indicated by the squares in To enable a visual representation of the differences in amino acid release kinetics, Principal Component Analysis of the released concentration profiles was performed. As more than 90.79% of the variation can be explained by the first principal component, only this was retained in the evaluation. The Some studies have described three possible mechanisms regarding the diffusion of water and water soluble compounds through the oil phase in double emulsions. These are reverse micellar transport, hydrated surfactant transport and diffusion across a very thin lamella ( In the case of entrapped electrolytes, small molecular weight emulsifiers have been shown to promote transport from the internal to the external phase by a reverse micellar mechanism. In case the osmotic pressure is not equal, water may flow from the internal into the external phase or vice versa. It has been shown that water molecules and water soluble compounds are transported via reverse micelles at significant rates even if there is no osmotic pressure gradient if a sufficient number of reverse micelles exist in the oil phase (  To evaluate the role of the surfactant in entrapped amino acid release, valine-containing double emulsions were prepared with similar characteristics, except from the PGPR concentration, which was either 2 or 5%. Thin lamellar diffusion occurs when internal droplets move towards the external interface causing a fluctuation of the oil layer (  In this paper, we examined amino acid release from double emulsions which was shown to be mainly affected by temperature and hydrophobicity. Comparing the behavior at 4, 20 and 37 °C, the fastest release was found at the highest temperature due to the increased amino acid solubility in the oil phase, as well as its faster diffusion rate at this temperature. On the other hand, as the amino acid hydrophobicity increased, the released amino acid concentration also increased which also points to the large effect of the solute solubility in the oil phase, which is not only hydrophobicity but also temperature dependent. This paper provides a useful insight to formulate food and pharmaceutical double emulsions for encapsulation purposes.  This work was funded by YOK 100/2000 Doctoral Scholarship of Turkey and Scientific Research Projects Unit (BAP) of Istanbul Technical University, project 41981. Mathieu Balcaen and Lorenz De Neve are gratefully acknowledged for the valuable discussions. The authors declare no conflict of interest.