The efficient production of acetate from HCO3
                     − is demonstrated in a photo-assisted microbial electrosynthesis system (MES) incorporating a WO3/MoO3/g-C3N4 heterojunction photo-assisted biocathode supporting Serratia marcescens Q1 electrotroph. The WO3/MoO3/g-C3N4 structured electrode consisting of a layer of g-C3N4 coated on graphite felt decorated with W/Mo oxides nanoparticles exhibited stable photocurrents, 4.8 times higher than the g-C3N4 electrode and acetate production of 3.12 ± 0.20 mM/d with a CE
                     acetate of 73 ± 4 % and current of 2.5 ± 0.3 A/m2. Photo-induced electrons on the conduction bands of WO3/MoO3/g-C3N4 favoured hydrogen evolution, which was metabolized by S. marcescens with HCO3
                     − to acetate, while the holes were refilled by the electrons travelling from the anode. Such mechanism reduced the interfacial resistances creating a supplementary driving force leading to higher acetate production. The biocompatible components of WO3/MoO3/g-C3N4 synergistically couple light-harvesting and further catalyze S. marcescens to acetate from HCO3
                     −, providing a feasible strategy for achieving sustainable high rates of acetate production.Microbial electrosynthesis (MES) systems, comprising cathodic self-replicating and self-repairing electrotrophs which are able to accept electrons from either soluble electron carriers (e.g., H Suitable semiconductor photocatalytic materials for this purpose should provide a strong biocompatibility with the electrotrophs and favorable band gaps, and should have other prominent features including low overpotentials, long-term stability and non-toxicity to the electrotrophs. They should also be operative in aqueous media within a biologically relevant pH range from 5 to 8. Indeed, very few studies have demonstrated the accomplishment of all these criteria [ Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C This study investigates the production of acetate from inorganic carbon (HCO The preparation of g-C A photo-assisted, dual-chamber reactor made from two cubic polymethyl methacrylate blocks with inner cylinder chambers was used (3 cm diameter, 28 mL in volume) throughout the experiments. The effective operating volumes of the anodic and cathodic chambers were 26 mL each. A carbon rod (Chijiu Co., Qingdao, China), 9 mm in diameter and 3 cm in length, was used as anode, whereas the prepared W/Mo/g-C A non-photosynthetic electrotroph of Potentials of either ‒0.6 V or ‒1.1  V versus standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) [ Control experiments involved four reactors configurations. The first one (abiotic control) was operated without electrotroph inoculation of the WO A SEM (Nova NanoSEM 450, FEI company, USA) equipped with an EDS (X-MAX 20−50 mm The electrochemical performance of the photo-assisted biocathode of MES was assessed by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). CV was carried out from −1.2 V to 0.5 V vs. SHE using a potentiostat at a scan rate of 0.1 mV/s (BioLogic, VSP, France) [ The concentration (mM) or as production rate (mM/d) of acetate was determined using gas chromatography (GC7900, Tianmei, China) as previously described [ An approach of high-sensitivity flow cytometry was used to evaluate the electrotrophic viability in the presence of the photocatalyst and under light irradiation conditions [ The possible formation of hydroxyl radicals under irradiation conditions was determined by sampling 2 mL of the catholyte from each abiotic control and by mixing with 3.6 mg of benzoic acid to produce a 10 mM solution of benzoic acid, which scavenges residual amounts of The role played by photo-generated holes in the semiconductor valence band (VB) was assessed using KI hole scavenger, which was dosed into the catholyte to produce a final concentration of 10 mM. This amount sufficiently scavenged the photo-generated holes [ The growth of the electrotroph in the cathode was determined by quantifying the total biomass formed on the cathode and in the catholyte. The cathode electrode was firstly immersed in 2 mL NaOH (0.2 M) at a constant temperature of 4 °C for 1 h, followed by vortexing for 10 s every 15 min intervals. 2  mL of a physiological saline solution was then added to the solution, followed by storage in a refrigerator at −18 °C for 1 h. The frozen solution was finally melted in a water bath at 90 °C for 10 min. The aforementioned procedure was repeated three times, and the solution was totally collected to determine the amount of proteins. The planktonic biomass was quantified by the difference between the amount of proteins in the cathode effluent determined before and after filtration through a 0.22 μm Millipore cellulose membrane. The total amount of proteins measured was equivalent to 80 % of the dry weight of the bacteria [ The coulombic efficiencies for the production of acetate ( where The successful deposition of crystalline W and Mo oxide species onto the g-C g-C The WO XPS analyses of W/Mo oxides, g-C The peak at 288.1 eV ( Collectively, the XPS results show that the binding energies of C1s and N1s in the WO The UV–vis DRS spectra of the W/Mo oxide species, g-C The positive slopes of the straight sections in the Mott-Schottky plots of WO In fact, the more positive SEM observations on the bare graphite felt, W/Mo mixed oxide species, g-C The compositional analysis of the precipitates and species on the cathodes by EDS, determined the presence of P signals on all sites occupied by The overall performance of such complex photo-bio-electrochemical system is critically determined by a tradeoff between efficient biocatalysis and light absorption on the bare semiconductor surface of the WO Table S2 shows the results at MES varying the cathode thickness (CT), the inorganic carbon (IC) concentrations, cathode potentials (CP), solution conductivities (SC) and initial pHs. Photo-assisted MES systems operated with an IC concentration of 24 mM, a CP of ‒0.6 V vs. SHE, a CT of 5.0 mm and a SC of 5.8 mS/cm produced a current of 1.1 ± 0.1 A/m Increasing the WO Based on the optimum WO The MES with light irradiation of the WO The generation of photo-excited electrons and holes in the WO The photocatalytic process occurring on the WO The EIS spectra ( The Z-scheme WO The role of the photogenerated holes under irradiation of the semiconductor heterojunction was elucidated by the introduction of KI valence band hole scavenger. The presence of KI decreased the current (1.9 ± 0.1 A/m The reactive and nonselective oxidizing species of Prolonged operation of the MES (3 days) increased the acetate production to 6.77 ± 0.60 mM, that is 2.23 times in the controls with the bare graphite felt cathodes ( A prolonged operation time of 3 days resulted in a The MES assembly system was further operated in multiple batch cycles every 3.0 days with refreshment of the catholyte, to assess the long-term stability of the acetate production process. Similar acetate production rates (2.2 ± 0.2 to 2.3 ± 0.3  mM/d) with residual hydrogen rates (0.0042 ± 0.0003 to 0.0048 ± 0.0002 m The circuital current stabilized at 2.3 ± 0.2 – 2.4 ± 0.4 A/m The use of WO The WO The stability of this assembling remained reasonably robust over an extended operational time due to very low catalyst leaching which occurred primarily during the first two operational cycles. The extreme anaerobic conditions purposely controlled throughout this study excluded the generation of potentially harmful reactive oxygen species [ Tungstate and molybdate are cost-effective oxides that can be easily prepared in-situ or recovered from acidic mine wastewaters [ Based on the optimum W/Mo/g-C There are no conflicts to declare.  The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: