Internet-based education is rapidly expanding because of its flexibility, convenience, and cost efficiency. On-line education is likely to continue to expand rapidly and become an increasingly significant component of higher education throughout the world. However, much of the course material that is available through the internet has been designed around information dissemination rather than learning. This paper discusses the planning, development, delivery, and evaluation of an on-line corrosion course developed at the University of Utah.The University of Utah's on-line corrosion course, Metallurgical Engineering 5600—Corrosion Engineering, was developed to make an existing corrosion course more accessible to students without compromising the educational quality or course objectives. The internet and WebCT software provided the vehicles for accessibility, and appropriately designed educational tools provided the means to ensure educational quality and meet the established course objectives. The course has as its learning objectives: Develop a sound understanding of corrosion theory and applications Understand the basic types and mechanisms of corrosion Be able to select appropriate materials and technologies for corrosion minimization Be able to estimate the rate and cost of corrosion. The learning objectives for this course are simple, but the achievement of these objectives requires appropriate learning material and assessment tools that are based on sound pedagogical principles. Most on-line or internet-based courses are similar in design to correspondence courses with the internet connection providing a pathway for disseminating course material and collecting student work. While this type of approach offers more rapid information exchange than typical correspondence courses, it underutilizes the powerful potential of computers and the internet for enhanced learning opportunities. Each student is unique in his or her style of learning, yet all students learn through auditory, kinesthetic, and/or visual perception modes. Research indicates that use of the auditory mode in a form such as reading will result in information retention levels between 10% and 26%, auditory and visual mode usage leads to 50% retention, and use of all three modes results in 90% retention ( The effectiveness of demonstrations and hands-on learning opportunities is recognized as an important part of the science learning cycle ( Additional evidence for the need to enhance the application learning step, which includes hands-on opportunities, is prevalent in various forms in current literature. In a recent National Research Council report ( The use of repetition is well known in improving information retention ( Another important aspect of learning is the presentation of material in a logical manner that begins with principles that are understood and builds gradually upon the foundation of prior knowledge. In other words, students must take necessary prerequisite courses, and instructors must build appropriately upon the student knowledge base. As discussed in the previous section, education research indicates that more effective teaching and learning occur when multiple modes of perception are utilized to present course content to students in different ways in a logical manner. Consequently, educational material that utilizes multiple modes of perception should be the foundation upon which on-line education should built to maximize learning opportunities. Consideration of pedagogical principles in the design of the on-line corrosion course led to the establishment of the following guidelines: Course content should be provided in an appropriate, logical sequence. Cooperative learning experiences should be provided. Appropriate comprehension assessments, which are based more upon understanding than recall, should be utilized. Repetition by different methods and media should be incorporated into the course. Students learn most effectively when multiple modes of perception are utilized. Following the pedagogical guidelines, the course was designed with PowerPoint lecture modules that contain animation and sound in each slide, assignments, quizzes, tests, group projects, a virtual laboratory, an image library, an e-mail communication utility, solutions to homework and test problems, as well as supplemental information. The on-line corrosion course content is organized and delivered using 18 PowerPoint lecture modules that are animated and contain a complete, automated sound track. Each module or unit covers a specific topic that is important to corrosion. Beginning modules cover basic background information such as thermodynamics and kinetics. Later modules cover specific types of corrosion, such as pitting and environmentally induced cracking. Other modules are devoted to case studies and assessment techniques. The lecture modules incorporate visual and auditory modes of perception as well as the minor kinesthetic influence of the computer keyboard or mouse that is utilized by the student to move from one slide to the next. WebCT is a software package used to administer internet courses. WebCT provides the interface between the student and the on-line course and the instructor. It provides a user-friendly platform for organizing and presenting course material using a central course web page interface. A part of the course web home page is presented in On-line quizzes with immediate grading upon submission provide a rapid means of assessing student comprehension of course concepts. Each of the 18 quizzes is designed to provide one question for each concept in the module. However, each question is randomly selected from a pool of questions that assess student comprehension of one concept. Calculated and multiple choice questions are used in the quizzes as illustrated by the sample questions presented in Quizzes provide another method of presenting course material, which assists learning through content repetition, as well as an important assessment tool. In addition, students are required to engage important problem solving and information retention skills, making the quizzes a very valuable learning enhancement tool. A virtual laboratory was created for the on-line corrosion course to provide a simulated laboratory experience in which the visual, auditory, and kinesthetic modes of perception are utilized. The virtual laboratory is designed to simulate a laboratory experience from a visual and decision making perspective. Students must first visit a stockroom as shown in The virtual corrosion laboratory provides important learning opportunities in which different modes of perception are utilized in a format that is different than those provided by the other course tools. The virtual laboratory allows students to set up, perform, and acquire incorrect data when the experiment is set up incorrectly. Students are also required to analyze the data provided by the virtual laboratory experiments. Each student in the on-line corrosion course is required to complete three corrosion assessment projects. Students are divided into groups of three. Each student in the group is assigned to be the group leader for one of the assessment projects. Each student is also correspondingly assigned as a group member for the remaining assessment projects. Student performance is evaluated by each group leader, and each group leader's performance is evaluated by the group members. Performance evaluations comprise approximately 33% of the project grade. The group projects provide a method of interaction and cooperative learning as well as an opportunity to develop and evaluate leadership and team member skills. Supplemental software in the form of spreadsheets with macros is made available to students to assist in electrochemical corrosion test result prediction and in statistical analysis of corrosion data. The supplemental spreadsheet materials provide an additional method of presenting information in which the visual and auditory senses are utilized. In order to provide another mode of material presentation from a different perspective, additional materials were recommended or provided to students. The textbook, Principles and Prevention of Corrosion by An image library containing images of corroded materials was organized by corrosion type and presented in a corrosion image library. The purpose of the library was to provide an opportunity for students to view the effects of the main types of corrosion and to learn to identify important features associated with the various types of corrosion as seen in real world rather than theoretical examples. The image library engages primarily the visual perception mode and presents examples in a format that is different from the lecture modules. Communication between the instructor and the students was facilitated by an e-mail system tool provided through WebCT. The e-mail tool also provided the ability for students to communicate with each other. Typed solution sets for homework problems and exam questions were provided for students after submission of homework and exams to increase opportunities for students to understand the course concepts. The solution sets provided additional exposure to course concepts in a different format, thereby providing repetition of course concepts in a different manner than other forms of presentation. All students taking the on-line corrosion course for college credit were required to take proctored exams in order to provide appropriate verification of course concept mastery. Students were allowed to choose testing centers that were convenient to them or employment supervisors as proctors. All proctors were required to provide a signed written statement verifying that the student took the exam under the conditions stated by the instructor. Exams were provided directly to the proctors by fax or e-mail immediately prior to the scheduled exam time. Students gave the corrosion course and instructor high ratings (3.9/4.0). Thirty-two students have taken the course during the 2001 and 2002 calendar years, although 12 of those students attended in-class lectures and demonstrations. Evaluation forms filled out by students did not have questions that would allow for a direct comparison of on-line and traditional course delivery modes. However, student comments and performance with respect to different aspects of the course provide significant insights into the effectiveness of the on-line corrosion course. These insights indicate that: Students with excellent English communication preferred in-class lectures, although they are generally very satisfied with the on-line version of the corrosion course. Students that have difficulty with English communication preferred the on-line corrosion course because of the ability to repeat lecture segments multiple times. Students enjoyed the flexibility of the on-line course. (More students enrolled for the course during the on-line summer offerings (20) than for the in-class version that was offered during Spring Semester (12). (Note that the corrosion course is not required by any department at the University of Utah.) Performance of students taking the on-line version of the course was identical to those taking the traditional in-class version of the course. (85 Group project work was difficult to administer without specific module completion deadlines and significant grade weighting on group interactions and evaluations. On-line courses can provide quality education to students when pedagogical principles for enhanced learning are applied through appropriate implementation of educational tools. The use of appropriate educational tools in on-line courses does not appear to compromise student performance relative to those offered in traditional in-class courses. Students with schedule constraints can be offered additional flexibility through on-line course delivery that can have the added benefit of increasing course enrollment. Students with language difficulties prefer on-line course delivery due to the additional opportunity to review the lecture multiple times, rather than only once by traditional in-class delivery. However, the additional flexibility offered by on-line courses should be moderated by some specific deadlines to encourage an appropriate course pace. Setting some module completion deadlines facilitates student interactions that are not otherwise feasible when students are on independent completion schedules. Partial financial assistance for the development of the on-line corrosion course was provided by the United States National Science Foundation (Grant DMR-9983945). Computer programming for the virtual corrosion laboratory was performed by David P. Harding, who was funded by the University of Utah. Professor R. Peter King developed the virtual laboratory template that formed the backbone of the virtual corrosion laboratory. The author also wishes to acknowledge the on-line education enthusiasm of Professor Saskia Duyvesteyn, who demonstrated the use of portions of the WebCT quiz tool to the author and was an important promoter of quality education in the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah.