Many extraction systems in practical industry or analytical science need to be completed at a high phase ratio (>20:1). However, operation at high phase ratio brings some issues such as long mass transfer distance, high mass transfer resistance and low specific surface area, which leads to the low extraction efficiency or long residence time. In this paper, gas-liquid-liquid (G/L/L) micro-dispersion technology is used to enhance the mass transfer and extraction of mixed rare earth elements (REEs). The results of liquid-liquid (L/L) system show that the extraction efficiency decreases as the phase ratio increases, further reflecting the challenge of extraction at high phase ratio. Subsequently, the gas phase is introduced to intensify the mass transfer. The results show that the overall mass transfer coefficient after gas introduction can be up to 8 times as high as that of the non-gas introduction, which demonstrates that introducing the gas phase greatly promotes the mass transfer and reduces the competing reaction between different REEs, achieving the enrichment and recovery of rare earth ions successfully. In addition, the extraction of medium and heavy REEs mixtures are also intensified by this method, which proves the universality and versatility of this technique.Heavy metal water pollution becomes one of the world’s three major water pollution today [ Recently solvent extraction technology has shown a “revolutionary” role in copper, nickel and cobalt smelting industry. In addition, it has achieved remarkable results in recovering valuable metals from secondary resources such as smelting residues, fly ash and waste liquor [ Most of the liquid-liquid extraction at micro-scale mentioned above are carried out with high concentration (> 500 mg/L) of metal ion and low phase ratio (< 5:1). However, for practical industry and analytical fields, many extraction systems need to be completed under extreme phase ratio (>20: 1), such as oil refining [ In our previous work, the introduction of inert gas to intensify the extraction of single rare earth element has been achieved both in microfluidic device [ The continuous phase contains rare earth chloride (PrCl The micro-dispersion module, which is made of stainless steel, is the core part of this set-up, as shown in As mentioned above, the REEs concentration at the beginning and the end in the aqueous solution are measured by ICP-OES, and the rare earth ions that react with the extractant can be calculated according to the conservation of mass. Thus, the extraction efficiency, Another important parameter, phase ratio, is defined as follows: The mean overall volume mass transfer coefficient, The residence time All the experiments are conducted at normal pressure and temperature. The interaction between REEs and P507 is an ion exchange process, and the reaction equation is as follows: The extractant and REE solution are dispersed and continuous phases, respectively. The concentration of each element is 60 mg/L. The outlet length is fixed at 2 m and the phase ratio is 100:1 to investigate the influence of continuous phase flow rate, When This section is aimed to explore whether the introduction of gas can be used to intensify and improve the mass transfer of mixed REEs at a high phase ratio. All the experiments are carried out at atmospheric pressure and room temperature, and the residence time can be adjusted by controlling the length of the tube. The previous results demonstrate that the two-stage MDME can form the gas-in-oil-in-water emulsions stably [ The overall volume mass transfer coefficient, The above results indicate that the introduction of an inert gas can enhance the reaction of the light REEs mixture at high phase ratio. For the mixed elements of medium and heavy REEs, it is worthwhile to study whether the method is also applicable. In this section, the Sm/Eu mixture is used as a representative of the medium REEs system, and the Er/Tm mixture is used as a representative of the heavy REEs system to study the effect of the introduction of the gas phase on the intensification of extraction. In this paper, MDME is used to enhance the mass transfer and extraction of mixed REEs. Firstly, the influences of continuous phase flow rate and phase ratio in L/L on the extraction efficiency are studied. It is revealed that the extraction efficiency decreases as the phase ratio raises, which further reflects the challenge of extraction with high phase ratio. Subsequently, the effect of introducing gas on the extraction efficiency is discussed. The overall mass transfer coefficient is used to quantitatively characterize the mass transfer rate. The results show that the coefficient after gas introduction can be up to 8 times as high as that of the non-gas introduction, which demonstrates that introducing gas greatly promotes the mass transfer and achieves the recovery and enrichment of REEs. In addition, the competition between different elements is reduced significantly and high extraction efficiency can be achieved for all the elements, which lays the foundation and provides an efficient way to recover and enrich the low concentration rare earth elements from waste water rapidly. The authors gratefully acknowledge the supports of the