The E–pH diagram for the Co–Sb–H2O system indicates that antimony and cobalt combine to form an inter-metallic compound that enhances the thermodynamic driving force of removal of cobalt from zinc electrolyte solution by cementation with zinc powder. The results of scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction show that antimony exists in the same form as nickel and cobalt which suggests that antimony and cobalt combine to form an inter-metallic compound CoSb. However, zinc exists in the form of basic zinc sulphate, zinc oxide and zinc. The activation mechanism of Sb2O3 is investigated in this paper.Zinc is one of the important non-ferrous metals. Owing to its low melting point and fluidity in the molten state, and easy die-casting of its alloys, zinc is increasingly used in the manufacture of shape-complicated components. In addition, zinc has good corrosion resistance and is used in galvanizing. Alloys of zinc with some non-ferrous metals are useful anti-friction materials. The efficient purification of zinc sulphate electrolyte is an essential requirement for the successful electrowinning of zinc. In order to intensify the electrowinning process, higher current density is adopted, and the electrolyte must be highly purified to make the level of impurities in the electrolytes as low as possible and to ensure the desired quality of cathode zinc. The methods of removing cobalt present in hydrometallurgical zinc plants can be classified into two categories: one is precipitation of cobalt with special reagents (e.g. xanthate), and another is removal of cobalt by cementation with zinc powder or alloy into which an activator (e.g. arsenate or antimonate) are added. Since the methods of removing cobalt by xanthate or by arsenate have many shortcomings ( The test solution was zinc sulphate solution after removal of copper and cadmium from a lead–zinc plant. The zinc powder was coarse atomized zinc dust produced by this lead–zinc plant and the fine electric furnace zinc dust produced by another plant. The activator is Sb 3 L of the test solution was added into a 5 L beaker. The experimental conditions were: temperature 85 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and X-ray diffractometer (XRD) was used to analyze the dried residue to determine the existing forms of cobalt and antimony. According to related thermodynamic data ( In the zinc sulphate solution, the water-soluble species of Sb The E–pH diagram of Co–Sb–H In summary, the activation mechanism of Sb Generally, Sb The E–pH diagram of Co–Sb–H During the removal of CoSb from the zinc sulphate solution, in which the copper and cadmium are eliminated by cementation with zinc dust, the pH in the vicinity of the surface of zinc dust increases, so that Zn