Restrictions in the proportion of recoverable cobalt from laterite ores in the Caron process are attributed to multiple effects. One of these is adsorption of cobalt solution species on the precipitated iron oxide phase. Cobalt loss to an iron oxide precipitate produced in an ammoniacal carbonate solution was investigated. Adsorption experiments, both during and after iron precipitation, were conducted under a variety of process conditions. While prior research has focused more on cobalt adsorption on hematite, the primary phase present in the residue was found to be ferrihydrite. Based on significant differences in adsorption capacity between various iron oxide phases, the material present in the residue will make a significant difference in cobalt losses. Cobalt loss was minimised at low iron concentrations, pH 10 and high ammonia concentrations, while temperature (over the range tested) did not display a significant impact on cobalt loss or the precipitated phase.The recovery of nickel from laterite ores has been the focus of a great deal of research due to inflating demand for stainless steel and the abundant nature of laterites in comparison to other nickel resources ( While there are several benefits associated with employing the Caron process as opposed to alternate treatment options, such as selectivity for nickel and cobalt ( There is no clear consensus in the literature as to the primary iron oxide phase present in material precipitated under Caron process conditions. Due to the sensitivity of iron oxide formation to conditions such as pH, concentration, temperature, residence time, solution potential and other species present ( Ferrihydrite is a nanocrystalline (often mistakenly referred to as amorphous) iron oxyhydroxide ( The relatively high surface area and affinity for adsorption of an array of soluble species is often of great benefit (i.e. removal of impurities ( Previous research concerning metal adsorption, occurring both during and after substrate precipitation, on various solid oxides (titania, hematite, quartz and alumina) has found that a vastly different behaviour is observed in the presence of ammonia ( This investigation examines cobalt uptake due to iron oxide precipitation under conditions similar to those in Caron process operations. Ammoniacal carbonate solutions were prepared with the required mass of anhydrous ammonium carbonate (NH Supernatant solution samples were diluted 100 times for cobalt assay using a Varian AA240 atomic adsorption spectrometer (AAS). Residue samples were dried at 40 Many factors may influence the proportion of cobalt loss to the residue to various degrees. The range of experimental conditions employed was selected to determine the key variables that influence the uptake of cobalt in the presence of the precipitating or precipitated iron oxide phase.  As can be seen in  The presence of cobalt during iron precipitation induced greater cobalt losses across a range of iron concentrations (  There was no apparent trend in cobalt loss with temperature between 25 and 45 Interestingly, the values of cobalt uptake observed in this study are much greater than those previously reported for adsorption on hematite. Even in experiments containing much greater ammonia concentrations and higher Co:Fe ratios, which should suppress the proportion of cobalt adsorbed, there are large discrepancies between the cobalt loss observed in these experiments and adsorption on hematite in previous studies (  Line profile analysis was conducted to determine the peak positions (fits displayed in The presence of the few relatively sharp peaks (labelled 2, 5, 7, 8, and 9) in The ferrihydrite peaks in  As can be seen, peaks 3, 4, 6 and 8 from This investigation has determined that ferrihydrite is likely to constitute a significant proportion of the iron oxide phase precipitated in the Caron process. If so, this is of great importance to the process; ferrihydrite has a far greater surface area than most iron oxide phases due to various forms of porosity and thus a greater capacity for adsorption. Therefore, characterisation of industrial residues is critical as the magnitude of cobalt loss due to the iron oxide precipitate may be greatly underestimated. The possibility exists to attempt to favour the formation of a different phase The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the