A numerical model has been developed for the determination of liquid flow permeability through columnar dendrite during growth and segregation in the Al–Si alloys. Therefore, in the present work two separate computational models of the grain growth and interdendritic liquid flow are coupled for modelling of the permeability in partly solid alloy. The grain growth is simulated using a cellular automation finite difference (CAFD) for a 2D dendrite, and fluid flow by using a computational fluid dynamic (CFD) model for determining permeability. A new model has been presented for calculation and modification of the dendrites permeability in the high solid fractions. Simulation results show which Si concentration variations in each time step could transform of dendrite shape. Also dendrites morphology could alter the interdendritic permeability factor.Concentration of alloying element in liquid Liquid heat capacity Mushy alloy heat capacity Solid heat capacity Concentration of alloying element in the solid Effective diffusion coefficient Diffusion coefficient in liquid Diffusion coefficient in solid Error of the continuity equation Solid fraction Liquid fraction Gravity acceleration Heat conduction coefficient of the solid fraction Heat conduction coefficient of the mushy alloy Heat conduction coefficient of the liquid fraction Permeability Permeability tensor Partition coefficient Equivalent partition coefficient Pressure heat flux Heat source term Growth rate of the solid–liquid interface time Temperature Liquidus temperature Melting point Eutectic alloy temperature Solidus temperature Velocity Latent heat of the solidification process Time step   Super saturate layer at the solid–liquid interface Dynamic viscosity Density of liquid Density of mushy zone Density of solid Casting engineers continually deal with macrosegregation, but despite their efforts, segregation sometimes persists and can even reach unacceptable levels leading to expensive scrap. In addition, macrosegregation in ingots or casting parts can be an overriding factor in limiting the size and the production rate of the cast product. Convection of interdendritic liquid through the dendritic mushy zone in solidifying alloys is responsible for most of the macrosegregation in castings and ingots. The pressure drop due to shrinkage and restricted feeding through dendritic structures, which famed to permeability, is a major factor contributing to the porosity in cast parts. The permeability strongly depended on geometry of the interdendritic channels, and its measuring is very difficult especially for the low solid fraction. However, experimental measurement of the liquid flow in the mushy zone and how it depends upon processing parameters is very difficult. For these reasons, concurrent modelling of segregation and fluid flow is desirable. The microscopic flow of fluid through the mushy zone is usually modelled by Darcy's Law In the A fine mesh of solid dendrites forms interdendritic channels filled with liquid metal. The tortuous of the interdendritic channels induces a pressure drop in the liquid flow between the entrance and the bottom of these channels. For typical dendrite arms spacing the liquid flow in this fine mesh can be treated as a flow through a finely porous media and the Darcy's law can be applied to estimate the pressure drop in the channel. Therefore, much research has focused on measuring the permeability of alloys in the mushy zone Piwonka and Flemings There are two commonly used the  Relative motion between the solid and the liquid during the alloy solidification is one of the most critical transport phenomena associated with macro segregation and micro structural development. In order to predict the relative movement as well as its ensuing effects in a solidifying alloy, accurate knowledge of the solid/liquid interfacial drag and the permeability over the entire range of the solid volume fraction is required. Therefore, in the present work two separate computational models of the The CAFD model was used to simulate grain formation Due to the difference between the solubility of solute in liquid and solid matrix phase, solute partitioning occurs during the solidification process. The solute concentration gradient is the driving force the solute diffusion within solid and liquid matrix phases. Assuming local equilibrium, the total concentration of solid solute per cell before eutectic is given by If the solid fraction within a cell is greater than zero, partitioning can occur and solute is rejected from the cell into its neighbouring liquid cells. The solute concentration heterogeneity produced by partitioning drives the diffusion, which tends to harmonize solute concentration. Partitioning and diffusion, as mentioned above, change solute concentration and therefore, the local liquidus temperature via phase diagram as well as local undercooling. In each solidifying cell, the change in the solid fraction is firstly determined by the KGT model In present work a CFD code, SUTCAST, developed to determine 2D permeability by solving the N-S equation using the SOLution Algorithm (SOLA) method, which has been described in references The heat transfer equation for mushy zone my be written as: In the present work two separate codes, the CAFD program for simulation of the Go to the CAFD code. The calculations are made for each time step, consists of the following steps: Initial settings are determined including: mesh generation, initiating arrays, the control parameter set up, physical-thermal property parameters. Semi-explicit approximations of Eqs. Dimensions (morphology) and properties of dendrite are determined. Go to the CFD code for calculation of micro-fluid flow and permeability near dendrite. The calculations are made for each time step; the basic procedure of advancing a solution through one increment in time, δ Semi-explicit approximations of Eqs. To satisfy the continuity Eq. In each iteration for the low solid fraction cells (0 Finally, temperature in each cell is calculated by means of Eq. Repetition of step 1 for determining new dendrite properties and morphology in the new time step. The flowchart for above computing procedures has been presented in the The CFD code computations were carried out in a square array of cylinders for code validation, as shown in ( A FDM solver, Fluent, is used to solve the N-S equation for the same conditions as described above. The top and bottom walls of domain were “fee-slip” condition, and at the solid/liquid interface was “no-slip” conditions. The left and right walls were “inlet” and “outlet”, respectively. In micro-macro modelling of the columnar solidification of the binary Al–Si alloy, the temperature gradient and growth rate are the main factors that affect the dendrite morphology. The CAFD solver is capable consider all the factors during solidification. Initially a nucleus is placed at centre of a square domain 1   In this investigation an algorithm was developed to calculating the permeability of mushy alloys for low and high solid fraction. To simulate the permeability both codes the CFD and the CAFD coupled. The CAFD created the solid dendrite and the CFD calculated the fluid flow near of the dendrite. Comparisons between the calculated permeability and the experimental data, which extracted from different authors, permit to conclude that present model, based on Eqs. Simulation results show that solute concentration could convert dendrites morphology from the rhombic toward the cloverleaf. These concentration variations are as power-law form. Consequently, the cloverleaf dendrites morphology could decrease the permeability and the pattern flow due to increase its drag force. Results of the simulation show that in a fix solid fraction, the flow pattern and the permeability could alter by the dendrite shape and angle between dendrite axis with streamline. The presented permeability in this paper could be used in the casting simulation codes for prediction of micro-shrinkage during the solidification process. The authors are grateful for the research support of the Sharif University of Technology and Department of Materials at Imperial College, London, specially Dr. P.D. Lee, Dr. R.C. Atwood.