Recent work has shown for the first time that high electric field strength microwave energy can facilitate comminution of ores, at energy inputs considered economically viable. However, due to difficulties in measuring stress formation inside a solid being exposed to microwave energy, the accuracy of a suggested thermal stress weakening mechanism has not been quantified. It is thought that microwave induced differential thermal expansion of certain mineral phases is sufficient to cause stresses that exceed the strength of the material. This study simulated this proposed weakening mechanism using a quasi-static thermo-mechanical 2D model of a simplified pyrite/calcite system formulated in commercial finite difference numerical modelling software. The effects of microwave power density and exposure time on simulated uniaxial compressive strength are quantified. Power densities expected in both continuous wave and pulsed microwave applications are examined, and the work concludes that pulsed treatment is more effective for weakening rocks. The paper makes recommendations as to the future operating requirements of microwave equipment for the most effective weakening at economic energy inputs.Comminution or rock breakage, accounts for 30–70% of the power draw of a typical plant and for 20–50% of the capital cost Microwave treatment has been identified as another potential method of inducing intergranular failure with rock samples. The rate at which minerals (and materials in general) heat in an applied electromagnetic field is governed by their dielectric properties. Metaxas and Meredith Some minerals heat extremely rapidly within a microwave field, whereas other mineral species remain transparent and do not heat. Work has been carried out in this area for over 20 years although it is only recently that significant reductions in strength have been demonstrated at economic energy inputs. Kingman et al. Chen et al. The spatial distribution and general characteristics of the thermally induced stress field, and the associated mechanism of potential weakening and mineral liberation within the ore, due to the microwave heating are not fully known nor can they be very easily measured. To provide a better understanding of the mechanisms associated with microwave heating of rock ores and to predict the affect of different microwave heating rates and energy inputs computational simulations of the heating and thermal damage due to microwave treatment on a conceptual mineral ore has been undertaken. The simulations were undertaken on two-phase mineral ore. This model ore comprised of pyrite particles randomly disseminated in a matrix of calcite. Pyrite (FeS The models were constructed to represent standard ‘cylindrical’ cores of rock, which are typically used for laboratory strength testing. The models were assigned a composition of 99% calcite, with 1% pyrite particles, which were located randomly throughout the sample to give a representation of mineral texture. Numerical modelling was undertaken using a geo-mechanical 2D finite difference modelling software package, FLAC V4.0 The mechanical behaviour of the mineral phases in the ore was simulated using two constitutive models which related the stress conditions within the mineral phases to the associated strains. Although there has been many different constitutive models developed for rock and ore, in general most rocks behave as brittle materials which deform elastically until a critical stress condition is met. Thereupon progressive cracking of the material leads to permanent plastic deformation and an observable reduction in strength. To simulate this characteristic behaviour a strain softening constitutive model was adopted for both mineral phases but with different material parameters to reflect the different properties of each mineral phase. The critical stress condition at the onset of plastic deformation is known as the yield point. Below the yield point the strain softening model simulated an isotropic linearly elastic medium characterised by the two material parameters of Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio. Within the constitutive model the yield point was determined using a inbuilt failure criterion. The most important failure criterion for rock materials and the one used in the strain softening model is the Mohr–Coulomb criterion, which relates the shear strength of the material using the parameters friction and cohesion to the shear stress (Eq. The sample may also fail in tension once the tensile strength of the sample has been obtained. To detect whether tensile failure may occur a tensile cut off is incorporated into the yield criterion. After failure the strain softening model performs a stepwise reduction in the Mohr–Coulomb strength parameters as a function of shear strain. In reality this represents the development of cracking within and between the mineral phases. The mechanical properties of the model's constituent minerals are given in To simulate the thermal conduction and expansion of the mineral phases the specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and thermal volumetric expansion coefficient of each of the mineral phases were required. These parameters are discussed in more details in the following section. The specific heat capacity for a particular material behaviour is not constant but varies as a function of temperature and can be estimated by an equation of the form: Values for Previously published thermal conductivity parameters for calcite and pyrite were utilised Single values were used for the thermal expansion coefficient. The thermal expansion coefficient values used were 2 The unconfined compressive strength of a rock is a useful parameter in determining the energy required to crush mineral ores. Well-established empirical correlations have been established between the unconfined compressive strength and crushing and grinding indices such as the Bond work index, point load index and the JKMRC breakage parameters To predict the effect of microwave treatment on the conceptual ore, simulations of the unconfined compressive strength test were undertaken on both the untreated and the thermally damaged samples to provide a relative index to compare the theoretical strength of the untreated rock to that which had been thermally damaged. The simulation was formulated by modelling two steel platens above and below the rock sample as per the normal arrangement in a standard test. The steel was modelled as an isotropic elastic material with the bulk modulus specified as 210 Images were generated of the shear strain within the models, which highlighted localised zones of full strain softening and hence macroscopic cracking. Fracture in UCS tests is characterised by diagonal shear planes, often from one corner of the sample to another, and this is a consequence of the stiffer steel restricting the outward movement of the top and bottom of the UCS sample. The shear deformation patterns are well defined and localised into distinctive bands. FLAC allows for the application of an energy dissipation rate per unit volume. A single power density value was applied to the absorbent phase for each microwave treatment configuration. This power density was estimated from the predicted electric field strength and the dielectric properties of the two mineral phases. Although this is recognised as a somewhat simplistic approach due to variations in mineral properties, electric field strength and effects such as thermal runaway and penetration depth it was considered that the models would still elucidate the major characteristics of the thermally induced stress field and mechanisms of thermally induced damage. Power density values used in the study were chosen in order to reflect the range of current and future capabilities of industrial microwave heating systems, and also in order to examine the interesting effect these values have on the simulated strength of the material. In this study, pulsed microwave generation is differentiated from continuous wave generation due to the switched nature of the power supply for pulsed magnetrons. Therefore, despite referring to exposure times of 10 High power pulsed microwave generators are widely used in medical, accelerator, and radar applications, where pulses (of duration of a few microseconds) of very high peak power are repeated several hundred times second. The technology and components used can easily be adapted for general industrial use In this case this results with an input power requirement of 1.66 As mentioned previously the modelling was undertaken to determine the effects of changes in power density and exposure time on the thermally induced stress fields and subsequent weakening of the theoretical sample during microwave heating. This section details other aspects of the model not yet specified, and the series of simulations undertaken for the study. A zone size of 0.5 It has already been shown by Jones et al. As the basis of the simulation, heating intervals were chosen between 1 The pulsed simulations were undertaken to assess the affects of very high pulsed microwave power for short time durations. The power density was varied between 1 The model configurations regarding power density and exposure time are summarised in The results of the continuous wave simulation have been tabulated as a matrix of unconfined compressive strength values obtained for individual power densities and exposure times ( An example of the increase in weakening with reducing exposure time and increasing power density is seen by comparing cases at applied power densities of 1 The data presented in The results of the pulsed simulations have also been tabulated as a matrix of unconfined compressive strength values for individual power densities and exposure times ( It can be seen from Based on the findings of this paper it is possible to make recommendations for the optimum operating conditions of future microwave comminution equipment. The main consideration is that this equipment should be capable of delivering at least 5 It is reasonable to assume that a pulsed system of similar power draw could generate power densities six orders of magnitude higher. More powerful generators, for example a 100 However, it can be seen that if, say, a 14% reduction in strength was required then twice as much energy would be needed at 5 Rocks consist of an arrangement of minerals containing flaws such as cracks, grain boundary weaknesses, cleavage, and variation with composition. It is not possible to incorporate this degree of detail into the model. As it is difficult to validate the model directly using laboratory data it is suitable to discuss the assumptions and limitations of the model, and to justify the magnitude of the reductions in strength. The following assumptions lead to the assertion that the simulated rock in this study is likely to be stronger than a typical ore of similar composition due to the lack of flaws. The model accurately yields the magnitude of the stresses generated in rock material when modelled as a continuum, and when coupled with experience of rock mechanics can yield an approximation of the level of damage associated with such stresses. This study has simulated damage in the sample as a consequence of strain softening. This phenomenon is a cornerstone of rock mechanics modelling. What is unclear is the exact numerical variation of the strain softening parameters in the material, as they are difficult to measure directly. However, the values used are representative of the typical values used to represent strain softening in rock mechanics modelling. Whilst natural rock material does contain flaws resulting in a weaker material, it may be that the flaws also result in a reduced effectiveness of the thermal stress weakening mechanism due to a reduction in confinement. The arrangements of grains in a natural rock material may allow for a degree of stress relaxation and redistribution, and a consequent reduction in the stress transmitted from grain to grain. However, this raises the possibility that microwave treatment may be more effective in tough, fine grained ores as opposed to weaker, coarser ores. It is logical to assume that a boundary between two phases can only be as strong as the strongest material involved in the boundary. This can be deemed a worst-case scenario in that it is likely that there will be a degree of disorder between the phases that consequently reduces the strength of the boundary in comparison to the strength of the strongest phase involved. This could result in a simulated material which is stronger than the real case, and hence will be weakened by lower power densities. The properties used in the study were a representation of the best available data for each phase. Some simplifications were required in order to ease the computational load during the simulation such as the approximation of the specific heat capacity's variation with temperature to two linear portions. For the purpose of this study it is assumed that the mechanical properties of the materials remain constant for all possible strain rates, although this may not actually be the case in real ores at extremely rapid displacements where the stiffness properties of the material may change. Phase changes are not programmed to occur at elevated temperatures in the model. The mechanical and thermal properties of each phase cannot be verified once phase change has occurred. Therefore, the model is only valid below the temperature at which any phase changes may occur. Some simulations undertaken in this study resulted in temperatures higher than the melting points of the relevant phases. However, it is still valid to assume that 400 This work produced the following major conclusions: It is apparent that the stresses generated increase as power density increases. This in turn leads to greater damage within the sample and in turn a lower UCS. Greater reductions in strength are observed for a given total energy input energy if the exposure time is decreased. It is suggested that a diminishing rate of reduction of strength exists as power density is increased. This is to say that there may be a power density above which no further reduction in strength is possible. Based on this model, it is possible to infer that any future microwave comminution should be capable of generating power densities of between 1