In collaboration with industry, Idaho National Laboratory is investigating uranium silicide for use in future light water reactor fuels as a more accident resistant alternative to uranium oxide base fuels. Specifically this project was focused on producing uranium silicide (U3Si2) pellets by conventional powder metallurgy with a density greater than 94% of the theoretical density. This work has produced a process to consistently produce pellets with the desired density through careful optimization of the process. Milling of the U3Si2 has been optimized and high phase purity U3Si2 has been successfully produced. Results are presented from sintering studies and microstructural examinations that illustrate the need for a finely ground reproducible particle size distribution in the source powder. The optimized process was used to produce pellets for the Accident Tolerant Fuel-1 irradiation experiment. The average density of these pellets was 11.54 ± 0.06 g/cm3. Additional characterization of the pellets by scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction has also been performed. Pellets produced in this work have been encapsulated for irradiation, and irradiation in the Advanced Test Reactor is expected soon.Further improvement and development of the safety and performance of fuel for Light Water Reactors (LWR) continues to be an important area of research especially as it relates to creating Accident Tolerant Fuels (ATF). The Fuel Cycle Research & Development (FCRD) program has made investigation of ATF concepts a high priority Uranium and silicon form several different stoichiometric compounds including USi The goal of this work was to develop a process that could be used to produce U Uranium silicide was formed from mixing powders of elemental uranium and silicon in near stoichiometric quantities. Uranium powder was created by a hydride/dehydride process, and the necessary silicon was procured as a powder. The mixture was then pressed into a compact. The compacts were agglomerated in a furnace at 1450 °C, and then sent to an arc melter to completely react the uranium and silicon. In the arc melter, a tungsten electrode passed current through the uranium and silicon sample into a water cooled copper or graphite hearth. The arc melting process was repeated two additional times to ensure complete reaction. This process produces uranium silicide that is more U The formulated U As was discussed briefly in the Introduction, U To start the U During the process, the hydriding step and dehydriding step were repeated over the course of a run to yield the final powder. The typical hydriding step consisted of applying hydrogen to the process tube until the hydrogen flow into the tube stagnated. Hydrogen atmosphere was maintained for about one hour. Vacuum was then applied to the process tube starting the dehydride step. The dehydride step lasted about an hour until the pressure in the tube had dropped below 10 mtorr. By iterating the steps a finer powder was created and bulk pieces of U metal were better broken apart. An example of some uranium after hydride/dehydride processing through several steps is shown in The resulting fine uranium powder was then mixed with powdered silicon. In initial development the silicon powder was produced by hammer milling highly pure Si chunks and sieving the resulting powder to a diameter of less than 300 μm. Later development and irradiation tests used highly pure Si powder (99.999 wt. %) with a particle size between 149 and 44 μm. The uranium and silicon powders were blended in near stoichiometric quantities (92.7 wt.% U, 7.3 wt.% Si). A small amount of excess Si was added to account for Si loss during arc melting per the recommendations from previous experience fabricating U After the powder was mixed, it was compressed into a small rectangular compact using a hand press with a pressing pressure of approximately 225 MPa (32,600 psi). This mixed powder technique is a departure from the historic model for fabricating U Arc Melting was chosen as the process by which the elemental Si and elemental U would be transformed into the U Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) examinations have been performed on the post arc melting microstructure. Uranium rich compositions will contain U in solid solution that will react with U Uranium silicide ingots from the arc melter are comminuted into a fine powder before being pressed into a green pellet and subsequently sintered. The comminution process to create a fine sinterable powder underwent extensive refinement. Obtaining the correct particle size distribution of the final U Planetary milling was chosen as the means to reduce the arc melted ingots into a fine powder. Before milling the arc melted ingots are manually broken up using a hammer mill. Appropriately sized U In order to achieve the desired final particle size ( The particle size distributions of the resulting powders from milling were evaluated using a Micromeretics Sedigraph III that utilizes sedimentation theory to calculate particle size distribution and are displayed in Forming the fine powder from milling into a green pellet for sintering required several iterations of development. To produce green pellets, charges of powder are loaded into a lubricated die with two floating punches. The floating punches and die are pressed in a manual press, ejected, and then examined before sintering. Pellets were pressed from a 9.525 mm (0.375 inch) diameter die. Before pressing, the die wall was lubricated with zinc stearate. In powder metallurgy, pellets with an aspect ratio (length to diameter ratio) of less than 1.0 help facilitate pellet production because stresses induced in pressing continue to concentrate the larger a pellet becomes. As this work was developmental and final sintered density was the key metric for success, a charge of 4 g of U The final powder from the comminution process, shown by the red curve in Sintering studies on the different powders from milling have been carried out in parallel with the milling and pressing development. In each development cycle, ∼30 g batches of powder were ground in the planetary mill, pressed into pellets, and sintered. Sintering of the U After sintering, the pellets still require some machining to reach final dimensions. A centerless grinder was procured to size the sintered U In addition to machining the pellets to their cylindrical dimensions, select pellets were drilled out to include a central hole for melt wires. An example of a pellet with a central hole is shown in the right picture of The primary metric for evaluating U The density of the sintered pellets was measured using immersion density following ASTM The process of developing a technique to create a high density, reproducible U However, these densities were short of the programmatic goal of demonstrating 95.5% theoretical density U It was clear that milling aids would need to be added to the planetary milling jar to create the needed particle size distribution. Pellets pressed from powders that were milled with various different milling aids (Oleic Acid and PEG of various molecular weights) had densities typified by the “Lubricant Studies” series in The key to the final powder product (powders with a particle size distribution represented by the red curve in To achieve higher densities above 95.5% theoretical density, the vacuum furnace was utilized. Pellets pressed from powder with During process development, examination of the porosity and microstructure of the sintered U SEM analysis of the as fabricated pellets for the irradiation was also performed. The microstructure of the as fabricated pellets is similar to what was seen in the development pellets and is shown in Chemical analysis was performed on source powders for enriched pellets and depleted pellets going into the ATF irradiation. Isotopic, major element, and trace element analysis was performed using different mass spectrometry techniques. For uranium isotopics and trace impurity analysis, powder samples were dissolved in hydrofluoric, nitric, and boric acid. For Si major element analysis, the powder samples were dissolved in hydrofluoric and hydrochloric acid. Uranium isotopics were examined using a Multi-Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS), and trace impurity was established using an ICP-MS. The Si was examined using an ICP-OES (Optical Emission Spectrometer). The enriched pellets had an enrichment of 5.44 wt.% U-235. The powders were analyzed for several trace elements including Al, Cr, Cu, Er, Mn, Mo, Ni, Ta, W, and Zr. Elevated levels of W (721 ppm) and Zr (254 ppm) were found in the enriched material, and elevated levels of W (335 ppm) were found in the depleted material. The elevated W is likely due to the arc melting process where either the tip spalls off or accidental dipping of the tip in the melt. Difference in the W trace amounts is likely due to differences in technicians. The elevated Zr may be due to the enriched uranium metal feedstock or may be from the planetary milling media (ZrO During development x-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on samples of arc melted U Exactly where the UO Microhardness measurements were also performed on sintered pellets. A Vickers hardness tester was used to produce indents. A 500 g force was used with a 13 s dwell time. The average Vickers hardness for the sintered material was 550 HV for 37 indents with a standard deviation of 46. No indents were observed where the one diagonal was significantly different than the other. No variation in hardness was observed across the radius of the pellets. The ATF-1 irradiation is a series of drop-in style ATR irradiation experiments designed to provide preliminary irradiation performance data on potential accident tolerant fuel concepts under typical LWR conditions Machined pellets from this work were incorporated into rodlets and capsules as part of the ATF-1 irradiation experiment. Pellets were pressed from depleted and enriched U The 6 rodlets were designed to operate at a variety of initial power and temperature conditions and remain under irradiation for a variety of burnups. The test matrix for the ATF-1W irradiation is shown in The primary purpose of this irradiation is to generate data on the swelling of U Uranium silicide pellets have been produced by powder metallurgy techniques as part of an accident tolerant fuel concept. The process to produce these pellets has undergone extensive optimization to yield reproducible pellets with a sintered density of greater than 94% theoretical density (11.47 g/cm Further work is underway to better identify the source of the USi phase (∼10%) in the as fabricated pellets. Additional characterization work is also on-going. Thermophysical characterization of sintered pellets has been initiated. Corrosion studies of U This work was supported by the