Mechanically induced reactivity of gibbsite in an attrition mill is focused in this paper. Reactivity of milled gibbsite, assessed in terms of its dehydroxylation and dissolution in alkali solution, is found to increase with the increase in milling time. Besides analysing the increased reactivity in terms of the changes in physicochemical characteristics, an attempt has also been made to correlate the reactivity with physicochemical changes. Changes in the physicochemical characteristics of gibbsite during milling in an attrition mill and corresponding change in reactivity are compared with that observed for gibbsite milled in a planetary mill, described in Part 1; thus a comparison of two different types of mills in terms of their efficiency in bringing out structural/reactivity changes is illustrated using the same feed stock, gibbsite.Mechanical activation (MA) of gibbsite—its relevance along with a list of all earlier studies pertaining to MA of gibbsite—has been detailed in Part 1 as a prelude to the mechanically induced reactivity of gibbsite milled in a planetary mill. It has analysed the mechanically induced reactivity in terms of the ensuing changes in the physicochemical characteristics. Looking from the point of scale up to the industrial level, planetary mill does not seem to be attractive, at least for the present, in terms of throughput; maximum throughput available is around 5000 Gibbsite used in this part of study (Part 2) is the same as that used in Part 1. Mechanically activated samples are characterised in terms of particle size distribution (by laser diffraction technique), specific surface area (by BET analysis), particle morphology (by SEM), bulk structural changes (by XRD and FTIR), and thermal analysis (by simultaneous TG-DTA). Detailed descriptions of these studies are presented in Part 1. Reactivity of the samples has been measured using the same parameters viz. decrease in thermal dehydroxylation temperature of gibbsite to boehmite, and increased leachability of gibbsite in alkali solution as described in Part 1. Mechanical milling of gibbsite has been carried out in a batch type attrition mill (PE-075, Netzsch, Germany). It consists of a stationary cylindrical milling chamber (capacity 750 Particle size distributions (PSD) of gibbsite milled for different time in an attrition mill are presented in The characteristic diameters, i.e. d Geometric surface area (SSA As discussed earlier, the gibbsite feed to the mill consist of agglomerates of platelet-shaped crystals [ The most prominent peak in the XRD pattern of gibbsite corresponds to the (002) planes. This is also the direction in which the different gibbsite layers, held together by the hydrogen bonding, are stacked. The variation in the intensity of reflection from (002) planes, as a function of attrition milling time, is presented in Analyses of the peaks presented in  FTIR spectra obtained from gibbsite milled for different time in an attrition mill (10, 30, and 60 Thermal transformations of gibbsite occurring at various temperatures depend on its reactivity. Nature of its first thermal transformation, i.e. its dehydroxylation to monohydrate occurring around 300 Leaching of unmilled and milled gibbsite are carried out in sodium hydroxide solution using the same procedure adopted for the planetary milled gibbsite described in Part 1. The operating conditions have been: caustic concentration, C Thermal transformations of gibbsite and its dissolution in caustic solution are dependent on its reactivity. The decrease in peak temperature (ΔT) and peak area (ΔA) of the dehydroxylation endotherm below 300 Binary correlations between the reactivity parameters and physicochemical parameters, calculated using Minitab software are presented in Decrease in the median particle size (d The breakage pattern influences the surface characteristics as well; different crystallographic planes of gibbsite have different OH coordination. The basal planes or the (001) planes are mostly occupied by the For an attrition mill, Kwade and Schwedes In the present study, the energy input to the mill has been altered mainly by varying the milling time, t Sluggish behaviour of amorphisation during the initial stages of milling (up to about 10 The FTIR bands get better resolved on attrition milling of gibbsite ( Clear cut changes are evident in the thermal analysis curves (not shown) of attrition milled gibbsite. Accelerated weight loss and appearance of an additional endotherm below 100 Decrease in dehydroxylation temperature (ΔT) and increase in alkali dissolution (ΔR), observed with increase in milling time, bear good correlations with the physicochemical parameters considered. Increase in BET specific surface area and decrease in median size (and consequent increase in geometric specific surface area) means (1) surface atoms/molecules having higher energy (than that in the bulk) are more and (2) increased reaction interface. Both will facilitate easy dissolution. Easier heat transfer to the bulk and shorter dehydroxylation path facilitate thermal transformations at lower temperature. Degree of amorphisation has been found to increase with increase in milling time. Increased amorphisation means that the solid structure has more stored energy, which lowers the activation energy barrier for reactions like alkali dissolution/thermal transformations. An attrition mill differs from a planetary mill in terms of milling mechanism, milling dynamics, energy density, operating mode (wet/dry) etc. Compression, shear, impact etc are operative in both the mills  Decrease in XRD peak intensity of attrition milled gibbsite as presented in A comparison in the dissolution behaviour of 60 Conclusions that can be drawn from the study on mechanical activation of gibbsite in attrition mill are: Particle size reduction prevails during the milling time employed in the study; no sign of aggregation is observed. Specific surface area increases with milling time; large variation in specific surface area from BET method and particle size distribution points changes in pore size distribution during milling. Intensity of XRD peaks has decreased with milling time while the changes in FWHM and FTIR characteristics have been minimal. Reactivity in terms of decrease in dehydroxylation temperature and increase in alkali solution has increased with milling time. A comparison of gibbsite milling in attrition and planetary mills indicates mechanical activation effect is more pronounced in planetary mill compared to that in attrition mill.