The dissolution of a range of Cu–Co–Fe alloys in ammoniacal solutions was examined. High-copper alloy dissolution was possible in ammonia–ammonium sulphate solution with the addition of copper(II) ions. Such a process was spontaneous, selective and efficient with almost all copper dissolved. No iron was found in the solution and the residual slimes contained iron and cobalt. Low-copper alloys were unaffected by the copper(II) ions but dissolved during electrolysis in ammonia–ammonium chloride solution with an anodic current efficiency of 97%. Under these conditions, almost all iron and copper transferred into the slimes and the cobalt was plated onto the cathode.Cobalt is recovered mainly by hydrometallurgical processes. Ores, concentrates, wastes and by-products containing cobalt and copper are subjected to acidic or ammonia leaching Significant amounts of cobalt are also present in alloys obtained as intermediate products of metallurgical processes as well as in nonferrous scrap where the cobalt concentration may be as much as 60%, especially in magnets scraps. A review of the literature shows a very limited number of papers concerned with the recovery of cobalt from alloys. Little data has been reported describing the leaching behaviour of cobalt alloys in ammoniacal solutions In a previous paper Four synthetic Cu–Co–Fe alloys, with the following compositions (in wt.%): Cu90Co5Fe5, Cu5Co25Fe70, Cu5Co47Fe48 and Cu5Co70Fe25, were used. These alloys allow to investigate a part of the Cu–Co–Fe system in respect of copper and cobalt recovery. The details of preparation and phase structure of Cu–Co–Fe alloys were presented elsewhere To assess spontaneous dissolution, a cuboidal alloy specimen (with total area of 25 cm In the course of the dissolution process, samples of the solution were taken and the concentrations of cobalt, copper and iron were determined. Copper content was determined by iodometry volumetric analysis, cobalt and iron concentrations were determined by AAS method (Perkin Elmer Atomic Absorption Spectrometer 3110). The corrections in the bath volume (as a result of the electrolyte evaporation and sampling) were taken into account during calculations. After interruption of the dissolution process, the slime was removed mechanically from the sample surface, thoroughly washed with water and dissolved in hot 2 mol/dm The structure of the alloy was examined by means of an optical microscope (Neophot-32), both before and after dissolution. To examine electrolytic dissolution, cuboid alloy anode (with total area of 25 cm In the course of dissolution process, samples of solution were taken and the concentrations of cobalt, copper and iron ions were determined by AAS method (the corrections in the bath volume were taken into account). After electrolysis, the cathodic deposit, the anodic slime and the suspension in electrolyte were obtained. The suspension was filtered. The cathodic deposit, the anodic slime and the filtration sediment were thoroughly washed with water and dissolved in hot 2 mol/dm Cu–Co–Fe alloys were leached in the ammoniacal sulphate solution with addition of copper(II) ions as an oxidant. Under these conditions, only the Cu90Co5Fe5 alloy dissolved. The other alloys did not dissolve. The low-copper alloys did not dissolve even when they were connected to a platinum plate forming a galvanic cell. Moreover, using ammonia–ammonium chloride as the electrolyte did not result in any dissolution.  It seems that copper exists in solution as cupric tetraammine complexes, in spite of the E–pH diagram for Cu–H The plot of sample potential versus leaching time  It is worth noting that the above leaching method enabled spontaneous dissolution of Cu90Co5Fe5 alloy at modest temperature (50 °C) without prior material grinding (the monolithic sample of the alloy) and without high pressure (under atmospheric pressure). The rate of leaching was rather high—about 200 g/m Microscopy of the Cu90Co5Fe5 alloy, This can be explained by comparing the corrosion potentials of Cu90Co5Fe5 and Cu5Co47Fe48 alloys, the latter has a composition close to the precipitate. At the onset of dissolution in ammonia–ammonium sulphate solution the potentials were: −0.35 and−0.03 V (versus SCE), for Cu90Co5Fe5 and Cu5Co47Fe48, respectively. The difference in these potentials produced a galvanic cell, in which the matrix played a role of the anode and the precipitates were the cathode. Consequently, the matrix dissolved and the precipitates remained in solid state in the slime. Clearly, there is a close correlation between the alloy structure and the leaching results. The Cu90Co5Fe5 alloy was leached in the ammonia–ammonium sulphate solution easy and more tests with the anodic dissolution were not necessary. The low-copper alloys did not leach in this electrolyte and some attempts were made to dissolve them during electrolysis. This trial did not yield positive results—the alloy anodes were still not dissolving. The anode potential measured during electrolysis corresponded to the potential of the oxygen evolution. Moreover, the loss in anode weight was not observed. It indicated that the only anode process was an oxygen evolution. The anodic polarization curves determined in these conditions showed that the potential of oxygen evolution was reached already at the current densities of 50–70 A/m Satisfactory results for low-copper alloys were obtained during electrolysis in the ammonia–ammonium chloride solution, though the anodic dissolution was not a selective process. In these conditions, the metals transferred into the slime, the electrolyte and the cathodic deposit. The electrolyte contained mainly ammine complexes of cobalt, probably cobaltic hexaammine. There was no available E–pH diagram for Co–H  The copper concentration in solution was about 1 mg/dm The slime consisted of two fractions: the material compactly adhered to the electrode and a suspended precipitate. The detailed compositions of these are showed in Chemical analysis of the suspended solids showed that their main components were iron compounds; however, significant amounts of cobalt were also present. The cathodic deposits were high-cobalt alloys although they contained some iron, despite the absence of iron in the electrolyte. It is suggested that the iron presence in the cathodic deposits resulted from adsorption features of iron oxide. Positively charged particles of iron oxide were driven in an electric field in the direction of the cathode. Cobalt ions adsorbed on the precipitates were reduced on the cathode incorporating the particles of iron compound into the growing metal layer. To confirm this reasoning, the fraction of the total amount of cobalt ions participated in the adsorption was calculated. The cathodic deposits (mass The cobalt content of the cathodic deposits, electrolyte and precipitates were   The anodic current efficiencies were over 95% and independent of the alloy composition. The cathodic current efficiencies were calculated using the copper and cobalt contents in the cathode deposits, since only Cu(II) and Co(III) cations participated in electrode reactions. The cathodic current efficiencies were low but, as expected, increased with the cobalt content in the alloy. There was no correlation between the cobalt concentration in the bath and the cathodic current efficiency; however, the adsorbed cobalt represents a significant fraction in the total mass of the cathodic deposit. During the electrolysis, the metals were divided among the bath, the cathodic deposit and the anodic slime. The distribution of the individual elements between these three phases at the end of the process is given in The high-copper alloy dissolved spontaneously in an ammonia–ammonium sulphate solution with added copper(II) ions. The leaching allowed a distinct metal separation with copper accumulating in the electrolyte whilst cobalt and iron remained in the slime. A strong correlation between the leaching results and the alloy structure was demonstrated—the alloy matrix dissolved whilst the precipitates did not. Low-copper alloys were unaffected by chemical leaching but did dissolve during electrolysis in ammonia–ammonium chloride solution. Anodic dissolution resulted in separation of metals with iron remaining mainly in the slimes, cobalt was a main component of the cathodic deposit and slimes, copper accumulated in the slimes. This research work was supported by the Polish Committee for Scientific Research under Grant No. 7 T08B 019 19.