Oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) steels are considered as the future structural material of interest for nuclear power plants, due to their elevated creep resistance at higher operation temperatures. In this study, a 0.3wt% nano-yttria (Y2O3) dispersed iron cast trial was elaborated using rapid solidification processing (RSP). The nano-sized Y2O3 particles were introduced into the iron matrix using the formulation of a low-concentrated colloidal dispersion.
                  The aim of this study is to understand the dispersibility behaviour of the ceramic Y2O3 nano-powder when added to an iron melt as a colloidal dispersion, during high-temperature melting or RSP.
                  It was found, after casting the iron/Y2O3 composites, that apart from an inhomogeneous dispersion, super-micron agglomerates alternate dispersed zones.
                  Overall, this study tried to assay the casting practice of iron/Y2O3 composites using RSP. As an overall conclusion, it can be stated that wettability in synergy with porous materials characteristics, (especially powder purity) seems to have a significant impact on the dispersibility of Y2O3 particles and its super-micron sphere formation behavior in an iron melt.Various industrial applications of matter formulated as colloidal dispersions in pharmaceutical industry (e.g. pulsed drug delivery systems), cosmetics, household products and agrochemical science, proves the potential and workability of colloidal dispersions across diverse technical disciplines So far, the most frequent and by far the most straightforward route for the production of fully ferritic and F/M ODS steels, was the conventional powder metallurgical (PM) approach Recently, more innovative trials to develop ODS materials based on new and alternative production routes have been set up An electrolytic iron batch was cast under protective atmosphere using a conventional Pfeiffer VSG100 vacuum melting unit (Pfeiffer Engineering Co., Inc., United States). The laboratory cast ingot or master matrix, was sub-sectioned into smaller parts, dimensioned (1.5×1.5×3) A low-concentrated Y The wettability in synergy with porous materials characteristics for binary Fe For the contact angle wetting experiments, as-prepared Y The Y An oxide dispersed iron cast (~60 Elemental bulk quality of the produced electrolytic iron batch has been investigated with ICP-MS using a Thermo Finnigan ICP-MS Element II, medium resolution device (Thermo Finnigan Mat GmbH, Germany). Elemental nitrogen (N) and carbon (C) content was evaluated using the combustion analysis (CA)-technique. Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GDOES) was carried out in order to verify the homogeneity of the Y  After casting, the material was ground and polished to mirror quality using standard metallographic procedures. In order to visualize the grain structure of the matrix related to the dispersed particles phase, an active oxides polish suspension OPU (Struers, Denmark) and appropriate etchants were used during the final etching step. After final polishing and etching, the as-cast microstructures were investigated in the casting direction by light optical emission microscopy (LOM), using a Zeiss Jenavert (Carl Zeiss, Belgium). A polaroid camera was used to observe the as-cast and etched microstructure in the cast direction in order to visualize the possible presence of secondary phases through the iron matrix. SEM was performed using a high resolution FEI XL30 scanning electron microscope FEI-XL30 SEM (FEI Company, USA). Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was performed in order to determine the chemical composition by using an EDAX system (EDAX INTERNATIONAL, USA). For higher magnifications, a NOVA 600 dual beam high resolution SEM equipped with a field emission gun source was used, allowing a minimal resolution of 2 After air-sintering the Y Electron probe micro analysis (EPMA) was executed at the interface between the Y High resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HR-XPS) was performed in order to investigate the elemental composition of the colored zones appearing in the Y The two areas of interest are, on the one hand, the spherical dark spots appearing after air-sintering and spreading homogeneously over the ceramic bulk, and on the other hand, the white-yellow bulk ceramic. Both types of colored zones only appeared in case the ceramic plates were pressed with impure powder P The chemical composition of the electrolytic iron cast is determined using ICP-MS and CA. The resulting elemental impurities detected in the produced electrolytic iron batch are summarized in Seen The PSD for the low-concentrated Y Following the weight percentage curve presented in Wettability in synergy with porous materials characteristics for binary Fe In this extended work the intention is to perform a first cast trial and to understand firstly the reaction chemistry playing between a purely iron melt and the ceramic yttria oxide powder at the solid/liquid (S/L) interface, and secondly to understand herein the influence of powder's characteristics such as powder purity. Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) performance depicts the in-batch powder impurities in ppm for the powder P  The dashed zone encloses the transition area from wettability to non-wettability. From Abutting the contact angles presented in  After air-sintering the Y After hot stage contact angle wetting experimentation, the ceramic samples made from powder P In case of the powder P The Y High resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HR-XPS) was performed in order to identify the molecular bonds or compounds responsible for the colorization of the Y Analysis of the HR-XPS resulting in the energy window [96–106]  From the spectral XPS data, it is clear that for the dark spots peaks for elemental C, O, Si, Y and no Ca were detected. For the white-yellow zone, the peaks indicated the presence of Y, O, Ca and Y, some traces of Si and a minority of C. Taken the NIST-database into consideration After 30    The dispersion state of the Y From Light optical microscopy (LOM) of the as-cast but non-polished (a,b) as well as the etched Y  As LOM resolution is limited to larger particles observation, HR-SEM was performed in order to scan the as-cast iron matrix for well-dispersed zones of smaller particles. After scanning several areas, it is confirmed that well-dispersed zones alternate large spherical agglomerates, see Concerning this work, a comparison can be made with hollow and massive microspheres produced with raw powder processing methods such as layer-by-layer self-assembly, emulsion processing, template methodics and high-temperature melting. During high-temperature melting, the raw powder material is blown into a hot flame or stream of hot gas, and melts at its respective melting temperature. The primary raw powder material transforms consequently into spherical structures, the spherical body starts forming under minimal surface tension and minimal but most favorable energy conditions. Gases originate during the high melting procedure (by thermal decomposition or evaporation of a liquid phase) and causes to form a cavity into the sphere. Finally, the gas that formed releases through the irregular or porous wall structure of the formed sphere. Sphere sizes with a diameter in the order of 10 to 50 Layer-by-layer self assembly and templating methodics are similar techniques, for which shell formation is based on solutes deposition or reaction of the solute with dispersed solid templates. The hollow structure forms by removal of the solids core. In line with this discussion, hollow Y In this study, a 0.3 In case of the powder P Dependant on powder impurity, the wettability between both rare-earth Y Taken those observations into account for both powders, the following hypothetic conclusions can be drawn. During a high-temperature sintering treatment of the Y From the HR-XPS spectra it was derived, for the white bulk material, that besides oxygen bounded to yttrium, a part of the elemental oxygen is also reacting with silicon and calcium resulting in the formation of wollastonite or calcium silicate (a white substance), according to the following reaction Eq. The interfacial bonds detected in case of the powder P The red color after contact angle wetting between low-purity powder P For the dark zone, most likely a reaction between Y Based on those observations, it can be concluded that powder impurity plays a significant role in the wettability between yttria and electrolytic iron. The observations made during wettability between the Y The success in dispersing yttria through the melt could be explained by yttria possibly interacting with a magnetic field, causing short oriented movements. The basic magnetic field being created by a current sent through the induction coil, while eddy currents are created in the liquid mass creating a secondary magnetic field. The particles possibly interact or orient individually or with both the basic magnetic field and the small magnetic fields created locally by small eddy currents. All materials exhibit an inherent magnetic character arising from the movements of their electrons. Since dynamic electric fields induce a magnetic field, atomic current loops are created on level ‘orbit electrons’, resulting in magnetic fields. An external magnetic field will cause these atomic magnetic fields to align so that they oppose the external field. This is the only magnetic effect that arises from electron pairs. If a material exhibits only this effect in an applied field it is known as a diamagnetic material. Magnetic properties other than diamagnetism, which is present in all substances, arise from the interactions of unpaired electrons. These properties are traditionally found in transition metals, lanthanides, and their compounds due to the unpaired A 0.3 As an overall conclusion, it can be stated that wettability in synergy with porous materials characteristics (especially powder purity) and the high-temperature melting state during induction heating seems to be of significant impact on the dispersibility of Y The first observation is that the commercially available nano-material is in reality not nano-sized, the individual particles and crystallites are micron-sized agglomerated. Secondly, independent on the initial particle size, but largely dependent on powder impurity, the wettability between rare-earth Y Concerning the hollow microspheres formed, those local feature formations could be detrimental for the mechanical strength of the cast. Rolling out the material would seal the holes, nevertheless introducing increased anisotropy of the mechanical properties. In order to obtain a complete homogeneous dispersion without larger super-micron sphere formation during the production of nano-reinforced steel casts using RSP, pre-reduction of particle size using comminution or grinding before casting would be crucial. It is worth noticing that within time, de-agglomerated particles tend to re-agglomerate. Therefore, a correct formulation and preparation of the colloidal suspension in terms of particle size reduction and dispersant selection is a key issue. For the suspension preparation and formulation of a low-concentrated Y VITO is gratefully acknowledged for providing the experimental equipment, as well as for the numerous discussions. Flamac is thanked for providing the equipment for contact angle determination. Oscar Steenhaut from the VUB is gratefully thanked for useful discussions as well as for performing the XPS analysis.