Extracting potassium from seawater has great economic potential, although conventional methods offer low separation capacity and selectivity. In this study, a series of novel potassium ionic sieves (PISs) were synthesized using ocean manganese nodules (OMN) as raw materials. The PISs were characterized by XRD, SEM, and nitrogen adsorption–desorption. The potassium adsorption capacities and separation factors of PISs and OMN in KCl solution and sea brine showed that KMnO4 treatment will result in the highest adsorption and separation performance. The resulted sample OMN-C exhibit major composition of birnessite-type potassium manganese oxides and high micropore volumes. The adsorption capacities of OMN-C to K+ in KCl solution and sea brine were 35.2mgg−1 and 22.1mgg−1, respectively. The separation factor of OMN-C was α(K+/Na+)=108.6 and the sieve did not adsorb Mg2+, indicating its relatively high separation selectivity to K+. Therefore, OMN-C can selectively extract potassium from sea brine effectively. This study not only utilized the abundant OMN resources, but also prepared effective PISs, which showed great potential in the utilization of seawater.Potassium which is the 6th abundant metal ion in seawater is one of the three major plant nutrients. Average ratio of nitrogen fertilizers, phosphates, and potassium carbonate in the world is 1:0.5:0.4, while the consumption of potassium carbonate is 60 Ocean manganese nodules (OMN), also known as iron-manganese nodules, or polymetallic nodules, were first discovered in 1873 during the voyage of the HMS Challenger ( In this study, novel PISs were synthesized from OMN using the method described by The OMN samples used in this experiment were supplied by China Ocean Mineral Resources R&D Association. They were collected from the China Pioneer Area in July 2001 during the voyage of DY105-11 at 7–10°N, 144–147°W ( The sea brine used in this work was prepared according to the following compositions: Mg Chemical reagents KNO The OMN samples were pretreated by soaking in standard seawater with pH value of 8.0 for 48 A sample of OMN powder (5 The obtained products were submerged in 300 The suspension (PIS) was filtered and washed with distilled water until the filtrate became neutral and dried in a temperature controlled oven at 110 Adsorption experiments were carried out in a series of 250 The crystal structures of OMN samples and PISs were studied by X-ray diffraction. The XRD data were collected by a D/max 2550 X-ray diffractometer (Riguaku, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation ( As shown in The PISs exhibit XRD patterns different from those of the untreated OMN due to complicated reactions between potassium reagents and OMN. It appears that KOH and KMnO As shown in As shown in As shown by the surface area and pore characteristics shown in  The adsorption of K As shown in Three kinetic models were used to investigate the adsorption kinetics and adsorption capacity ( Pseudo-second-order model, known as Ho’s pseudo-second-order model, can be expressed by Eq. Eq. These models were tested for the adsorption of K The selective adsorption properties of OMN and PISs for the adsorption of K  The separation factor ( Three different potassium ionic sieves (PISs) have been prepared using natural ocean manganese nodules (OMN). XRD and SEM showed that the crystal structure and micro-morphologies of PISs vary with potassium reagents. OMN exhibits the highest BET surface area, pore volume, and mesopore fraction. However, the rank of adsorption capacity for K This research is supported by the 973 program “Hydrothermal activity and ore-forming mechanism in back-arc basins (2013CB429700), “Gas stripping aeration device development and its application in mariculture” (2010C32034), and “Program for Zhejiang leading team of S&T Innovation” (2010R50036).