Placement of a screw from the lateral wall of the calcaneus into the constant sustentaculum tali fragment can be difficult when surgically repairing a calcaneal fracture. This screw serves to compress the fracture fragments and support the posterior facet. This difficulty results from the small landing zone of the sustentaculum tali with its nearby vulnerable soft tissue structures. We present an anatomic study of 10 cadavers to determine a starting point and angle of screw advancement when placing a constant fragment screw.Calcaneal fractures comprise approximately 2% of all fractures Significant improvements have occurred during the previous century in the understanding of this fracture and in advances in internal and external fixation techniques. In addition, imaging and classification schemes ( A key step in open reduction internal fixation of intra-articular calcaneal fractures is to obtain stable fixation and reduction of the posterior facet. This is done using the lag screw technique into the so-called constant fragment of the sustentaculum tali (ST) by directing the screws from slightly posteriorly and laterally to anteriorly and medially. After reduction of the posterior facet fragments, screws are driven into the ST, just inferior to the facet. This screw placement allows stable support of the reduction and stability and/or compression across the fracture lines. Typically, the screws are directed from slightly posteriorly and laterally to anteriorly and medially; however, accurate placement can be difficult. Recent attempts to describe navigation techniques to reduce errors when placing these screws have been published The goal of the present study was to describe the ST anatomy and the anatomic landmarks that can be used to target the “constant fragment” screw placement for calcaneal fracture open reduction internal fixation. To our knowledge, this information has not been previously established. Ten adult cadavers were used in the present study during the San Diego Cadaver Anatomic Research Symposium. These limbs were numbered and denuded of their soft tissue surrounding the calcaneus. The first step was to anatomically define the ST. The measurements included the height, taken from the most medial point on the ST, from inferiorly to superiorly, and the width from anteriorly to posteriorly ( Next, the orientation of the ST in relation to the lateral calcaneal wall was determined using a series of Steinman pins. A Steinman pin (pin 1) was placed from the center of the ST across the calcaneus from medially to laterally, perpendicular to the visually estimated long axis of the calcaneus and the ground. A second pin (pin 2) was placed from laterally to medially, inferior to the center of the posterior facet in the dense subchondral bone in the typical constant fragment lag screw placement. This pin exited medially in the ST, creating an apex with the start point of pin 1 ( The distance, on the lateral calcaneal wall, from pin 1 to the subtalar joint superiorly, was recorded. The distance from pin 1 to the calcaneocuboid joint (CC) distally, from the anterior margin of the posterior facet to pin 1, and from pin 1 to pin 2 on the lateral side were measured ( The mean height of the ST was 12.8 (range 11.3 to 14.4) mm. The mean width of the ST was 20.8 (range 17.7 to 26.5) mm. The average position from pin 1 to the subtalar joint was 6.6 (range 1.6 to 12.0) mm. The average position from pin 1 to the CC joint was 22.0 (range 13.5 to 29.3) mm. The average position from the front edge of the posterior facet to pin 1 was 5.0 (range −2.9 to 12.3) mm. The mean distance from pin 1 to pin 2 was 16.1 (range 7.0 to 24.0) mm. The average angle created from pin 1 to pin 2 was 29.8° (range 14° to 42°). All the data are listed in Fixation of calcaneal fractures has the goal of restoring Bohler's angle and anatomic reduction of intra-articular fractures. Percutaneous methods have recently been described to facilitate these goals, while minimizing risk to the lateral soft tissue envelope Once reduction and provisional fixation of the posterior facet of the subtalar joint have been performed, screw fixation is placed from the subtalar joint fragment into the ST. The stable ST piece is often targeted for 2 reasons. First, it is composed of bone that has often been spared from injury. This allows adequate screw thread purchase. Second, it is positioned to allow the screw to support the posterior facet in its reduced position. However, the threads of the screw are aimed at a relatively small target, and erroneous screw placement can occur. Intraoperative 3-dimensional targeting devices have been attempted in Europe in recent studies On the basis of the data from the present study, the location on the lateral wall of the calcaneus, which is directly perpendicular to the midpoint of the ST, is approximately 22 mm proximal from the CC joint at the same height from the ground. This position would allow a screw placed from laterally to medially to land centrally within the ST. Using the ST reference point, the surgeon should initiate the second guidewire or screw approximately 16 mm posteriorly, with an angle from posteriorly and laterally to anteriorly and medially of approximately 30°, all the while remaining parallel to the floor in the coronal plane. This guidewire or screw will be approximately 5 to 10 mm inferior to the posterior facet in the dense subchondral bone. This guidewire should reproducibly traverse beneath the posterior facet, across the calcaneus and into the dense ST. The calcaneal length and tuber reduction before this step will allow these measurements and angles to correlate with our cadaver models. This anatomic template avoids an arbitrary start point and allows for reproducible screw placement. This is important for many reasons. The first is to allow a better chance of successful drill and wire delivery on the first try. Second, if the screw targets the medial-most point, more threads have the opportunity to purchase, allowing better strength. Finally, allowing the screw to be housed entirely within the ST cortical shell protects the surrounding soft tissue (i.e., the flexor hallucis longus tendon, coursing directly inferior to the ST). The study limitations included the cadaveric nature and that the measurements were based on an intact calcaneal model, not a fractured model. The measurements might have proved different in a fracture model. Traditionally, radiographic confirmation has been used intraoperatively to aid in screw placement, and we have primarily relied on clinical placement. Also, the small number of limbs used, 10, allowed for anatomic anomalies to alter our mean findings of the angles and distance measurements. In conclusion, identifying a starting point and angle of entry of the ST screw used in calcaneal fracture repair is beneficial. The starting point is easily reproducible, and an angle of 30° can be estimated with relative ease or measured if one is more confident. The ST perpendicular reference point is approximately 22 mm proximal from the CC joint. The ST lag screw starting position is approximately 16 mm proximal to the reference point or 38 mm proximal from the CC joint. The surgeon should angle the ST lag screw approximately 30° from posteriorly and laterally to anteriorly and medially to land centrally in the ST. This information should help the surgeon reliably target this important fixation when using open reduction internal fixation of calcaneal fractures. This could also lead to plate or instrumentation design that would allow an angle of 30° to be inherent to the plate by design. We would like to thank DonJoy Orthopedics Global for their past and continued support of the San Diego Cadaveric Anatomical Research Symposium research initiative.