Acrylamide (AA) is reported present in high-temperature-processed food and classified as a possible human carcinogen. In vivo metabolic activation of AA by CYP 2E1 to glycidamide (GA) may play an important role on AA carcinogenicity. AA and GA can be detoxified by glutathione-S-transferase to form AA and isomeric GA glutathione conjugates (AA-, GA2- and GA3-GSH, respectively), which can be further metabolized to mercapturic acids (MAs). Although many studies analyzed MAs in urine of rodents and humans, few studies have characterized and analyzed the GSH conjugates. The objectives of this study were to synthesize, purify, and characterize AA-GSH, GA2-GSH, GA3-GSH, (13C3)-AA-GSH, (13C3)-GA2-GSH, and (13C3)-GA3-GSH to develop an isotope-dilution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) method to analyze AA- and GA-GSHs in blood of rats treated with AA. After purification and characterization of these conjugates, the LC–MS/MS method was developed and validated. This method reveals a limit of detection (S/N
                     =3) at 0.017 and a limit of quantitation (S/N
                     =10) at 0.05ng/mL of serum for AA-GSH, 0.075 and 0.25ng/mL for GA2-GSH, and 0.15 and 0.5ng/mL for GA3-GSH. Analyzed with this method, AA-GSH, GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH were 1651.1±374.5, 18.4±6.3 and 75.3±31.3ng/mL in blood of male rats at 2h after treatment with 5mg/kgbw of AA by ip injection. These results showed that the LC–MS/MS method was successfully developed to analyze AA-GSH, GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH with satisfying sensitivity of AA and GA which were conjugated by glutathione in vivo.Acrylamide (AA) is a widely-used chemical in industries, and in products used for water treatment, oil drilling, papermaking and mineral processing. AA is neurotoxic to humans and rodents, and classified as a probable carcinogen to human by International Agency of Research on Cancer Upon absorption, AA can be metabolically activated by cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) to glycidamide (GA) Analysis of the AA- and GA-glutathione conjugates will further provide direct evidences of detoxication of AA and GA AA (99.9%, 25 AA (35 Parts of the purified standards were dissolved in deuterium oxide and further characterized with  GA (17.4 MS/MS analysis was operated under the identical conditions with those used to characterize AA-GSH. Fragmentations of GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH are presented in The purified GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH were dissolved in deuterium oxide and further characterized by The NMR data for GA3-GSH were as follows:  The Oasis MCX cartridge (3 The HPLC system consisted of a hypercarb C18 HPLC column (3 A triple quadruple mass spectrometry (TSQ Quantum Access, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Ringoes, NJ) with an electrospray ionization interface was used for sample analysis. A spray voltage was set at 3.5 Calibration curves were achieved by repeatedly analysis of AA-GSH, GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH standard solutions prepared in water and rat serum. The concentration ranges were 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000, 1500, 2000 and 2500 All procedures involved in the animal study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of National Taiwan University. Male Sprague–Dawley rats of 78 Glutathione conjugation is usually considered as a detoxication mechanism and plays an important role in toxicity expression of a chemical. The AA detoxication was either studied by using indirect analysis of the GSH depletion in erythrocytes or liver and brain of rats treated with AA AA-GSH was first synthesized, purified, and characterized by Pernice et al. GA-GSH was purified from the reaction mixture with HPLC ( According to the MS/MS spectra of GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH, the product ions of GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH were formed from the S The Accordingly, we could simply assign the quaternary carbon C-1 (175.6; 175.8 To completely separate GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH with chromatography, mobile phases containing methanol and acetonitrile were compared, and the latter appeared to achieve sharper peaks and better separation of both conjugates. Formic acid was added into mobile phases (0.05%, Calibration curves in serum were obtained from triplicate analysis of the calibration standard solutions and fitted with simple linear regression. Linearity ( Compared with previous analytical methods of AA-GSH, the current study has improved the sensitivity of AA-GSH. The LOD of AA-GSH in this study is 111-fold lower than that in Pernice et al. (0.045–5 Our newly-developed LC–MS/MS method was sensitive to measure the AA- and GA-GSH in blood of rats treated with 5 Analysis of AA-GSH was used to investigate the detoxication of AA Mercapturic acids of AA and GA has also been well studied in rodents In conclusion, this study has synthesized, purified, and characterized AA- and GA-GSHs, and successfully developed a sensitive LC–MS/MS method to directly analyze these conjugates in blood. By applying this method, AA-GSH, GA2-GSH and GA3-GSH has been analyzed to demonstrate AA and GA detoxication by GSH in AA-treated rats. According to our results, the estimated levels of AA-, GA2- and GA3-GSH in blood of rats treated with 0.05 The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. The  This study was supported by a grant from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 