Thiourea leaching of precious metals such as gold and silver from ores has several advantages when compared with conventional cyanidation process. In recent years, the use of ultrasound in leaching processes is becoming increasingly popular in hydrometallurgy. This paper deals with combining these two techniques for silver leaching from solid waste of a cyanidation leach plant located in Kütahya, Turkey. The primary aim of this research is to assess the technical performance of the method. To achieve maximum leaching yield, eight process variables have been selected to estimate optimum process conditions by means of statistical factorial design and steepest ascent techniques. Laboratory-scale experiments showed that complete leaching of silver may be achieved by this process.step size in steepest ascent experiments coded value of the process variable process response (leaching yield) absolute value of the process variable Silver is one of the widely used metals in industry. The majority of silver is consumed in film processing industry with 40–50% of overall consumption, electrical industry follows with 20–30%, and ornaments and jewelry consist of 10% of overall consumption. In addition to the recovery of silver from scrap metals, silver is produced either directly from ores or as a side product during the productions of zinc, copper and lead. Today, silver production is mainly performed by the conventional cyanidation process. Thiourea (NH The use of ultrasound for ore leaching becomes increasingly popular in hydrometallurgy. Sonochemical extraction techniques together with classical methods gave a faster Recently the effects of ultrasound for improving chemical reactions have been reviewed The purpose of this work is to investigate the effect of ultrasonic energy on the leaching yield of silver content of a mining waste, and maximize the yield by means of response surface methodology. The effect of the ultrasound on the leaching kinetics and mechanism is planned to be investigated in a further study. A significant part of the industrial experimentation is devoted to finding functional relationship between independent variables and process response: The gradient of the model equation Thus, a Solid waste samples used in this study were collected from a silver ore processing plant (Gümüşköy 100 Yıl) located in Kütahya, where approximately 4000 tones of silver ores is processed by cyanide leaching method to recover approximately 122 tones of 1000 carat (99.99% in purity) silver per year. The plant started production in 1987 and planned to have 20 years economical life, at the end of which, approximately 25 million tones of solid waste will be stored in four different pools located within the factory. Ag Wet solid waste was dried at room temperature (approximately 20 °C) until constant weight. Samples were withdrawn from the air-dried waste, for sieve, chemical and X-ray analysis. The chemical composition of the air dried is given in The schematic illustration of the experimental set-up is shown in In a typical run; 500 ml of sulfuric acid-thiourea solution with known concentration was placed into the reactor, and heated to the reaction temperature. O In this three-phased leaching system, in addition to inherent process variables such as temperature, time, reactant concentrations, and ultrasound power, additional ones arise due to the presence of a solid phase; pulp density and particle diameter, and a gas phase; gas flowrate. Thus, eight process variables considered in this study, are presented in 2 Process variables are categorized and ranked, according to their parameter values, as: Variables with positive parameter value, affecting proportionally the response Variables with negative parameter value, affecting inversely the response The adverse effect of the leaching time on the process yield may be explained as follows: chemical reactions which occur during the leaching process are; the oxidation of Ag bearing sulfide minerals by dissolved O As seen in The experimentally obtained leaching yield is 96.0%, close to 94.0% as predicted by Eq. The results are presented in On the other hand, gas flow rate and gas type are the other variables to be further investigated for their effects on the leaching yield; It is worth to assess the possibility of using air, as a more cheaper gas, instead of pure O As seen from Fairly high yields obtained with O  In the light of the above considerations, the base point which is suitable as a starting point for steepest ascent experimentation is decided as follows: In the steepest ascent experiments, pulp density, air flowrate and particle size are hold constant. For a chosen step size, Laboratory-scale batch experiments showed that silver may be leached almost completely from the solid waste of a silver ore beneficiating plant, by means of ultrasound assisted thiourea leaching method. With 55 μm particle sized sample at 100 g