Currently the effect of the pre-weakening of ore particles by high voltage pulses is evaluated by the percentage change of A
                     ∗
                     b values between pulse-treated and untreated ore particles. The values of A
                     ∗
                     b, widely used as an ore breakage competence indicator in the mineral industry, are determined from the parameters of the JKMRC breakage models. In this study a t
                     10-based method was developed to predict the degree of size reduction, t
                     10, of pulse-treated particles from that of untreated particles broken at the same size/energy level. This method incorporates one parameter, CAb
                     , which is equivalent to the percentage change of A
                     ∗
                     b values.
                  The t
                     10-based method was validated using nine sets of comparative JK Rotary Breakage Tester data on pulse-treated and untreated ore samples over a wide range of impact specific energies and particle sizes. The t
                     10-based method can be used to calculate the energy reduction due to the pre-weakening effect in the downstream comminution process. It indicates that the energy reduction by pre-weakening increases with an increase in the target product fineness and the degree of pre-weakening, and with the decrease in feed particle size.Comminution is the most energy intensive process in the mining industry. It has been reported that comminution consumes, on average, 36% of the energy utilized by the industry ( In order to evaluate the effect of pre-weakening by HVP, the percentage change of The   Eqs. In a standard JKDWT test, particles in five size fractions are tested, each with three specific energy levels. At each size/energy level 30 particles are tested in a single-particle breakage mode. The testing procedures are time-consuming, taking typically two days to complete the characterisation of one sample. In a standard JKRBT test, four of the five size fractions in the JKDWT are tested, each with three energy levels. With the feature of rapid breakage operation, the time used for impact breakage in the JKRBT is reduced significantly compared to the JKDWT. However, the amount of material needed for a characterisation test, and the time required for sample preparation and product size analysis are still burdensome. Because of this, a reduced JKRBT test was developed ( The standard and the reduced JKRBT tests do not use all particles in the feed; only particles in the designated size fractions are used. In a test to characterise the pre-weakening effect, sufficient material is required in those designated size fractions. This may present a burden in the sample preparation process, such as the one using HVP in a single-particle treatment mode. An This paper presents a new method for evaluation of ore pre-weakening effect, using the known Nine sets of data were collected for the development of the The ores used for the HVP pre-weakening and JKRBT characterisation tests were collected from various mines. Ores 1, 2, 3 and 8 were collected from a gold–copper mine operation in New South Wales, Australia. Ore 4 was from an iron oxide copper–gold deposit in Brazil. Ore 5 was from a copper deposit in New South Wales, Australia. Ore 6 (lead–zinc ore) and 7 (copper–gold ore) were both from Queensland, Australia. In the HVP treatment process a single-particle, single-pulse method was used for Tests 1–5 in an incremental breakage mode, ie. the unbroken particles were subjected to another pulse loading until they were broken ( For Tests 6–9, the traditional 700 The JKRBT characterisation tests were conducted on the pulse-treated and untreated materials respectively. According to the availability of particles in the HVP products, various size-energy combinations were selected in their JKRBT tests. Details of the particle sizes and energy levels used in the JKRBT tests are given in The trend of the JKRBT product The majority of the The relation between each pair of The relationship between Based on the observed trends in As shown in Eq. It is reasonable to assume that when Thus, the values of Eq. To evaluate the degree of pre-weakening by HVP, a term of percentage change of The Similarly, when Equating Eqs. which after rearranging gives: By comparing Eqs.  In the traditional method, the size-dependent model parameters In the The error bars presented in The nine sets of data show that the degrees of pre-weakening range from 16.1% to 78.1% according to the values of The relationship between Assuming there is an untreated sample of given ore type with impact breakage characteristics described by the size-dependent breakage model as below: When the target of impact breakage is to achieve a product fineness, Using Once the material breakage characteristic parameters ( By way of example, the relation between energy reduction by pre-weakening and the target product fineness   This paper only demonstrates the direct comparison of energy reduction due to the pre-weakening effect resulted from HVP treatment, but it does not cover the pre-weakening effect on comminution circuit configuration. A Since the benchmark The The financial support from