Based on a large sample for the German commercial and services sector, this paper econometrically assesses the relevance of various types of barriers to energy efficiency at the sectoral level and across fifteen sub-sectors. The results at the level of entire sectors suggest that the lack of information about energy consumption patterns and about energy efficiency measures, lack of staff time, priority setting within organizations, and – in particular – the investor/user dilemma are all relevant barriers. Allowing for sector-specific differences in the relevance of these individual barriers yields a more heterogeneous picture. The numbers and types of relevant barriers vary across sub-sectors, and the majority of sub-sectors are subject to relatively few barriers. The statistically most significant barriers are found for the sub-sector of public administrations. These findings are robust, independent of whether the definition of an organization's energy efficiency performance includes only measures that have actually been realized or also those that are being planned. For planned projects, however, organizations appear to underestimate internal priority setting as a barrier to energy efficiency.Improving energy efficiency is often seen as the fastest and most cost-effective way to achieve global greenhouse gas emission targets (e.g. On the policy side, the Spring European Council Presidency Conclusions stress the need “to increase energy efficiency in the EU so as to achieve the objective of saving 20% of the EU's energy consumption compared to projections for 2020, as estimated by the Commission in its Green Paper on Energy Efficiency” ( Complementary to the case study approach, a few analyses do exist which rely on surveys exploring the empirical relevance of barriers to energy efficiency. An early paper by This paper assesses the relevance of various types of barriers to energy efficiency in the commercial and services sector at the sectoral level and In summary, the paper relates to the existing literature as follows. First, econometric analyses of barriers to energy efficiency are carried out for energy consumers which have – apart from The paper is organized as follows. In the commercial and services sector in Germany, the share of energy costs is usually well under three percent of total costs (e.g. There is a large body of literature on the nature of barriers to energy efficiency, which draws on partly overlapping concepts from neo-classical economics, institutional economics (principal-agency theory and transaction cost economics), behavioural economics, sociology and psychology ( If individuals lack adequate information on either energy efficiency opportunities or the energy performance of technologies, they may invest too little in energy efficiency. First, there might be inadequate information about the levels and patterns of current energy consumption. The availability of such information depends on the level of sub-metering, the information content of utility bills, the use of computerized information systems, the time devoted to analysing consumption information, etc. Gathering and analysing information on current energy consumption is associated with investment, operational, and staff costs, which can also be interpreted as a particular category of transaction costs. Second, organizations may lack information on specific energy-saving opportunities either because they have failed to evaluate energy efficiency opportunities, or because there is no information on the costs and performance of specific energy-saving technologies. For example, the performance of technologies such as control systems, motors, and variable-speed drives may be difficult to evaluate even after purchase because detailed metering is not feasible. Therefore, the performance of the energy-efficient technology remains unknown. Similarly, details about the performance of new energy-efficient technologies are only known to the investor, but would be of value to others, too (public-goods character of information). In this case, markets undersupply such information (market failure). Third, information on the energy consumption of new and refurbished buildings, process plants, and equipment and machinery could be asymmetric, resulting in adverse selection and thus inefficient outcomes. For example, the market value of a house should, among many other characteristics, also reflect its energy performance. While this information may be available to the seller, potential buyers have difficulty in recognising and evaluating energy performance. As a consequence, their bids for the house may be too low. Eventually, unless the buyer can adequately assess the energy performance of a building, or unless the seller is able to credibly disclose this information (e.g. through demonstrations, publication of technical materials), only energy-inefficient buildings could be offered on the market. Thus, the logic originally developed by Organizations may fail to invest in seemingly profitable energy-efficient technologies because there are additional costs associated with their use which are hidden to the observer, but not to the organization. That is, decision makers may be very well aware of those hidden costs, but they cannot easily be observed or adequately quantified via, say, an engineering–economic investment appraisal carried out by external energy auditing companies. First, there are the costs (utility losses) that result from the Second, hidden costs may be part of the Third, there may be hidden costs related to the general, If these hidden costs are real and substantial, firms' observed failure to adopt seemingly “profitable” energy-efficient technologies would still be consistent with standard neoclassical optimization. However, if these costs are unobservable or difficult to measure, attributing the failure to adopt these technologies to unobservable costs would be next to tautological. Exploring firms' voluntary participation in the US Environmental Protection Agency's Green Lights Program, High (implied) discount rates are often observed for investments in energy efficiency. In essence, however, high discount rates are a restatement rather than the source of the energy efficiency gap. Instead, stringent investment criteria and the rejection of particular energy-efficient technologies may represent a rational response to perceived risk. They may result from New energy-efficient technologies may also be associated with Finally, waiting to invest in irreversible energy efficiency technologies may be optimal if future economic conditions are uncertain ( If organizations' In addition to this external “access to capital” problem, which relates to all types of investments, there may also be Finally, because of constraints on their time and attention, top management may not consider energy-cost savings a strategic priority, or may favour large, strategic projects which are more prestigious than energy management activities. More specifically, findings from management literature suggest that the strategic character of an investment is the primary reason for its approval, even more important than profitability (e.g. In the context of energy use, arguably the most well-known example for split incentives is the landlord/tenant or user/investor dilemma (e.g. Besides the landlord/tenant problem, there are also other situations where split incentives may prevent adequate investments in energy efficiency. For example, if managers – because of job rotation – remain in their post only for a short time, they may have limited incentives to invest in energy-efficient projects, which have a longer payback time. Similarly, depending on their compensation scheme, managers may not be indifferent to the equality of making or saving the same amount of money. Further, if departments (in larger organisations) are not accountable for their own energy costs, department managers may have no incentive to invest in energy efficiency because the benefits in terms of cost savings accrue elsewhere. Similarly, the person responsible for purchasing equipment may have a strong incentive to minimize capital costs, but may not be accountable for operating costs (including energy costs). Likewise, if the energy performance of a product or a system cannot easily be observed, developers may ‘get away with’ cheaply installed systems that the purchaser discovers to be sub-optimal afterwards. Orthodox neoclassical economics assumes a rational decision-maker choosing the optimal solution given the available information on alternatives. In particular, the decision is not tainted by cognitive limits or biases. In contrast, organizational theory suggests that lack of time, attention, or cognitive limits on the ability to adequately process information may prevent optimizing behaviour. Instead, bounded rationality may result in satisfying behaviour, using routines, or rules of thumb ( In conclusion, the different concepts underlying the barriers to energy efficiency each provide different insights into the nature of these barriers. In particular, neoclassical economics distinguishes between barriers which root in market failures and those which do not ( In Germany, official energy balances partition final energy consumption into four end-use sectors: industry, private households, transportation, and the combined commercial and services sector. The latter consists of small industrial enterprises (with no more than 20 employees), all public and private services as well as the agricultural and construction sectors. Hence, the German commercial and services sector differs from the categories ‘service sector’, ‘public sector’ or ‘tertiary sector’ usually found in United Nations or Eurostat energy statistics. As defined above, the German commercial and services sector accounts for about 15% of final energy consumption and 6.5% of direct CO The analyses in this paper are based on a representative, cross-sectional survey of 2848 companies and public institutions in the commercial and services sector in Germany ( Interview partners in the surveyed organizations were given a set of possible energy-saving measures and asked which of those measures had already been realized in their organization or were planned to be implemented. The measures considered differed across sub-sectors and generally included both technical and organizational measures. For the commercial businesses and trade organizations, these measures typically referred to specific production technologies. Similarly, for the public and private services organizations, which tend to be dominated by space heating, the measures primarily included technological and management options to reduce heat demand and to improve the energy performance of the heat supply system. From a technology perspective, cross-sectional and sector-specific measures can be distinguished. Cross-cutting measures can be applied in all sub-sectors and include, for example, thermal insulation of outside walls, roofs and basement ceilings, thermally insulated windows and glazing, heat recovery in refrigerators and freezers, and using outdoor sensors to control indoor temperature. In comparison, sector-specific measures vary across sub-sectors. For laundries, for example, the list of measures considered contains, among others, heat recovery from flue gas or condensate return to preheat the boiler, heat recovery from the air discharged by the drier, or heat recovery from warm washing water to heat the rinsing or fresh water thereby reducing the liquor ratio, i.e. the ratio of water volume in the drum (in l) to the dry load (in kg). In the survey, interviewees could indicate whether some of the suggested measures were not feasible for their organization, for example for technical reasons. While all the suggested measures are energy-efficient, no information is available on whether they are truly cost-efficient for individual organizations. Following The dependent variable in the econometric models is dichotomous and takes the value of one if the organization is “active”. For “inactive” organizations, the dependent variable is zero. The explanatory variables available from the survey are: ENERKNOW, INFO, TIME, UNCERTAIN, PRIORITY and RENTED are the dummy variables for the barriers. They assume the value of one if the associated statement is judged to be true for the organization, and zero otherwise. There is no one-to-one relationship between the barriers discussed in the conceptual Two types of models are estimated. The “Sector model” explores the impact of the “explanatory” variables on a rather aggregated level. Effects which are specific to the The “Sub-sector model” allows for (sub) sector-specific differences in the relevance of individual barriers across organizations. In this way it is possible to identify sectors in which particular barriers are statistically significant. To model these possible interaction effects, sector dummies Estimation results are shown in  With regard to the individual explanatory variables, the parameter estimate associated with ENERKNOW exhibits a negative sign and is found to be statistically significant regardless of whether adopted and planned measures (“Active A&P”) or only adopted measures (“Active A”) are used to construct the independent variable. In sum, the results are robust to both estimation procedures and to the choice of independent variables. To the extent that the variables included in the model reflect the barriers presented in The “Sub-sector model” allows for (sub)sector-specific differences in the relevance of individual barriers and energy use across organizations through the interaction of sector-specific dummies with these variables. The parameter associated with SIZE is assumed to be identical for all sub-sectors. The first column in In sum, only a few of the variables identified as statistically significant in the “Sectoral model” are also statistically significant for many sub-sectors. Hence, the strength of the barriers is likely to be different across sectors. When comparing the results between models, however, it has to be kept in mind that there are considerably fewer degrees of freedom in the “Sub-sector model” than in the “Sector model”, leading to larger standard errors in the former. Further, all parameters which are statistically significant exhibit the expected signs — except for INFO for the sub-sector wholesale trade. Thus, the results for the “Sub-sector model” are generally consistent with those of the “Sector model”. The results for the “Sub-sector model” further indicate that the types and numbers of barriers to energy efficiency vary across sub-sectors. For most sub-sectors, one or two barriers are statistically significant, but no clear pattern appears to exist regarding combinations of barriers. As expected, the more energy-intensive sectors like laundries and bakeries tend to exhibit the least number of barriers. Exploring the relevance of various barriers to energy efficiency based on a large sample for the German commercial and services sector indicates that most of the barriers considered turned out to be statistically significant at an aggregate level (“Sector model”). In general, therefore, these results complement the findings from case study analyses and the existing survey-based studies (e.g. Results from the “Sub-sector model” yield a more heterogeneous picture. The numbers and types of relevant barriers vary across sub-sectors, and most sub-sectors are subject to relatively few of the barriers explored. Allowing for sector-specific responses, these results help to identify sub-sectors where a policy measure is likely to be effective. Since individual measures are usually not able to address several targets, a mix of different policies would be required to tackle the multiple types of barriers (see also While the findings of this paper generally support the view that barriers help to explain the lack of investment in energy-efficient (and arguably also cost-efficient) technologies, it is beyond its scope, however, to assess whether these barriers should be overcome because they inhibit economic efficiency. For example, the costs for installing meters may be prohibitively high in sub-sectors with low energy costs. Further, from the perspective of neoclassical economics, the inability to access capital may well constitute a barrier, but it need not imply a failure in capital markets that should be corrected. If small companies are considered high-risk borrowers, potential lenders may demand a high risk-adjusted rate of return ( Ultimately, even if the barriers identified are also found to inhibit economic efficiency, policies to overcome those barriers would still have to be cost-efficient. Thus, ex ante cost–benefit analyses would have to be conducted for any proposed energy efficiency policies. Alternatively, policy makers could also draw on experiences gained from existing programmes. Increased data availability and the continuing diffusion of micro-econometric evaluation techniques are expected to reduce the uncertainty about how many kilowatt hours and CO The author is particularly grateful for insightful suggestions made by three anonymous reviewers. The paper also benefited from discussions at the 31st Annual Conference of the International Association of Energy Economists (IAEE) in 2008 in Istanbul, Turkey. Final thanks go to Gillian Bowman-Koehler for proof-reading the paper. The usual disclaimer applies.