In this research, the effect of aluminothermic reaction on the progress of carbothermic reaction in simultaneous mechanochemical reduction of CuO and ZnO has been studied. A mixture of CuO and ZnO powders along with different amounts of aluminum and graphite was milled in a planetary ball-milling machine. The adiabatic temperature and overall reaction enthalpy were varied by changing the aluminum/carbon ratio. The results showed that by increasing the amount of aluminum, the exothermic aluminothermic reaction provided the required heat for the endothermic carbothermic reactions. Consequently the oxide powders were entirely reduced during ball-milling process and α-brass–Al2O3 nanostructured composites were obtained. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used to characterize the final products. By utilizing the Scherrer's method, the mean grain size of the products was calculated to be in the nanometer range, further confirmed by TEM observations.Reduction of metal oxides is usually carried out at high temperatures in appropriate conditions with respect to equilibrium thermodynamics. However, because of the high activity of fresh surfaces, mechanochemical reduction is possible In the past couple of decades, reduction of many metallic oxides by solid metallic reducing agents (metallothermic reduction) through mechanical alloying has been extensively studied. Solid state reduction of CuO by Ca, Al, Mg, Ti, Mn, Si, Fe, Ni In addition to metallothermic reduction, carbothermic reduction can take place during mechanical alloying. Yang et al. In this work, we have used CuO/ZnO powders as starting materials and Al/carbon as reducing agents and studied the effect of aluminothermic reaction on carbothermic reaction during simultaneous reduction of mentioned oxides and formation of α-brass. CuO (96% purity, Merck 102761), ZnO (99% purity, Fluka 96484), Al (99.5% purity, Mashhad Powder Metallurgy Co.) and C (99.5% purity, Mashhad Powder Metallurgy Co.) powders were mixed to give the following desired stoichiometric composition: Adiabatic temperature can be calculated from the following equation Mechanical alloying (MA) was performed under argon atmosphere in a planetary ball-mill at room temperature with a rotation speed of 260 The reduction progress in the ball-milled powders was characterized by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα ( The first step was to ensure that the copper and zinc oxides could be simultaneously reduced during the mechanochemical process; in this regard, sample 1 was ball-milled for different time periods. The adiabatic temperature in this sample was calculated to be 2300 As can be seen in The changes in the (1 In order to study the effect of the aluminothermic reduction reaction on the progression of the carbothermic reaction, samples 2, 3 and 4 were ball-milled for 20 α-Brass peaks could be found in sample 2 which had a calculated adiabatic temperature equal to 1800 The adiabatic temperature in sample 3 is calculated to be 1300 In order to study the microstructure and particle size of the synthesized brass, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was utilized. The particles do not have a constant and similar morphology and the size of the particles was within 0.2–0.3 Simultaneous mechanochemical reduction of copper and zinc oxides in the presence of carbon and aluminum was successfully performed. It was observed that by changing the aluminum/carbon ratio and consequently changing the adiabatic temperature, the reduction reactions could take place in two different modes: gradually and instantaneously. In order to activate the carbothermic reduction reaction and the aluminothermic reduction reaction simultaneously, the adiabatic temperature must be over 1800