High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is widely applied in many industrial and scientific fields. Transversal high gradient magnetic separator applied in industry has relative higher magnetic leakage due to the large magnetic pole spacing and consequently low capacity as well as low recovery of fine minerals. Optimization of transversal HGMS is of great significance for improving mineral particle efficiency or reducing energy consumption. In this study, a new concept of matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied magnetic induction for maximum particle capture in transversal HGMS was proposed. Effect of matrix aspect ratio on particle capture was studied under equal matrix cross-section area and equal matrix horizontal axis using extended particle capture models for saturated and unsaturated matrices as well as model selection methodology. Particle motion trajectories under different circumstances were depicted and particle capture radii were determined and compared. Results showed that there existed matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied magnetic induction for maximum particle capture under the two cases considered. The matching relation is independent on particle and matrix size. Particle capture radius of matrices with the optimal aspect ratio can be much larger than that of conventional rod matrices. The matching relation can be used to configure the HGMS system for improving mineral recovery or reducing energy consumption.vacuum permeability, 4π × 10 magnetic susceptibility of particle – volume of particle, m magnetic field, A/m the applied magnetic field strength, A/m the applied magnetic induction, T radius of particle, m particle capture radius, m polar angle coordinate – polar coordinate, m angle of applied field with respect to matrix long axis – angle of fluid with respect to matrix long axis – base of natural logarithm imaginary symbol the saturation magnetic of the matrix, T viscosity of the fluid, Pa·s velocity of particle, m/s velocity of fluid, m/s initial velocity of fluid, m/s half the long axis of elliptic matrix, m half the short axis of elliptic matrix, m half the focal length of elliptic matrix, m radius of circular matrix, m horizontal axis of elliptic matrix, m vertical axis of circular matrix, m ratio of matrix long axis to short axis – ratio of axis along magnetization to that perpendicular to magnetization – elliptic angle coordinate – elliptic coordinate – High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is effective in removing or recovering weakly magnetic particles form slurry and has witnessed widespread application in many scientific and industrial fields ( Modeling of particle capture by matrices in HGMS can provide quantitative analyses on matrices’ performance and many particle capture models have been established ( Transversal HGMS is also an important configuration and transversal high gradient magnetic separators are being applied in industry for the processing of weakly magnetic ores ( In this study, extended particle capture models (for saturated and unsaturated matrices) in transversal HGMS were established and effect of matrix aspect ratio on particle capture was investigated. The aim is to clarify whether there exists the matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied magnetic induction for maximum particle capture in transversal HGMS. Then transversal HGMS system can be configured based on the matching relation to improve mineral recovery. As shown in  For HGMS of weakly magnetic particles in the size range of several to dozens of microns, the electric force, the Brownian motion, and inertial force are negligible. The dominating forces are magnetic and fluid drag forces ( As both magnetic field and electric field belong to conservative field, the complex potential functions of magnetic field around elliptic matrix can be obtained by analogy with that of electric field around elliptic dielectric given by Smythe ( Coefficients Using the magnetic field, magnetic force acting on paramagnetic particles can be calculated and the components are given by Eqs. For the case of Similarly, coefficients Then components of magnetic field and magnetic force can all be calculated, as shown by Eqs. (15)–(18). The potential flow field around an elliptic matrix can also be described by complex potential function, as shown by Eq. The real part is flow velocity potential: Then flow velocity can be calculated with Eq. For the case of The velocity potential: Components of flow velocity: Using the flow velocity, fluid drag force acting on paramagnetic particles can be calculated with Eq. Particle capture models were established based on Newton’s second law. The dominating forces are magnetic force and fluid drag force and the inertial terms can also be neglected ( For the case of For the case of For unsaturated and saturated matrices, For the case of For unsaturated and saturated matrices, Magnetization state of matrix varies not only with applied magnetic induction, but also with aspect ratio. Matrix with large aspect ratio can also reach saturation under low applied magnetic induction. To investigate the effect of matrix aspect ratio on particle capture, magnetization state of matrix under specific condition should be clarified to select the applicable particle capture models. In our previously published papers, we studied magnetization process of circular and elliptic matrices with increasing applied magnetic induction ( With the judgement, magnetization state (saturated or unsaturated) of matrices could be rapidly determined and particle capture models could be selected for specific conditions.  Firstly, particle capture performance of matrices was investigated under the same cross-section area. Under this circumstance, packing fraction of matrices were the same. The cross section of all the matrices (with aspect ratio of 1/5, 1/2, 1, 2, 4 and 6) was π mm    Based on the variation regularity of particle capture radius under different applied magnetic induction, it can be inferred that there also exists an optimal aspect ratio Matrix size is also a very important parameter influencing matrix’s performance in HGMS. To investigate the size effect in the study of matrix aspect ratio, these matrix sizes were considered: cross-section area For comprehensive study of the matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied magnetic induction for maximum particle capture in transversal HGMS, particle capture performance of matrices with the same horizontal axis but different aspect ratio was also investigated. As magnetization state of matrices only has relation with aspect ratio and applied magnetic induction, selection methodology of particle capture models in this case was the same as that in Particle capture efficiency in this case could also be calculated using Eq. Transversal high gradient magnetic separator has been applied in industry for the processing of weakly magnetic minerals. The appearance and the magnetic system were presented in Analyses above showed that matrix aspect ratio has significant influence on particle capture in transversal HGMS. There exists the matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied magnetic induction for maximum particle capture. In a moderate applied magnetic induction (0.3–0.8 T) commonly used in the processing of weakly magnetic minerals, as shown in On the other side, as shown in In mineral processing, the recovery of valuable minerals is not the only index, the metal grade of concentrate is equally important. In the processing of magnetic minerals by HGMS, the main factor influencing quality of concentrate is the mechanical entrainment of gangue minerals. Studies by previous researchers showed that direct impinge of feed pulp on particle deposit on matrices was responsible for the mechanical entrainment in HGMS ( In this study, we put forward a new concept of matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied magnetic induction for maximum particle capture in transversal HGMS. The matching relation exists for both the cases of equal matrix cross-section area and equal horizontal matrix axis. For both the two cases, the matching relation is independent on particle and matrix size. Particle capture radius at the optimal aspect ratio can be much larger than that of conventional circular matrix. The matching relation can be used to configure the transversal HGMS system: adopting matrix based on the matching relation is proposed for improving separation efficiency or reducing energy consumption. Follow-up studies will be focused on the mechanical entrainment with respect to matrix aspect ratio and the matching relation for maximum separation efficiency in HGMS.  The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This research work was financially supported by the