Investigations into the effects of mineral matter content on Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) were carried out on some low-rank Turkish coals. Quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were carried out using an interactive data processing system (SIROQUANT™) based on Rietveld interpretation methods. Selective leaching processes were used to determine the water and acid-soluble contents of coal samples.
                  Among the coal seams tested, the HGI values of Elbistan coal samples presented a large range from 39 to 83, whereas Tufanbeyli coal samples ranged from 48 to 69. Treatment of the coal with water, ammonium acetate, and hydrochloric acid showed that a considerable part of the ash-forming inorganic matter occurs in water-soluble, acid-soluble, or ion-exchangeable form. Grindability tests on samples of varied water and acid-soluble content showed a significant effect of water and acid-soluble contents on HGI.Coal grindability, usually measured by the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI), is of great interest since it is an important practical and economic property for coal handling and utilization aspects, particularly for pulverized-coal-fired boilers. In general, coal grindability characteristics reflect the coal hardness, tenacity, and fracture that are influenced by coal rank, petrology, and the distribution and the types of minerals. The “mineral matter” in a coal ( dissolved salts and other inorganic substances present in coal’s pore water; inorganic elements incorporated within the organic compounds of the coal macerals; and discrete inorganic particles (crystalline or noncrystalline) representing true mineral components. The first two forms of mineral matter that may be described as non-mineral inorganics are significant, if not dominant, in the mineral matter of low-rank coal seams ( It is reported by Hardgrove grindability tests and standard proximate analyses were carried out in the coal laboratory of Afsin-Elbistan power station and the coal laboratory of Adana Çimento T.A.Ş. cement factory, following American Society for Testing and Materials recommended guidelines ( X-ray diffraction data obtained from the raw coals themselves were evaluated using an interactive data processing system (SIROQUANT™ The elements occurring in different ways within the non-mineral inorganic fraction were removed from the coal samples by a series of selective leaching processes (  Rank range based on huminite random reflectance of coal samples was between 0.21% and 0.27% Statistical analyses were conducted using the SPSS software package. The variables crystalline mineral matter content (quartz, clay minerals, carbonate minerals, goethite, gypsum), HTA and water- and acid-soluble content contribute to the regression analysis. Coal rank and macerals do not include to the initial regression. Water- and acid-soluble content of coal has strong correlation with HGI ( The best fit equation used the variables quartz ( In  Minerals identified in raw coal samples by XRD include quartz, gypsum, calcite, aragonite, feldspar, jarosite, pyrite, goethite, kaolinite, illite, smectite, chlorite, and halloysite. Water- and acid-soluble mineral matter content has great influence on grindability of low-rank coal. It has a positive contribution. High ash and water- and acid-soluble content samples present higher HGI values, whereas high ash and low water- and acid-soluble content samples have lower HGI values. The authors wish to thank Çukurova University Research Fund for funding this study (Under Project No: MMF2003BAP5). The support of the Electricity Generating Authority of Turkey and Adana Çimento T.A.Ş. cement factory is also acknowledged. The corresponding author also wishes to thank Colin R. Ward for his constructive comments on earlier versions of the manuscript, which led to great improvement of this paper.