Persistence here refers to the how long a frother remains effective in producing small bubbles, one of its prime functions in flotation. One way to evaluate is to track gas holdup over time while air is sparged into a column: if frother is depleted bubble size will start to increase consequently increasing bubble rise velocity and hence decreasing gas holdup. Persistence of nine frothers was evaluated in this manner. Polyglycol frothers exhibited high persistence with gas holdup virtually constant over 50h compared with alcohol frothers. The alcohols divided into two groups, one showing steady decline in gas holdup, e.g., 1-hexanol, and a second group exhibiting a sharp decline at a given time, e.g., MIBC. Tests on MIBC showed increasing concentration extended persistence while increasing gas velocity and increasing bubble size decreased persistence. The decrease in gas holdup was related directly to measured decrease in frother concentration. It appears that the transport of frother to and through the froth and from froth to atmosphere needs to be considered.Frothers are used in flotation to decrease bubble size and promote froth stability ( Tests to characterize frothers to help explain their action and aid selection for a given duty continue to evolve ( The set-up was an instrumented 238    To investigate variables influencing persistence MIBC was selected both because it is a widely-used commercial frother and, as  To confirm the direct role of frother loss on persistency, The last test was designed to answer whether loss may be due to frother reacting with air (e.g., oxidation) by comparing air and nitrogen: Frother persistence is a consideration in operations where a low persistence frother may require stage addition and one with high persistence may see frother build-up in recycled water ( The test clearly distinguished the lower persistent alcohols from the more persistent polyglycols. Among the alcohols, two groups were recognized, one exhibiting a steady decline in persistence, e.g., 1-hexanol, and another showing a sharp decline after a certain time, e.g., MIBC. MIBC is generally considered to have low persistence (often ascribed to high volatility as its odour is characteristic) and the results here provide direct evidence. Of the frothers tested MIBC had the lowest persistence; The interpretation is that the decrease in gas holdup is associated with frother loss. The properties assembled in The loss to atmosphere involves a series of transport steps: frother adsorption on rising bubbles, transfer into and through the froth (note MIBC is concentrated in the froth water, The discussion is relevant to any bubble reactor involving surfactants; i.e., the results are relevant to flotation systems. There may be significant additional features, however, due to the presence of solids and other reagents. For example, carbonaceous solids cause loss through adsorption ( A novel test of frother persistence is introduced by monitoring gas holdup as a function of time. In examining nine frothers some of the findings are: Alcohols were less persistent than polyglycol-type frothers which gave stable gas holdup over prolonged periods (up to 50 The alcohols divided into two groups, one showing steady decline in gas holdup, another rapid decline at a given time. MIBC is an example of the latter and showed the lowest persistence of the frothers tested; at 10 Using MIBC, it is confirmed that the decrease in gas holdup corresponds to a decrease in frother concentration and that the loss is to atmosphere not due to reaction with the gas (e.g., oxidation). The mechanism of loss is partly attributable to the generally higher vapour pressure of alcohols but transport processes need to be understood to provide a more complete explanation. This work is funded through the Mineral Processing Chair Renewal Grant, under the Collaborative Research and Development program of NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) sponsored by Vale Inco, Teck Cominco, Xstrata Process Support, Shell Canada, Agnico-Eagle, Barrick Gold, COREM, SGS Lakefield Research, and Flottec. The assistance of Maryam Hashemi in frother analysis is also gratefully acknowledged.