Diagenetic concretions are common in sandstones, but little is known about a possible structural control on such features, and even less so in arkose. We studied compactive shear bands (CSB) with cataclasis in high-porosity arkose associated with spatially heterogeneous carbonate cementation. We investigated the mineralogy, microstructures, grain-size and grain-shape, porosity and pore-size, for both host rock and CSBs. We documented the relationship between CSBs and concretions and quantified the effect of both deformation and cementation on petrophysical and mechanical properties of the assemblage bands-nodule with respect to the pristine rock. Microstructural observations on this particular mineralogy allowed us to identify different fracturing mechanism that affect feldspar (intragranular fracturing) and quartz (spalling/flaking of edges). Cleavage-facilitated fracturing of feldspar results in i) preferential cataclasis of feldspar with respect to quartz, and ii) cleavage control on cataclasis, grain-shape and grain-organization within the CSB. The spatial association between concretions and CSBs suggests that CSBs played a role in cement precipitation. The combined effect of deformation and cementation on mechanical properties is reflected on the rock-strength measurements that show a rock strengthening in the assemblage bands-nodule. Our findings represent new insights into the deformation mechanism in arkose, the relationship between structures and diagenesis as well as their effect on petrophysical and geomechanic characteristics.Porous sandstones are important reservoirs for geofluids. In this kind of granular materials, the interplay between deformation localization and cementation during diagenesis is critical since both processes can strongly reduce rock porosity and permeability thus baffling the fluid flow (e.g. In sandstone reservoirs, pore-filling calcite cement is a common diagenetic feature and may occur pervasively throughout the rock sequence or concentrated in some horizons as concretions with various shapes and arrangement (e.g. The terms nodules and concretions are used almost interchangeably in the literature (e.g. In this paper, we Petrophysical (e.g. porosity, permeability, and capillary entry pressure) and mechanical (e.g. rock strength) properties may change significantly during volumetric deformation in porous sandstones. Such granular rocks have grains that may move exploiting the pore space and are subjected to stress concentration at contact points, which causes grain fracturing and cataclasis. The influence of deformation bands during reservoir production could be minor depending on the permeability contrast and/or band frequency (e.g. The outcrop of our study area is in the Emilian Apennines, that is part of the Northern Apennines fold-and-thrust belt, which developed since the Late Cretaceous as a result of the collision between the Adria microplate and the European plate (e.g. We measured the orientation of the structures in the field to evaluate the structural framework of the Loiano Sandstones. Deformation bands orientation was measured using a Brunton™ geological compass. The deformation bands traces were mapped onto outcrop photographs to document their geometry and the relationships among various deformation band sets. Stereographic projection ( The aim of our work with the Schmidt hammer is to understand the variations of rock uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) across the CSBs and concretions with respect to the HR, since both CSBs and cement can affect rock mechanical properties (e.g. compressive strength, Young's modulus, etc.). Rebound values were obtained using an L-type Schmidt hammer made by DRC The rebound index Combining optical and electron microscopy analysis with 2-D digital image processing on polished thin-sections, we identified various mineral phases and quantified the following properties: the fraction of each mineral phase, porosity, grain and pore size (area, Feret's diameter: the longest distance between any two points along the selection boundary, i.e. particle major axis), the principal grain shape parameters (roundness, circularity, aspect ratio), and grain angle with respect to a chosen reference system in the CSBs and in the HR samples of Loiano Sandstones. Manual point counting was performed with a Zeiss™ microscope on 300 spots using an electro-mechanical microscope slide stepper (produced by J. SWIFT) coupled with an electronic counter (see Each mineral phase was analysed separately by EDS distribution element mapping. The fraction of each mineral phase was calculated as the ratio of the number of pixels belonging to that mineral phase over the total pixels of the map (e.g. Grain and pore sizes were measured using the same element maps mentioned before, after application of an area/diameter conversion algorithm (Eq. The total grain size distribution was measured starting from the single-mineral-phase grain size distribution and then computing the relative percentage of each mineral phase in the considered sample. Where grain size reduction is a key feature in CSBs, the assessment of particle size distribution is fundamental for understanding the deformation micro-mechanisms and quantifying the degree of comminution. According to a number of authors (e.g. Grain shape descriptors were evaluated to define the rock framework and the texture evolution from the HR to the CSB due to cataclasis and grain reorganization by rotation and translation during shear. Analysis of selected SE images allowed us to compute different grain shape descriptors. The Kozeny-Carman (KC) model ( Permeability was calculated both for HR and CSB. The calculations were done without considering the presence of cement within the pores. The KC equations for permeability cannot be applied to concretions (cemented HR and CSB) where most of the pores have been filled by cement, because the concept of granular media (necessary for the applicability of KC relation) is no longer pertinent. Parameters and results of permeability analyses are shown in The outcrop with the CSBs is within the damage zone of a normal fault striking NW-SE and dipping SW ( Various sets of CSBs, spatially-related with the concretions, as well as to its shape and elongation direction, were recognized. In particular, this link is apparent for two main sets: the NNW-SSE (no.1 [red], no.3 [green] and no.4 [yellow] in Combining optical and electron microscopy analysis with digital image processing, we characterized the Loiano Sandstones as medium to coarse-grained and mostly composed by Quartz (49–60%), Feldspars (39–48%), rock fragments (up to 4%), carbonate clasts (e.g. lithoclasts, bioclasts; 1.1–4.5%), and minor accessories (e.g. micas, chlorites, heavy minerals, etc.). Manual point counting validated this composition. Thus, the Loiano Sandstones can be classified as an arkose. Composition resulted to be quite homogenous within the thin-sections, both in HR and CSB, as also confirmed by XRD analysis. The predominant crystalline phases identified with XRD analysis are quartz, followed by K-feldspar, plagioclase, calcite, and traces of mica/illite (see The CSB's microstructure ( We refer to the 0.5-mm-wide area located along the wall of the CSB and on both sides of the CSB as transition zone ( Porosity variations between HR, transition zone, and CSB are shown in The pore size diminishes along with grain size and porosity ( In addition to grain fracturing and grain size reduction, we observed that elongated sand grains (high aspect ratio) show a preferred orientation, and that the long axes tend to be aligned parallel to the plane of the CSB ( Similarly, to what observed for feldspars aspect ratio ( Considering that the Loiano Sandstones are arkose sandstones, it is important to evaluate if different fracturing mechanisms operate on different mineral phases (e.g. feldspar and quartz), because it could have important effects on the CSB microstructure, as well as on the grain size distribution. The feldspar grains show a grain-size reduction mainly by intragranular fracturing within the CSB; fracturing is preferentially oriented along cleavage planes (  Here, we present the permeability results obtained with the Kozeny-Carman relation (Equations In the concretions (cemented HR and CSB), the cementation filled most of the sandstone pores generating a framework consisting of grains, cement, and a few remnant voids. In this contest, the KC equations for permeability cannot be applied because the concept of granular media is no longer pertinent, and other methods are needed for the estimation of the permeability (e.g. core plugs, portable air permeameters, etc.). The UCS values obtained with the Schmidt hammer are summarized in In the following, we will discuss several aspects of the texture and microstructure of CSBs with cataclasis and their petrophysical properties. Then, we consider the association between CSBs and carbonate diagenetic structures, and their impact on bulk petrophysical and geomechanical properties. Finally, we discuss about the implications for sandstone reservoirs or aquifers. The results concerning the mineralogy and grain size of Loiano Sandstones, obtained with the characterization techniques, both optical and SEM imaging, are consistent with each other and with the data from the literature ( The CSB core is characterized by a broad grain-size distribution curve, with a few large, rounded, and nearly undisturbed sand-size grains surrounded and cushioned (e.g. The grain fracturing also induces particle shape alterations ( The feldspar grains within the CSB show a grain-size reduction mainly by intragranular fracturing preferentially oriented along cleavage planes ( In the Loiano Sandstones, the different nature of feldspars and quartz mineral phases may explain the microstructure, textural characteristics, and the grain fracture mechanisms of CSBs. Feldspar cleavage planes guide the fracturing (intragranular fractures), leading to more elongated (>aspect ratio; < roundness and circularity) grains and particle fragments ( More than one mechanism caused porosity and permeability reduction in the Loiano Sandstones, namely localized shearing associated with cataclasis and cement precipitation in the pore space. In Loiano Sandstones, the CSB porosity is reduced by an order of magnitude ( Despite the high feldspars content in the Loiano Sandstones, the XRD patterns did not show any significant clay minerals content both in the HR and in the CSB. In this case, as suggested by The timing of CSBs formation and calcite cementation in Loiano Sandstones is still under investigation and will be presented in a future work. Here, however, we discuss some preliminary results. There are several evidences that support the hypothesis that the formation of the CSBs precede the cementation. Field observations show that the concretions are preferentially developed along the CSBs, being all not bed-parallel concretions (25% of the total concretions; In the following, we discuss about which mechanism could have promoted the precipitation, and where and why these mechanisms may occur. Grain surface area is a critical parameter for cement precipitation ( We hypothesize that carbonate cement precipitation is promoted (1) where fluid flow slows down (low permeability and advective velocity) (e.g. The combination of different mechanical rock properties, such as Young's modulus, hardness, strength, surface smoothness, density and cementation are reflected in the hammer rebound values ( Combination of cataclasis (angular grains and non-unimodal GSD), and compaction leads to interlocking of grains and asperities, promoting strain hardening ( Considering that porous sandstones are important reservoirs and aquifers, including many feldspar-rich sandstones (e.g. The excellent exposures shown in this paper allowed documenting the association between deformation bands and carbonate concretions in the Loiano Sandstones, which are a high porosity reservoir/aquifer analogue for arkose sandstone. Microstructural observations of CSBs in this particular mineralogy allowed us to discuss: (i) the preferential cataclasis of feldspar, and (ii) the cleavage control on cataclasis, grain-shape, and grains organization within the CSB. In terms of structural diagenesis, this research shows a case in which deformation affects the fluid flow, focuses the diagenetic processes, and controls the distribution of diagenetic products. Furthermore, we show interesting results about the rock strength increase caused by the assemblage CSBs-concretions. The major conclusions that we obtained from this work are the following: CSBs in the Loiano Sandstones are characterized by two main processes: cataclasis and compaction. Within the CSB both cataclasis and grain crushing reduce the grain size distribution, producing an angular fine-grained matrix that surrounds a few large, rounded, and nearly undisturbed sand-size grains. The presence of feldspars controls cataclasis development within the CSB. The mineralogy, in fact, controls the grain size distribution and the shape of cataclasis-related grains. Feldspar contribution to the increase in fine grains content within the CSB prevails with respect to the quartz. Feldspars are characterized by a persistent cleavage that makes them weaker and more prone to fracture with respect to quartz. The cleavage controls fragment shape: elongated (high aspect ratio) and low in roundness and circularity. Quartz grains, on the other hand, do not show any preferential fracture direction, so that grain crushing will occur at defects and weakness points (i.e. edges). The microstructure and texture of the CSB is influenced by the alignment of elongated grains (mostly feldspars) along the plane of the band during progressive shear. The mineralogy controls the deformation mechanisms and the cataclasis. In turn, different fracturing mechanism between feldspar (intragranular fracturing) and quartz (spalling and/or flaking of edges) explain the preferential cataclasis of feldspar grains within the CSB. The joint effect of compaction and cataclasis decrease CSB porosity by an order of magnitude with respect to the pristine HR. The porosity and pore-size decrease within the CSB causes a change in pore connectivity and a decrease in permeability up to three orders of magnitude from pristine HR to CSB. The calcite cement precipitation enhances the porosity and permeability reduction effect caused by the deformation. Cementation affects porosity/permeability in the Loiano Sandstones. Porosity drops one order of magnitude from the pristine HR to the concretions. Sheet-like nodules and concretionary bodies of cemented sandstone localized on pre-existing low permeability CSBs further extend and enhance the permeability reduction associated with the CSBs. The variations of petrophysical properties due to the nodules and the cataclastic faults may have a strong influence on the migration, trapping, and production of geofluids in a sandstone reservoir/aquifer. Nodules and concretions, regardless of the presence of CSBs, show higher UCS values (∼49 MPa) with respect to the pristine HR (∼24 MPa). Nodules associated to ZB are those with the highest UCS values measured in outcrop. Cataclasis, compaction, and cementation contribute to increase the strength of the Loiano Sandstones, and in particular of the assemblage CSB – concretion. This research is part of the PhD project of the first author, and it was funded partially by the author MA (RFO14ANT3 - RFO 2014) and by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at