This work describes the development of basic studies to determine hydrodynamic parameters of a coiled flocculator reactor namely Flocs Generator Reactor (FGR) and their correlation with the particle aggregation efficiency using Fe(OH)3 (colloidal suspension model) and a cationic high molecular weight polyacrylamide. The hydrodynamic characterization was carried out through head loss measurements (Hf) and theoretical determinations of hydraulic parameters, such as: Reynolds number (Re), velocity gradient (G), Dean number (De) and Germano number (Gn). The aggregate generation efficiency in the distinct hydrodynamic conditions studied was evaluated through flocs settling data and compared with a complete mix device (mechanical agitation). The theoretical numbers of Re, G, Camp, Dean and Germano were characteristic of a turbulent flow in the coiled pipe and show the high energy dissipated in the liquid mass (shear forces), ideal to promote the contact between the particles and the destabilizing agent. A comparative study for the generation of Fe(OH)3 flocs via mechanical agitation and by the FGR, with the same G
                     ·
                     t (Camp number) applied, showed that flocs formed in the reactor had higher settling rates (∼20 m h−1), whereas for the mechanical agitator, the settling rates were close to 5 m h−1 for the different G
                     ·
                     t investigated. Yet, comparative studies of the FGR configuration (coiled or linear) were carried out, and it was observed that the flow in the FGR with a coiled geometry generates large and dense flocs with higher settling velocities when compared to the flocs generated in the linear pipe. It may be explained due the better mixing efficiency (contact between particles and the destabilizing agent) promoted by the coiled flow in relation to the linear flow, evidencing that in a coiled system the centrifugal forces generates other local hydrodynamics that have great influence on the aggregation phenomena, such as the secondary flow due to curvature and the torsion in the flow (Dean and Germano numbers, respectively). Results show the importance of taking into account such parameters for future scale-up of tubular coiled aggregation units. The hydraulic performance of the FGR, besides reducing considerably the foot print area (by enrolling its overall length), promotes the generation of “strong” flocs which promptly settle, and avoids electrical and mechanical energy consumption, suggesting the application of this reactor for in-line aggregation and high-rate solid–liquid separation.Aggregation efficiency of suspended particles in a liquid is mainly due to two phenomena: physicochemical conditions and hydrodynamics. Physicochemical conditions are related to coagulant or flocculant type and dose, temperature, pH and particle (e.g., surface charge, density). Hydrodynamics depends on both the geometry of the aggregation unit (where the process is conducted) and on the mixing intensity (impeller speed and type, for mechanical units; feed flow rate for hydraulic; and, air flow rate, for pneumatic units). Particle collisions are caused by their relative motion, concentration, type and concentration of destabilizing agents, superficial interactions and contact time. This relative movement may be due the random thermal “Brownian” motion (particles under 1 or 2 μm) in the absence of agitation — perikinetic aggregation, or by the movement of the fluid and the particles due the imposition of an external force or differential settling — orthokinetic aggregation ( Reactors of complete mixing and plug flow are mostly employed in the treatment of raw water and liquid effluents. According to Several efforts have been made to improve the performance of mixing vessels in terms of their power consumption; pumping capacity and degree of mixing achieved and new types of impellers are continuously being evolved everyday. However, all the energy provided by the impeller to the fluid is not efficiently utilized to achieve the desired mixing in stirred vessels ( The flow in curvilinear tubes differs considerably to linear pipes. In the flow through coiled pipes, a secondary motion or a secondary flow is induced by an imbalance between the cross-stream pressure gradient and the centrifugal forces due the curvature (Dean number). Yet, the pitch between the rings enables the impregnation of the torsion effect, characterized by the Germano number. The hydrodynamic characterization of these coiled reactors may enable correct scale-up factors in treatment operation plants, with the reproduction of the same hydraulic conditions optimized for the aggregate generation in laboratory scale. Many treatment plant designers attribute the non-correct characterization of the hydraulic treatment systems as the main factor for the non-reproduction of the results obtained in bench scale during industrial processes. The knowledge of the overall flow pattern as well as shear stress distribution is of paramount importance. While most studies have been focused on laminar flow in mixing vessels, there are many industrial applications involving intense mixing rates and centrifugal forces applied to wastewater treatment ( In this context, the aim of this work was to describe basic studies and determine hydrodynamic parameters of the FGR and correlate with the particle aggregation efficiency (using Fe(OH) Here, the main hydraulic parameters influencing the fluid motion and the particle contact (and destabilizing agents) in the interior of the curved pipes (coiled) are summarized. The hydrodynamic conditions effect is a relevant factor in the destabilization of the colloidal system through hydrolyzed electrolytes and/or flocculants. For particle aggregation to occur, two processes must take place in a sequential stages. First, the particles must collide to one another, and, then, under colloidal forces, they must join forming aggregates. In this way, the global equation for the aggregation may be given by Eq. The size and size distribution of the formed aggregates depend on the applied shear rate ( Substituting Eq. Another important parameter in the aggregation of tubular systems is the Reynolds number ( In the case of differential settling, denser particles that settle with a higher rate ended up colliding onto smaller particles being determined by the balance of the gravitational forces, up rising and drag, settling velocity ( The liquid mass that flows in a curved pipe develops orthogonally the principal and secondary flows due to the centrifugal force. This was first studied by Dean in 1927–28 and it is characterized by the fast-flowing liquid near the center of the pipe that is driven towards the wall on the outside of the curve, while the slow-moving liquid near the wall flows back towards the inside of the curve, shown in The Dean number ( In the case of a coiled tube with pitch ( The torsion effect in the liquid mass may result in the flow destabilization according to Curvature ( Reagents employed in the flocculation studies were: FeCl Sartorius analytic balance, model BP2105. Analion pHmeter, model PM608. Mechanical stirrer Fisatom, model 713 T with a propeller turbine (5.5 cm diameter). Electronic digital optotachometer Tako, model HT 1300 for the stirrer velocity measurement. Floc sizes were determined by a digital camera Sony model DSC. In this study four (4) coiled reactors (FGR) were designed and constructed with a capacity of 0.3; 1.2; 2.8 and 4.8 m The technical system set up employed for the Fe(OH) Feed pump: A centrifugal pump motor Eberle, model 30P866, with feeds ranging from 1 to 40 L min Flocculant preparation unit and dosage: One polystyrene vessel with a storage capacity of 5 L and a dosing peristaltic pump Provitec, model DosaMiniS-AX. Flocs generation unit (FGR): Four reactors were designed and constructed with a 0.3; 1.2; 2.8 and 4.8 m Instrumentation and control: valves, rotameters and manometers. The head loss (Hf) was determined by differential manometric measurement by the differences in head losses at the entrance and at the exit of the distinct FGRs and at different feed rates, using manometers. The head loss at the exit of the FGR was negligible. The dispersion (suspension) used in the flocculation studies was Fe(OH) The comparison of the FGR efficiency with a mechanical agitation was determined through the same Camp number ( The The The efficiency of flocs generation with different configurations of the FGR was measured using a reactor with the following magnitudes: 0.0125 m diameter and 6 m length, with a 0.6 L volume; disposed in the linear (extended) and coiled design, analogously. The coiled arrangement was obtained with the enrolling of the tubing in a support column with a 0.10 m diameter. The hydrodynamic parameters of the distinct FGRs studied were obtained through measurements of the head loss in the FGR and are shown in According to some authors ( The settling velocity of all flocs generated after the flow travelled through the reactors ranged from 16 to 18 m h The settling results of the Fe(OH)   The evaluation of the design (coiled or linear) of the FGR is shown in Results show that the settling rates of the flocs generated in the coiled FGR is higher when compared to the settling rates of the flocs formed in the linear reactor, for all the feed rates. However, this difference is not so significant for the higher feed rate (6 L min Basic studies of characterization and evaluation of the hydrodynamic conditions for the Fe(OH) The authors thank all colleagues responsible for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM and to all institutions supporting research in Brazil (FAPERGS, CAPES, CNPq, FINEP, UFRGS). Also, Mr. Carissimi is grateful to the University of Utah for the hospitality and research assistance during his leave and thanks to CAPES-Brasil for the studentship awarded.