Welding fillers containing various amounts of 30 nm nano-Al2O3 particles were fabricated using friction stir processing and used to improve the mechanical properties of the welding zone. Single-pass welding was made using gas tungsten arc welding. To achieve a uniform distribution of the nanoparticles, friction stir processing was applied to the welding zone. The even distribution of nanoparticles, the removal of welding defects and grain size refinement led to significant improvements of the tensile properties and hardness of the welding zone.Welding of 5083 aluminum alloy is an important production process, especially in marine industries and various structural applications where high strength is needed. Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) is extensively used in the welding of aluminum alloys ( Friction stir processing (FSP) is a successful technique for the fabrication of metal matrix composites and the generation of ex-situ and in-situ nanocomposites ( In the present study, nano-Al Commercial aluminum alloy 5083-H111 rolled plates with the chemical composition shown in Plates of 5083-H111 aluminum alloy with a single V-shaped groove, thickness of 6 mm, and an angle of 60° were welded by ER5183 filler metal and composite fillers. The single pass welded metals were made using GTAW with the composite fillers and ER5183 filler metal. Details of welding parameters are provided in To modify the microstructure and improve the mechanical properties, FSP was performed on the welding zone using a cylindrical threaded hardened H-13 tool steel pin with 4 mm diameter, 4.5 mm length, operating at 1400 rpm, 28 mm/min and 5° tilting angle. The tool traversed along the welding zone for 6 passes on both sides (3 passes on each side). The schematic view of the process is presented in Three sub-sized tensile test specimens with 25 mm gauge length and 6 mm width were made from the welding zone according to ASTM B 557 M. Afterwards, they were tested using a SANTAM universal tensile test machine, model STM-400 at room temperature and at a constant cross-head speed of 1 mm/min. Vickers micro-hardness test was performed on one test specimen for each sample with the load of 25 g and dwell time of 10 s at least 5 times for each specimen according to ASTM E384 using Buehler micro-hardness tester model MMP7. Microstructural characterization was performed using optical microscopy (DM400 M model, Leica) and scanning electron microscopy (Mira3 model, TESCAN). For metallographic examination, the specimens (one test specimen for each sample) were cross-sectioned perpendicularly to the welding direction. After preparation, the specimens were etched with 50 ml of Poulton's reagent solution (12 ml HCL+6 ml HNO The stress-strain curves for some of the samples are presented in In comparison with the base metal, the mechanical properties of the “Simple weld” specimen decreased. The yield strength, tensile strength and elongation decreased from 175 MPa, 320 MPa and 20.7%, respectively, for base metal to 142 MPa, 276 MPa and 19.4%, respectively, for “Simple weld” specimen. The hardness decreased from 93 HV (for base metal) to 80 HV (for “Simple weld” specimen). The presence of nano-Al Applying friction stir processing to the welding zone led to an improvement in the mechanical properties. The yield strength, tensile strength and elongation increased from 142 MPa, 276 MPa and 19.4%, respectively, for “Simple weld” specimen to 160 MPa, 303 MPa and 23.2%, respectively, for “Simple weld + FSP” specimen. The largest amount of the area under the curves illustrated in By considering the mechanical properties of un-FSP-ed specimens (such as “Simple weld” specimen and “1.5” specimen presented in By increasing the amount of nano-Al The value of hardness of the specimens containing nanoparticles (“0.75”, “1.5” and “2.5”) was greater than that of the “Simple weld + FSP” specimen (FSP-ed sample without nanoparticles). In the range of above 0.75 Vol.% of nanoparticles in filler wires, the presence of nanoparticles in the welding zone was more effective than grain refinement on the hardness. The cross sectional macrostructures of the “0.75”, “2.5” and “1.5 + FSP” samples with 10X magnification have been shown in The microstructures of some of the samples in the different zones are presented in Different areas of FSP-ed specimens including stir zone (SZ), thermo-mechanically affected zone (TMAZ) and heat affected zone (HAZ) are presented in The microstructure of the stir zone shown in The SEM micrograph of Al The relationship between hardness and grain size of the welding zone is shown in In comparison with the un-FSP-ed specimen, the hardness of the FSP-ed specimens varied by changing the grain size with different slope. The effect of grain size on the hardness depends on the slope of the curve. In addition to dislocation density in the grain interiors, other microstructural factors such as particle distribution can also influence the slope of the Hall-Petch equation ( The strengthening mechanisms for 5083 aluminum alloy included grain boundary strengthening, solid solution strengthening, work hardening and strengthening due to dislocation sub-structures ( The strength of the welding zone was lower than the other specimens because of similar casting microstructure. The microstructure of the welding zone was dendritic. The "simple weld" specimen grain size was coarser than the other specimens. Also, residual stress and welding defects (such as porosity and micro-cracks) can affect mechanical properties of the welding zone. Applying FSP to the welding zone resulted in the grain size refinement, removal of the welding defect due to severe plastic deformation and forging of the welding zone. Compared to the “Simple weld” specimen, the grain sizes, which were affected by dynamic recrystallization phenomenon, decreased. Grain boundaries are barriers to dislocation movement and lead to dislocation pile-up at the grain boundaries. Fine grains retarded the fracture by increasing the crack propagation energy. By creating compressive residual stress caused by Friction Stir Processing, the stress concentration at the weld nugget decreased. The microstructure of the stir zone included smaller constituent precipitates than those observed in the un-FSP-ed specimen as shown in The agglomerated nanoparticles are suitable sites for nucleation of cracks. The distance between particles is an important factor for the Orowan strengthening mechanism. Piled-up dislocations formed at the agglomerated nanoparticles lead to the high stress creation at the particle sites, easy initiation of micro-cracks and brittle behavior ( During the welding process, there was no challenge with filler wires containing 0.75 and 1.5 vol percent of nanoparticles unless the particles tended to float on the weld pool. By increasing the amount of nanoparticles, the welding speed reduced and difficulty of the welding process increased. Therefore, a significant amount of particles moved toward the surface of the weld pool which could not improve the mechanical properties of the welding zone. Poor wettability of reinforcing particles led to float of the particles. Various techniques were used to increase the wettability of reinforcing ceramic particles in molten metal. Metal coating of reinforcing particles, which modiﬁes their surface tension in the molten metal, is perhaps the most favorable technique for improving the ceramic particle wettability ( Strengthening mechanisms are responsible for the strength enhancement in composites including Orowan strengthening, grain size refinement due to the Hall-Petch effect, creation of dislocations to accommodate thermal expansion mismatch between reinforcement and matrix, the loadbearing effect of the reinforcement and solid solution strengthening ( In comparison with the “Simple weld” specimen, the matrix grain size of the FSP-ed specimens decreased and the area of grain boundaries increased. Grain boundaries served as barriers to dislocation motion. The grain refinement enhances the strength by increasing the strain hardening rate. When the strain hardening rate was increased, the necking initiation was delayed and the tensile properties were improved ( Different thermal expansion coefficients between nanoparticles and aluminum matrix generate thermally induced residual stresses. The presence of dislocations around the reinforcements increased the strength of the welding zone (termed as dislocation strengthening) ( Dislocation density affects strain hardening of the matrix. Strain hardening of the FSP-ed specimens (such as “1.5 + FSP” specimen) is related to the interaction of dislocations and constraints of plastic flow due to the presence of nanoparticles. During the welding zone solidification, the particles were pushed into the solid-liquid interface and trapped and clustered in inter-dendritic zones ( Micro-cracks initiation was greatly influenced by the presence and nature of reinforcing particles. In comparison with “1.5” specimen, higher ductility of “1.5 + FSP” specimen was related to superior quality of matrix-particle bonding ( Strong bonds between particles and the matrix. The small particles are more resistant to cracking. The slip distance decreased. Therefore, the number of piled-up dislocations decreased. Removal of welding defects such as porosity and micro-cracks leads to an improvement in the mechanical properties. The presence of finer inclusions causes an improvement in precipitation strengthening. By considering the “0.75 + FSP” specimen, the strength properties related to the “1.5 + FSP” specimen increased. The matrix became constrained considerably to plastic deformation at higher nano-Al The mechanisms of increasing the hardness in non-heat treatable aluminum alloys (such as the 5083 aluminum alloy) are solid solution hardening, grain refinement strengthening and work hardening ( Because of pore nucleation at Al  Mechanical properties of the welding zone such as hardness and strength were improved significantly using the filler-containing nano-Al By increasing Al Applying FSP to the welding zone led to an improvement in tensile properties. In comparison with the “Simple weld” specimen, maximum improvement of yield strength (29%) and tensile strength (about 17.5%) of the welded parts was attained in the FSP-ed specimen containing nanoparticles in the welding zone (“1.5 + FSP” specimen). The authors would like to thank