It is a fundamental objective to transition towards a low-carbon economy worldwide which is supported by an international legal agreement – the 2015 Paris Agreement. In order to achieve this ambition, there is a need for new and more mineral extraction which is necessary for the technology for this low-carbon transition. These minerals are known as critical minerals and this article examines the role of justice needed in their development. The literature to-date lacks any holistic yet focused examination of the key elements of justice in the development of this industry. This conceptual article makes an original contribution that utilises an interdisciplinary perspective, legal geography, and explores key issues of justice that include distributive, procedural, restorative, recognition and cosmopolitan. The research identifies the key questions that need to be resolved under each element of justice and the unfortunate limited timeframes for action. Critical justice areas include taxation, environmental impact assessments, waste management, social license to operate, and cross-border actions. Resolving these issues will directly address societal issues of inequality and ensure a just transition to a low-carbon economy. Already there is a global race for critical minerals, and justice needs a stronger role in its development based on evidence to-date.Critical minerals have long been crucial for society, but they are now super-critical. Society has always had resource problems and that is why economics remains so important as at its simplest it concerns the management of resources in the most efficient way. Today, however, society is faced with the accepted consequences of climate change and through international legal agreements (for example, The number and definition of critical minerals has changed over time and this will probably remain the case as technological development increases for the demands of a low-carbon society. There is little literature in the area of critical minerals from a non-science perspective but the non-science issues have been raised very recently in prominent journals such as This article aims to explore from a conceptual perspective and comparative perspective the core justice aspects of critical mineral development and extraction. It will examine the issue from an interdisciplinary perspective utilising legal, economic and business taxation perspectives to deliver on what the key challenges for achieving justice in terms of critical minerals are. This is of vital importance considering their increased use for the development of a low-carbon economies. The underlying focus here is to ensure that the transition to a low-carbon economy happens in a ‘just’ way ( In order to ascertain what are the key justice challenges for critical mineral development and extraction this paper first looks briefly at the critical minerals industry ( As stated earlier the critical minerals industry has been around for some time but it is really that the increased demand for them which has arisen due to the low-carbon energy transition which is responsible for their return to prominence once again. The US already had commissioned a first report on their strategy for critical minerals due to the clean energy technology back in 2010 ( The 1973 report discussed the importance of minerals and stated there were three questions to ask: “ The second part of what critical minerals are is what is included in this critical minerals industry (CRM). This paper does not intend to go into depth on what is included within the critical minerals industry but more aims to present an overview and then consequently discuss how and if justice has been considered as a part of this. Nevertheless, in terms of the CRM, this paper takes a broad definition and includes elements and metals, energy mineral resources, and supply chain products – by utilising the term CRM, it is recognised the industry involves the raw material product, i.e. the modified mineral or element. The number of minerals that are classed as critical (according to the definition provided earlier – i.e. that critical refers to the importance to the clean energy economy and at risk of supply disruption) is increasing and a clear example of this is in the EU which classifies them as critical raw materials (CRMs). The EU stated in 2011 that there were 14 CRMs ( A review research study that analysed the number of critical minerals identified by reports from across the world held that the following were the most critical minerals: Rare earth elements (REE), Platinum Group Metals (PGMs), Indium, Tungsten, Germanium, Cobalt, Niobium, Tantalum, Gallium, Antimony, Bismuth, Thallium, and Magnesium ( It is no surprise that there are a range of different values places on the Critical Minerals Industry. Indeed few reports seem willing to place a value on this growing industry and they all agree it is growing and will grow near exponentially ( The mining sector declined over the period 2011–2015 however it has rebounded since then ( It is important to remember that the critical minerals sector is part of the mining sector which the UN has stated clearly is crucial to meet the UN Sustainable Development Goals ( There is other literature that has aimed to review some considerations of justice but actual references to justice within the text are rare There has however been a growth in literature on critical minerals over the last few years and this will increase. But to-date this increase in the literature has not assessed issues of justice for this sector. The justice that needs research is for critical minerals development and this needs to reflect their role in the transition to a low-carbon economy. As stated by It seems strange to ask such a question of why justice is needed. However, it is clear that in the context of the development of critical minerals that question needs to be asked. An example of why, is the significantly documented issue is the child labour issues surrounding cobalt extraction in the Democratic Republic of Congo (Heffron 2018). One of the reasons that law developed in terms of the extractive industries was on repeated issues of safety failure back in the early 1800s when coal began to be mined commercially across the industrial world ( A key reason for justice is to ensure fairness and equality in society, in essence resolve inequalities. Economics since the 2007–2009 financial crisis has started to engage on this issue in a significant way ( Considering the broad role that critical minerals play in the development of the low-carbon economy that the majority of countries have signed up to achieve via the Paris COP21 Agreement it is necessary to have a broad view of justice that can encapsulate this global industry that has global impacts. In this context there is a need to incorporate elements of climate, environmental and energy justice and these can be united together in terms of having a just transition to a low-carbon economy. This can be best expressed through the The benefit of utilising the      There is motivation to utilise the energy justice framework as this will ensure that policy-making moves a country towards a just transition to a low-carbon economy. In this section utilising the Distributive justice is one of the three cornerstones of justice. There is a need to ensure there is a fair distribution of resources in society. As stated earlier in The core issue for distributive justice is taxation. There is a need to know where the revenue from the critical minerals is going and how is it distributed. Recent scholarship has concluded that distributive justice should be recognized as the cornerstone of tax law, i.e. as the “ The reality however of revenue distribution from a resource that is extracted is difficult to calculate because it is a complex operation and then there is a global market for the price of the resource, hence and too often the revenue sharing arrangements for a project are completed in the majority of projects in a case-by-case basis, despite the existence of taxation legislation. There are however, actions on this issue, through the initiative the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative ( There is further global action also from an OECD led initiative which seeks to reform issues around taxation of energy and resource extraction ( Procedural justice focuses specifically on the legal process of taking a project through from start to finish of planning and construction to operation and to end-use, and do all stakeholders have a legitimate opportunity to be involved (or represented) at these different stages. There are of course many issues here in terms of finance and taxation which are mentioned in the elements of justice here. The key issue for the development of critical mineral industry in procedural justice is the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process each country has at a national level. This is the legal process a project developer has to go through in three phases and at an international, national and local level:    There have been two recent cases where energy projects, coal, have failed to pass the EIA process and these were in Australia and Kenya. A key reason for the failure in both countries was that the EIAs lacked completeness in terms of data provision, the poor assessment of the social and environmental impacts from the existing data and the projects’ positive economic contributions were overestimated ( Of significance, is that the legislation around EIAs is changing periodically and this is for two main reasons, the first is that once it changes, i.e. is improved in one country, other countries follow. The reason why this happens is that increased requirements in the EIA process reduce the risk profile of the project for all stakeholders. The second reason for change is that data capture methods are increasing so different types of environmental impact as well as socio-economic impact of a project can now be measured. EIAs are becoming more and more stringent and this is documented in the literature, it will be increasingly hard for energy projects, including critical minerals, to pass this process. There is additional support for EIA legislation through international law through an international agreement the ( Restorative justice concerns how if there is an injustice in the energy sector it should be rectified ( Of importance across the world as critical minerals are developed is that these sites of extraction are not abandoned. The energy sector already has a well-documented history of abandoned energy sites which then become environmental problems ( The EIA process needs to include the ‘restorative cost’ and plans in the EIS that is prepared and which involves multiple stakeholder consultations. As was previously the case, just satisfying the local community at the outset of the project is not sufficient, and the project operator needs to work with the local community for the duration of the project operation. This has been formalised into a Social-License-to-Operate (SLO) agreement and in some countries is recognised in legislation ( This is a clear restorative cost and is in essence the decommissioning or waste management operational cost. This is a major area of weakness and needs to be rectified in national and international law and policy ( One tool that is already in use in some countries are forms of an Energy Financial Reserve Obligation (EFRO) which can be referred to as a clean-up obligations and/or environmental bonds. In the US, under the Federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) 1997 (and in Australis it's the Financial Assurance under the Environmental Protection Act 1994.), energy companies are required to remediate the lands where mining activity has occurred. However, many companies were allowed to self-bond and therefore when they went bankrupt there was still no finance available for meeting reclamation obligations ( The EFRO now has become legislation in more than several countries and it is already causing an impact on the value of an energy asset as it requires an operator to place an estimated amount of money that will pay for the decommissioning of the energy infrastructure and site into a neutral bank account; this is to avoid the scenario where the State has to pay should the operator go bankrupt or sell on the asset to a company without the financial capacity to pay for a clean-up. Recognition justice is about whether rights of different groups are recognised as development happens. In particular, recognition justice in the energy sector has focused on the effect of energy developments and activities on indigenous communities ( These issues arise repeatedly as a result of energy projects and most recently, one legal case concerned directly this issue where the foreign company abused its position, polluted sacred places and committed other serious crimes - In recognising the rights of indigenous communities it is important that new legal structures strengthen their voice and in that context it is welcome that legal agreements around a In addition, in there is a broadening of the term recognition justice, as many advocate it is not only indigenous communities that deserve recognition for their rights but many disadvantaged communities do, as in essence this is where the issue of societal inequality rises. For example, The issue of human rights and business is a fast-growing area of research and practice in law ( In the context of critical minerals development, the link to cosmopolitan justice where it is based on the core premise that we are all citizens of the world is clear. There is a global effect to our actions, and as identified in There is a growing recognition of this issue and as will be outlined below, this has to be realised and accounted for as the critical minerals extractive industry develops. There are several recent clear examples where there is a growing interest in taking legal action as a result of cross border or overseas effects. A first clear example, though not related to critical minerals is in coal where in 2019 in Australia a Judge stated in a decision that a coal mine should not receive permission to open due to the effects of the carbon dioxide that would be produced in other places in the world – Indeed, disputes are on the rise in the mining sector and increasingly it concerns some issue that is international in nature ( There are other examples of cross border actions which can affect the critical minerals industry and these relate to the aforementioned EIAs, Equator Principles and Tax initiatives mentioned under the The third part of the JUST framework is ‘Space’ which covers a range of issues listed below which follow key literature in geography around space ( the location, i.e. where the ‘events’ are happening; whether the action is happening at a local, national and international level; the interlinks, i.e. is it part of a global supply chain, and what are the characteristics of this; and the stakeholders involved and their activities, i.e. a multinational company utilising tax services for example. It is of vital importance that the critical minerals industry is considered as a global industry. Actions that happen at a local level in terms of mining operations are all influenced by what happens at a national and international level. International taxation practice for example guides the taxation of the critical mineral been extracted which in turn influences how the scale, length and operational design of the extraction project. In essence actions in one part of the world influence another. This can be demonstrated clearly in As a result of this there are multiple issues that get raised at local, national and international level. One of these is to explore the flow of finance around that global supply chain. The Further, it is important to consider then where the profits from the mining sector and as a result where profits from the critical minerals sector will end up. This will generally be in bank accounts offshore that belong to a collection of technology companies and mining companies via the services of professional firms who assist in this process. Indeed, the IGF-OECD initiative representing circa 60 countries released three reports on the aggressive tax avoidance by multi-national firms in the mining sector ( Time brings into transition timelines such 2030, 2040, 2050, 2080 etc. and also ‘speed’ of the energy transition, i.e. is it happening fast enough?; which many say it is not ( The Paris Agreement while it does not specifically bind a country to meeting a goal in 2030, it does require them to produce a clear pathway of how it will achieve these goals. Some countries have been taking progressive action in meeting 2030 goals – such as the UK phasing out the use of coal by 2025 ( In thinking of how to achieve for example, 2030 climate and energy goals, a country has to establish new law on how to achieve this energy transition. There is no common solution as countries have control over their own energy resources (a right of a nation in international law ( Timelines are of vital importance to the transition to a low-carbon economy and in particular from a legal perspective. Law needs to be in place that can deliver on climate and energy goals for 2030, 2040 and 2050. In different countries the formulation of law can take different lengths of time for example, from one to five years, and that is not even to question whether that law is effective. The essence of the issue here is that in order to achieve a 2030 energy or policy goal that will deliver a transition to a low-carbon economy the law needs to be changed, reformed etc. at least a reasonable length of time before that – one would need to think before 2022 at the latest to achieve 2030 goals. A key reason why this is necessary is to ensure that there is a stable legal structure around the activity, in this case critical mineral development. This legal stability (or what can be referred to as Therefore, for critical minerals to be developed in a just way, there is a need for legislative development that (1) covers all issues around extraction, production and export and (2) ensures that the latter legislative development complies with and adapts to (such as adapting to the demand for critical minerals as a result of these international agreements) goals of the Paris Agreement at national levels and international energy and climate targets. The critical minerals industry is growing and already at a fast pace. This paper examines the underexplored role of justice in the development of this industry. As societies move towards being low-carbon it is necessary that the societal problem of inequality is addressed and that there is a ‘just’ transition to a low-carbon economy. This research here addresses these issues and from a conceptual basis using key elements of justice – distributive, procedural, restorative, recognition and cosmopolitan – utilising a JUST framework approach from the interdisciplinary area of legal geography. Future research can utilise this framework in forthcoming projects such as for example, the planned uranium mine project (Greenland Mineral Ltd.'s Kuannersuit/Kvanefjeld Rare Earth-Uranium Project, Greenland). The aim of this interdisciplinary approach is to facilitate a more practical focus from the conceptual analysis and hence the paper explores from a practical perspective what are the key issues under each element of justice that need to be addressed for the critical minerals industry. In order to ensure a role for justice in the development of the critical minerals industry there is a need at international, national and local level to address problems on taxation, environmental impact assessments, waste management, social license to operate, and cross-border actions and cooperation. And these issues are time-sensitive, as in order to achieve energy and climate goals that will deliver a low-carbon economy by 2030 or even 2040 or 2050, legal action needs to happen now. Given the current state of the world due to COVID-19 and the resulting economic crisis, there is a need for society to ensure a more equal distribution of resources. This should in particular happen in terms of critical minerals, and the revenue should be more equally shared across the business value and supply chains for these resources. Technology companies from the developed world should not be making what economists refer to as super-normal profits when vital components for their technology are being sourced with minimal cost and limited transaction costs, i.e. taxes, for acquiring the resource. Indeed, as recent scholarship on taxation by two leading international economists states, research should identify multiplicity of options for a fairer future and they advocate for Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 