Influence of wet oxidation on the surface area and the porosity of lignites was investigated using five different Turkish lignites. Lignite samples were oxidised in aqueous medium in a 1l Parr autoclave at 423K under 1.5MPa partial pressure of oxygen for 60min. Some physical properties such as surface area, bulk density, apparent density, mean pore radius, and porosity of the original and oxidised lignite samples were determined. For this purpose, BET and mercury intrusion porosimetry techniques were performed. In order to examine the effects of oxidation on the functional groups, FT-IR technique was applied for both original and oxidised lignite samples. On the other hand, some inorganic constituents were eliminated from the samples as a result of in situ formation of sulphuric acid from oxidation of sulphur compounds. The changes taken place in the physical properties were studied considering chemical compositions of the samples and the extent of the interaction between the samples and oxygen.The pore structure of coals and chars includes miscellaneous pores in size, namely from big cavities to small pores that even helium cannot fill at ambient temperature The pore size distribution of coal is closely related to the rank of coal. The pores of coal with carbon content below 75% (daf), consist mainly of macropores. On the other hand, micropores are extensively found in the coals having carbon content in the range of 85–91% (daf) When coal is exposed to oxidative atmosphere, oxygen is integrated with the coal matrix by physical and chemical means, covering the surface of coal, and filling existing apertures in the coal structure. Some functional groups such as carboxyl, hydroxyl, carbonyl are formed regarding oxidation, affecting pore structure and surface characteristics. The extent of the chemisorption depends on the rank of coal, particle size, petrographic composition, surface area, pore size distribution, the severity of the oxidising conditions, etc. As a result of oxidation, important changes take place in coal properties In this study, some Turkish lignite samples were oxidised in aqueous medium with dissolved oxygen, and effects of oxidation on the pore structure characteristics and the surface area were investigated. In the experiments, five different Turkish lignite samples (from Agacli, Bolluca, Tavsanli, Malkara, and Yenikoy deposits) were used. The proximate and ultimate analyses were performed according to ASTM standards and their results are given in Oxidation of the lignite samples was carried out in a 1 Surface area measurements were carried out using a Flowsorb 2300 BET system using helium and nitrogen gases, and liquid nitrogen. Prior the measurements, degas treatment was applied to the samples at 473 The results of the mercury intrusion porosimetry measurements of the original and oxidised lignite samples are given in When pore structures were considered, it was determined that the total porosity of Agacli lignite sample, having minimum carbon and hydrogen contents and maximum oxygen content, consisted only of macropores. On the other hand, this youngest lignite sample having large pores and cavities had the least porosity (10.3%). However, after treatment with dissolved oxygen, 10% of its total porosity consisted of newly forming mesopores. Consequently, total porosity also increased to 23.4%. This fact indicated that, oxidation accompanying heat treatment led to severe collapsing of the pore structure of this young lignite sample, changing pore structure characteristics completely. Consequently, the total porosity of this lignite sample increased as a result of the formation of new mesopores. Likewise, the mesopores of the other young lignite sample Bolluca increased as a result of oxidation. However, in case of older lignite samples, these findings changed entirely. After oxidation, the mesopores almost transformed into macropores in Yenikoy lignite sample. Consequently, the total porosity decreased from 27.2 to 20.9%. The highest mesopore content was determined in Tavsanli lignite sample with the maximum fixed carbon content. Since Tavsanli lignite sample had the lowest mean pore radius, these two results were in good agreement with each other. In spite of the highest mesopore content, its total porosity was not as high as expected. This fact may be explained by high mineral matter content of this sample. Malkara lignite sample was determined as having the lowest bulk density. This showed that the structure of Malkara lignite sample was highly porous. The result of its total porosity confirmed this statement. Its total porosity reached to 39.3%. Bulk density and apparent density generally decreased after oxidation, except for Malkara lignite sample, which had the highest porosity among the samples. The mean pore radius of the oxidised lignite samples was lower than that of the original lignite samples. This indicate that pore structure of the lignite samples were extremely sensitive to oxidation. Ultimate analysis results of the oxidised lignite samples are shown in Ash removals varied between 14.2 and 39.4%. The extraction of some acid soluble finely disseminated components from the samples might play an important role in the decrease of the pore radius of the oxidised lignite samples. Since acidic conditions caused mineral matter removal to a certain extent, some new pores might appear in the oxidised lignite samples. In this connection, removal of the mineral species increased the porosity, and oxygen uptake on the organic matrix reduced the porosity. Formation of new pores and plugging them with oxygen might establish a dynamic equilibrium. In order to determine the extent of the interaction between oxygen and the chemical structure of the lignite samples, FT-IR spectra of the original and the oxidised lignite samples were compared. These spectra implied that all the lignite samples were affected by oxidation to some extent. However, the differences in the chemical structures related to oxidation were in different proportions. Namely, the difference in the spectra of the original and oxidised forms of Agacli, Bolluca and Tavsanli lignite samples were not so distinct. However, for Malkara and Yenikoy lignite samples, this difference became much apparent. It can be seen from Comparison of the FT-IR spectra of the original and the oxidised Malkara lignite samples revealed a different situation that the band of the mineral matter became apparently concentrated after oxidation. Basing on this, it can be said that severe decomposition took place in the organic matrix of Malkara lignite sample. Therefore, concentration of the mineral matter increased relatively. In fact, only 78.3% of the calorific value of the Malkara lignite sample could be recovered after treatment. The absorbances of the C–O and CO bands so increased that it was very easy to see the effect of the oxidation on the organic structure of this lignite sample. Likewise, decrease in the absorbance of the C–H bands can be attributed to the consumption of the constituents during oxidation. Consequently, a sharp increase in the O–H bands occurred. On comparing Pores of the lignite samples were plugged with oxygen under pressure by physical means. Moreover, formation of the oxygen bearing functional groups on the surfaces of the lignite samples caused chemical filling of the pores. On the other hand, owing to the effect of temperature, oxygen that combined with the organic matrix may be desorpted in the form of CO and CO Decrease in the results of the coal recoveries due to ash removal was accompanied by the decomposition of the organic coal matrix as a result of oxidation. Coals may show some weight gain due to incorporation of oxygen. However, this is soon replaced by progressive weight losses as some of the chemisorbed oxygen leaves the coal with carbon and hydrogen (mainly in the form of carbon oxides and water). In a cyclical process this is replaced by newly sorbed oxygen that is subsequently similarly eliminated. Losses of carbon and hydrogen contents due to oxygen uptake, and collapse of the organic matrix caused further reduces in the coal recovery results. The relation between carbon contents of the original and oxidised lignite samples and bulk densities are illustrated in Surface areas of the original and oxidised lignite samples are given in Treatment of lignites by dissolved oxygen in aqueous medium at 423