This study investigates binder distribution in wet granulation and focuses on the nucleation zone, which is the area where the liquid binder and powder surface come into contact and form the initial nuclei. An equipment independent parameter, dimensionless spray flux Ψ
                     a, is defined to characterise the most important process parameters in the nucleation process: solution flowrate, powder flux, and binder drop size.
                  Ex-granulator experiments are used to study the relationship between dimensionless spray flux, process variables and the coverage of binder fluid on the powder surface. Lactose monohydrate powder on a variable speed riffler passed under a flat spray once only. Water and 7% HPC solution at two spray pressures were used as binders. Experiments with red dye and image analysis demonstrate that changes in dimensionless spray flux correlate with a measurable difference in powder surface coverage. Nucleation experiments show that spray flux controls the size and shape of the nuclei size distribution. At low Ψ
                     a, the system operates in the drop controlled regime, where one drop forms one nucleus and the nuclei size distribution is narrow. At higher Ψ
                     a, the powder surface cakes creating a broader size distribution. For controlled nucleation with the narrowest possible size distribution, it is recommended that the dimensionless spray flux be less than 0.1 to be in the drop-controlled regime.Granulation is the process of agglomerating fine powdery materials using a liquid binder to give larger granules. This can be achieved in a range of different processing equipment including drums, pans, fluid beds and high shear mixers. It is an important process in a range of industries including agricultural chemicals, pharmaceuticals, mineral processing, food and detergents. Granulation is an example of particle design. We adjust formulation properties (properties of the feed powder and liquid binder) and process parameters to give granules with controlled attributes, particularly granule size distribution and porosity. Modern research in wet granulation aims to quantify these effects so that granulation continues to move from an art to quantitative engineering. Wet granulation is complex. Many phenomena occur simultaneously in the granulator, which will influence the granule attributes. We divide these into three groups Granule nucleation and binder distribution Granule consolidation and growth Granule attrition and breakage Recently, Iveson and Litster An understanding of binder dispersion is a crucial step towards controlling granule properties. The degree of binder dispersion indicates the quality of the mixing between the powder and the binder fluid, and is reflected directly in the nuclei and product size distribution Many variables affecting binder dispersion and nucleation have already been identified. Several authors Large spray angles and high nozzles both increase the area of the bed exposed to the binder spray. Several workers stated that as the nozzle height increased, the average granule size decreased An attempt to describe the nucleation zone conditions across equipment scales has been made by Tardos et al. In this work, we investigate binder distribution and focus on the nucleation zone, which is the area where the liquid binder and powder surface first come into contact and form the initial nuclei. A dimensionless spray flux is defined as an equipment-independent parameter to characterise the nucleation process. Ex-granulator nucleation experiments are used to study the effect of process parameters on the nuclei size distribution. Consider the process of nucleation in the spray zone of a granulator as shown in Ideal nucleation conditions occur when one drop produces one nucleus granule (drop controlled nucleation). Therefore, to able to predict conditions for good nucleation, we need to study: The kinetics of drop penetration, largely controlled by formulation properties. The flux of drops onto the bed surface, controlled largely by process parameters. This paper considers the second of these constraints. Consider a spray nozzle with a volumetric spray rate flowrate Each droplet landing on the powder surface covers a certain projected area. We will assume that the area covered by each drop is equal to the cross-sectional area of the spherical drop. Therefore, the area covered by each drop is given by: The total projected area of drops produced by the nozzle per unit time is: This area of droplets is distributed over some spray area Each drop hitting the powder surface will leave a footprint as it wets the powder. For As Ex-granulator nucleation studies are a very useful way to test this theoretical analysis. In these studies, a powder bed is passed once only through the spray zone at a well-defined speed. Thus, we can “freeze” the granulation process immediately after the nucleation step and study it separately from growth, consolidation and breakage. If a flat spray is used, perpendicular to the direction of powder flow, then the powder flux through the spray zone is simply given by: Note that low Lactose monohydrate (Foremost farms, WI, USA ) was prepared by screening over a 150-μm screen and discarding the +150 μm material. This allowed complete separation of granules (+180 μm) from the unwet powder (−150 μm) during sieve size analysis. See Two different binders were used: water and a 7 wt.% hydroxy propyl cellulose (HPC) solution. The HPC solution was prepared by slowly dissolving 70 g of HPC in 930 g of cold USP water. The solution was left to stir overnight covered in foil to minimise evaporation. Liquid properties were measured the following day. A Brookfield DV-III programmable rheometer was used to measure the viscosity using a SC-18 spindle. Surface tension was measured using a Krüs K122 CMC surface tensiometer with the Wilhelmy plate attachment. Red dye (McCormick red food colouring) was added to the binder for some experiments to assist visibility of the binder on the powder surface. Nucleation studies were performed using the rotating table of a Quantachrome spinning riffler (SBR-3) to pass a bed of powder under a spray zone with known velocity. The spinning riffler consisted of an octagonal-shaped rotating table designed to take eight trapezoidal shaped trays. A schematic diagram showing equipment set-up and tray dimensions is shown in A single flat spray nozzle (Spraying Systems, tip 650017) was positioned above the centre of the rotating trays and the flat spray was perpendicular to the direction of powder motion. The nozzle was 90 mm above the powder bed surface, so that the width of the fan at the powder surface was approximately equal to the tray width to minimise overspray. A 5-l pressure pot was used to vary the liquid spray rate and the drop size distribution (increasing pressure results in an increased flowrate and decreased drop size). Drop size distributions were measured at the Spray Systems Laboratory in Chicago using a Malvern ST1800. The drop size distribution was measured 90 mm from the nozzle tip at five points across the spray fan and averaged (see For each experiment two trays were filled with powder and placed opposite each other on the rotating table. This ensured constant rotation speed by balancing the table and gave replicate samples for analysis. About 200 g of lactose was gently poured into the tray and the surface levelled with a spatula to give loosely packed bed of powder as close as possible to that expected inside an agitative granulator. The spray nozzle was turned on and a scoop was held beneath the nozzle to prevent the spray falling on the powder bed. The riffler was started and after allowing 20 s for the nozzle spray to reach a steady flow, the scoop was quickly removed to allow each of the two trays one pass only under the spray nozzle. The scoop was then replaced to prevent further spray onto the powder beds. After spraying, each tray of powder was dried, undisturbed, overnight in an oven set at 60°C and ambient humidity. The next day, samples were rehumidified (60% relative humidity using a magnesium chloride solution) to avoid static electricity problems and then sieved for 1 min using a standard sieve series (2, 1, 0.7, 0.5, 0.355, 0.25, 0.18 mm). This analysis gives between 0.5 and 5 g of nuclei granules with the unwet powder reporting to the pan. The experiments were repeated with a small quantity (5 ml/l) of red dye added to the binders to allow the actual powder surface coverage to be measured analytically using image analysis. Pictures of the powder bed surface were taken at 11 points on each tray as soon as possible after spraying. Image analysis (Leica Q500MC Qwin image analysis software), using the hue–saturation–intensity colour space was used to calculate the fraction of the image area covered by red dye. The final fraction coverage result is the average of all 22 results on both trays. Thus, two key types of results were collected: Red dye powder surface coverage measurements. Nuclei granule size distributions. A summary of the experiments is given in In order to validate the spray flux approach, experiments to measure the surface coverage of the powder using red dye were performed. The powder surface coverage will be proportional to The relationship between Scatter of the data at low spray flux is partly due to distortion of the white light reflected from the lactose powder surface, which gave false high readings to the coverage measurements. Surface coverage measurements for the three sprays do not coincide exactly at the same For the HPC solution, the measured coverage is higher than the water sprays at low In summary, these experiments have shown that changes in dimensionless spray flux correlate with a measurable difference in powder surface coverage. Differences in the powder coverage–spray flux relationship for the three sprays are probably due to non-uniformities in the spray pattern and variations in drop behaviour on the powder surface. The lactose nucleation experiments studied the effect of powder velocity, spray droplet size and fluid type on nuclei size distribution. The conditions used were identical to the surface coverage measurement experiments. Visual inspection using a microscope confirmed that the pan contained only feed lactose crystals and no granules. All granules formed were greater than 180 μm, as the feed was pre-screened to −150 μm. The granules were generally irregular in shape with rough surfaces. The smallest granules were roughly spherical. Granules a little larger in size were sometimes doughnut-shaped with a crater in the middle where the drop partly penetrated the powder surface before splashing out (see  The nuclei size distributions for the three nozzle/fluid combinations at the highest powder velocity (where the nuclei size distribution best reflects the drop size distribution) are shown in These results all qualitatively support the nucleation regime theory. To quantitatively test the theory, the dimensionless spray flux  Note that the curves for the three sprays do not exactly coincide. Small differences in the drop size distribution and level of spray development mean that for a certain fluid and nozzle combination, slightly different values of are needed to produce the same powder surface coverage. Plotting fraction agglomerates against measured powder surface coverage values obtained in This an exciting result as it shows that the nuclei distribution is dominated by the fluid coverage on the powder surface. For surface coverage less than 0.2, the number of agglomerates is very low and the system is in a drop-controlled regime where one drop makes one nuclei. As the surface coverage increases above 0.2, the fraction agglomerates rises sharply and the width of the nuclei distribution increases accordingly. The value of Dimensionless spray flux is a useful tool for design, operation and scale-up of granulation. It provides a quantitative method to describe and set liquid distribution conditions independently of equipment scale and design. However, dimensionless spray flux only describes the process parameters that determine the flux of drops onto the powder surface during nucleation. The wetting kinetics and drop penetration time, both determined by the formulation properties, must also be favourable to remain in the drop controlled regime. An equipment-independent parameter, dimensionless spray flux, is defined to characterise the most important process parameters in the nucleation process: solution flowrate, powder flux, and binder drop size. Experiments with red dye and image analysis demonstrate that changes in dimensionless spray flux correlate with a measurable difference in powder surface coverage. Size analysis shows that spray flux controls the size and shape of the nuclei size distribution. At low Thanks to Maria Cruanes, Larry Rosen, and Udit Batra of Merck and Co. for their assistance during the project. This project was funded by an Australian Research Council grant, International Fine Particles Research Institute, and by Merck and Co.