Although the mill systems are only auxiliary elements in pulverized fuel boilers, their impact on the correct operation of the boiler is considerable. Through modernization, it is possible to achieve improvement in the operation of the mill system to obtain an optimal particle size distribution PSD. Many modernizations are connected with the need to meet NOx emission limits. Another criterion, particularly important due to the increased share of renewable energy sources in power systems, is the need to increase the flexibility of the power plant operation. Important issues are preventing the deposition of pulverized fuel in pipelines and to reduce the wear of the grinding system components. Coal mills can also be used for reducing harmful emissions from the boiler. Appropriate modernization can not only decrease the sulfur content in the pulverized fuel, and thus the SO2 emissions, but also the emissions of arsenic and mercury. An important objective of modernization of the grinding systems is to equalize fuel and air streams to individual burners, which is needed to ensure the required NOx emissions and combustibles content in ash.Although the mill systems are only auxiliary elements in PF boilers, their impact on the correct operation of the boiler is considerable. The output of the pulverizers determines the range of maximum boiler loads possible, while the characteristics of powdered fuel largely determine the combustion process and fly ash properties. The dynamic properties of the mill affect the possible rate of change in the load of the power unit. Due to the significant share of milling costs in the total unit operating costs, the unit energy cost for grinding and airflow, as well as the wear of milling elements, is also important. The basic task of mills in the power industry is of course grinding fuels; however, the mills are also used for grinding mineral sorbents, mainly limestone. Through modernization, it is possible to achieve improvement in the operation of the mill system to obtain an optimal particle size distribution PSD, determined due to the criterion adopted Switching fuel from coal to biomass (replacement or co-firing) can also be a serious challenge for existing milling systems. With a relatively low biomass share, the problem is to meet the optimal conditions to achieve the maximum boiler power using existing coal mills. In the case of large shares or total replacement, existing mills should be supplemented with an additional biomass grinding system. The problem of biomass comminution is further discussed in The coal-milling product is pulverized fuel PF containing grains with a different size (polydisperse product). The degree of comminution can be defined using the Joining the points given by the sieve analysis and plotted onto the After relevant transformations of the formulae presented above, a relation is obtained As a result, the PSD governed by the RRSB law can be determined unequivocally by giving the material retained amount on two sieves. The polydispersity number It results from if the polydispersity number is if the polydispersity number is which means that a higher furnace loss will arise if the boiler is fired with PF with a lower value of The comminution number There is a need to describe the relationship between the capacity of the mill and the properties of the milled material. Appropriate methods are based on various comminution theories, the most common of which are Rittinger’s The commonly used method to evaluate the grindability of coal in medium speed pulverizers is the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) Broad dissemination of biomass burning in PF boilers caused the search for other indicators better reflecting the comminution of such materials There are also other tests, such as CMT (Clausthaler Mahlbarkeitstest By the term “quality of pulverized coal” is understood its fineness (cumulative percentage retained The problem of optimizing the quality of the pulverized coal has long been the subject of research because of its importance for the operating costs of the power unit. This resulted in a variety of recommendations Based on the measurements carried out and the actual periods between overhauls of mills of the boiler under investigation, which were determined during the operation, a correlation was found to determine the abrasive wear rate of the elements of ring-ball mills with a nominal output of 33 t/h (type MKM 33). The following function was determined for this particular set of data:  SiO The optimization described in Ref. For installations with other types of pulverizers, the general form of the algorithm (made in the form of the MS Excel spreadsheet) remains the same. However, functions derived for MKM33 mills have to be replaced with other resulting from respective research. Further development of the described method should allow the automation of settings of blades in static classifiers of pulverizers or rotational speed in dynamic ones. It can be included in online monitoring of the boiler thermo-flow parameters, in a similar way to that presented in Ref. The optimization results depend not only on PSD, but also on other parameters of influence. The diagrams in Taking into account significant share of maintenance cost in the total cost, economic optimization allows to choose the option of replacing parts that are susceptible to wear by choosing for example between coal piping made of cast ductile iron, carbon steel, and ceramic lined elements. The type of fuel is another important impact parameter. Even hard (bituminous) coal has many varieties with different petrography, especially when comparing coals from the To optimize the performance of milling systems in PF boilers, various software and control tools can also be used It was John Anderson, chief engineer of power plants at the Wisconsin Electric Power Company who introduced pulverized coal firing in power stations 1. High speed pulverizers Beater mills Fan mills - The grinding is performed by means of hammers rotating quickly in a chamber lined with wear-resistant lining. The hammers hit the ground material, crushing it against the lining. Further comminution is achieved by attrition of the particles against each other. Fan mills are designed in the form of a centrifugal fan and therefore do not need a separate mill fan. Mills of this kind are commonly used for pulverizing lignite and similar fuels. In Poland, they are also used for grinding hard coal for hot water boilers. 2. Medium speed pulverizers (compression mills) Ball-ring mills ( Roller-bowl mills (truncated cone rollers) ( Both types are used in Polish power plants for grinding high-volatile hard coal. Various companies offer other types of medium-speed pulverizers: Vertical spindle roller mill (toroidal rollers) Vertical spindle roller mill (cylindrical rollers) Roller mills (pendulum rollers) The maximum capacity of such pulverizers reaches 250 Mg/h. 3. Low-speed pulverizers Tube ball (drum) mill This type of coal mill consists of a rotating tube (diameter 2-4 m, length 3-8 m) filled with 30–60 mm cast alloy balls. The drum is filled with balls to its 20%–35% of volume. In the past, most tube-ball mills had a single inlet and outlet, but now both ends are used to feed the raw material and also to remove the powdered product. As the tube rotates, the balls are lifted by rotation and fall on the coal, compressing and pulverizing it ( Seeking to improve the operation of tube ball mills, a new type of milling element called DOERING Cylpebs is proposed The tube ball mills are good for grinding very hard materials HGI < 30 (e.g., anthracite, pet coke) which are not combusted in Poland. They are mainly installed in indirect systems, where fuel is pulverized and stored in a PF bunker. Because storage of PF can create a risk of fire or even explosion, appropriate monitoring, and prevention measures should be taken, particularly by milling high-volatile coal. An advantage is that the fuel is metered to the burner as required. The pulverizer can be stopped (e.g., for maintenance) independent of firing the burners. For grinding high-volatile (e.g., Polish) hard coal, both medium and high-speed mills may be used. For boilers with an annual operating time longer than 4000 h/a the most profitable are medium speed compression mills, mainly because of a relatively long period between overhauls and acceptable specific energy consumption (power consumed by the mill per Mg of coal ground including the consumption of the mill fan). For boilers with a low annual time of use under 4000 h/a (typical of hot-water PF boilers installed in heating plants), fan mills are more economical, with relatively low CAPEX and energy consumption about two times lower than for medium speed mills (no mill fan is needed) There is also a separate type of mills producing very fine coal powder, called micronizing mills. Micronization The pulverizers can be installed in direct or indirect grinding systems. In the direct systems, the pulverized fuel (PF) is ground and blown directly into the burners. The problem is that the pulverizer must operate all the time during coal combustion. Therefore, Polish milling systems are designed using The medium-speed pulverizers have to be fitted with an external fan. Depending on its location, the systems with under- or overpressure in the grinding chamber may arise. In pressurized systems ( In suction type systems ( In modern steam generators fired with hard coal, the pressurized systems are a standard. However, in general, these are the systems in which there is no separate fan of the mill, a pressure is generated in the primary (cold) air fan situated upstream of the air preheater. The pressure rise in this system must be significantly higher, and the air preheater must be designed for operation with a big pressure difference between the air and flue gas. The air ducts must also be designed for high-pressure operation. This idea can also be used to modernize older pressurized systems to reduce the energy consumption of the fans. The production capacity of the pulverizer is related to the characteristics of the crushed fuel and its fineness. The changes in relation to the basic (nominal) capacity are described by the equation:     The The An important element of a mill is its classifier. There are two types of these devices: static ( A common feature of various structures of dynamic classifiers is a rotating element, generating an additional inertial force, improving the conditions of separation. Dynamic classifiers can achieve more efficient classification and are able to achieve more accurate particle size control, resulting in higher uniformity number An interesting comparison of mills feeding the same boiler is presented in Ref. It should also be noted that mills with rotating classifiers can produce very fine PF, but at the cost of reducing maximum output and increasing consumption of energy and wear of milling elements. Experiences proved that by combustion of high-volatile hard coal, the very fine milling is not necessary (sometimes may even be harmful). Therefore, broader dissemination of dynamic classifiers is observed in power plants burning low-volatile fuels or a large variety of fuels. Reduction of NOx emissions is realized by means of air staging or air and fuel staging that creates in the furnace the fuel rich and lean zones, leading to decrease the combustion efficiency and increase of losses due to unburned combustibles in slag and fly ash. It can be prevented, among other things by increasing the fineness of the coal. Sometimes it is necessary to modernize the milling system in order to differentiate the concentrations of pulverized fuel in selected burners (VCM – Section 4.3.3.2). Production of finer PF leads to decreasing the mill performance and to worsening of its dynamic properties. Therefore, the scope of necessary modernization expands on measures to prevent these phenomena. Another side effect of finer milling is increased wear of the grinding elements. To compensate for this effect, various technologies are used, such as cladding, surface hardening or ceramic composite elements The majority of hard coals combusted in the Polish power sector are coals of high Before the introduction of low-NOx combustion systems relatively coarse pulverized coal was used ( To achieve the first of these ranges in compression mills proved sufficient the new generation of static classifiers redesigned and of increased volume, which is produced in Poland for all types and sizes of mills In order to ensure higher efficiency of ball-ring mills and ensure their stable operation at low power unit loads, it is necessary to increase the speed of the transporting-drying medium on the path between the milling unit and the gravitational separation zone of the mill. The aforementioned effect can be obtained by implementation of new nozzle rings, which enable more efficient transport of the pulverized material from under the grinding unit to the gravitational separation zone. In the elutriation zone thicker particles are returned under the balls to improve the milling effect. The system of adjusting the flow resistance of the rotating nozzle ring, proposed by FPM SA, allows for limitation of excessive material overflow to pyrites chamber. Another solution in this area for HP, RP, and RS/RPS Mills is described in Ref. In comparison to the compression mills, fan mills for hard coal, especially those with higher performance, produce PF with worse parameters: milling is more coarse, and the number of polydispersity is lower (  PF gas mixture is directed through pulverized fuel inlet to the classifier. The coarse particles are separated from the main flow due to decrease in mixture velocity, caused by extension of the flow cross section area. Additionally material classification occurs also due to change in flow direction on adjustable guide vanes. The position of the blades allows for milling quality control. Rejected particles fall down to reject return duct, which leads back to the milling chamber. In order to avoid negative influence of excessive mill ventilation on boiler operation, for high mill capacities, the internal recirculation system is introduced. Part of the transportation-drying medium is returned to the milling chamber through reject return/internal recirculation duct. The amount of recirculated gas is adjusted by recirculation damper position, which narrows or widens the flow cross-section. Similar design is also used in the mill MWk-9 ( The measurements showed the possibility to achieve In Ref. In fan mills generally exists the possibility of using the mixture of air and flue gas as a drying medium. It is an advantageous tool to reduce NOx-emissions by means of decreasing the oxygen concentration in the combustion zone. To further reduce the O partly recirculation of the relatively cold mixture of coal dust and gas from the outlet of the pulverizer on its inlet, replacing (at least partially) the hot air through relatively cold flue gas from the outlet of the boiler, control of the rotational speed of the wheel to reduce the ventilation at low load, injection of water to the mill, and adaptation of the milling system to the operation with low ventilation and increased temperature of the drying medium. Other interesting information about modernization of classifiers in MPS and Atrita pulverizers is presented in Ref. The fineness of the milling product and the capacity of the pulverizer are strictly connected. With increased fineness grows the overall circulation rate of coal in the mill, coal retention time and the flow resistance. As a result, the maximum mill capacity decreases and the rate modernization of grinding elements, using of a nozzle-ring integrated with the bowl, and increasing the rotational speed of the mill. The analysis It has to be mentioned that the number of balls is increased during the mill operation. For example, the initial ten balls, after lowering the diameter below some value (due to wear), is complemented with the 11 If the existing pulverizer is equipped with 6 or 7 balls, increasing of its capacity is also possible by means of replacing the ball-ring system with the bowl and roller milling device. The milling costs per Mg of fuel in both systems are similar. However, with the same dimensions of the milling systems, the capacity of the roller system is about 15%–20% higher. Another advantage is the shorter renovation time, which is about 7–14 days for the ring-ball system, while for the roller mill, only 3–7 days. In addition, hardfacing and re-profiling of grinding components are much easier for roller milling systems. During the modernization of milling plant with compression mills, detailed analysis requires the selection of cross sections of nozzle-rings at the inlet of the drying agent to the mill, in order to minimize the amount of coal removed from the grinding chamber. The preferred solution is a rotating nozzle ring integrated with the bowl. This ring equalizes air distribution pattern at the periphery of the grinding chamber, which allows increasing the capacity of the grinding system without fear of excessive loss of fuel from the mill. The rotational speed of the vertical spindle mill affects the operating conditions of the grinding unit. At high rotational speeds, the grinding unit operates at high flow of the material in the radial direction and low layers of the material under the grinding elements If the rotational speed is too low, the material flow will decrease significantly. The thickness of the material layer under grinding elements will exceed the maximal height for which the particles are drawn under the grinding elements, causing excessive buildup of the material in front of the grinding elements. The material outflow from the bowl (or the bottom ring) is not supported by grinding elements movement, which results in higher flow resistance and uneven loading of the nozzle ring. These factors cause a significant decrease in mill efficiency. The study   The optimum of Tests carried out for some industrial mills have proven that the change of grinding unit rotational speed strongly influences mill capacity. Therefore, by changing the gear ratio of the mill, both milling capacity and dynamic properties of the mill can be improved. Keeping the proper velocity of the air-coal mixture in pipelines connecting mills and burners is an important measure preventing pulverized fuel settling. If the ventilation of pulverizers is lowered significantly, it may be necessary to diminish the diameter of pipes. The problem of milled material settling in pipelines of complicated geometry is still not completely solved. Experience to date After reaching a certain limit of flow rate, the deposition of pulverized coal is eliminated, but the excessive increase in velocity causes a sharp increase in the intensity of erosion and transport costs. The installation should be designed so that despite relatively low flow velocity the dust settling and flow blocking has not occurred. The characteristic parameter governing this phenomenon is the Froude-number  On the The system of various concentration of fuel and air mixture (VCM) is based on the differentiation of fuel concentration at various burner levels. In some Polish boilers with ball-ring mills, the classifier was modernized using the introduction of a separation ring ( In another way, pipelines for the burners supplying boilers with MKM33 mills are modernized ( Such a system is used in 225 MW If individual burners are supplied with different amounts of fuel and air, in each of them there will be a different air-fuel ratio. The result is an increase in UBC in burners with too high fuel flow and excessive NOx emissions in burners with a too high excess of air. Therefore, the flows in individual fuel lines should be properly balanced. The standard assumption is that the fuel balance between the lines should not exceed ±10%. To improve the balancing of solid particles on the individual lines of the coal-air mixture, the flow resistance in the various pipelines should be adjusted. It can be obtained by means the same concentration of PF in the transporting air, the same pressure drop for all lines belonging to the given pulverizer, and the same diameters of pipes. Respective methods of calculation are presented in Ref. Various systems based on a number of techniques including laser, white light, acoustic emission, microwave, electrostatic are used to measure and control the flow of pulverized material in the fuel lines connecting mills and burners. An extensive analysis of this problem was done in Ref. The most common method used by the power industry to balance the coal lines are static orifices used to restrict the flow of air-fuel mixture in individual pipes. They are designed as plate style and Venturi style devices made of wear resistant materials, including ceramics. There are also orifice assemblies that can be replaced during boiler operation. The renovated pulverizer must be out of service and the barrier valves closed Significant progress in controlling the flow of dust-air mixtures, are adjustable orifice valves such as EUcoalvalve™ ( A system of Total AFR™ Management was developed by EUtech An interesting relationship between the rotational speed of the dynamic classifier and the equalization of flows in the lines through which the mill feeds 5 burners is shown in The Spanish company INERCO Substitution system: Balanced air and fuel supply for all configurations of operated mills, which avoids problems resulting from the unavailability of the mill (“burner gaps”) that produce increased NOx and UBC. This also allows for increased flexibility in mill maintenance. Addition system: Minimum NOx generation by the achievement of maximum fuel stratification and coal residence time, without increasing mill production and, therefore, without worsening coal fineness, which minimizes CO emissions and UBC. This technology is a cost-effective solution for reducing NOx with increased flexibility of the boiler and grinding system. Boiler efficiency can be increased by reducing the excess air in the furnace. In boilers with SNCR, the FLEXICOM-LNB facilitates the adjustment of the reagent injection to the “temperature window” of reactions. At high load of the boiler, the “Addition” enables lowering of reheat steam temperatures to avoid reheat attemperation. The gradient of the boiler power increase depends on the increase of the fuel stream supplied to the furnace through the burners. The power increase signal is transmitted to the fuel feeders before the mills, after which the additional fuel stream begins to flow to the mills, To improve the dynamic properties of installations with compression mills, the following can be done: replacement of existing mills with larger capacity mills, using the static or dynamic classifiers as an active control element, temporary increase or lowering in ventilation (air flow), increasing the load force of grinding elements to increase capacity, and increasing the rotational speed of the mill to increase capacity. The required improvement in the dynamic properties of the grinding system can be achieved by replacing existing mills with mills that can produce more powdered fuel per unit of time. An example of such a upgrading is replacement of ball-ring mills with bowl and roller mills. Mills of this kind are characterized with significantly larger capacity than ball-ring mills of similar size. With a comparable size of both types of mill, many elements of the existing device do not need to be replaced. CAPEX (as well as renovation time) for such modernization is comparable to the expenses for a major overhaul of the mill, and if it was carried out during this renovation, it could be treated as practically costless. In addition to much higher throughput, bowl and roller mills also ensure better milling quality compared to the ring-ball system with similar capacity. The main factor determining the time of transition between two points of operation of the mill is the accumulated mass of fuel in it. Improving the fineness of product multiplies the ratio of internal recirculation and increases the mass accumulated, influencing the dynamic properties of the furnace negatively. With finer grinding, the coal components that are heavier and more difficult to grind are retained in the mill. According to Ref. Similar effect as changing the PF fineness can be obtained with temporary changes in ventilation (air flow). Increasing ventilation reduces the mass of coal accumulated in the mill and thus increases the mass of fuel burned. The methods described in Sections A relatively easy (and also inexpensive) way to increase milling capacity and milling quality is to increase the pressure (load force) of balls or rollers. In mills with spring pressure of grinding elements, this requires the introduction of hydraulic loading of rollers or balls. The pressure of hydraulic loading installation can be adjusted in range of 20–60 bar, which corresponds to pressure of grinding elements equal to 0.15–0.80 N/mm However, it should be mentioned that the increased pressure leads to increased wear of elements. Therefore, this method should only be used for short periods of load increase. On the other hand, insufficient load force leads to unstable milling bed formation, low milling quality, and rough movement of rollers on the bowl surface The issue of increasing the rotational speed of the mill was discussed in An additional element of many pulverizers is a pyrite scraper, eliminating the minerals of high density and generally hard (like pyrite) from the mill. This device increases the lifetime of the grinding system, and in the case of FeS Studies of various coals showed that there is a correlation between sulfur bound in pyrite and arsenic as well as mercury ( A specialized mineral removal device for roller-bowl mills presented in Ref. An additional benefit is the decreased grinding energy required to reduce the mineral matter to a fine powder that can pass through the classifier to the boiler. According to Ref. Elimination of hard and erosive substances extends the periods between milling installation maintenance. Technology can be implemented in roller-bowl, ring-ball, and tube ball mills. Desander can be turned off and on while the mill is running, in the event of damage normal mill operation is still possible. The reject material in the form of separated mineral matter is characterized by less than 5% coal content and can be utilized as material for ceramic and construction industry.