Interaction of Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans and Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans with soluble uranium(VI) was studied. Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans aerobic cultures showed considerable decrement of uranium in solution when pH was set to 4 with KOH. This condition stabilized polythionates produced as a result of the oxidative sulphur metabolism and favoured uranium indirect reduction. Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans was able to use uranium(VI) as an alternative final acceptor in the respiratory chain when elemental sulphur was the electron donor. Bacterial growth was also supported by this process obtaining bacterial yields comparable with those when iron(III) was the final acceptor.Uranium is a heavy metal, primarily associated with nuclear energy processes and acidic mine drainage; with several harmful effects to human ( Interest in removing the metal from soil and water in a cost- efficient way increased with isolation and characterization of uranium tolerant microorganisms, capable of coupling uranium reduction and growth. Several bioremediation processes have been described until now, including biosorption by bacteria, fungi and algae ( According to uranium chemistry, soluble uranium(VI) can be reduced to uranium(IV), which precipitates at low redox potential values, forming UO2. Microbially mediated reduction followed by precipitation has also been described and proposed as an in situ alternative for bioremediation of uranium. These processes, mediated by Sulphate and Iron Reducing Bacteria (SRB, IRB) take place under  Considering that   When culture reached late log phase, necessary volume of a concentrated uranyl nitrate (UO A 3  A 4 Uranium(VI) mass in solution was quantified by colorimetric Arsenazo III method ( Total uranium mass in solids (sulphur and cells) was quantified by gamma spectrometry, as previously described (  Tendency of decrement in the total uranium mass in solution was observed when reducing compounds increased (dashed line arrows in Redox potencial reached lower values in cultures at pH 4 than values in cultures at pH 2 (inner graph, In a second experience, quantification of uranium in solids revealed presence of this metal in the + When pH was set to 2.5, uranium first accumulated in the + When  Higher global yields values will indicate that more biomass was supported per mol of substrate, i.e. the substrate was more efficiently used. Bacterial yields were calculated ( Detailed analysis on When pH value of the experiment is 4 ( pH range of study was set below uranium solubility limits, so pH dependent precipitation is discarded. Decreasing in redox potential coincided with increasing of reducing compounds (inner graph  We compared the anaerobic reduction of uranium(VI) with the well studied process or iron(III) reduction by Global yields obtained when uranium(VI) and iron(III) were the final acceptors were comparable, as they were in the same order of magnitude. Global yields were observed to change as a function of the electrochemical reduction potentials of the final acceptor redox couple: oxygen gave higher bacterial yields ( In contrast of what was reported with chromium(VI) ( Indirect reduction of uranium(VI) by 