It has been shown that diethylenetriamine (DETA)-functionalized magnetic carriers are able to complex copper ions from dilute streams. Complexometric titration using a copper selective electrode indicates the complexation of 0.52 μmol of Cu2+ per 50 mg of magnetic carriers. This loading capacity is equivalent to the removal of 100 ppm of copper ions from a 1-liter solution by 3 g of magnetic carriers. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results confirm the presence of Cu2p bands, indicating the loading of copper ions. A shift of the nitrogen N1s bands to higher binding energies confirms the involvement of secondary amine and amide nitrogen atoms from DETA-functionalized carriers in copper complexation.Magnetic carriers offer a new perspective in wastewater treatment in two major ways. First, they offer selectivity for targeted metal ions, which is of great importance in the separation of metals from complex solutions ( The ligand diethylenetriamine (DETA) is known to show excellent selectivity for the base metals Zn(II), Cu(II), and Ni(II), against Fe(III), Ca(II), Mg(II), and Al(III), present in mining effluents ( The removal of copper ions from dilute aqueous solutions by complexation with DETA-terminated magnetic carriers, forming chelates, is studied. A diagram of the preparation of magnetic carriers through functionalization of nanosized magnetic particles is presented in Characterization of the chelates by complexometric titration using a copper selective electrode, will assess the copper loading capacity of the magnetic carriers. Further, characterization by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) will give insight into the possible coordination geometry adopted by the chelates. The preparation of DETA-terminated magnetic carriers is described elsewhere ( All titration experiments are done at room temperature using a TitraLab titration laboratory (Radiometer Analytical, Copenhagen, Denmark) composed of a TIM90 Titration Manager, an ABU91 Autoburette high-precision burette station, and a SAM90 Sample Station. The samples are stirred using the overhead stirrer part of the SAM90. Titrations are performed using a copper selective electrode (Radiometer ISE25Cu) along with a calomel reference electrode (Radiometer REF401). Titrations are run in the continuous inflexion point IP mode, without predose and with a minimum/maximum speed fixed at 2%/min of a 10-ml burette. A smoothing parameter of eight is used in the calculation of inflexion points. Titrations of bare iron oxide (maghemite) surfaces are performed on oven dried (350°C) maghemite particles to model surfactant-free surfaces. XPS spectra are obtained on an ESCALAB 220i-XL Fisons Instruments with an Al monochromatic source at a take-off angle of 90° to the sample. The instrument is calibrated against the pure Ag  From This average volume corresponds to 0.52 μmol of Cu XPS spectra of the magnetic carriers with (a) and without (b) copper, are shown in The XPS results in Inspection of the N This work confirms the complexation of copper ions by the DETA-functionalized magnetic (maghemite) carriers prepared by The help from Mr. Georges Veilleux in obtaining the XPS spectra, is gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) first through a Strategic grant and subsequently through a Collaborative Research and Development grant sponsored by Inco, Falconbridge, Cominco and Noranda.