Single phase nano-crystalline K0.5Na0.5NbO3 (KNN) ceramic has been successfully synthesized by the mechanochemical activation method. High energy ball milling was carried out on a mixture of K2CO3, Na2CO3 and Nb2O5 powders for different times (6h, 12h, 24h and 32h). The 32h mechanically activated sample was calcined at 550°C for 2h. This is about 300°C lower as compared with conventional solid state reaction. X-ray diffraction pattern of calcined sample revealed single phase perovskites structure with orthorhombic phase. Particle size of these powders was measured using DLS. The Morphology of mixture powder, before and after calcination, was examined under FEG-SEM. Dielectric, ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties were evaluated and compared with reported results using other competing techniques.Perovskite Pb(Zr,Ti)O The conventional synthesis of KNN ceramic requires high-temperature and long time for calcination, which leads to the volatilization of the alkali metal and consequent, non-stoichiometric and undesirable secondary phase formation. Furthermore, this method results in products with large and inhomogeneous particle sizes, due to particle coarsening that deteriorates the piezoelectric response Mechanochemical activation involves high energy ball milling of a mixture of powders and is accompanied by chemical reaction. Initially this technique was used for synthesizing metallic alloys and inter-metallic compounds In this paper, we report synthesis of single phase nanocrystalline KNN ceramic, using mechanochemical activation, in an effort to decrease the calcination temperature as compared to conventional solid state reaction. The morphology, structure and electrical properties of the ceramics so obtained are presented. The starting materials used in this study were K Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed, in flowing air, at a heating rate of 10  The XRD pattern of mixture of powders, mechanically activated for different times, is shown in  Particle size distribution of KNN powders, mechanically activated for 32 FEG-SEM micrograph of samples, mixture of K The HR-TEM micrograph of KNN powders, mechanically activated for 32 The temperature dependence of dielectric constant (  In this work, we also measured the piezoelectric coefficient of KNN ceramic prepared by the mechanochemical activation method. The piezoelectric constant ( Single phase nano-crystalline KNN ceramic powders have been successfully synthesized by the mechanochemical activation method. This method is attractive for commercial applications as huge amount of nano-material can be produced, in a relatively short time, as compared to chemical routes. Single phase KNN ceramic has been obtained by high energy ball milling for 32 We express our thanks to SAIF, IIT-Bombay and Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India, for FEG-SEM and HR-TEM studies.