Dissolved air flotation (DAF) process has been widely used for many applications including waste water treatment. For the purpose of heavy-metal removal, this study will implement several commercial polymers as collectors in DAF process. The investigated polymers are polyvinyl alcohol, polyethylene glycol, and chitosan which will be used as separation-enhancing agents in the air flotation process. On the other hand, the studied heavy metals are zinc chloride, lead(II) nitrate, manganese(II) chloride, nickel chloride, and cadmium chloride. Different parameters have been studied in this work such as the concentration and types of collectors, modification of polyvinyl alcohol, and the type and concentration of the heavy metals.
                  The results showed that chitosan was generally better than the other investigated polymers in affecting the removal of Cd (29%), Ni (27%), Mn (31%), and Pb (29%). The removal of Zn was not consistently high for any type of polymers, although it was less with chitosan. Polyvinyl alcohol was modified by carboxylation and the modified polymers were found to be more effective at removing the smaller metals such as Ni (30%), and Zn (28%), and less effective at removing the larger metals Cd (24%) and Pb (29%) at heavy concentration of 250ppm.Wastewater treatment represents one of the main processes for recycling water that compensates the shortage of water in many areas in the world. The facilities that treat wastewater are not enough at the present, only about 10% of the wastewater generated is treated and the remaining is disposed into our water bodies Several methods were implemented for the removal of heavy metals from wastewater such as filtration, membranes, disinfection, settling, coagulation, flocculation and flotation The flotation method relies on differences in the surface properties of different particles, specifically wetting characteristics, to separate one particle type from another. The hydrophobic particles escape from water by attaching to air bubbles, which rise to the surface, and are captured in the froth phase. The froth is removed and the concentrate of separated hydrophobic particles is used as is or is sent off for further processing There are several types of flotation methods such as ion flotation, electrolytic flotation, precipitate flotation, and dissolved air flotation (DAF) Collectors are reagents that are used in the DAF process to selectively adsorb onto the surfaces of particles. Collectors can be either chemisorbed or physically adsorbed Many workers DAF was implemented by other workers to treat surface and seawater Ferric chloride is the most used coagulant. However, Bunker et al. (1) It increases the production of inorganic sludge which results in increasing sludge handling costs and a significant amount of remaining ashes after sludge incineration. (2) It causes an increase in the salinity of the effluent due to the release of counter ions by the flocculants. Polymers are effective over a wider pH range than inorganic coagulants. They can be applied at lower doses, and produce smaller volumes of more concentrated, rapidly settling flocculants. The flocculants formed from the use of a properly selected polymer will be more resistant to shear, resulting in less carryover and a cleaner effluent. Polymers have been utilized in coagulation/flocculation processes for water purification for almost four decades Lower coagulant dose requirements, A smaller volume of sludge, A smaller increase in the ionic load of the treated water, A reduced level of aluminum in treated water, Cost savings of up to 25–30%. Synthetic organic polymers used in water treatment are most commonly sold in the form of dry powders or inverse emulsion and are categorized into two major types (1) Low to mid molecular weight cationic coagulants based on nonquaternised dimethylamine (polyamines) and diallyldimethyl ammonium chlorides (DADMACs); (2) Very high molecular weight polyacrylamides (PAMs) flocculants, which may be anionic, cationic or nonionic. In this research, different polymers will be investigated as collectors to remove heavy metals from wastewater using DAF process. These polymers are polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), modified PVA, polyethylene glycol (PEG), and chitosan. The heavy metal salts that were used in this work are CdCl Seven different polymers have been used as collectors in DAF process. These polymers are: Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA) with two molar masses of 9000 and 13,000 Modified PVA derived through carboxylation of PVA 9000 and PVA 13,000 Polyethylene glycol (PEG) with two molar masses of 10,000 and 35,000 Chitosan. The reason for using these polymers is that they have oxygen hetero-atoms capable of binding to different metal ions effectively. Furthermore, these polymers are cheap and available. Each heavy metal salt was prepared at the following concentrations: 20, 50, 100, 150, 200 and 250 PVA 9000 or PVA13000 with a mass of 1.0 The The batch DAF cell that was used in this study is shown in The DAF cell consists of six 1-l beakers equipped with a plastic drainage valve at the bottom of each one. A movable mixer module paddle drive system and an injection system were mounted on top of the Plexiglas beakers. An 8-l stainless steel pressure vessel was used for water saturation. Recycled water was injected into the jars and was controlled by a solenoid valve connected to injection tubes fitted with a 1.2 After setting the mixing speed, saturated air was injected for10 This section will present the results and discussions of the treatment of five different heavy metal salt solutions using seven polymeric collectors in a DAF process. The last section will present results of the application of DAF process to treat Red Sea water as an alternative process for pretreatment processes. In order to choose the suitable concentration of the collectors through DAF process, different experiments were carried out for PbCl The results of the experimental work conducted on the treatment of waste water containing different heavy metals using DAF will be covered in this section at a recycle ratio of 10% and a speed of stirring of 300  The pretreatment of waste water containing ZnCl The removal of MnCl The situation is different for the removal of Pb(NO In this section, the percentage removal results for all single heavy metals at a specific concentration of 150 For the second type of polymers, PEG, the results are shown in the By summarizing the previous removal results for each collector, it is apparent that there are variable removal values for each heavy metal. For the PVA collector, the removal of CdCl DAF was implemented in this research to treat Red Sea water in order to test its validity as a pretreatment method in desalination process. Modified PVA (MPVA) was conducted via a carboxylation reaction of a fraction of the hydroxyl groups of PVA with chloroacetic acid in DMF in the presence of a catalytic amount of KI. The base K MPVA 9000 and MPVA 13000 were implemented in the DAF process to treat waste water containing heavy metals and to compare their results with previous non-modified polymers (PVA 9000 and PVA 13000). Finally, the removal of Pb using both MPVA 9000 and MPVA 13000 as collectors is shown in Treatment of waste water containing different heavy metals was investigated in this study using DAF process. Seven different polymeric collectors were used in DAF process including polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with two molar mass of 9000 and 13000, polyethylene glycol (PEG) with two molar mass of 10000 and 35000, modified MPVA 9000 and MPVA 13000, and chitosan. The results showed that the separation of various heavy metals using the DAF technique was affected by the type of polymer chosen as a carrier. The removal of Zn was not consistently higher for any type of polymers, although it was less with chitosan than with other polymers. On the other hand, chitosan was found to be generally better than the other investigated polymers in affecting the removal of the heavy metals Cd, Pb, Ni, Fe, and Mn at the studied concentrations (50–250 All used polymers are commercially available at relatively low prices, making them attractive choices for their implementation as carriers in the air flotation process. In particular, chitosan can be used for the removal of Cd and Pb, which cause serious environmental problems. Finally, the DAF process was implemented to treat Red Sea water as a practical applications using the investigated polymeric collectors and the results showed that PEG 35000 gave the highest removal among the studied collectors. This project is funded by the, Abdul Hameed Shoman Foundation, Fund for Scientific Research Support, Jordan. Moreover, all experiments were carried out in the laboratories of the colleges of Engineering and Sciences at Al-Hussein Bin Talal University. The authors would like to thank the mentioned institutions for their encouragement and support. Finally, the authors would also like to thank the engineers Niveen Assaf and Rawan Shakour and the chemists Yousef Shanan and Marwan Al-Azzeh for their help in the experimental part.