Existing nano-Mo2C preparation methods suffer from expensive raw materials, subtle operation demands and complex synthesis steps. Herein, both theoretical and experimental studies were performed to develop a more efficient and economical method for nano-Mo2C preparation. Reaction thermodynamics of gas-vapor system of CH4-MoO3-N2 indicates that high-proportion inert gas significantly increases the required carbonization potential (CO/CO2) for Mo2C formation, but surplus carbon produced from methane decomposition can trigger water gas producing reaction and Boudouard reaction to help meet the requirement. Nano-Mo2C was then synthesized by mixing N2-carried MoO3 vapor with CH4 under varying conditions including temperature, gas flowrate and vapor concentration. It is found that MoO3 vapor experienced conversions to monoclinic MoO2 to cubic Mo to hexagonal Mo2C, and all these stages could be finished in as short as about 6 s at 1100 °C with initial molar ratio of CH4 to MoO3 over 3.5. The final products were present as porous plate-like single crystals or chain-like polycrystals, which are determined by initial vapor concentration and gas flowrate. Furtherly, electrocatalytic properties of Mo2C nanocrystals for hydrogen evolution reaction were measured, and the sample with the largest specific surface area and cleaner surface showed competitive performance over reported nano-Mo2C.Molybdenum carbide (Mo With considerable effort, nano-Mo Carbothermal reduction of Mo-precursors is usually achieved through temperature program reduction (TPR). Reducing agents commonly include H In addition to above methods, nano-Mo Overall, existing methods of nano-Mo Equilibrium constants of gas-solid reactions in the temperature range of 800–1200 °C were obtained from the software of HSC 9.0 utilizing Reaction Equations module. For reactions only comprise single gaseous reactant and product, equilibrium partial pressure ratios of gaseous reactant to product such as CO/CO The evaporation rate of MoO The synthesis of Mo Detailed synthesis parameters are listed in Table S1. The temperature for MoO Product phases were identified by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, BRUKER, Advance D8) with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) performed at a scanning rate of 8° 2θ min Surface morphology and structures of synthesis products were investigated by the Focus Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscopes (FIB-SEM, FEI Czech Republic s.r.o., Helios Nanolab G3 UC, 2 kV), and Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM, JEOL, JEM-2100F, 200 kV) along with High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM) and Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED). To prepare the working electrode, 3 mg of as-prepared nano-Mo Electrochemical measurements were operated with an electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, CHI604) using a carbon rod as the counter electrode, and a saturated Hg/Hg Possible reactions in gas-vapor system of CH To further obtain Mo Once ultrafine Mo Obviously, molar ratio of original CH With the guidance of thermodynamics, synthesis experiments were carried out using a double-section heating furnace. The quartz tube inside the furnace has two intake pipes for driving N As a result, formation mechanisms of Mo Precise contents of C and Mo in as-prepared nano-Mo XPS data of Mo 3d spectrum of Mo Morphology and structure of Mo When gas flow rate increased, average residence time for Mo Morphology and structure of intermediate products synthesized from incomplete reactions were also investigated. Sample 1# (MoO Therefore, morphology and structure evolution of Mo Specific surface areas of as-prepared Mo The as-prepared Mo A novel method characterized as reducing‑carbonizing N  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at