In this work, a supramolecular hydrogel formed from N,N′,N″-tris(3-pyridyl)-trimesic amide was reported to serve as the matrix for the growth of biominerals. The organic hydrogel scaffold contains nitrogen heterocyclic ring and amide groups that can bind anions of the mineral (specially here, carbonate ions and phosphate ions) through hydrogen bonding interactions and act as the biomineralization active sites for growing biominerals. Calcium carbonate nucleated on the site of the hydrogel fiber where carbonate ions bonded and left obvious hydrogel fiber prints on the obtained product. Calcium phosphate grew into curved platelike nanostructures along the hydrogel fibrous network. XRD pattern and FT-IR spectra confirmed the formation of minerals on the hydrogel. The results indicate that the hydrogen bonding interaction can provide strong enough binding force for the growth of the minerals on organic scaffolds. Our finding extends the organic scaffolds into biodegradable small molecule hydrogels and also extends the growth centers of the minerals from conventional carboxylate groups binding Ca2+ to amide and pyridyl groups binding PO4
                     3−.Calcium phosphate is one of the most important minerals “processed” by living organisms Trimesic acid (5 The hydrogel was prepared in 2:1:1 EtOH/H Firstly, the hydrogel was prepared in 1:1 water/ethanol (v/v) mixed solvent at a concentration of 0.6 FT-IR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Vector_22 FT-IR spectrophotometer at a resolution of 2 Firstly, the microstructure of the organic supramolecular hydrogel scaffold is illustrated. Supramolecular gel is attracting more and more interests in the past few years, because of its potential application in biology arising from its special biodegradability as compared to polymer gels As we know, in Na In addition to the CaCO XRD measurement confirm that the obtained calcium phosphate was composed of β-Ca In summary, a novel mode of growth sites in the biomineralization has been demonstrated and biomimetic composite of supramolecular hydrogel/nanoplatelike calcium phosphate was obtained. It is different from the conventional organic scaffolds, which binds calcium cation first through carboxylate groups and then phosphate anions via electrostatic interaction. We adopt nitrogen heterocyclic ring and amide as acceptor and donor of hydrogen bonds in organic hydrogel scaffolds to bind mineral anions, which act as the biomineralization active sites for growing calcium phosphate. The results indicate that hydrogen bonding interaction can provide strong enough binding force for the growth centers of minerals on the organic scaffolds. Our finding extends the organic scaffolds into biodegradable small molecule hydrogel and also extends the growth centers of minerals from conventional carboxylate groups binding Ca Financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China Project No. 90606005, No. 20490210, No. 20371026, No. 20571040 is greatly appreciated.