The nature of the hydrothermal reaction between sphalerite and copper solutions was investigated in the range 160–225 °C. Digenite (Cu1.8S) was the main reaction product at 160–212 °C, and chalcocite (Cu2S) at 225 °C. The reaction was characterized by the formation of a compact layer of copper sulfide around the sphalerite nuclei. Final particles retained the size and shape of the original ZnS. Reaction rate followed a parabolic kinetic law. No significant effect of aqueous copper concentration was observed in the range 1–10 g/L. An activation energy of 147 kJ/mol was obtained, indicating kinetic control by solid-state counter diffusion of Cu+ and Zn2+ ions through the copper sulfide layer. A possible electrochemical mechanism is discussed. The removal of zinc from digenite or chalcocite bearing copper concentrates is effective at ∼225 °C, in which a high sphalerite conversion can be achieved in times allowing autoclave processing (∼1 h).Improving “clean” technology in copper pyrometallurgy is expected to solve a number of environmental problems, particularly those associated with the processing of wastes containing hazardous heavy metals. Copper concentrates are usually produced by selective flotation from complex sulfide minerals. Sphalerite is one of the more common impurities in these concentrates. The behavior of zinc during copper smelting has been studied by  The hydrothermal reactions of chalcopyrite have been studied more extensively than those of sphalerite and several patents were already published during the 1950s ( The enrichment of chalcopyrite concentrates has also been studied with the controlled injection of O The objective of the present study is to examine the nature of the reaction of sphalerite with copper ions, as well as the major kinetics dependencies of the process. A significant departure from previous research is the extension of the temperature range to 225 °C. Reaction rates increase dramatically under these conditions, which permits to obtain extensive conversion of sphalerite particles—as large as 50 μm—within a time frame permitted by autoclave processing. Preliminary research on Chilean copper concentrates indicated the possibility of the removal of about 80% Zn by treatment at 225 °C, 1 h, 8 g/L Cu The sphalerite used in this research was taken from a single 4-cm crystal from La Unión (Murcia, Spain). Characterization by X-ray diffraction (XRD), and Scanning Electron Microscopy coupled by Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (SEM/EDS) confirmed a single phase product. The composition determined by Electron Microprobe Analysis (EMPA) was 61.14% Zn, 4.46% Fe and 33.74% S. The samples for autoclave experiments were prepared from the ground crystal by wet sieving. Particle sizes of <25, 25–40, 80–106 and 140–180 μm were used. Experiments were performed in a Teflon-coated stainless steel PARR-4563 stirring reactor with a programmable heating controller. The stirring speed was 800 min The nature of the reaction of sphalerite with copper ions was investigated in the range 160–225 °C. 0.1 g of 25–40 μm sphalerite particles was treated with 100 cm The kinetics of the process was also studied in the range. Experiments were performed in the same way as previously described for large excess Cu  The results obtained by XRD on solid phase composition are shown in However, on increasing the reaction temperature to 225 °C, the stability of digenite decreases under the conditions studied. It is initially formed during the heating process but evolves to chalcocite by 225 °C; first tetragonal chalcocite (Chalcocite-Q) ( The formation of small amounts of covellite during the hydrothermal reaction of sphalerite was also detected in the interval 160–200 °C ( In accordance with the solid phase composition, the expected general stoichiometry for the sphalerite reaction would be:  Considering the reaction stoichiometry and the molar volume of the pure phases (23.2, 25.7 and 27.4 cm SEM measurements of copper sulfide layers obtained at different times showed nonlinear rates. Consequently, kinetic data were treated by the following shrinking core model:  The copper concentration effect was studied at 200 °C, pH 1.3–1.1, This effect is similar to that found by Temperature effect was studied at [Cu The obtained activation energy in the interval 180–225 °C was 147 kJ/mol (35 kcal/mol), a typical value for diffusion in solid state, which confirms this kinetic reaction control for the hydrothermal conversion of the sphalerite. The rate at 160 °C was not considered in the determination of the activation energy, as at this temperature conversion is very slight and, in relative terms, the formation of covellite was of the same magnitude as that of digenite (  On the other hand, the product layer rate constants for sphalerite are much lower than for chalcopyrite at ≤200 °C. For instance, the reported Hydrothermal conversion of the sphalerite to chalcocite or digenite involves cathodic (the reduction of Cu Cu Chalcocite: Digenite: Cu Chalcocite: Digenite: Chalcocite: Digenite:  The reaction of sphalerite with Cu The reaction occurs through a compact layer of copper sulfide surrounding the sphalerite nuclei. Final copper sulfide particles retain the size and shape of the original sphalerite. Reaction rate follows a parabolic kinetic law, indicative of a solid layer diffusion control. The negligible effect of the aqueous copper concentration and the very high activation energy (147 kJ/mol) are consistent with a reaction control by solid state counter diffusion of Cu The removal of sphalerite from digenite or chalcocite bearing copper concentrates is effective at ∼225 °C, in which a high conversion can be achieved in times allowing autoclave processing (∼1 h). The authors wish to thank the Universidad Católica del Norte (Chile) for the financial support of this research in the framework of a Doctorate Program in collaboration with the Universidad de Barcelona (Spain). The support of the “Serveis Científico-Tècnics de la Universidad de Barcelona” and Mrs. E. Vilalta in the characterization studies is also gratefully acknowledged.