The effect of underfeeding on digestion was studied in cows fitted with ruminal cannulas. Four cows in a Latin square design received four diets made up of 60% hay, 30% straw and 10% maize. They were given either 80% or 27% of maintenance energy requirements, with or without urea to compensate for the shortage of rumen degradable N in the rumen. Contrary to the trend observed at higher levels of intake, the decreased intake resulted in a decrease in digestibility of OM (59.1% vs. 53.6%) and fibre. Neither N supply nor the interaction between intake and N supply significantly modified digestibility. The fall in digestibility could not be explained by retention time of particles in the rumen or by a disturbance of feeding behaviour, and in situ measurements did not reveal any impairment of theoretical DM degradability (56.2% vs. 55.0% for high and low intakes, respectively). Ruminal ammonia and non-protein non-ammonia N concentrations, and plasma urea concentration were decreased at low intake and/or low N supply, but there was no evidence that shortage of N compounds for ruminal microbes is responsible for decreased ruminal degradation at low intake. Further research has to be done in order to explain such disturbances in digestibility at very low intake.Decreased feed intake generally results in increased diet digestibility. This is considered to be a consequence of an increase in particle retention time in the rumen, allowing a more complete degradation of feeds by microbes (see for example As retention time does not limit the extent of digestion when decreased intake causes decreased digestibility, it seems likely that microbial activity is somehow impaired at very low intakes, although this has not been demonstrated by in situ degradation measurement. A number of explanations can be proposed. A reduction in numbers and activity of microbes might be implicated. A decrease in protozoa population has been observed, but the amount of protozoa per kg of organic matter intake is not reduced To test the hypothesis of a N shortage effect, cows were submitted to two levels of intake of a low-quality diet, with and without rumen degradable N supply. Feeding behaviour, digestibility and ruminal digestion were determined. Special attention was paid to the fate of N fractions in the rumen. Four Holstein cows, weighing 782±46 kg, in very good body condition, dry and non-pregnant, were used. They were fitted with ruminal cannulas made of polyamide and polyvinyl chloride. Surgery had been performed under general anaesthesia more than 1 year before the experiment. The cows were penned in individual stalls. Four treatments were set and applied to the cows for four successive periods in a Latin square design. Each period lasted 28 days: 22 for adaptation and 6 for measurements. The experiment was carried out according to the recommendations of the Guide to the Care and Use of Experimental Animals The four diets were composed of 60% natural grassland hay, first cut, harvested late and field-cured with rain; 30% wheat straw; and 10% ground maize, with and without urea addition. Diet HL corresponded to a daily delivery for each cow of 4.50 kg hay, 2.25 kg straw and 0.75 kg maize, on a DM basis. On a DM basis, this diet comprised 93.1% organic matter, 6.76% crude protein, 64.6% NDF and 39.3% ADF. It covered on average 80% of energy requirements and 74% of intestinal digestible protein requirements expressed in the French net energy system (UFL) and in the French protein digestible in the intestine (PDI) system Maize and urea were mixed and given at 08:00 h, hay was given at 09:00 h and straw at 16:00 h. This feeding sequence was designed to avoid straw refusals. Intake of each feed was recorded daily by weighing offers and refusals. Water and salt block consumption were recorded (days 2–6). Urine was separated from faeces by a device fitted on the vulva of the cows and directed by a pipe to a bottle containing 500 ml of 10% sulphuric acid. Faeces were collected from day 1 to 6, homogenised, weighed, and an aliquot taken daily for DM determination and then kept for further analyses. Another aliquot was kept frozen. Urine was weighed and an aliquot was kept frozen for N analysis. Another aliquot was diluted with 3 vol. water and then kept frozen for analysis of purine derivatives. Feed samples were composited within each period. The DM content of offered feeds and faeces was determined by drying at 80 °C for 48 h and the ash content was determined by ashing samples at 550 °C for 6 h. Neutral detergent fibre and ADF were determined according to Feeding behaviour was monitored by recording jaw movements using a rubber pear-shaped bag filled with polyurethane foam fitted under the lower jaw. This bag was connected to a portable electronic device fixed on the cow's neck (APEC, INRA, Theix, France). This device converted pneumatic signals into digital data In situ DM disappearance of hay was determined using polyester bags with heat-sealed edges (53 μm pore size, internal dimensions 5×10 cm; Ankom, Fairport, NY). Bags were filled with 3 g of the hay or straw used in the experiment, ground through a 0.8 mm screen. Eighteen bags with hay and three bags with straw were put in the rumen at 09:00 h. Bags with hay were removed in groups of three after 3, 6, 12, 24, 48 and 96 h incubation. Bags with straw were removed after 96 h incubation. After removal, bags were rinsed under tap water and then frozen until the end of the experiment. After defrosting, they were washed in a washing machine and then dried at 80 °C for 48 h for DM determination. The kinetics of hay disappearance were adjusted to the exponential model: On days 4 and 6 at 08:00, 10:00 and 14:00 h, samples of 100 ml of rumen liquid were taken in the ventral sac via the ruminal cannulas using a tube. The pH was immediately measured using a combination electrode, after liquid filtration through cheesecloth. For ammonia determination, 10 ml of liquid was added to 1 ml 5% At 08:00, 10:00 and 14:00 h on day 5, a blood sample was taken from the jugular vein in a heparinised tube. After centrifugation (3000× On day 6 at 14:15 h, the rumen was completely emptied manually, and the contents weighed. A representative sample of 1 kg was dried at 80 °C for 48 h for DM determination then kept for ruminal retention time determination (see below). The rest of the contents were returned to the rumen. Ruminal passage rate of indigestible NDF, taken as internal marker, was determined according to Statistical analysis was performed by analysis of variance with the GLM procedure of The lower intake than allowed for by the design was due to refusals of both straw and hay, which was of very low palatability ( Salt block intake was higher when cows were fed at low intake, probably due to boredom. As a consequence, water intake per kg DM intake was higher at low intake. No effect of N supply was observed for water or salt block intake. The decrease in DM offered resulted in a significant fall in time spent in intensive eating, and a slight increase in idling periods, taken as a searching for food by poorly fed cows ( The decrease in intake resulted in a decrease in DM, OM and fibre digestibility ( Ruminal passage rate of indigestible NDF did not vary with intake. Total and dry ruminal contents, and DM proportion in these contents varied with intake, but the effect of N supply was not significant ( Decreasing intake resulted in an increase in pH ( Decreased intake resulted in decreased digestibility. At levels below maintenance, this effect is frequent when the lowest level of intake is less than 35% of maintenance (this trial and Contrary to the general trend This trial focused on the interaction between underfeeding and N supply to rumen microbes. No effect of N supply given as urea was observed, although the low N diet was theoretically short in rumen degradable N, according to the French PDI system, which predicts insufficient rumen degradable N to maximise microbial N synthesis for the mixture of straw, hay and maize. When rumen ammonia levels are ca. 5 g per 100 ml as in this trial, digestibility is generally impaired This experiment shows that a shortage of N compounds does not explain the decrease in the extent of ruminal degradation. It is surprising that the extent of variation in digestibility is greater than that of rumen degradability. A partial explanation for this could be reduced intestinal digestibility at low intake, but it is more likely that the in situ method does not reproduce all the phenomena occurring in the rumen The implication for animal husbandry is that when animals are underfed, a possible concomitant lowering of diet feed value has to be allowed for. In countries where harsh climatic conditions exist, this problem adds to the low quality of forages and sometimes lack of forage in the dry season. It is thus necessary for animals to have a high capacity of adaptation, mainly through an extensive use of body reserves. The authors thank A. Ollier for his important contribution to data analysis, D. Thomas for animal care and sampling, and D. Bany, G. Sauvage, I. Séraud and M. Tourret for chemical analyses.