Cemented carbides are excellent engineering materials and they are widely used in cutting tools for metal cutting, mining, drilling, etc. Cemented carbide is a ceramic-metallic composite usually consisting of carbide grains, which are the hard phase occupying 70–97 wt% content, and binder, which is the soft phase occupying the rest. The two-phase microstructure unites adequate hardness of carbides with the toughness of the binder. Combinations of different phase compositions and carbide sizes can result in diverse microstructures of the material, which in turn strongly influence its mechanical behaviour, such as its hardness, fracture toughness and strength. Within this context, it is meaningful to investigate the microstructural properties of cemented carbides. In this paper, a cobalt and nickel based cemented tungsten carbide is selected as the study material. A three-dimensional reconstruction method by means of sectional-polishing technology is proposed based on the study of the carbide grade. Statistical quantification of carbide grains for a certain volume is carried out using the advanced 3D materials analysis software AMIRA. The results of the cemented carbides relating to material metallographic preparation, 3D reconstruction procedure and quantification are introduced and presented.Cemented carbides are composite materials in which brittle refractory carbides of the transition metals (e.g., WC, TiC, TaC) are bound together by a soft and ductile metal binder (e.g. Co, Ni, Fe) [ Although microstructural characterization of cemented carbides is a topic extensively addressed in the literature [ The three-dimensional characterization usually includes three basic steps: sequential cross sectioning, 3D volume reconstruction and grain quantification [ This cobalt and nickel based cemented carbide grade has a hardness of 600 HV30, a nominal density of 12.7 g/cm The sample was shaped preliminarily by wire electrical discharge machining (W-EDM). As a result, the starting surface became quite rough and covered by a layer of oxide and re-deposited melted material ( The fine-grinding step was engaged to effectively reduce the traces caused by the previous step. During subsequent polishing, the traces were completely removed, and the intrinsic microstructure could be revealed. In the metallographic processing program each consecutive step normally utilizes the suspensions containing smaller abrasives. However, the fine-polishing step was somewhat optional in this scenario, as a satisfactory high-quality image had been achieved after the polishing step ( In the sequential sectioning, a total of 23 μm was removed, i.e. 0.115 μm is estimated to be removed at each layer in a process repeated 200 times, in accordance to the metallographic processing program for sequential sectioning detailed in The 3D volume reconstruction stage is essential for grain quantification, since the accuracy of the obtained geometrical properties can be strongly influenced by the reconstruction quality, i.e. resolution and contrast of the reconstructed volume. 3D volume reconstruction includes the following functions: voxel size determination, slice alignment, volume crop and segmentation. Prior to 3D volume reconstruction, all the obtained cross-sectional images should be checked and adjusted in terms of its brightness and position, if necessary. A voxel is the smallest unit to construct the studied volume [ The voxel size is obtained: The slice alignment function aims to vertically stack the obtained 200 images along the Once the studied volume is determined, it is necessary to eliminate the binder volume taking into account that the binder is the interference phase for the grain quantification. The effective removal of the binder phase then depends strongly on the segmentation of the binder from the grains. Segmentation is carried out by the banalization of the grey value of each pixel, i.e. each pixel is endowed a new grey value, 0 or 255, according to its position in the defined arrangement. Hence, the grey values should be set to be 0 (black) or 255 (white), representing grains and binder, respectively. For example, if the grey value 115 is defined as the threshold, then the voxels whose grey values are less than or equal to 115 are considered as grains and voxels with values greater than 115 are considered as binder (    In this study, the 3D model of a cobalt/nickel based cemented carbide with the volume of 215 × 10 The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. The authors Shiqi Fang and Luis Llanes declare that they have no conflict of interest. The work leading to this publication was supported by the