Bioleaching of chalcocite mineral was conducted in two stirred reactors at 30°C. Bacteria culture from the Zijin copper mine bio-heap was applied in this test. Leaching test started from pH 1.2 was carried in reactor A, and for reactor B, a start-up pH of 1.5 was used. Results showed that low pH could effectively facilitate copper dissolution and the affected microbial community structure thus inhibited iron dissolution. By using the 16 S rRNA gene clone library technique, bacterial community structure and change in the two reactors was revealed. In the inoculated culture, the dominant bacteria groups were Leptospillium, Acidithiobacillus and Sulfobacillus. While as leaching tests continued, the bacteria community in the two reactors presented different structures. A decrease in the proportion of Leptospillium from 22.2% to 10% and an increase in the proportion of Acidithiobacillus from 31.1% to 86% was detected in reactor A under relative higher redox potential (from 651mV to 705mV) and low pH (pH1.2). While for reactor B, an increase in the proportion of Leptospillium and Acidithiobacillus under relative low redox potential (from 530mV to 631mV) and high pH (pH 1.5–1.6) was observed, each from 22.2% to 59.2% and 31.1% to 40.8% respectively. Leaching experiment data were fitted to the shrinking core model. Diffusion control was found to be more significant at pH 1.2 bioleaching than it was at pH 1.5 bioleaching. These results may help us understand bioleaching behavior of secondary copper sulfide and improve commercial plant operation.Bioleaching techniques are now used in large-scale heap leach operations for the recovery of the metal all over the world ( The reported pyrite content of copper ores from China's first commercial bio-heap plant at the Zijin Copper Mine is up to 5.8% ( For understanding pH affection to the bioleaching of secondary copper sulfide, in this research, chalcocite mineral bioleaching was conducted in two stirred reactors, the leaching pH was started from pH 1.2 to pH 1.5 respectively, microbial community at a different leaching stage in both reactors was studied using a cultivation-independent molecular approach. Dynamic microbial community structure was related to the leaching pH and other leaching parameters. These results may be used to optimize the leaching of iron in the commercial plant. The chalcocite mineral used in this study was hand selected from the Zijinshan Copper Mine (Fujian, China). Chemical analysis of the ore revealed a composition of (mass percent) 72.51% Cu, 4.64% Fe and 20.55% S. The size fraction of the concentrate used was 44–50 The acidophilic mesophile culture was taken from the bioleaching plant of the Zijin Copper Mine and maintained on 9K medium plus pyrite powder for one month. Two sets of 3 At each sample time, 200 Sequences were analyzed using BLAST at the NCBI database ( A model developed from previous research was used in this research ( Where t is the reaction time, For the 9 clone libraries, a total of 443 16 S rRNA gene clones were grouped into only 7 OTUs with a distance level of 2%. The collection curve, which plots the number of sequences screened versus the number of OTUs observed and estimated. Chao1 richness ( In order to understand the dynamics of the microbial populations in the reactors, we determined time profiles, using the percent of clones within the library as a surrogate of relative abundance. The 16 S rDNA inventory revealed that the major bacterial population contained six species: In both reactors, the population change of genus For reactor B, in the initial leaching stage, the increase in the proportion of A shrinking core model was used to determine whether the leaching tests were chemically controlled or diffusion controlled. Copper and iron dissolution data from the two reactors were fitted to the mixed-control rate equation (Eq. In this research, chalcocite mineral bioleaching was carried out at initial pH of 1.2 and 1.5. Microbial community at a different leaching stage in both reactors was studied using the 16 S rRNA gene clone library technique. Previous research noted that as library size increases, both accumulation curves and phenotype richness estimators converge on a stable estimate of the true phenotype richness and species richness can only be compared when accumulation curves have reached an asymptotic maximum ( Leaching experiment results started from different pH showed that bacteria community succession in the two reactors was differed with each other at the beginning of the leaching experiments. At 144 Shrinking core models have been successfully applied to the bioleaching process in the last years ( In the Zijin Copper Bioleaching Plant, the leaching pH is between 1.0 and 0.9 accompanied by a high concentration of iron within the solution. A high concentration of ferrous and ferric ion could reduce the reaction control of the pyrite leaching thus accelerating iron dissolution. The future process modification of the Zijin Copper Bioleaching Plant may focus on the following: an increase in leaching pH to 1.2, reduced iron ion within the solution and maintaining it in a proper range, periodically inoculating sulfur oxidizers into the heap. For further investigation, column leaching of Zinjin secondary copper sulfide ore operated by the conditions listed above is currently being carried out. This work was financially supported by the