We examined the effects of the variation of boron content in Fe–B films on the microstructure and the coercivity of Fe1−x
                     B
                        x
                      (0⩽x⩽0.2) magnetic thin films by means of transmission electron microscopy, auger electron spectroscopy (AES), field emission scanning electron microscope, atomic force microscopy, and Cu Kα X-ray diffraction pattern analysis. Fe–B thin films were fabricated by dc magnetron sputtering. The sputtered Fe–B films with a boron content <13at% were found to have metastable Fe(B) solid solution. However, amorphization took place when the boron content was >13at%. Sputtering pressure was fixed at 1×10−3
                     Torr to prevent oxygen intrusion, which induces a columnar structure in films and eventually deteriorates the soft magnetic properties of the films. Nevertheless, according to the AES depth profile, oxygen and argon atoms were incorporated into all films approximately up to 5at%. While bare Fe film showed a columnar structure, there was no evidence of columnar structure in boron-containing films. Both root mean square roughness and coercivity decreased drastically with the increase in boron content. These results may be due to the evolution of featureless films with smoother surface by amorphization.Recently, magnetostrictive materials have drawn significant interest in sensor and actuator applications. With actuation, the unique non-contact nature makes the magnetostrictive materials particularly attractive for theft detection system or micro-robot application. In most sensor applications, a large magnetostriction needs to be induced at low magnetic field, hence requiring materials that have a combination of large saturation magnetostriction and low saturation field ( Therefore, in an effort to develop a material that can be used for micro-sensors, we examined the effect of boron addition on the crystallinity and magnetic properties (especially coercivity) of Fe Using a standard mechanical-diffusion pump system, Fe In general, a high cooling rate is required for the formation of amorphous phase. In the Fe–B system, however, an alloy of the eutectic composition (Fe    The variation of surface roughness of the films with various boron contents is shown in In sputter deposition, residual stresses in film experience the transition from a compressive stress (by Ar incorporation) to a tensile stress (by oxygen incorporation) as the sputtering pressure increases. Particularly, introduction of oxygen in high-sputtering pressure induces a columnar structure in a film, resulting in the deterioration of the soft magnetic properties Changes in the coercivity of the films with boron content are shown in In Fe The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation [KOSEF 97-0300-1101-5].