The evolution of plate fixation of fracture was accompanied by advances in metallurgy and improvement in understanding of the requirements for successful fracture healing. Locked internal fixation minimizes biologic damage and when used in conjunction with minimally invasive approaches may optimize fracture healing. Some current metal locked plate constructs may actually be too stiff, and various methods including screw modification, plate hole modification, and changes in plate material composition may provide a solution to optimize fracture healing. This paper reviews the evolution of plate design and describes the early clinical experience with the use of carbon fibre reinforced reinforced polyetheretherketone composite plates.Open reduction and internal fixation using plates was popularized by the Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Osteosynthesefragen (AO) group and gained widespread acceptance for the operative fixation of fractures and osteotomies. Their initial plate contained round screw holes and fracture site compression or axial loading was achieved using an external compression device. In 1965 the AO introduced the dynamic compression plate (DCP). The sides of the screw holes in this plate are inclined, and when a screw is inserted eccentrically into the hole, the screw head impacts the angled side causing movement of the plate leading to compression of the fracture. Conventional open reduction and internal fixation usually requires wide surgical exposure to access and directly visualize the fracture. It requires pre-contouring of the plate to match the surface anatomy of the bone. Fixation stability with a conventional non-locked plate relies upon the force of friction between the plate and the bone ( One disadvantage of conventional plate fixation is the damage to the periosteum beneath the plate. This initially produces necrosis beneath the plate and with time results in localized osteopenia The PC-Fix, which was the forerunner of today’s locking plate implants, was designed for fixation of forearm fractures and has small points on the undersurface to limit the plate contact with bone Locking plates use screws that have threads on the screw head that engage matching threads in the plate holes, creating a fixed angle implant. Stability is achieved by the engagement of the locking screws in the plate and does not rely on compression of the plate to the bone as in conventional plate fixation ( Initially, locking screws were designed to be inserted along a set axis in order to properly engage the plate thread locking mechanism. Locking screws inserted off-axis in these systems showed a significant decrease of failure load Metal has long been the foundation for orthopedic implants. Metal implants offer the benefits of high strength, high stiffness, ease of machining, and low cost. Additionally, many metals offer good ductility allowing them to be manually bent or contoured intra-operatively to fit individual fracture sites. The use of stainless steel for surgical applications began in 1926 when Strauss patented 18Cr-8Ni stainless steel that contains 2–4% molybdenum and a very low percentage of carbon, having sufficient corrosion resistance for implantation in the human body The AO group began exploring the use of pure titanium for plate fixation in the late 1960s. Commercially available pure titanium contains varying traces of iron, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon and hydrogen. There are different grades of pure titanium based on the amount of these trace elements, which influence its mechanical properties. In addition to pure titanium, titanium alloys are also used for internal fixation plates. Ti-6Al-4V contains a nominal 6% aluminum and 4% vanadium. The addition of aluminum and vanadium to commercially pure titanium produces an alloy whose mechanical properties are closer to that of cold-worked stainless steel. Ti-6AL-7Nb which is an alloy containing 6% aluminum and 7% niobium was developed as an alternative to Ti-6Al-4V because of concerns that vanadium has demonstrated cytotoxic outcomes when isolated Titanium offers several advantages over stainless steel. Compared to stainless steel, titanium and titanium alloys better match the modulus of elasticity of bone. Titanium has greater superior strength under repeated load stresses, making it capable of withstanding higher strains during internal fixation. It is also considered more biocompatible, with excellent corrosion resistance and chemical inertness. The excellent corrosion resistance of titanium and titanium alloys is due to the formation of an adhesive TiO Advances in metallurgy, including addition of various surface coatings, have been beneficial in improving orthopedic care. However, disadvantages of metal implants include a limited fatigue life, mismatch of modulus of elasticity with bone leading to stress shielding, potential for generation of wear debris, corrosion, and their radiodensity that can preclude accurate radiographic visualization. While stiff metal plates worked well for direct fracture reductions in which the load was shared by bone, they may not be optimal for certain cases of indirect reduction with relative stability in which you want more flexible fixation to stimulate callus formation. A 20% rate of nonunion was reported in a retrospective review of 86 distal femur fractures treated with locked metal plate fixation. Limited callus formation in these cases suggest that mechanical factors may play a role in the failure of fracture healing Several strategies to reduce the stiffness of locked-plate constructs have been proposed. One strategy is that of far cortical locking in which locking screws that engage the far cortex of bone have a reduced mid-shaft diameter to bypass the near cortex, allowing for elastic cantilever bending of the screw shaft within the near cortex Another strategy to improve fracture healing is the concept of a dynamic plate in which the locking holes are elastically suspended within the plate by means of a silicone envelope that controls the amount of permissible axial motion Carbon fibre reinforced epoxy resin plates were initially studied in both animal models and humans in the early 1980s This same group of investigators reported on their use of this semi-rigid plate in 19 more challenging fractures including open fractures and fractures complicated by either infection, nonunion, or comminution By the late 1990s, polyetheretherketone (PEEK) had emerged as the leading high-performance thermoplastic candidate for replacing metal implant components, especially in orthopedics and trauma. PEEK intervertebral spinal cage implants have been in use since 1999. Carbon fibre reinforced polyetheretherketone (CF-PEEK) is a composite material that is composed of carbon fibres within a polymer matrix. This material has very high fatigue strength and is even more flexible than titanium, better matching the modulus of elasticity of bone. CF-PEEK has greater strength and fatigue properties than stainless steel implants. The modulus of elastic of PEEK is approximately 3.5 Another important benefit of PEEK and other carbon fibre reinforced materials is its ability to permit improved radiographic assessment of bone healing post-operatively. The material is radiolucent allowing improved standard radiographic imaging to assess healing. The lack of artifact also permits unhindered CT and MRI imaging Carbofix Orthopaedics (Herzeliya, Israel) initially developed carbon fibre reinforced PEEK (CFR-PEEK) plates for use in the proximal humerus and distal radius, along with a straight plate for use in the diaphysis ( In a multicenter study, 182 patients with proximal humeral fractures were treated with a CFR-PEEK Plate (Diphos H; Lima Corporate, Udine, Italy), and 160 patients were followed clinically and radiographically for 2 years or longer A total of 23 (14%) complications occurred including 2 nonunions (one septic and one aseptic), 13 cases of humeral head necrosis (9 partial and 4 massive), and 8 cases of screw penetration of the humeral head. The investigators concluded that the CFR-PEEK plates proved as reliable as metal plates in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures. They noted the advantages of better visualization of fracture reduction during intraoperative fluoroscopic assessment and easy hardware removal due to the absence of screw-plate cold fusion. In another study twenty-nine patients (mean age, 66 years) with a 3- or 4-part proximal humerus fracture were treated with a CFR-PEEK plate (DiPhos-H; Lima Corporate, Udine, Italy) and followed prospectively In a matched case-control study, the results at 1 year follow-up of 21 patients (mean age, 66.8±9.9 years) with displaced proximal humeral fractures treated with a carbon fibre reinforced PEEK plate (PEEK Power Humeral Fracture Plate; Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) were compared with the results of 21 patients (mean age, 67.4±9.7 years) treated with a conventional titanium locked plating Investigators reported on 40 AO type B and C distal radius fractures treated with a CFR-PEEK volar plate (DiPHOS-RM; Lima Udine, Italy). All fractures healed, with radiographic union at an average of 6 weeks While the early clinical results of CFR-PEEK plates are promising, further clinical research will be required to identify the actual benefits and preferred indications for the use CFR-PEEK implants in fracture repair. Their future use may be especially advantageous for fractures of the distal femur, since certain current plate fixation constructs may be too stiff to promote callus formation There have been many innovations in plate fixation of fractures during the past several decades, all aiming to improve fracture healing and decrease complications. How best to achieve the ideal plate fixation construct remains an unanswered question, in part due to the variability and complexity of individual fractures which each have a unique pattern. Ongoing basic science and clinical research will further assess these innovations as we strive to optimize techniques for plate fixation of fractures. The authors’ institution has received a research grant from Carbofix for a clinical study of their implants. DJH has served as a paid consultant for Invibio, which produces PEEK. The authors of this manuscript express their thanks to the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation for the sponsorship of the publication of this Supplement in Injury.