Phytoextraction has been proposed as an alternative remediation technology for soils polluted with heavy metals or radionuclides, but is generally conceived as too slow working. Enhancing the accumulation of trace pollutants in harvestable plant tissues is a prerequisite for the technology to be practically applicable. The chelating aminopolycarboxylic acid, ethylene diamine tetraacetate (EDTA), has been found to enhance shoot accumulation of heavy metals. However, the use of EDTA in phytoextraction may not be suitable due to its high environmental persistence, which may lead to groundwater contamination. This paper aims to assess whether ethylene diamine disuccinate (EDDS), a biodegradable chelator, can be used for enhanced phytoextraction purposes. A laboratory experiment was conducted to examine mobilisation of Cd, Cu, Cr, Ni, Pb and Zn into the soil solution upon application of EDTA or EDDS. The longevity of the induced mobilisation was monitored for a period of 40 days after application. Estimated effect half lives ranged between 3.8 and 7.5 days for EDDS, depending on the applied dose. The minimum observed effect half life of EDTA was 36 days, while for the highest applied dose no decrease was observed throughout the 40 day period of the mobilisation experiment. Performance of EDTA and EDDS for phytoextraction was evaluated by application to Helianthus annuus. Two other potential chelators, known for their biodegradability in comparison to EDTA, were tested in the plant experiment: nitrilo acetic acid (NTA) and citric acid. Uptake of heavy metals was higher in EDDS-treated pots than in EDTA-treated pots. The effects were still considered insufficiently high to consider efficient remediation. This may be partly due to the choice of timing for application of the soil amendment. Fixing the time of application at an earlier point before harvest may yield better results. NTA and citric acid induced no significant effects on heavy metal uptake.Pollution of soils and sediments with organic and inorganic pollutants has been an unfortunate by-product of industrialisation. In Flanders, Belgium the most recent estimates for polluted sites requiring prioritory clean-up constitute for 21 Phytoremediation is the use of plants for containment, degradation or extraction of xenobiotics from water or soil substrates ( In phytoextraction research, two main strategies can be identified. The first is the use of metal hyperaccumulating species ( Ethylene diamine disuccinate (EDDS) is an APCA that is produced naturally by a number of microorganisms ( The plant species used for the enhanced phytoextraction experiment in this study, is The aim of this paper is to compare the performance of the naturally occurring biodegradable chelator, EDDS, with the recalcitrant synthetic chelator, EDTA, for phytoextraction purposes. The 40 The soil substrate used in our experiments was a dredged sediment derived surface soil, which had been in an oxidised state for several years prior to sample collection. The sediment was collected at the dredged sediment disposal site at Meigem (Belgium), currently in use as a (non-agricultural) grassland. Due to the general state of pollution in Western European waterways, sediments dredged from these waterways contain elevated levels of organic and inorganic pollutants. All soil samples were analysed in triplicate for general soil properties and total metal content ( Pots containing 450 Pots containing 450 In order to determine post-harvest mobility of heavy metals in the pots, the pots were kept moist at 2/3 field capacity and fitted with Rhizon-MOM for soil solution extraction (MOM-type Rhizons; Eijkelkamp Agrisearch Equipment, Giesbeek, the Netherlands). Two weeks and five weeks after harvest, soil solution samples were collected and analysed for levels of heavy metals. In a second, follow-up plant experiment, the kinetics of plant absorption of mobilised metals were assessed by harvesting plants at varying time periods after treatment. Pots were filled with 2.5 Descriptive statistics were performed using the SPSS 11.0 (SPSS Inc.) and Excel (Microsoft Inc.) software packages. Dunnet’s pairwise multiple comparison Observed concentrations of heavy metals in the soil solution, following treatment with EDDS and EDTA are presented in Mobilisation of Zn was initially comparable for both chelators, but decreased over time in EDDS treated pots only. Cu mobilisation by EDDS appeared to be independent of applied dose with induced levels between 130 and 180 Shoot concentrations of Zn, Cu, Cd and Ni after treatment with soil amendments are presented in The average dry weight production per plant was 3.7 Prolonged mobilisation of heavy metals after harvest is highly undesirable as the absence of an actively transpiring crop may result in percolation of mobilised metals. Therefore, the effects induced by soil amendments should be largely gone by the time of harvest or at least attenuate rapidly thereafter. To examine the decrease in metal mobilisation, the soil solution was extracted 14 and 34 days after harvesting the plants. Control values observed in the pots did not differ significantly from those observed in the soil solution experiment (cfr. Section Two weeks after harvest and three weeks after initial soil treatment, the soil solutions of the EDDS-treated pots still contained elevated levels of heavy metals. Zn content varied from 35  Soil solution levels of Cd, Cu, Cr, Ni and Zn were evaluated for a period of 40 days after soil treatment with EDDS or EDTA. Cr was not mobilised by either soil amendment under study. Cu mobilisation by EDDS appeared to be dose independent, with the lowest dose (0.8 Cu mobilisation by EDTA was significantly and substantially lower than was observed for EDDS: at the lowest applied dose, EDTA was able to induce soil solution levels of 18 Distinct differences in mobilisation patterns by both amendments could be observed: Zn was comparable for both substances, Cu was mobilised more by EDDS than by EDTA, Cd and Pb were mobilised more by EDTA than by EDDS and initial mobilisation of Ni was highest for EDDS but was overtaken by EDTA as time progressed. Effect half life is defined as the decrease of heavy metal mobilisation by soil amendments over time. It can be calculated by substituting To solve the equations obtained from the observed soil solution levels, the equation was first log-transformed into Eq.  Ligand effect half life is a crucial parameter when considering the implementation of enhanced phytoextraction procedures. Short living substances such as EDDS can be used to dramatically increase extraction by a standing crop. The induced effect dissipates sufficiently fast to prevent downward motion of mobilised metals, while it endures sufficiently long to enhance phytoextraction. The use of soil amendments in this context requires the maintenance of the following hydrological balances (Eqs. When performed towards the end of the growing season, the crop will exhibit a strong active evapotranspiration. In temperate regions, such as Western Europe, evapotranspiration exceeds climatological precipitation during the summer months. This implies the prevention of downward motion of water and hence the percolation of mobilised metals. The condition stated in Eq. From the above, it becomes apparent that long-lived substances, such as EDTA, are inappropriate for the use in enhanced phytoextraction: its longevity will cause elevated metal mobility, even long after harvest. After the crop has been removed from the site the hydrological conditions stated in Eqs. None of the treatments significantly affected biomass production. This was attributed to the short time span between treatment and harvest. Heavy metal content in the control plants was: 96 Zn uptake in EDDS and EDTA treated pots was 150–200% than that in the untreated controls. Application of NTA or NH Cu uptake was significantly affected only by EDDS: observed shoot levels were 265–422% that of the untreated control. Levels of >30 Cd uptake was only deemed significant in the highest EDDS treatment and the second highest EDTA treatment. At observed shoot levels of maximum 2.9 Only a limited fraction of mobilised metals was effectively absorbed and translocated by the plant: in the treatment with the highest observed total metal extraction (1.6 Post-harvest decreases in ligand effect occurred more rapidly than in the soil solution experiments. This effect was more pronounced for EDTA than for EDDS. The higher rate of ligand degradation was attributed to a culmination of two things: (i) microbial activity was expected to be higher in pots which had contained plants for 11 weeks and (ii) soil temperature in the greenhouse experiment was expected to be slightly higher than the soil solution experiment, which was performed at room temperature. The ligand effect half life in pots treated with 4 Based on the dose independent shoot accumulation of heavy metals as observed in The experiment revealed that during the first two weeks after application, shoot levels of heavy metals did not increase in comparison to the control, while a rapid increase was observed after 3 weeks. The subsequent drop in shoot levels after 4 weeks was found to be statistically insignificant. However the observed drop deserves further research to ascertain whether complexed metals could potentially be remobilised from the shoot upon initial accumulation. The observed accumulation pattern suggests that plants may require a sufficient exposure time for optimal effect. This should be taken into consideration when applying soil treatments towards the end of the growing season. Strong mobilisation of heavy metals was observed for both chelators. However, there were distinct differences between both amendments: Zn mobilisation was comparable for both substances, Cu was mobilised more by EDDS than by EDTA, Cd and Pb were mobilised more by EDTA than by EDDS and initial mobilisation of Ni was highest for EDDS but was overtaken by EDTA as time progressed. The mobilisation effect decreased rapidly for the soils treated with EDDS, with half lives of 3.8–7.5 days, depending on the applied dose. The effect half life observed in EDTA treated soils ranged between 36 days and infinity (no degradation observed within 40 days of monitoring). The strong persistence of EDTA makes it unsuitable for use in phytoextraction under normal field conditions. In the plant experiment, none of the treatments significantly affected biomass production of This research was funded by the