Mechanical alloying technique has been used to produce aluminium-based metal matrix composite powders. As base material, the aluminium alloy AA2014 was selected, and two different carbides (VC and TiC) were chosen as reinforcements. Elemental powders (Al, Mg, Si and Cu) and carbide powders were mixed together in a high energy horizontal ball mill (Zoz attritor), with a balls/load (in weight) ratio of 20/1 at 700rpm for different times (5, 7 and 10h). The amount of elemental powders was such that the composition of AA2014 alloy (4.4% Cu, 0.5% Mg, 0.7% Si, Al bal., all wt.%) reinforced with 5%vol carbide powders was obtained. The produced composite powders were consequently analysed. The influence of the mechanical alloying parameters on morphology, particle size, microhardness, and microstructure of the final powder was studied. Results show that composite powders can be obtained in an only step with improved properties by means of mechanical alloying. The use of this technique and these powders as raw materials not only eliminates problems associated to other techniques of the MMC production but allows the achievement of materials with enhanced final properties due to a better powder production.Mechanical alloying (MA) is a powder processing method developed in the sixties The high energy involved in the MA process fragments and cold rewelds powder particles that form the initial mix. The microstructure of final powders is usually finer than that of powders obtained by atomization and has grain size levels similar to those obtained using rapid solidification techniques. Besides, the powder particles are continuously trapped between balls and balls/container colliding what raises the level of microstructural strain, enhancing its mechanical properties. Aluminium alloys manufactured through MA have better properties, especially at higher temperature than alloys obtained by atomisation or conventional means MA is also an appropriated technique for the development of metal matrix composite (MMC) materials with better properties than those obtained by other methods. By using MA one avoids the agglomeration of the reinforcement particles and leads to a homogeneous distribution of the reinforcement within the matrix. Besides, this continuous colliding eliminates possible defects that reinforcement could contain Aluminium matrix composite powders mainly reinforced with SiC and Al The main aim of this work is the use of one of the high energy milling processes to produce composite aluminium matrix composite powders, reinforced with a homogeneous dispersion of carbide particles. It is a single step process starting from the elemental powders that form the aluminium alloy and the carbide powders as reinforcement, mixing all together in an attritor in only one step. So the selected aluminium alloy is obtained as base material and simultaneously the disperse phase (carbides) is integrated in this aluminium matrix. The selected aluminium matrix alloy is AA2014 (chemical composition (wt.%) 4.4% Cu, 0.7% Si, 0.5% Mg, bal. Al). The use of MA to obtain this aluminium matrix has been successful and it has been reported in the literature The composite material powders were manufactured by mixing simultaneously the elemental powders in the appropriate percentage to obtain the aluminium alloy matrix and the selected carbides (5 The process parameters for mechanical alloying of the composite powders were identical to those mentioned for the “base” material. Three different MA times (5, 7 and 10 After manufacturing, morphology, microstructure, size and shape distribution of the powders was characterised using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), powder laser diffraction and microhardness tests (load 5  The particle size distribution is bimodal. Moreover, TiC composite powders have a smaller particle size than those of VC composite powders, probably due to the more brittle behaviour of TiC.  Besides, an important fraction of free carbide particles remained between the composite particles what confirms that a full composite powder has not been obtained ( After 7 However, there are still differences in average size when different carbides are used what indicates that not only time and other processing parameters have an influence on the final powder characteristics but also the type of hard particles introduced can modify them. It has been reported elsewhere  Finally the analysis of the powder processed for 10 One of the most important problems associated with the composite materials production is the presence of reinforcement agglomerates. The possibility of obtaining a composite material setting from a composite powder, where reinforcement particles are fine and homogeneously distributed by means of mechanical alloying process, eliminates the possibility of these segregations formation When longer milling times are used, the morphology of particles changes ( The powder hardness increases due to microstructural refinement and dispersion strengthening ( This process evolution can also be studied by means of the particle size analysis ( The same tendency is observed when the composite powder is reinforced with TiC ( The main conclusions are: The one step in situ production of aluminium matrix composite powders has been successfully realised by means of mechanical alloying. A powder with enhanced properties in terms of morphology, size distribution, microhardness, and carbide reinforcement distribution can be obtained. Besides, MA process not only improves the distribution and homogeneity of the disperse phase in the matrix compared to conventional blending, but also increases the properties compared to the base alloy. The technique eliminates the employment of ball mills for blending steps. The dependence of each reinforcement on the milling time is different, as well as the final properties. For each material combination the processing conditions should be optimised. This work has been possible thanks to a grant from Universidad Politécnica de Madrid to the author Dr. E.M. Ruiz-Navas, and financial support of Spanish Educational Ministery through a project CICYT MAT96-0722-C02-01. The authors would like to thank the collaboration of Prof. Amigó (Universidad Politécnica de Valencia) and Prof. Torralba (Universidad Carlos III de Madrid).