The connection between prolonged granitic magmatism and the formation of giant tungsten (W) polymetallic deposits has long been disputed. In this study, we present 6 mica Ar–Ar plateau ages and 22 molybdenite Re–Os model ages data on the newly discovered giant Dahutang W–Cu–Mo deposit in South China, which is one of the largest W deposits in the world. New and published zircon U–Pb, mica Ar–Ar, and molybdenite Re–Os age data reveal that the Mesozoic Dahutang magmatism and mineralization occurred in two major periods: (1) the Late Jurassic (ca. 153–147 Ma), forming the hydrothermal breccia, large wolframite-bearing quartz vein, and scheelite-dominated disseminated/veinlet type orebodies, which is mainly associated with the emplacement of porphyritic biotite granite; (2) the Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous (ca. 146–130 Ma), forming the Cu–Mo–W ± Sn mineralization overprinting the Late Jurassic W–Mo ± Cu orebodies, which is mainly related to the successively emplacement of the Early Cretaceous granites. We suggest that continuous accumulation of mineralization for a long period of time (151–130 Ma) have contributed to the formation of the giant Dahutang deposit.The possible correlation between the duration of magmatism and the size of hydrothermal deposits has been a long and controversial topic, especially when super-large/giant-scale mineralization is concerned ( The recently discovered Dahutang W–Cu–Mo deposit in South China is a giant deposit, hosting an estimated resource of up to 1.1 million tonnes (Mt) of WO South China has long been recognized as one of the world’s major W mineral provinces ( The W–Cu–Mo mineralization at Dahutang mainly occurs around the intrusive contacts of the Late Mesozoic granite stocks. Major ore types include disseminated/veinlets, large wolframite-bearing-quartz veins, and hydrothermal breccias. Previous field observations and molybdenite Re–Os dating suggest no discernible spatial or temporal relationships among the three types of mineralization. Ore minerals at Dahutang include mainly scheelite, wolframite, chalcopyrite, and molybdenite, with minor cassiterite, sphalerite, bornite, arsenopyrite, pyrite, and stannite. Gangue minerals at Dahutang include predominately quartz, with minor mica, feldspar, fluorapatite, fluorite, chlorite, and calcite. Five muscovite and one biotite samples for   Twenty-two molybdenite samples for the Re–Os dating have been systematically collected from drill cores and underground tunnels of the North, Central and South Dahutang ore blocks. Sampling locations/depths and mineralogical features of the samples are summarized in Molybdenite grains were magnetically separated and then handpicked under a binocular microscope to obtain a >99% purity. Re–Os isotope analyses were conducted at the Key Laboratory of Mineralogy and Metallogeny, Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (GIGCAS). The Carius tube method was used for the dissolution of molybdenite and equilibration of samples, and tracer A total of six mica Ar–Ar ages and twenty-two molybdenite Re–Os model ages were obtained in this study. Summary of the Ar–Ar data of the biotite and muscovite from Dahutang are given in As shown in The porphyritic biotite granite (G1) intruded the Neoproterozoic Jiuling granodiorite batholith and Shuangqiaoshan Group in North, Central and South Dahutang and is the oldest Mesozoic granite in the area (ca. 153.0–146.8 Ma; Coeval with the Stage I magmatic-hydrothermal event are three molybdenite Re–Os model ages (DH-332: 147.3 ± 1.0 Ma; DH-352: 150.3 ± 1.3 Ma; DH-126: 147.7 ± 1.4 Ma) of the disseminated-/veinlet-type orebodies in North and Central Dahutang, and two molybdenite Re–Os model ages (DH-209: 146.8 ± 0.6 Ma; DH-19: 147.0 ± 1.1 Ma) of the large wolframite-bearing quartz-vein-type orebodies in North and South Dahutang. The presence of major mineralization at Dahutang during this period is also supported by six published molybdenite Re–Os model ages (ca. 148.5–151.9 Ma) in North Dahutang ( Field geology and petrographic observations of samples used for Re–Os dating suggest that the mineralization in Stage I is characterized by the formation of hydrothermal breccia, disseminated/veinlet and large wolframite-bearing quartz vein type orebodies with the accompanying abundant W–Mo ± Cu mineralization, which mainly shows as wolframite – molybdenite – scheelite ± chalcopyrite mineralized breccias, scheelite – wolframite – molybdenite ± chalcopyrite – quartz disseminates/veinlets, and large wolframite – molybdenite – quartz veins. Combined with the published and new granite ages and molybdenite Re–Os ages, we suggest that the W–Mo ± Cu mineralization in Stage I is associated with the emplacement of porphyritic biotite granite during 153–147 Ma. The Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous period (ca. 146–130 Ma), mainly forming the Cu–Mo–W ± Sn mineralization and overprinting the W–Mo ± Cu mineralization of Stage I, can be further subdivided into three mineralization stages: Cu–Mo ± W mineralization (Stage II), W–Mo ± Sn±Cu mineralization (Stage III) and W–Mo ± Cu mineralization (Stage IV). Fine-grained biotite granite (G2) in North Dahutang (zircon U–Pb age: 144.7 ± 0.5 Ma, In this study, the two molybdenite Re–Os model ages (144.0 ± 1.0 Ma and 141.5 ± 1.4 Ma) obtained from the large wolframite-bearing quartz-vein-type orebodies in North Dahutang, one molybdenite Re–Os model age (DH-17: 141.1 ± 2.4 Ma) from the same orebody type in South Dahutang, and two molybdenite Re–Os model ages (143.2 Ma and 141.0 Ma) from the disseminated-/veinlet-type orebodies in Central and North Dahutang are generally coeval with the magmatic ages above-mentioned. The mineralization in Stage II is characterized by the abundant Cu–Mo ± W mineralization, which mainly shows as disseminated/veinlets scheelite – molybdenite mineralization in porphyritic muscovite granite, disseminated/veinlets scheelite – molybdenite – chalcopyrite mineralization in fine-grained biotite granite, and molybdenite – chalcopyrite mineralization in early granite porphyry. Stage II mineralization also commonly overprinted the W–Mo ± Cu mineralization in Stage I, showing as chalcopyrite – molybdenite ± bornite ± arsenopyrite ± stannite polymetallic sulfide assemblages replacing the Stage I wolframite along cleavages in large wolframite-bearing quartz vein orebodies; chalcopyrite crosscutting and cementing the Stage I scheelite in disseminated-/veinlet-type orebodies. Combined with the published and new granite and molybdenite Re–Os ages, we suggest that the Cu–Mo ± W mineralization in Stage II is associated with the successively emplacement of fine-grained biotite granite, porphyritic muscovite granite, and earlier phase granite porphyry during ca. 146–141 Ma. The buried fine-grained muscovite granite (G5), mainly distributed beneath Central and South Dahutang, intruded into the porphyritic biotite granite (G1), fine-grained biotite granite (G2), porphyritic muscovite granite (G3) and the Neoproterozoic Jiuling granodiorite. Our new muscovite Ar–Ar dating on the fine-grained muscovite granite, including two ages from Central Dahutang (DH-02: 140.4 ± 0.6 Ma; DH-120: 138.8 ± 1.8 Ma) and one from South Dahutang (DH-94: 137.6 ± 2.7 Ma), are the first similar ages reported and have complemented the previous magmatic age gap at Dahutang. Correspondingly, the two molybdenite Re–Os model ages (DH-108: 140.2 ± 1.1 Ma; DH-117: 136.7 ± 1.0 Ma) obtained from a disseminated-/veinlet-type orebody in Central Dahutang are broadly coeval with the fine-grained muscovite granite (muscovite Ar–Ar plateau age: 138.8 ± 1.8 Ma (DH-120)) in the same drill core (ZK510). It’s worth noting that the two molybdenite samples are from the wolframite – molybdenite – scheelite ± chalcopyrite – quartz veins crosscutting the Stage I disseminated-/veinlet-type orebody (molybdenite Re–Os model age: 147.67 ± 1.44 Ma (DH-128)). Besides, two molybdenite samples from fine-grained muscovite granite yielded Re–Os model ages of 138.5 ± 1.0 Ma and 139.0 ± 1.0 Ma, which resemble the muscovite Ar–Ar age of 140.4 ± 0.6 Ma for the fine-grained muscovite granite in Central Dahutang. Moreover, we obtained two molybdenite Re–Os model ages of 141.0 ± 1.2 Ma and 138.9 ± 0.9 Ma from the large wolframite-bearing quartz-vein-type orebodies in North Dahutang and one muscovite Ar–Ar plateau age of 138.6 ± 0.9 Ma (DH-42) from the large wolframite-bearing quartz-vein-type orebodies in South Dahutang, which are also coeval with fine-grained muscovite granite emplacement ( Stage III is characterized by the W–Mo ± Sn ± Cu mineralization showing as wolframite – molybdenite – scheelite ± cassiterite ± chalcopyrite – quartz veinlets and scheelite ± chalcopyrite disseminates/veinlets in fine-grained muscovite granite. Locally, stage III wolframite – molybdenite – scheelite ± chalcopyrite – quartz veins (nearby the fine-grained muscovite granite) crosscut the Stage I disseminated-/veinlet-type orebody. Combined with the new granite Ar–Ar and molybdenite Re–Os ages, we suggest that the W–Mo ± Sn ± Cu mineralization in Stage III is associated with the emplacement of fine-grained muscovite granite during 141–136 Ma. Late granite porphyry (G6), mainly occurs as dykes and apophyses, intruded the porphyritic biotite granite (G1) and porphyritic muscovite granite (G3) in South Dahutang, where it crosscut some large quartz veins and intruded into some orebodies, but the relationships between G6 and G4, G5 are not clear. Late granite porphyry samples were dated by zircon U–Pb method to be 134.6 ± 1.2 Ma ( Five molybdenite Re–Os model ages from the large wolframite-bearing quartz-vein-type orebodies in South Dahutang show similar age range with Stage IV magmatism, among which three ages (134.6 ± 1.2 Ma, 135.2 ± 1.2 Ma and 134.8 ± 1.2 Ma) are coeval with the zircon U–Pb age of 134.6 ± 1.2 Ma for late granite porphyry in South Dahutang ( Stage IV is characterized by the weak W–Mo ± Cu mineralization commonly overprinting the early-stage mineralization, which mainly shows as molybdenite ± chalcopyrite mineralization along the fractures in quartz vein walls and the scheelite ± chalcopyrite veinlets crosscutting the large wolframite-bearing quartz veins. Combined with the published and new granite and molybdenite Re–Os ages, we suggest that the last weak W–Mo ± Cu mineralization in Stage IV may associate with the last magmatism during 136–130 Ma. As we discussed above, nine types of Late Mesozoic granites exist in the Dahutang deposit, granite evolution and mineralization process are very complex. Three types of mineralization in Dahutang W–Cu–Mo deposit include disseminated/veinlets type, large wolframite-bearing-quartz veins type, and hydrothermal breccias type. However, our new research finds that there is no discernible spatial or temporal relationships among the three types of mineralization. These different mineralization styles commonly coexist and mutually overprint. Disseminated/veinlet type: Taking No.1 ore belt ZK510 drill core in Central Dahutang as an example. We obtained three molybdenite Re–Os model ages (147.7 Ma, 140.2 Ma, and 136.7 Ma) from the drill core ZK510, which suggest that the oldest Re-Os age (147.7 Ma) is coeval with the porphyritic biotite granite (zircon U–Pb age: 148.3 ± 1.9 Ma; Hydrothermal breccia type: Taking Xidouya hydrothermal breccias type ore body in Central Dahutang as an example. The hydrothermal biotite megacrysts sample from hydrothermal breccias yielded a well-defined plateau age of 149.2 ± 1.1 Ma, which is largely coeval with the nearby porphyritic biotite granite (zircon U–Pb age: 148.3 ± 1.9 Ma; Large wolframite-bearing-quartz vein type: Taking Shiweidong No. 38 large wolframite- bearing- quartz vein in South Dahutang as an example. We also obtained three molybdenite Re–Os model ages (147.0 Ma, 141.0 Ma, and 132.0 Ma) from the No.38 large wolframite-bearing- quartz vein, which suggest that the oldest Re-Os age (147.0 Ma) is coeval with the porphyritic biotite granite, the other two ages are coeval with the muscovite granite. Above all, obviously, all three types of mineralization began to form during the early granite intrusion in Dahutang. With the continuous intrusion of the later stage granites, three types of mineralization were successively forming and superimposed. Therefore, we suggest that nine types of granites were emplaced in the Dahutang area over a long and multiphase magmatism (ca. 152–130 Ma). The complex Dahutang W–Cu–Mo polymetallic mineralization related to this multiphase magmatism also lasted for around 20 m.y. and displays multiphase characteristics. The long-lived multiphase mineralization leads to a very complex interspersed and superimposed relationships between ore minerals and granite rocks. Although it is difficult to correlate each phase mineralization to each magmatic phase, the mineralization ages are generally consistent with the magmatic ages. In summary, we propose the following ore genesis evolutionary model for the Dahutang deposit ( In stage I (ca. 153–147 Ma), porphyritic biotite granite stocks were emplaced at Dahutang. The magmatic-hydrothermal fluids of these intrusions may have converged onto the apical parts and led to cryptoexplosions that formed hydrothermal breccia-type orebodies. The large wolframite-bearing quartz-vein-type orebodies were likely formed when the magmatic-hydrothermal fluids ascended along the fault system. The ore-forming fluids that entered the Jiuling Neoproterozoic biotite granodiorite batholith generated intense greisenization and the disseminated-/veinlet-type orebodies. In stage II (ca. 146–141 Ma), the Cu–Mo mineralization overprinted on the early-stage W-dominated mineralization, along with the emplacements of fine-grained biotite granite, early granite porphyry and porphyritic muscovite granite in North and Central Dahutang. In stage III (ca. 141–136 Ma), the fine-grained muscovite granite was emplaced with the moderate W–Mo ± Sn±Cu mineralization, which locally overprinted the Stage I and II mineralization. In stage IV (ca. 136–130 Ma), the late granite porphyry, medium- to fine-grained muscovite granite, porphyritic two-mica granite, and fine-grained two-mica granite dykes successively emplaced into the early phase granites and orebodies. Weak W–Mo ± Cu mineralization occurred and overprinted/reworked the previous mineralization. Our geochronological study indicates that the giant Dahutang W–Cu–Mo deposit was formed by a long-lived (20 m.y.) and multistage mineralization processes, led by a prolonged and coeval multiphase magmatism. Hence, we suggest that multiphase magmatism and continuous accumulation of mineralization play a significant role in the formation of giant Dahutang W–Cu–Mo deposit. This study was financially supported by the DREAM project of Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at   