This paper experimentally explores the frictional sliding behavior of two simulated gouges: one, a series of quartz–smectite mixtures, and the other, powdered natural rocks, aiming to evaluate and codify the effect of mineralogy on gouge dilation and frictional strength, stability, and healing. Specifically, velocity-stepping and slide-hold-slide experiments were performed in a double direct shear configuration to analyze frictional constitutive parameters at room temperature, under normal stresses of 10, 20, and 40 ​MPa. Gouge dilation was measured based on the applied step-wise changes in shear velocity. The frictional response of the quartz–smectite mixtures and powdered natural rocks are affected by their phyllosilicate content. Frictional strength and healing rates decrease with increasing phyllosilicate content, and at 20 ​wt.% a transition from velocity-weakening to velocity-strengthening behavior was noted. For both suites of gouges, dilation is positively correlated with frictional strength and healing rates, and negatively correlated with frictional stability. Changes in the permeability of gouge-filled faults were estimated from changes in mean porosity, indexed through measured magnitudes of gouge dilation. This combined analysis implies that the reactivation of caprock faults filled with phyllosilicate-rich gouges may have a strong influence on permeability evolution in caprock faults.Massive fluid injection for the stimulation of shale and enhanced geothermal reservoirs, and for the disposal and sequestration of wastewater and CO Previous experiments showed that mineral composition affects the frictional properties of faults ( Experiments on powdered gouges have indicated that gouge dilation is also strongly dependent on mineralogy ( Permeability typically evolves during fracture shear as a result of dilation and compaction ( This paper (1) reports laboratory measurements of the influence of phyllosilicate content on frictional strength, stability and healing of simulated fault gouges; (2) assesses the relationships between fault gouge dilation and frictional strength, stability, and healing; and (3) applies these observations of friction–dilation to infer the permeability evolution of gouge present in caprock faults by directly indexing permeability with gouge dilation. The experiments conducted for this study used quartz–smectite mixtures and powdered natural rocks as simulated fault gouges. Velocity-stepping and slide-hold-slide experiments were conducted in a double-direct shear configuration on quartz–smectite mixtures and powdered (natural) reservoir rocks. Strength evolution data were used to project magnitudes of frictional strength, stability, and healing, and to infer the evolution of permeability. Synthetic quartz–smectite mixtures and powdered natural rocks were adopted as simulated fault gouges for friction tests. The quartz powders used were commercially available quartz sand with >98% purity; grain-sizes <150 ​μm were separated by sieving. The smectite powders were derived from sodium bentonite; grains <45 ​μm in size were separated by sieving through a 325-mesh. The fabricated quartz–smectite gouges span the entire 0–100 ​wt.% range. Natural rocks like the Daqing volcanic rocks (Songliao Basin), Shengli sandstone (Shandong Hills), Junggar clasolite and sandstone (Junggar Basin), Fuling shale, Changning shale and chlorite schist (Sichuan Basin) were used for these experiments. X-ray diffraction (XRD) results showed between 4 and 37 ​wt.% phyllosilicate content for these natural rock samples ( All friction experiments were performed in a double direct shear configuration using a biaxial loading frame ( Velocity-stepping and slide-hold-slide tests were carried out to measure frictional stability and healing, respectively, at three different normal stresses ( At the initiation of each velocity-stepping experiment, normal stress was established at 10 ​MPa, after which shear velocity was applied at 10 ​μm/s until a steady frictional state was achieved. The velocity was then stepped from 0.3 through 300 ​μm/s for the quartz–smectite mixtures, and 0.1 through 100 ​μm/s for the powdered natural rocks at each normal stress level ( Different from the velocity-stepping tests, for the slide-hold-slide experiments, the shear velocity was set at 10 ​μm/s throughout the entire test duration; the hold time (the time for keeping the driving vertical piston steady) varied from 3 to 300 ​s for the quartz–smectite mixtures, and 1–1000 ​s for the powdered natural rocks. Holds were applied with every 0.5-mm-shear displacement ( Frictional strength was evaluated from the coefficient of friction The velocity dependence of fault slip was analyzed on the basis of the rate and state friction as ( For a single velocity step ( As established in previous studies ( In slide-hold-slide tests ( Experimental results showed that the frictional properties and dilation of both, the quartz–smectite mixtures and powdered natural rocks, were strongly dependent on their phyllosilicate content. Relationships between gouge dilation and fault strength, stability, and healing were established and are discussed in detail below. Previous laboratory studies suggested that the frictional strength of simulated fault gouges is negatively correlated with their phyllosilicate content ( The frictional stability of the two suites of simulated fault gouges was evaluated by the friction parameter Fault healing is a fundamental process in earthquake physics and is closely related to the recurrence of repeated stick-slip cycles ( The values of gouge dilation are determined using the procedure described in Section The relationship between gouge dilation and the measured critical slip distance is also examined for the two suites of gouges ( The relationships between gouge dilation and frictional strength, stability, and healing are shown in The dilation and the relationship of friction–dilation of both suites of gouge are examined and compared with previous studies. The observed friction–dilation is used to infer the permeability evolution in gouge-filled caprock faults. Previous experimental studies have extensively explored the role of mineralogy on frictional properties of tectonic faults, although only a small proportion have systematically examined the role of gouge dilation and its effect on permeability. They suggest that dilation is affected by the state of consolidation and drainage conditions ( On the basis of Darcy’s law and cubic law for fluid flow, the initial equivalent permeability In this study, the fault aperture incrementation Δ Equation The relative permeability values for phyllosilicate-rich gouges in this study are congruent to previous experiments which measured permeability directly ( Since the frictional strength, stability, healing, and permeability of both, the quartz–smectite mixtures and powdered natural rocks, scale with phyllosilicate content, the relationships between permeability and fault strength, stability, and healing may also be established ( The mechanical integrity, low permeability, and high entry pressures of caprocks are necessary for the integrity of water and CO This study systematically investigates the role of mineralogy on gouge dilation and frictional strength, stability, and healing relationships for a suite of synthetic gouges, quartz–smectite mixtures and powdered natural rocks. Velocity-stepping and slide-hold-slide experiments were conducted to measure frictional stability and healing rates, respectively. The friction–dilation relationship is applied to define the permeability evolution of caprock faults and evaluate the change of normalized apparent permeability. The conclusions drawn from this study are: The frictional strength of both suites of gouges systematically decrease with increasing phyllosilicate content. Frictional stability measurements indicate a transition from velocity-weakening (potentially unstable slips) to velocity-strengthening (stable sliding) at about 20 ​wt.% phyllosilicate content for both gouges. The frictional stability parameter Gouge dilation shows an overall decreasing trend with increasing phyllosilicate content for both suites of gouges. Fault gouge dilation also shows a strong dependence on critical slip distance and stress conditions. The friction–dilation relationships suggest that gouge dilation is positively correlated with frictional strength and healing rates, and negatively correlated to frictional stability. Fault reactivation may have a negligible influence on permeability change for phyllosilicate-poor gouge-bearing caprock faults. The research is supported by the