There are contrasting reports about whether and how land covers influence soil organic matter fractions and microbial activities. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the relationship between above-ground plant cover and the nutrient cycling in semi-arid areas, which are often considered as especially fragile and sensitive ecosystems, are almost unknown. The purpose of this research was to evaluate the influence of different shrub and grasslands located in northern Iran on the fractions of soil particulate and dissolved organic matter, microbial/enzyme activities. In this study, a total of 15 soil samples (30 × 30 × 10 cm) from each vegetation type [i.e. (1) Crataegus microphylla C. Koch., (2) Berberis integerrima Bunge., (3) Ribes Uva – crispa L., (4) Prunus spinosa L., (5) rangeland cover with dominant Lecokia cretica (Lam.) DC., Orchis mascula L., Cardamine bulbifera (L.) Crantz, and (6) rangeland cover with the dominance of Fragaria vesca L.] were transferred to the laboratory. Berberis significantly increased soil particulate organic C (2.26 g kg−1), but the maximum particulate organic N (0.27 g kg−1) was found under the Cratagus plant type. Soil dissolved organic C content was found to be significantly higher under Berberis (38.08 mg kg−1) ≈ Cratagus (34.81 mg kg−1), whereas the soil dissolved organic N was enhanced in Cratagus (22.84 mg kg−1) land cover. Significantly higher values of basal and substrate induced respiration (0.27 and 1.22 mg CO2 g−1 day−1, respectively) were found under Berberis when compared with the other land covers. Soil microbial biomass C and P were found to be significantly higher under Cratagus (259.90 and 61.00 mg kg−1) and Berberis (273.72 and 54.80 mg kg−1), whereas microbial biomass of N was enhanced under Cratagus (36.88 mg kg−1) plant type. Soil urease (18.22 µg NH4
                     +–N g−1 2 h−1), acid phosphatase (305.66 µg PNP g−1 h−1), arylsulfatase (90.60 µg PNP g−1 h−1), invertase (97.53 µg Glucose g−1 3 h−1), geometric mean (4.73) and Shannon's diversity index (0.15) of enzyme activities were significantly increased in the topsoil of Cratagus compared with the other vegetation types. Based on principal component analysis (PCA), Cratagus, Berberis, and Ribes enhanced soil organic matter fractions, microbial and enzyme activities and were related to higher amounts of soil moisture, pH, organic C, total N, available P, fulvic/humic acids, and root biomass. Pasture and Prunus decreased the fractions of organic matter and soil microbial activities and most often affected the stoichiometry of carbon sources. It was concluded that shrubs (especially Cratagus and Berberis) can play a crucial role in nutrient cycling and soil-related processes in semi-arid rangeland ecosystems.Soils are the most diverse components of the biosphere and have distinguishing features and processes within them at the nano- and macro-scales. The spatial and temporal variability of organic matter input into soil, due to the presence of different plants, causes hotspot areas of microbial activities in terrestrial ecosystems ( Microbial biomass plays a key role in soil C sequestration, is a good indicator of SOM changes, and responds to land cover changes quite rapidly ( Vegetation types have different impacts on SOM fractions and soil biological indicators. Any changes in plant species can affect different components of organic matter, resulting in significant changes in soil properties, C and N cycles ( Based on our knowledge, the relationships between SOM fractions and microbial activities and plant species in semi-arid rangeland ecosystems are almost unknown, particularly in northern Iran. Therefore, the objectives of this research were to (1) assess soil properties and organic matter fractions under different vegetation types in the same topographic conditions; (2) study the reaction of soil microbial/enzyme features to shrub and grasslands; and (3) determine the correlations among land covers, SOM fractions, soil physico-chemical and biological properties. It is hoped that the results would improve scientific approaches to further understand the mechanism of soil functions (microbial activities and nutrient cycling), and help in optimizing land cover structures and enhance ecosystem services. The Diakooh site with an area of 30 ha is located in the central Alborz mountains in northern Iran ( CR: Crataegus microphylla C. Koch. as dominant plant (>90%) with co-dominated plant (1–5%), including Medicago sativa, Lolium prenne, Stachys laxa, Stachys byzantine, Bromus brizaeformis, and Teucrium polium; BE: Berberis integerrima Bunge. as dominant plant (>90%) with co-dominated plant (1–5%) same as the previous vegetation type; RI: PR: MP: rangeland covers with dominant PP: rangeland covers with dominance of These vegetation types are located at a distance of<600 m from each other. Five transects (100 m apart from each other) each 300 m in length were designed in each of the studied land covers. Soil samples (30 × 30 × 10 cm) were taken at the beginning; middle and end of the transects. A total of 15 soil samples from each land cover were transferred to the laboratory for physical, chemical, and biological analyses (see Soil moisture in the Cratagus (22.11%) and Berberis (21.45%) vegetation showed significantly higher values when compared with the Ribes (17.84%), Prunus (16.08%), mixed (15.52%) and pure (10.75%) pastures. The Cratagus vegetation type significantly increased the amounts of soil macro/micro aggregates (51.86 and 31.46%) and soil pH (6.99), whereas organic C was not significantly different among land covers. The content of soil organic carbon in the macro/micro aggregates particles (0.30 and 0.18%) increased in the Berberis, but the CMI and C stock were not significantly affected by those vegetation types. Higher values of total N (0.40%), nitrogen in the macro/micro aggregates (0.16 and 0.13%), and N stocks (5.27 Mg ha Berberis significantly increased soil POC (2.26 g kg Vegetation types have different effects on soil POM and DOM caused by different plant residuals supplied to the soil ( In arid and semi-arid ecosystems, relatively little is known of land cover effects on soil properties and associated microbial activities. In these regions, nitrogen transformation in soil is mostly dependent on microorganisms, and microbial activity depends on substrate availability, quantity and quality but also on temperature and soil water content ( Soil enzymes are responsible for metabolic processes in the biogeochemical cycle of nutrients and are considered to be suitable indicators to resolve the effect of different vegetation types on soil quality indices ( Soil organic matter fractions and microbial/enzyme activities can react significantly after changes in vegetation types and thus have been suggested as biochemical indicators of soil quality and soil health. All of the studied ecosystems (i.e. different shrub and grassland species) clearly differed in soil ecological properties. The Cratagus, Berberis, and Ribes vegetation types enhanced soil organic matter fractions, microbial processes, and enzyme activities and were associated with increased values of soil moisture, pH, organic C, total N, available P, fulvic/humic acids, and root biomass. Pasture sites and the Prunus vegetation type, however, decreased fractions of organic matter and soil microbial activities and often affected the stoichiometry of carbon sources. The current findings indicated that shrub ecosystems, especially Cratagus and Berberis, can display a very important impact on nutrient cycling and soil-related processes in semi-arid rangeland ecosystems. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors express their thanks to Tarbiat Modares University for the financial support of the study reported in this paper.