Ayran is a yoghurt drink produced in Turkey. Ayran is manufactured traditionally by adding water and salt into yoghurt or industrially by fermentation of diluted milk with water and further dilution with salt containing water after fermentation. Optimum consistency and no serum separation are desired characteristics for ayran. Use of stabilizers in traditionally manufactured ayran to prevent serum separation during storage was studied. High methoxyl pectin, guar gum, locust bean gum and gelatine at different concentrations were added to traditionally manufactured ayran and the samples were evaluated for rheological and sensory properties and serum separation during storage for 15 days at 4 °C. Guar gum provided the highest apparent viscosity and consistency index and prevented serum separation in ayran. However, guar gum provided an oily mouthfeel that was not suitable for ayran. High methoxyl pectin and gelatine did not prevent serum separation in ayran at a level of 0.25% but were effective at an increased concentration of 0.50%. Both high methoxyl pectin and gelatine affected the taste and the odor of ayran and the ayrans containing these stabilizers were found unacceptable in the sensory analysis. Locust bean gum at a level of 0.10% prevented serum separation and increased apparent viscosity without affecting the taste and the odor in ayran.Ayran is a yoghurt drink produced in Turkey. Ayran is traditionally manufactured by addition of water at a level of 30–50% and salt at a maximum level of 1% to yoghurt. In the industrial manufacture of ayran, milk with adjusted dry matter content is fermented using exopolysaccharide producing cultures and the viscous curd obtained is further diluted with salt-containing water. Ayran is separated from other fermented milk beverages being a yoghurt drink with salt and without any fruit flavoring. The Shelf life of ayran is reported as 10–15 days at 4°C by the manufacturers. Ayran is prone to textural instability during storage due to its low pH as other acidic milk beverages. Main textural defects in ayran are low viscosity and serum separation during storage. Ayran should have a high enough viscosity for good mouthfeel. Ayrans sold at retail in Turkey was found to have upto 30% serum separation (Unpublished data). Serum separation seen in the package adversely affects the consumer preference. Hydrocolloids have been widely used in textural stabilization of fermented milk products. High methoxyl pectin is preferred in acidic milk beverages as a stabilizer ( Gelatine is another commonly used stabilizer in fermented milk products that forms a gel meltable in the mouth ( Guar and locust bean gum have been used to modify the rheological properties of aqueous systems. Guar gum can be dispersed in aqueous phase and swollen providing high viscosity ( Optimum consistency and homogeneous texture for good mouthfeel and no serum separation are desired characteristics for fermented milk beverages. Serum separation occurs in fermented milk beverages without the use of stabilizers ( Stabilizers were kindly supplied by Incom Inc. (Mersin, Turkey) except gelatine that was kindly provided by Yılmaz Chemistry (Istanbul, Turkey). In the preliminary trials, a wide variety of stabilizers including low methoxyl pectin, κ-carrageenan, Na-alginate, agar agar, locust bean gum (LBG), guar gum, high methoxyl pectin (HMP), carboxymethylcellulose and gelatine at a level of 0.25% (w/w) were evaluated primarily for prevention of serum separation and secondarily for homogeneous texture in ayran. Carboxymethylcellulose caused excessive serum separation. κ-carrageenan led to visible aggregation, gelation and serum separation. Low methoxyl pectin, Na-alginate and agar agar caused aggregation and serum separation. Only four stabilizers including guar gum, LBG, gelatine and HMP were found to be suitable for ayran. Minimum effective concentrations of these four stabilizers to prevent serum separation in ayran were determined. Ayran samples were prepared by adding stabilizer solutions to yoghurt obtained from a local retail store. The solution of stabilizers were prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of stabilizer and salt in distilled water to obtain 50% water, 1% salt and desired concentration of stabilizer in the final 250 g ayran sample. The stabilizers and their final levels by weight in ayran samples were 0.10 and 0.25% guar gum, 0.10 and 0.25% LBG, 0.25 and 0.50% HMP and 0.25 and 0.50% gelatine. The stabilizer-salt solutions were heated at 85 °C for 10 min to pasteurize the solutions and to dissolve the stabilizers. The solutions were homogenized for 30 s at 9500 rpm by using a homogenizer (Ultra Turrax T25, Janke and Kankel GMBH Co., Germany). After cooling to room temperature, the solutions were added to yoghurt and the mixture was homogenized for 30 s at 9500 rpm. Approximate compositions of the samples were 8.7% dry matter, 1.9% fat, 1% salt and their pH were in the range of 4.1–4.3 except samples with HMP with a pH of 3.9. The samples were prepared in duplicate and the experiment was replicated twice on different days. Samples were stored at 4 °C during the analyses. The rheological properties of the ayran samples after 1 A controlled ramped shear rate test was carried out to determine the rheological characteristics of the samples. The shear rate was increased linearly from 0.13 to 300 s Viscosity values in the upward viscosity/shear rate curves at a shear rate of 55 s Rheological properties of the ayran samples were determined by applying non-linear regression using SPSS 10.0 statistical software. The power law model was used to determine the consistency coefficient and the flow behavior index of the samples using the shear stress data obtained from increasing shear rate measurements as follows: Thixotropic behaviour of the samples was evaluated by calculating the area of the hysteresis loop between the upward and downward shear stress/shear rate curves. The effects of low concentrations of stabilizers on the rheological properties were analyzed by using one way anova and the means were compared by using Duncan's multiple comparison test at 95% confidence level. Ayran samples were placed in 50 m graduated cylinders (1.2 cm radius, 12.5 cm height, 1 Ayran samples prepared were analyzed for odor, taste, consistency, texture and overall acceptability after 1 day of storage at 4 °C. Sensory analysis was performed by using 20 panelists familiar with the product. A 7-point hedonic scale including both the number and verbal scores was provided to the panelists ( The apparent viscosity of ayran was increased with increasing concentrations of added stabilizers ( The power law model has been used in modeling the flow behaviour of fermented milk beverages ( The flow behaviour indices of all the ayran samples were below 1 also pointing to non-Newtonian behaviour ( For all the hydrocolloids, an increase in concentration was accompanied by an increase in pseudoplasticity shown by a decrease in the flow behaviour index. When the concentration of the guar was increased to 0.25%, the flow behaviour index of ayran was decreased dramatically. Pectin addition was reported to increase the flow behaviour index of acidic milk beverages ( Shear thinning in stabilizer thickened solutions is caused by the orientation of the extended particles under shear and the reduction in entanglement ( Increase in the stabilizer levels resulted in increased consistency coefficients in ayran ( Ayrans with and without the stabilizers exhibited thixotropy determined by the area of the hysteresis loop between upward and downward shear stress/shear rate curves ( Addition of guar gum caused the largest hysteresis loop in ayran ( Thixotropy is caused by the structural break down in a dispersion under shear. Weak particles in a suspension or the weak interparticle bonds can be broken under shear ( Serum separation occurs in fermented milk products due to the aggregation and sedimentation of casein particles during storage. The use of the stabilizers was found necessary to prevent serum separation in fermented milk beverages (  Sour milk drinks as ayran are dispersed systems and inherently prone to phase separation. Phase separation occurs due to the aggregation of casein micelles to particles and movement of the particles under gravity. According to Stokes' law, gravitationally induced phase separation increases with particle size and decreases with the viscosity of continuous phase. Polysaccharide gums increase viscosity in dispersions by nonspecific entanglement preventing the interactions of dispersed particles ( HMP is known to adsorb onto casein particles via electrostatic interactions thereby creating ionic and steric repulsions in acidic milk beverages ( Gelatine has been used in yoghurt to prevent syneresis due to its high water holding capacity. Since ayran is a yoghurt based beverage, similar effect was expected. A high concentration of gelatine was necessary to minimize the serum separation. Gelatine at a level of 1.5% gelatine was found to form of a continuous interconnected network that entrap water in yoghurt ( The effects of nonadsorbing polysaccharides, LBG and guar gum, on serum separation were attributed to the increased viscosity as they do not interact with casein particles. High concentrations of stabilizers were necessary to prevent the serum separation in ayran. However, in the preliminary sensory assessments, high concentrations of the stabilizers were found to adversely affect the taste of the ayran providing a foreign taste of their own. Therefore, ayrans with low concentrations of the stabilizers were presented to the sensory panelists. Stabilizers were found to have a significant effect on taste, odor, consistency and overall acceptability ( The ayrans with added HMP and gelatine had lower odor and taste scores compared to other samples. Six panelists for HMP and two panelists for gelatine noted that they had a foreign taste. Since HMP and gelatine adversely affected the taste and odor of ayran, they were not preferred by the panelists. Guar gum and LBG containing ayran samples had similar taste and odor to ayran without stabilizer. In the literature, the effects of the stabilizers on flavor have not been studied as much as their effects on texture in acidified milk beverages. Guar gum was reported to cause taste problems and steam treatment was recommended to reduce it ( Hydrocolloid stabilizers can be used in ayran to prevent serum separation and to adjust the viscosity. When used at sufficient level, stabilizers reduced the serum separation to negligible levels and increase the apparent viscosity. However, the amounts of the stabilizers that can be used were found to be limited by their effects on the flavor of product. HMP and gelatine were found to carry an unfamiliar taste and odor to ayran even at low concentrations. In addition, HMP and gelatine did not prevent serum separation at low concentrations. Even though guar gum provided the highest apparent viscosity and prevented the serum separation in ayran, it was not preferred organoleptically due to the oily mouthfeel it provided. However, guar gum can be suitable for high fat containing milk beverages. LBG at a level of 0.10% is recommended for acidic milk beverages to stabilize the texture without affecting the flavor of the product. Furthermore, use of combination of different stabilizers can be investigated to provide an effect at minimum levels not affecting the flavor in acidified milk beverages. This research was supported by the Istanbul Technical University Research Fund.