For pharmaceutical purposes, micron-sized drugs are required for several dosage forms—such as for oral or pulmonary use. The common way for micronization is the milling of previously formed larger crystals. However, this technique is ineffective and shows disadvantages such as electrostatic effects, broad particle size distributions, and the creation of thermodynamically unstable areas due to the high-energy input. Disruptions in the crystal lattice can cause physical or chemical instability. In this study, microcrystals were not produced using comminution techniques but by controlled association in order to obtain naturally grown particles. The drug was dissolved in a solvent. Precipitation was carried out in the presence of hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (HPMC) as a stabilizing agent by pouring a nonsolvent into the solution rapidly. After drying the obtained fine disperse suspension by spray-drying, the drug is obtained as dry powder in micron-sized particle size.
                  In this study, several drugs were exemplarily in situ micronized: in the case of the poorly water-soluble drugs for oral use, ibuprofen and ECU-R1, the technique is used in order to increase the dissolution rate. In the case of drugs for pulmonary use [ECU-R2 as an example of a poorly water-soluble drug and disodiumcromoglycate (DSCG) as an example of a water-soluble drug], the technique was employed in order to obtain a drug powder with an improved aerodynamic behaviour which results in an increased fine particle fraction. The properties of the in situ micronized drug powders were compared to the jet-milled drug. The dissolution rate is significantly enhanced (ECU-01: common drug, 4% after 20 min; in situ micronized: 93% after 20 min) due to the large surface, which is hydrophilized due to the adsorbed stabilizer as shown by a decreased contact angle. Furthermore, the powder flow is increased. As the in situ micronized drug powder is less cohesive compared to the jet-milled drug, the aerodynamic behaviour is improved, which results in an increased fine particle fraction (FPF<5 μm). The FPF (measured without excipients and without an inhalation device) of jet-milled drugs is 7% (DSCG) or 13% (ECU-R2) while fine particle fractions of 75% (DSCG) or 78% (ECU-R2), respectively, are obtained with the in situ micronized powders.Micronized drugs are required for different pharmaceutical dosage forms. The bioavailability of poorly water-soluble drug substances (like many newly developed pharmaceutically active molecules) is a well-known difficulty to be coped with during the development of new drug substances. For class II drugs and also for class IV drugs, according to the biopharmaceutics classification system The common way for micronization by jet-milling provides only limited opportunity for the control of important product characteristics such as size, shape, morphology, surface properties, and electrostatic charge The aim of this study was to prepare micron-sized drug particles of poorly water-soluble drugs for oral use (ibuprofen and ECU-01 as model substances) and drugs for pulmonary use [ECU-R2 as an example of a poorly water-soluble drug and disodiumcromoglycate (DSCG) as an example of a water-soluble drug]. The micron-sized drugs were prepared by a solvent change process that precipitates and stabilizes the drug in small particle size by the use of hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (HPMC; Ref. Ibuprofen (BASF, Ludwigshafen, Germany), ECU-01 (a low molecular enzyme inhibitor with anti-inflammatory properties for oral administration; Elbion, Radebeul, Germany), ECU-R2 (a poorly water-soluble low molecular peptidomimetic enzyme inhibitor for pulmonary application belonging to the chemical class of glyoxylic acid amides with anti-inflammatory properties which is in clinical state of development; Pharmatech, Flintbek, Germany), and disodiumcromoglycate (DSCG, Profarmaco, Milano, Italy) were used as model substances. Acetone and isopropyl alcohol (both from Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) were of analytical grade. Water was used in double-distilled quality. The employed stabilizing agent was hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (HPMC type 2910, USP; Metolose The in situ micronization process was carried out using the solvent change method by instantaneously mixing two liquids in the presence of hydroxypropylmethylcellulose as a stabilizing agent as described by Rasenack and Müller ( In order to compare the physicochemical characteristics of the in situ micronized drugs with the jet-milled drug powder, drugs were also freshly jet-milled with a fluid energy mill using nitrogen (3 cycles with 8 bars; Jet-O-Mizer 00, Fluid Energy Aljet, Plumsteadville, USA). The volume particle size distribution was measured using a laser diffractometer (Helos, Sympatec, Clausthal Zellerfeld, Germany). The dispersions were diluted with the nonsolvent used in the precipitation process and measured in a cuvette without any further treatment. As a second determination method, the dry powder was measured after dispersion by compressed air (2 bars; Helos/Rodos). SEM photographs were taken using Philips XL 20 (Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). Samples were fixed on an aluminium stub with conductive double-sided adhesive tape (Leit-Tabs, Plano, Wetzlar, Germany) and coated with gold in an argon atmosphere (50 Pa) at 50 mA for 50 s (Sputter Coater, Bal-Tec, Liechtenstein). Dissolution studies were carried out under sink conditions in simulated gastric fluid according to the paddle method (USP) using an Erweka DT6 dissolution apparatus (Erweka, Heusenstamm, Germany). The stirring speed employed was 100 rpm, and the temperature was maintained at 37±0.5 °C. Quantification of the dissolved amount of drug was carried out photometrically at 284 nm (Lambda40 UV VIS Spectrometer, Perkin Elmer, Connecticut, USA). All samples were analyzed in triplicate. The dissolution medium consists of 0.25% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.2% sodium chloride and is adjusted with hydrochloric acid to pH 1.2±0.1 (all from Merck). Surface tension is lowered by SDS in an attempt to mimic in vivo conditions as described by Pedersen et al. The contact angle was measured by the sessile drop technique using a goniometer (G1, Krüss, Hamburg, Germany). A compressed disc of the powder (100 mg) was made at 30 kN for 90 s under vacuum. The contact angle between the disc and a single drop of water (25 μl) was determined 10 s after the droplet was put onto the disc. Determination was repeated 20 times. The aerodynamic particle size was evaluated using a multistage liquid impinger (MSLI; Erweka). The pure drug (2 mg) was delivered to the impinger by using a deviceless application system After spray-drying the formed dispersion, the in situ micronized drug powders were obtained as illustrated in The in situ micronized drug powders show a clear enhancement in dissolution rate as illustrated in Besides the particle size of a drug, the deagglomeration behaviour in an air stream is important for pulmonary drug delivery. The aerodynamic behaviour analyzed in a multistage liquid impinger for the pulmonary drugs investigated in this study is shown in After dispersing the in situ micronized drug powders in water (without further excipients normally used in suspensions), a stable dispersion with a symmetric and tight particle size distribution is obtained. No crystal growth occurs. Four weeks after dispersing the spray-dried microcrystals in water, a partial sedimentation was observed, as was to be expected. But due to the small particles, no caking occurred. After shaking, a fine disperse suspension Micron-sized drug powders can be prepared using a controlled crystallization technique in the presence of HPMC as protective hydrophilic polymer followed by spray drying. This technique offers a relatively easy way for the production of micron-sized drugs which are characterized by a homogeneous particle size distribution. As drug particles are naturally grown, critical effects resulting from milling processes are avoided. In situ micronized drugs can be used, for example, for oral (increased dissolution rate) and pulmonary use (increased deagglomeration behaviour which results in an increased fine particle fraction). As the production process can be carried out continuously using a static mixer, a scale up can be carried out easily. First results of in vivo studies confirm the suitability of microcrystals prepared according to this technique for increasing the bioavailability of poorly water-soluble drug substances. As many new chemical entities (NCEs) in pharmaceutical research and development show poor bioavailability because of their poor water solubility, this technique can represent a way for in vivo optimization. In contrast to other techniques for increasing the bioavailability such as, for example, solid solutions, drug delivery systems based on in situ micronized drugs are thermodynamically stable as in this case where the drug is crystalline and not amorphous.