The extraction of rare earth elements from chloride medium by mixtures of sec-nonylphenoxy acetic acid (CA100) with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) dithiophosphinic acid (Cyanex301) or bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) monothiophosphinic acid (Cyanex302) in n-heptane has been studied. The synergistic enhancement of the extraction of lanthanum (III) by mixtures of CA100 with Cyanex301 has been investigated using the methods of slope analysis and constant mole. The extracted complex of lanthanum (III) is determined. The logarithm of the equilibrium constant is calculated as –1.41. The formation constants and the thermodynamic functions, ΔH, ΔG, and ΔS have also been determined. Moreover, the different extraction effects of rare earth elements in the mixing systems of CA100 with Cyanex301 or Cyanex302 have been employed to consider the possibility of separating rare earth elements according to their separation factors.Synergistic solvent extraction, the extraction of metal ions with two kinds of extractants, has attracted much attention in the last decades. It not only enhances the extraction efficiency but also improves the selectivity significantly ( Carboxylic acids are another kind of extractant for the extraction of REEs (  In the present paper, the solvent extraction of REEs by mixtures of CA100 with C301 or bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) monothiophosphinic acid (Cyanex302, hereafter abbreviated as C302) from chloride medium has been studied. The synergistic coefficient, the extraction mechanism and the thermodynamic functions are determined for lanthanum (III) when extracted by mixtures of CA100 with C301. Based on the various extraction effects on REEs, the possibilities of separating them are discussed according to the separation factors. High purity REEs (> C301 and C302 were supplied by Cytec Canada Inc. CA100 with a purity greater than 98% was purchased from Shanghai Rare-Earth Chemical Co., Ltd. Both of the extractants were used as received and dissolved in The concentrations of REEs were determined by spectrophotometry using a Cintra 10e spectrophotometer (GBC Scientific Equipments, Australia). A pHS-3C digital pH meter was employed for pH measurements (Shanghai Rex Instruments Factory, China). Deionized water was prepared by the Milli-Q SP system (Millipore, Milford, MA, USA). The extraction procedures were carried out as follows: equal volumes (5 The loaded organic phase was equilibrated with hydrochloric acid of different concentrations. The mixtures were shaken at 293 The extraction of La The extracted complex of REEs by C301 from nitrate medium has been reported as LnA In this work, the effects of pH and C301 concentration on the extraction of La Similarly, the extraction of La In order to study the synergistic effect in the mixtures of C301 and CA100, the following reaction is proposed: At fixed concentrations of C301, CA100, and ionic strength, the effects of pH on the extraction of La According to Eqs. The formation constants, The values of When La The Δ The extraction effects of REEs by mixtures of CA100 with C301 or C302 have been studied in detail. In CA100 The different extraction effects may be used to investigate the separation of REEs. If The further The aqueous medium is an important factor that may affect the extraction behavior of metal ions. In the present work, the extraction of REEs by CA100 The loading capacities of REEs by CA100 In the present study, the mixtures of CA100 with C301 or C302 are applied to the extraction of REEs from chloride medium. The mixtures exhibit different extraction effects on different REEs. The synergistic extraction of La