A visible light active Ag2CO3/TiO2/2-hydroxylethylammonium formate (RTIL) nanocomposite has been synthesized via loading Ag2CO3 flower-like particles on TiO2/RTIL by a simple precipitation method. TiO2 nanoparticles were prepared by the modified sol–gel method using 2-hydroxylethylammonium formate (RTIL) as an ionic liquid. The prepared photocatalysts were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform-infra red spectroscopy (FTIR) and Diffuse reflectance UV–vis spectroscopy (DRS) techniques. The photocatalytic performance of the synthesized photocatalysts was investigated by the photodegradation of acid blue 92 (AB92) dye under both visible and UV light irradiations. It was divulged that the Ag2CO3/TiO2/RTIL heterostructure noticeably exhibited an improvement in both efficiency and rate of AB92 photodegradation in comparison with both TiO2 samples. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of Ag2CO3/TiO2/RTIL nanocomposite is mainly attributed to the promoted absorption of light and more efficient suppression of charge carrier recombination. The possible mechanism for the improved photocatalytic properties of the Ag2CO3/TiO2/RTIL nanocomposite was also discussed.The most important factor of a safe and healthy life is the reliable water resources free of perilous and toxic contaminants. These days, environmental pollution causes a great deal of concern among scientists all over the world. Hence, selective and sensitive detection of different toxic pollutants as well as an effective approach are the main steps for decreasing their effects. Since the conventional methods are not efficient enough to decontaminate pollutants completely, Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) are widely used. Within the past decades, semiconductor heterogeneous photocatalysts which utilize solar energy count as a common example of AOPs Of all semiconductor photocatalysts investigated till now, titanium dioxide (TiO Contrary to the mentioned above advantages, the broad band gap of TiO In this study, Ag Navy blue Acid Blue 92 (MW X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the prepared samples were recorded on a Bruker D4 X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα ( Synthesis of RTIL was performed according to the previous report Nanoparticle TiO Modified Ag The photocatalytic activity tests were performed in the Pyrex reactor by measuring the photodegradation of AB92 under both UV and visible light irradiations. The photocatalytic reactor is schematically shown in S.1. The UV light (S.2) was provided by an OSRAM 125 The crystallite property of the prepared samples is reported via XRD patterns which are illustrated in The average crystal size for all samples was calculated by applying the Scherrer’s formula, as expressed by Eq. To investigate the surface morphology of the synthesized catalysts, they were characterized by FE-SEM images as shown in  The light absorption of the Ag The photocatalytic performances of as-prepared samples were comparatively evaluated by measuring the degradation of AB92 as a hazardous dye under both visible and UV light irradiations. Degradation conversion for the AB92 elimination was calculated from the Eq. The experimental results for the photocatalytic activity over different samples are shown in For the reference, the evaluation of photocatalytic activity for the AB92 degradation under both visible and UV light irradiation in the presence of Ag Additionally, the photocatalytic degradation kinetic was investigated; the linear simulation of AB92 degradation can be accounted for by a pseudo first-order model, called the Langmuir–Hinshelwood ( To have a better understanding of the reaction kinetics of AB92 degradation, the graph of ln( The photodegradation rate constant for AB92 by TiO The recycle experiments were performed for the five consecutive cycles to examine the durability of Ag It is required to evaluate the possible mechanism for the markedly improved photocatalytic activity of the Ag e Ag Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: