In situ measurements on stress–indentation curves conducted with the National Research Council (NRC), Canada and the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (ARRI), Russia borehole indentors (BHI) are analyzed and classified. This establishes harmony with laboratory observations on stress–strain diagrams and some compatibility with the recommendations (ISO/DIS 19906) on estimating uniaxial ice strengths from BHI strengths. The analysis is devoted mainly to consider the influence of local ice conditions and the indentation rates on the pressure–indentation curves. Simultaneous records of the acoustic emission (AE) detected by accelerometers installed on the ice surface, within 1.5m of the indentation plate, indicated that major cracks are nucleated at the ice/plate interface. Microstructural analysis of the indented ice confirmed this important conclusion in addition to revealing recrystallization as well as healing activities in the indented ice. An attempt, with extremely limited success, has been made in applying conventional ice failure criteria for predicting the observed stress–indentation curves. Phenomenologically, however, a power-law between the indentation-rate and upper-yield strength exhibits the same rate sensitivity (about 3) usually obtained for strain-rate dependence of uniaxial strengths. Numerical solutions of the rate-sensitive indentation processes must be developed (as has successfully been achieved for uniaxial tests) on microstructure-property based mathematical (rheological) model that includes the effects of the rate-dependent kinetics of deformation, microcracking and crack-enhanced creep. Premature brittle fractures are contact problems and modeling must consider the nucleation of cracks in ice at the ice/plate contact surface.In situ borehole indentor (BHI) tests involve loading a large volume of ice. For a given thermal and mechanical state of an ice cover, the micromechanics of failure processes and consequently the stress–indentation response of ice depend very strongly on the rate of indentation ( Due to augmented interests in shipping through sea-ice infested waters, due primarily to the decrease in the extent of sea ice and the duration of the cold seasons caused by climate change and global warming, NRC-BHI is increasingly being used in the Arctic for over twenty years to measure the in-situ bulk strength of the ice and its seasonal variation ( The BHI or borehole jack (BJ) strength has recently been recommended in The NRC-BHI was built in 1985 and was designed by the first author, as described in Recently a new BHI has been designed and built at the Arctic and Arctic Research Institute (ARRI) and is being used on sea ice ( One of the objectives of this paper is to briefly present the NRC-BHI and ARRI-BHI test systems and procedures for improving the test systems. The other objectives are to discuss the BHI results and analytical methods to be developed to present them in a rational manner, keeping in mind the micromechanics of ice deformation and failure processes involved during indentations. However, the primary objective is to combine the knowledge base developed on physics and mechanics of ice, and the modeling capabilities of the three authors. The NRC borehole system was designed and fabricated in 1985. It was developed to evaluate the ‘rate sensitivity’ of in situ ductile strength of ice in its natural state and compare the results obtained from laboratory tests. This would then help in establishing the micromechanics of deformation properties of natural ice with those at the level of the mobility of ice-lattice dislocations and the kinetics of intercrystalline microcracking leading to ductile high-temperature failures. As for brittle compressive fractures, laboratory tests on fresh-water granular or snow-ice ( The NRC-BHI has two independent pressure chambers and uses two movable plates with polished surfaces ( The light fibre-glass core auger, for the NRC system, makes 150 In case of ARRI-BHI, the main goal of development was to determine the in-situ compressive strength at a given rate of loading (indentor speed of 4.2 The AARI-BHI is a single piston device with two plates ( The ARRI-BHI is capable of delivering a constant indentation rate to an ultimate penetration depth of 50 Most of the recent ARRI-BHI tests were carried out using the 90 The maximum depth of tests using the ARRI system has been to a depth of 5 The strongest point in ARRI-BHI tests is the use of three accelerometers installed in the ice sheet surface, in the vicinity of the indentor, to register acoustic emissions (AE) indicating crack formation during the tests. The seismometers (AПT1-M) register signals in the range of frequencies up to 100 A number of failure processes occur in ice, regardless of test configuration (laboratory unconfined or biaxial and in situ BHI), temperature, ice types and the structural state of ice. The stress–strain or stress–indentation (plate displacement) curves are used for classifying the failures. These processes may be divided into the four commonly observed (idealized) modes, as described below and illustrated in      Ice mechanics is a part of a huge field of high-temperature materials science, metallurgy, geology and geophysics. In mechanical/metallurgical engineering, the intergranular or grain-boundary cracking readily observed in ice and illustrated in In the field of materials science of crystalline materials, “high-temperature” is defined as ‘homologous’ temperatures T  Brittle, or rather premature fractures (introduced in Stress–displacement diagrams, like The first peak stress in The relatively shallower zone in the central section and triangular zones of recrystallized ice are prominent in Question is when did these major cracks develop? These are the forensic type of enquiries that can be addressed by microstructural analysis ( HIPed is a new term for ice mechanics people and was introduced in ice engineering by Going back to Microstructural analysis provides windows of opportunity for observations after the completion of the BHI tests. However, records of acoustic emissions during the BHI tests provide opportunities for an understanding of the kinetics of micro- and macro-cracking activities leading to failures. This is presented in the next section. Results obtained from the ARRI-BHI experiments are in general agreement with those of the NRC-BHI tests. Both ARRI and NRC laboratories, therefore, found a common ground for agreement in the classification of stress–displacement records into four failure types, as suggested in The strongest point in the ARRI-BHI tests is the installation of three-component seismometer/accelerometer on the ice surface at about 1.5–2 Recordings of seismo-acoustic signals (pulses) during the borehole indentation tests, and particularly their locations, confirmed the formation of internal cracks in ice at the ice–plate interface — and provide credibility to conclusions drawn from forensic microstructural investigations presented in In winter periods, the ice was strong and brittle. The unconfined strength (measured on 17 March 2009) of granular sea ice samples from the depths of 0.6 For weak (decayed) ice in hummocks and at depths more than 1.5–1.8 It follows from the experimental results presented in Penetration in the ‘elastic–ductile’ ice was considered by The computational scheme for the problem is given in The indenter is modeled as a flat circular plate located in the center of the cylinder front plane. It is proposed to move with a constant velocity Applicability of the conventional failure criteria Tresca (T), Mohr–Coulomb (M–C), Mohr–Coulomb–Tresca (M–C–T), and Nadreu–Michel as adopted by Fish–Zaretsky (F–Z, 1997), as illustrated in All of these models determine the failure surface in coordinates p–   The following two problems were analyzed by Which traditional mathematical model better describes the experimental data? How do weak zones in ice influence the borehole indenter records? The assumed criterion for choice of the suitable model should be based on how well the calculated results compare with the experimental observations. Determination of model parameters on the basis of the above-mentioned criteria is actually inverse problems. These problems are often confusing because several combinations of input data may approximately correspond to the same final result. The following results obtained from the ARRI-BHI measurements were used in the analysis carried out: The AARI experiments show that the maximum pressures measured during BHI tests (at a fixed indentation rate of 4.2 The ratio of the maximum BHI pressure, ‘p’, and the unconfined strength, ‘R The AARI measurements show that the unconfined ice strength (R The test results in  It is shown in this paper that the stress–indentation records obtained with BHIs developed at NRC and AARI are complimentary. This provided the opportunity for a mutually-agreed classification of failure processes depending on the physics of registered stress–indentation curves ( All the reported ARRI-BHI tests were carried out using the 90 Replacing one of the plates in the NRC-BHI with a surface area of 9.0 Up to now BHIs were used mainly for consideration of physics of processes which follow the intrusion in ice. The practical needs demand clarification of level of parameters which are necessary for sea structures design. The attempts to link BHI pressure with the ice unconfined strength cannot be considered as successful. The great difference in the empirical transitional coefficient (3–5 and even 6) obtained in different regions may lead to significant over or under estimation of the ice loads exerted on structures. Moreover, physics-based justifications for the values of the coefficient have to be developed. As the activity in the Arctic regions increases, transition from pure experimental methods of estimating loads on structures and integration with approaches of their evaluation on fundamental basis (experiment Whereas premature fractures, due to the complex and variable contact problems are unpredictable, the upper yield (UY) type of failures depends on indentation rate and can be quantified ( The imposed condition (the independent variable) during a BHI test is the rate of indentation. Ideally the rate of indentation should be constant. For phenomenological relationship, the average indentation rate to failure, In Eq. Eq. Eq. The stress exponent, 1/b of about 3 is well known for constant-stress dislocation creep in pure polycrystalline ice under uniaxial (1D) loading conditions. A value of 3 was also obtained for 1D creep in FY sea ice ( Eq. ARRI-BHI and NRC-BHI should be tested side by side in the same ice. In conjunctions with a 90 Use of the borehole indentors (BHI) for the investigations of in-situ ice properties has many advantages in comparison to other widely used methods. This instrument avoids many of the problems of ice sampling and specimen preparation, and thereby increases the reliability of the experimental observations. The results provide information on the effect of in-situ factors like temperature, salinity, ice microstructure including cracks, voids, etc., and the effect of the indentor displacement rate on three-dimensional confinement and modes of failure. Four failure types were identified on the basis of pressure–displacement (indentation) curves. BHI permits the determination of ice properties as functions of depth usually encountered in floating ice including hammocks keel. They provide information not only about ice properties but also may reflect certain gross features related to the structure of any ice body (location of large cracks, border between the consolidated layer and the hummock's keel, anisotropy, heterogeneity of the ice mass, etc.). Construction of two in-situ borehole indentor (BHI) systems for ice has been described. One was developed at the National Research Council (NRC) of Canada in 1985 and the other at the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (ARRI) of Russia in 2006. It is shown that both of these indentors have essentially the same features and their records are qualitatively similar. In fact, the classification of BHI failure modes into four general types was mutually agreed between the Russian and Canadian investigators. Nonetheless, tests should be performed in ice simultaneously with both of these test systems for quantitative correlations. The BHI may be considered as a small structure interacting with the natural ice. The analysis of BHI results gives an opportunity for the selection of a more reliable ice model. The first step in this direction, albeit based on the traditional concepts of yield-criteria, has been taken in this work. A number of ice failure criteria have been suggested in models used in ice engineering. These models were examined, but their justification faced difficulties. More complicated investigations should be conducted in future. Consequently, ice loads for design of offshore structures in the Arctic regions should be determined both experimentally and theoretically. Theoretical treatments of ice loads require appropriate constitutive equations capable of describing ice behaviour and failures under environmentally induced different conditions. NRC-BHI was used to develop test techniques for examining the failure processes in ice, micromechanics involved in the failure processes, the rate sensitivity of upper-yield (UY) strength of ice and quantifying the degree of maturity for premature brittle-like fractures. Four general modes of BHI failures also occur during unconfined tests, whereas the ratio between the BHI and unconfined strength may vary widely. However, determination of similar rate sensitivity for UY failures unifies the in-situ BHI tests to laboratory uniaxial and confined tests — an issue that could be vital to the recent ISO codes. NRC tests concluded that the ductile UY failures during BHI tests involve microfracturing, recrystallization and HIPing (Hot Isostatically Pressing), but the premature ‘brittle’ fractures are caused by nucleation of crack at the indentor plate/ice interface and propagation of these cracks in the bulk of the ice body. The ARRI tests involving additional detection of acoustic emissions (AE), especially the identifications of major cracks and locating their source of nucleation at the plate/ice interface confirms NRC's observations. The ARRI system also provides the kinetics of microcracking activities during tests and this will be extremely important, in future, for developing numerical methods, based on NRC-developed elasto-delayed-elastic-viscous (EDEV) model and crack-enhanced creep, for simulations of BHI results.