The beneficiation potential of the iron ore slimes produced from the washing plants and tailing ponds of Kiriburu mines assaying up to 60% Fe, 3.34% SiO2, and 2.93% Al2O3 is analyzed. To start with, the ore slime was characterized in sufficient detail to reveal that it is extremely fine — 80% below 110 μm and contains substantial amount of goethite (Fe2O3·H2O). The liberation study indicates that the finer particles (−45 μm) are less liberated than the coarser particles.
                  Taking into account all the physical and chemical attributes of the ore, a two-stage hydrocyclone–spiral circuit was envisaged for processing the ore. At first, the performance of this circuit was assessed through simulation using MODSIM — a modular simulator for ore dressing plant flow sheets. Simulation results showed that the ore could be upgraded up to 64% Fe that formed the basis for a pilot plant campaign. A 5-in. hydrocyclone followed by a five-step spiral (5-ft diameter) was set up to process the ore in close circuit. The experimental results show that it is possible to raise the iron content up to 64.17% at a solid recovery of 37.3% with simultaneous decrease in the alumina content down to 1.17%.Indian iron ore is generally considered of softer nature with high clay content that typically generates more fines (−10 mm size) during preparation of the ore. These fines being relatively of lower grade cannot be used directly in a blast furnace, hence, rejected into the tailing dam. However, it has been lately reported in the literature that even −100 mesh fraction in the sinter feed can be accepted up to 40%, by micro-balling of the sinter mix prior to sintering. For this reason and to avoid the loss of fines in the form of slime, it has become increasingly attractive to upgrade the ore fines using appropriate beneficiation techniques. Problem in processing the iron ore slimes primarily stems from the compositional characteristic as well as the soft nature of the ore. The composition of the Indian iron ores is typified by high iron content with relatively higher amount of alumina as high as 7% Analysis of earlier work indicates that beneficiation of the iron ore slime is not difficult, but the beneficiation techniques to be used must be matched to the quality of the ore and must be suitable for the range of products. The ore in hand is the Kiriburu ore deposit located at Bonai range of mines in India. A vast reserve of iron ore fines exists in the tailing dam that contain up to 60% Fe. The ore is mainly hematite. The wet processing plant (5 million tonnes per year capacity) located at the mine site produces −40+10 mm lumps for use in blast furnace, −10 mm+100 mesh fines for the sinter plant, and the −100 mesh is disposed as tailings. During a survey between 1991 and 1997, it was estimated that for the production level of 3.15 million tonnes per year, the slime (−100 mesh) generation would range from 0.6 to 0.8 million tonnes per year. This slime is discarded as an overflow product of a spiral classifier during processing at the rate of 200 tonnes/h carrying between 57% and 61% Fe. With almost 30 years of operation of Kiriburu mine, the accumulated slime loss at the tailing dam amounts to approximately 15 million tonnes. Owing to the dwindling high-grade ore at the Kiriburu mine and increasing loss of mineral values during processing, it has become imperative to develop efficient and cost-effective processing routes to recover valuable minerals from ore slimes. However, it is not quite straightforward to process the slime ore mainly because the valuable mineral is typically present in a finely disseminated form. Other difficulties associated with this type of ore are linked to fine grain size, occurrence of clay minerals, and poor liberation The experimental procedure for characterization of the ore, which is an overflow product of a spiral classifier, consisted mainly of (i) size fractionation, (ii) density measurement in a helium pycnometer, (iii) microscopic examinations, and (iv) image acquisition and processing for liberation spectrum. These steps are described in detail in the following sections and corresponding results are presented. The original sample of iron ore slime obtained from the Kiriburu mines was split into two fractions; one of the fractions was subjected to size analysis using a combination of wet screening and Microtrac that uses a laser beam for size determination. The measured size distribution of a received sample is presented in The Kiriburu iron ore constitutes predominantly of hematite with up to 2% magnetite and varying amount of goethite The other fraction of the original sample was divided into seven size fractions by wet screening. The size classes chosen were +106, −106+75, −75+53, −53+45, −45+38, −38+25, and −25 μm. A representative sample was taken from each of the intermediate size fractions and subjected to helium pycnometry. The density measurement results for each size fraction are shown in To start with, a representative sample of particles weighing approximately 6 g was taken from each of the mono-sized fractions using a Pulverit, except for the particles smaller than 25 μm and greater than 106 μm. The latter size fractions were not amenable for image analysis in the SEM due to magnification restrictions and also due to the difficulty to separate clean narrow-sized fractions for sizes smaller than 25 μm. The available samples covered most sizes of interest. Each of these samples was carefully mounted using liquid epoxy and epoxide hardener. A series of images was generated from each specimen mount. The width and height of the images were kept constant at 1024×1024 pixels but the magnification was changed and kept proportional to particle size. A solid-state back-scattered electron detector was used for all images at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. This was enough to obtain good phase resolution, and consequently, phase separation was possible between silicates and iron oxides. Several sets of images for each size range were processed for maximum phase separation and carefully analyzed. A typical image of each set corresponding to different size ranges of particles is shown in The purpose of this study was to determine the volumetric grade distribution of the mineral phase. A specialized sequence of processing steps was developed for this ore to determine the liberation spectrum. This included delineation of spurious images followed by a series of segmentations to properly define each phase in the particle cross-sections. The porosity was carefully identified and the particle cross-sections were filled with the correct phase. Details of these procedures are available in the literature The liberation spectra presented in In summary, the particle characterization work revealed the following characteristics of the ore slime that must be taken into account while selecting a processing route. The main attribute of this ore deposit is that about 80% of particles (by weight) are less than 110 μm. This fact has to be given utmost importance while selecting the unit processes for up-gradation of this ore. The chemical analysis of the composite ore show up to 60% Fe, 3.34% SiO Microscopic examination coupled with pycnometric data show that the ore contains predominantly hematite/magnetite. However, substantial amount of goethite is also present particularly in the coarser fractions. Liberation analysis show that there is lesser amount of liberation in the finer fractions. Several design considerations were given while selecting the unit processes based on the physical and chemical characteristic of the ore. First of all, it was felt that the process envisaged must be such that it would not increase the cost of processing beyond its economic viability. For example, processing the ore by magnetic means would unduly increase the processing cost of the ore compared to relatively simpler gravity separation processes. Second, the ore must be deslimed before it was concentrated. Particles below 38 μm can be discarded as this portion of the ore show relatively poor liberation characteristic. Furthermore, as it was observed from Prior to any experimental work, it was decided to assess the beneficiation level of the ore in a hydrocyclone–spiral circuit through simulation. MODSIM A partition function developed by A hydrocyclone–spiral circuit was considered in conformity with the design considerations as discussed earlier. The hydrocyclone was used to deslime the feed prior to gravity concentration. This allowed the finer unliberated particles to be discarded in the overflow of the hydrocyclone. The coarser fraction, i.e., the underflow was treated by means of a set of spirals. Two flow sheets were considered for treating this ore. The arrangements of unit processes in each of these flow sheets are shown in The results of simulation are summarized in Encouraged by the simulation results, an extensive pilot scale experimental campaign was undertaken. At first, only a hydrocyclone was used on stand-alone basis to optimize its performance as well as study the desliming behavior of the ore. The hydrocyclone with a 5-in. stub was assembled in a test rig that was supplied by M/s Mozley. Altogether, 12 experiments (as determined through design of experiment) were conducted to optimize the cyclone parameters. The variable parameters were pressure dropped (10, 15, and 20 psi), percent solid (15%, 17.5%, and 20%), and vortex to apex ratio (1.5, 2.0 and 2.7). Each parameter was varied at three levels as indicated. Higher recovery was obtained in all the four tests having vortex to apex ratio of 1.5. Out of these four experiments, the ultrafines in the underflow product was minimal when the pressure and the percent solid in the feed were kept at 10 psi and 20%, respectively. Thus, the hydrocyclone was found to operate at its best under the following conditions: 20% solid in the feed, pressure drop of 10 psi, and vortex to apex ratio of 1.5. The solids recovery to the underflow under these conditions was found to be 73.6%. Under the optimized conditions the ore was upgraded up to 63% Fe, which is still below the targeted level of 65%. A 5-ft diameter spiral was used to treat the underflow product of the hydrocyclone. The spiral has five turns that accounts for a total length of 5.5 ft and its maximum capacity is approximately 2 tonnes/h. Several experiments were conducted with the optimized parameters of the hydrocyclone. The underflow was fed to the spiral with varying degree of dilutions: 20%, 15%, and 10% solid. The samples collected in the individual streams were assayed. In addition to the chemical analysis, the corresponding size analysis was also carried out by using the Fritsch particle size analyzer that uses a laser beam for size determination. The feed to the hydrocyclone conformed to a The research work described in this paper is about exploring the possibility of upgrading the iron ore fines located at the Kiriburu mines of India such that it can be used in the blast furnace after agglomeration. The iron ore is a spiral by-product that analyzes up to 61% Fe, 3.34% SiO To overcome this challenge, a rigorous characterization study was undertaken that includes size analysis, pycnometry, microscopy, and liberation study. Microscopic examination coupled with pycnometric data showed that the ore contains substantial amount of goethite (Fe The calculated solid recovery reduced to 37% when 5% error in the flow measurement was considered. Nevertheless, the concentrate is found to be quite suitable for commercial exploitation as a sinter feed to the blast furnace. Authors are grateful to the Steel Authority of India (SAIL) for supporting this research. One of the authors, B.K. Mishra, would like to thank Dr. Claudio Schneider of the University of Utah for his help in carrying out the liberation work.