  Jürgen received his PhD with work in theoretical electrochemistry from the Dresden University of Technology (DUT) in Germany in 1970 and the Dr. Habil for research in applied electrochemistry by the same university in 1982. He worked from 1970 to 1990 as senior researcher for batteries and fuel cells at the DUT. From 1991 to 2004, he was head of the Electrochemical Energy Storage and Energy Conversion Division of the Center for Solar Energy and Hydrogen Research in Ulm, Germany. After his pension, he founded the consulting office Fuel Cells and Batteries (FCBAT) in Ulm, where he is still active. He was visiting professor at the Shandong University (China) and Sapienza University of Rome (Italy), and is currently senior professor at the Ulm University. He has more than 300 publications and 10 patents, and is co-editor of five books and two journals.   Eckhard received his diploma in physics in 1995 and his PhD in electrical engineering in 2001 from Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen University of Technology with projects on CAE modelling and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of lead–acid batteries. Having spent 2.5   Pat was awarded a PhD for crystal structure analysis in 1968 by the University of Durham, UK, and a D.Sc. for research publications in materials science, by the same university, in 1994. He worked for 23 From 1995, he was Manager of Electrochemistry at the International Lead Zinc Research Organization in North Carolina and Program Manager of the Advanced Lead Acid Battery Consortium. In 2005, he also became President of the Consortium. Dr. Moseley was one of the editors of the Journal of Power Sources for 25   Dr. David Rand, AM, PhD, ScD, Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering (FTSE), was educated at the University of Cambridge, where he conducted research on fuel cells. In 1969, he joined the Australian Government's Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) laboratories in Melbourne. After further exploration of fuel cell mechanisms and then electrochemical studies of mineral beneficiation, David established the CSIRO Battery Research Group in the late 1970s and remained its leader until 2003. He was one of the six scientists that established the Advanced Lead–Acid Battery Consortium in 1992 and served as its Manager in 1994. As a Chief Research Scientist, David became CSIRO's Scientific Advisor on hydrogen and renewable energy until his retirement in 2008. He remains active within the organisation as an Honorary Research Fellow, and has served as the Chief Energy Scientist of the World Solar Challenge since its inception in 1987. David was awarded the Faraday Medal by the Royal Society of Chemistry (UK) in 1991 and the UNESCO Gaston Planté Medal by the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences in 1996. He became a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering in 1998, and became a Member of the Order of Australia in 2013 for service to science and technological development in the field of energy storage.