The number of waste electronic devices (called as e-wastes) is ever increasing since the last decade. This is mainly because the lives of these products have become shorter, and at the same time the world market has been flooded with a huge number of new products ( Printed circuit board assembly (PCBA) is one such e-waste which has a high metal content and is a key resource to the e-waste recycling industry. A PCBA is actually an electronic part that comprises a printed circuit board (PCB), with several electronic components (ECs) mounted on the board ( In the conventional metal recovery process, the PCBAs are typically crushed, ground and smelted without disassembling the ECs ( In the last few years, several reports had been published on the disassembly process of ECs, such as automatic part removal process ( In the current research, a newly-designed, automatic EC disassembling apparatus attached with IR heater and steel brushes has been introduced. Furthermore, the disassembly ratio of the ECs under different conditions and the effects of different parameters were investigated. Moreover, the process time was also measured to evaluate the potential of the apparatus for practical applications. Various sizes of laptop PCBs were used in this study. The details of the PCBs are as follows. Laptop computer PCBAs from various manufacturers Number of PCB samples: 48 EA Average sample weight: 237.94 Standard deviation of sample weights: 66.18 A detailed drawing of the apparatus is shown in This feeding–heat–scrape sequence was repeated 3 times to achieve a higher disassembly ratio. The PCBA was discharged from the apparatus after these series of processes. A schematic flowchart of the whole disassembly process has been shown in To evaluate the apparatus' performance, ECs disassembly ratio was considered. The efficiency was calculated as follows. Where, W W W To find the optimum condition of the disassembly process, the temperature of the IR heater was varied from 200 The connection types of the ECs can be categorized into SMT (surface mounting technology), THT (through-hole technology), rivet, screwed joint, and socket pedestal ( It is to note that disassembling of THT, rivet, and screwed joint connection types had always been challenging through automated system; therefore, manual detachment by hand is always preferred for them ( Photographs of printed circuit boards before and after the disassembly process are shown in The disassembly ratios under various conditions are shown in Although Pb–Sn alloy had been most widely used as PCBA solder for many years because of its technical advantages and low cost ( The disassembly process time under optimum condition is shown in PCBAs have been widely recycled via pyrometallurgy process; however, only a small proportion of metals, such as Au, Ag, and Cu are recovered in this method. In order to recover metals of more types, hydrometallurgy-based recycling process is preferable. In the first step of the hydrometallurgy recycling method, disassembly of ECs is an essential requirement because various types of metals can be recovered. The newly designed EC disassembly apparatus effectively detached more than 94% of the ECs from both sides of PCBs without any manual hand work. The average processing time was 70 To realize an entire PCBA recycling process, it is also important to sort the ECs based on their metal composition following the disassembling treatment. In future, we plan to separate and sort the ECs via physical separation processes, such as electrostatic separation and gravity separation. As the disassembly treatment was done with the laptop PCBAs, we are also investigating and improving the apparatus to extend it to other electronic appliances, such as mobile phones and desktop computers. Further disassembly studies will be conducted from an economic standpoint regarding cost and energy savings, so that a successful commercialization of the process can be achieved eventually. This work was supported by the