Hydrogen is a key raw material for many chemical processes and a clean fuel for various power generation strategies. Coal-to-hydrogen (CTH) conversion is an alternative way to produce hydrogen that is applicable to the abundant coal reserves in China. The use of fossil energy has contributed to severe environmental problems, which drives the development of potential hydrogen production processes. Biomass is a promising renewable energy as well as an attractive resource for producing hydrogen, and it may address some of these environmental problems. In this paper, the simulation results of the biomass-to-hydrogen (BTH) and CTH processes were validated using available experimental data from the literature. Based on the simulation results, a techno-economic analysis was conducted from the viewpoints of the first and second laws of thermodynamics. The techno-economic analysis included determination of the energy efficiency, material consumption, total capital investment, production cost and carbon tax. The energy efficiencies of BTH and CTH were 37.88% and 37.82%, respectively. The BTH process had a larger raw material consumption and total capital investment (TCI) than the CTH process. However, the BTH process had a lower production cost and GHG emissions than the CTH process. The results of energy analyses of the BTH and CTH processes showed that the energy efficiency can be improved from a thermodynamic perspective. The combination of thermodynamic analysis and techno-economic performance evaluation provides insights into the improvement and operation of clean hydrogen production.Hydrogen, as a low- or zero-carbon energy source, is now considered the most promising clean energy for the 21st century. With a significant increase in hydrogen energy, global hydrogen consumption is expected to reach more than 300 Mton by 2050 [ Traditional hydrogen production in China mainly depends on fossil fuels. Presently, hydrogen produced from fossil fuels accounts for 96% of the global consumption [ The use of fossil energy has contributed to enormous environmental problems. As the impact of global warming becomes increasingly serious, the use of traditional fossil fuels needs to be decreased. Developing renewable energy is regarded as a potential way to address the environmental pressure [ There are three main methods for producing hydrogen from biomass: mechanical, biochemical [ Presently, numerous research and energy policies are focused on the hydrogen economy. Hydrogen production may play an important role in economic development. Biomass and coal, as important raw materials for hydrogen production, have become topics of interest in the development of the hydrogen energy industry. Levin and Chahine [ In this paper, the energy and mass balances of the BTH and CTH processes were calculated based on simulation results. Their techno-economic performances were analyzed and compared in terms of the energy efficiency, material consumption, total capital investment (TCI), production cost, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and carbon tax. Energy analysis was implemented to determine the location of energy loss. The energy analyses of the BTH and CTH processes showed that the energy efficiency can be improved from a thermodynamic perspective. The aim of the paper is to provide design parameters for the development of BTH and CTH processes. The combination of thermodynamic analysis and techno-economic performance evaluation provides insights into the improvement and operation of clean hydrogen production. The flowsheet simulation software Aspen Plus was used to simulate the BTH and CTH processes. China has abundant straw production, which is commonly used as fuel in rural areas. Compared with other energy sources, straw has the advantage of a low price. In this work, wheat straw was selected as biomass for proximate and elemental analyses [ The stream name corresponds to The hydrogen production process diagrams for different raw materials are shown in Compared with the BTH process, the CTH process based on the circulating fluidized bed gasifier mainly consists of six units [ The air separation unit (ASU) provides high-purity O For modeling the ASU, Peng-Rob EOS was selected as the thermodynamic method. A RadFrac block was employed to model the separation tower. The gasifier is the core equipment for the hydrogen production process. Fuels such as coal and biomass are used in the gasification process, and fuel is converted to syngas primarily containing CO, CO According to the process principle described above, assumptions are as follows [ The tax rate is 25%. The equipment salvage value is 8%. The model is at a steady-state, including gasification and combustion kinetics. The equilibrium of ash, char and tar yield in the gasification process and the pressure drop in the gasifier were not taken into account in the simulation. The model considers all of the processes occurring in the gasifier. Gasifer types include a fixed-bed gasifier, an entrained flow gasifier (EFG) and a fluidized bed gasifier (FBG). Advantages and disadvantages of each gasifier type have been previously published [ In the final step, the raw gas from the gasifier cools and leaves the gasifier and produces a certain amount of high-pressure steam. The main components of raw synthesis gas include CO, H To model the gasification unit, a thermodynamic equilibrium model was presumed, and all of the reactions were assumed to be in equilibrium [ The equilibrium constants of the reactions mentioned above are as follows: The equilibrium constants Assuming that the gasifier is an adiabatic reactor at constant temperature, the energy input and output is considered balanced. Eq. To increase the hydrogen content, CO is converted to CO For modeling the WGS unit, the Aspen Plus built-in flat plug flow reactor RPlug model was used for the prevariable and main converters of the converter unit. SRK was chosen as the proper method for the WGS unit. Details of the simulation have been described in our previous work [ The Rectisol unit is a commonly used acid gas removal process in coal-based chemical processes. The process is a physical absorption gas purification method using low-temperature methanol as the absorbent. Low-temperature methanol has relatively high solubility for acidic gases such as H For modeling of the Rectisol unit, the PC-SAFT physical property model equation was selected for the simulation process. The RadFrac model was selected to model the acid tower, CO As a new technology for the separation of gases, the PSA has been widely applied in the process of hydrogen purification [ For modeling the PSA, RK-Soave was selected as the thermodynamic model. Sep block is employed to model the adsorption tower. The BTH and CTH processes were established based on the data in Aspen Plus. Based on the simulation results, the techno-economic analysis was performed. The raw material of the BTH process is biomass, while the raw material of the CTH process is coal, and the consumption of raw materials has a significant influence on the production cost. In this work, an indicator of material consumption was used to analyze the performances of the BTH and CTH processes. Material consumption is defined as the ratio of biomass-to-hydrogen product or coal to hydrogen product, respectively, and can be shown as follows: The material consumptions by the BTH and CTH processes were calculated based on Eqs. The total capital investment (TCI) includes direct investment, indirect investment, fixed capital investment and working capital [ Values for the equipment investment and scale of the reference systems were collected from the literature [ The TCI values of the BTH and CTH processes are calculated as follows: The total capital costs of the BTH and CTH processes were calculated using Eq. The production cost is calculated using Eq. The production costs of the BTH and CTH processes were calculated on the basis of Eq. For the BTH process, the largest contribution to the production cost is from raw material consumption, accounting for 44.7% of the total production cost. The lower production cost for the BTH process is mainly due to the very cheap biomass. Depreciation and utility costs followed, accounting for 20.2% and 17.8%, respectively. Raw material, utility, and depreciation costs are the most important factors for the production cost and are the same for the CTH process. The largest production cost is raw material consumption, accounting for 51.4% of the total production cost in the CTH process. However, the utilities cost occupies a greater portion than that of the depreciation cost in the CTH process, with values of 22.0% and 13.6%, respectively. In this section, the biomass and coal prices are analyzed. The production cost ratios of the BTH and CTH processes are calculated based on Eq. At a constant biomass price, as the coal price increases, the production cost ratio increases. At a constant coal price, as the biomass price increases, the production cost ratio decreases. Further increases in the biomass price reduces the production cost gap between BTH and CTH. With the variation in the raw material price, the fluctuations of the BTH process are smaller than those of the CTH process. This finding indicates that economic performances of the BTH and CTH processes are not significantly different at a low raw material price. However, the economic performance will be significantly different at a higher raw material price. Thus, it can be concluded that the BTH process has a superior performance in terms of its resistance to price risk than the CTH process. Carbon tax is a tax imposed on carbon dioxide emissions. To limit and gradually reduce carbon emissions, carbon emissions have been taxed in many developing countries [ Under different carbon tax prices with constant production costs, the prices of biomass and coal is shown in As an environmental parameter, GHG emissions are of great significance [ The GHG emissions of the BTH and CTH processes were calculated based on Eq. Energy efficiency is the main thermodynamic efficiency index for evaluating energy conversion processes [ Based on CTH and BTH processes with an annual output of 90,000,000 Nm Compared with the CTH process, CO In this study, techno-economic analyses of the two processes were presented based on simulation results. A comparative performance analysis was conducted considering the energy efficiency, material consumption, total capital investment, production cost, raw material price and carbon tax. The production of the BTH process is cheaper than that of the CTH process. With further increases in biomass prices, the gap between the production cost of the BTH process and the CTH process will increases. The production cost for the CTH process is higher than that for the BTH process when considering the effect of the carbon tax. The BTH process shows better performance than the CTH process in a market where the carbon tax needs to be considered. The comprehensive energy efficiencies of the BTH and CTH processes are 37.88% and 37.82%, respectively. The gasification units of the BTH and CTH processes are responsible for 64.5% and 67.4% of the total energy loss, respectively. As a core part of the process, the gasification unit can help improve energy utilization. Biomass has the potential to play an important role in the production of hydrogen. Thus, the performance analysis reported herein provides insights into development and investment. The authors declare no competing financial interest. This work is supported by the  biomass to hydrogen coal to hydrogen greenhouse gas life cycle assessments Air separation unit Gasification unit water gas shift Rectisol unit pressure swing adsorption Claus unit Gas and steam turbine unit total capital investment Entrained-flow gasifier fluidized bed gasifier : raw material cost : utility cost : operating and maintenance cost : depreciation cost : plant overhead cost : administrative cost : distribution and selling cost  hydrogen moles (kmol) oxygen moles (kmol) water moles (kmol) carbon monoxide moles (kmol) carbon dioxide moles (kmol) methane moles (kmol) hydrogen sulfide moles (kmol) enthalpy (KJ Kmol latent heat of vaporization reference state formation enthalpy change