Purpose
                  Periprosthetic fractures around total knee arthroplasty are relatively rare complication comprises to 0.3–2.5%. But these injuries are often complex and challenging for the surgeons due to ageing population in conjunction with severe osteoporosis. The management option varies from conservative to internal fixation or revision surgery. Thus this study was conducted to analyze the results of various methods of treatment of periprosthetic fractures following TKA and to form the optimal treatment guidelines for fixation or revision.
               
                  Material and methods
                  51 cases diagnosed with periprosthetic fracture were enrolled and underwent surgical intervention. Type of primary prosthesis, interval between TKA and periprosthetic fracture, type of fracture, prosthesis stability and mode of fixation of fracture, any revision surgery and complication were noted.
               
                  Results
                  The mean age of all patients was 65.89 years. The mean interval between the index surgery and periprosthetic fracture was 6 years (Range 2 months to 10 years) in male and 18.5 months (Range 4 days to 7 years) in female. 44 (86%) fractures were femoral, 4 (8%) fractures were tibial and 3 (6%) fractures were of patella. The mean knee society score (KSS) & oxford knee score (OKS) were found to be good for revision group as compared to the fixation group at final follow up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In presence of poor bone stock, far distal fracture configuration, comminution, severe osteoporosis, difficulty in achieving stability with plates & old age-revision TKA is a viable option with stemmed components.Increase in the life expectancy and functional demands of the patients have resulted in substantial increase in the frequency of total knee arthroplasty (TKA). This further has increased the number of revision surgeries due to likelihood postoperative complications. Periprosthetic fractures around total knee arthroplasty are relatively rare complication comprises to 0.3–2.5%. The management option varies from conservative to internal fixation or revision surgery. The most appropriate treatment to achieve a satisfactory outcome is dependent on a number of factors that include degree of displacement, adequacy of bone stock, stability of prosthesis and the medical fitness of the patient. It was a retrospective study which was conducted at high volume arthroplasty centre in northern part of India. Out of 7390 primary cemented TKAs performed during 2000–2018, 51 cases diagnosed with periprosthetic fracture were enrolled and underwent surgical intervention. The data was analysed in terms of clinical and functional outcome. All patients with periprosthetic fracture that occurred during intraoperative period & following primary or revision TKA were included in the study. Patients with incomplete records and those who died or did not come for follow up were excluded out. Diagnosis was made on the basis of clinical examination and radiographic evaluation of all the patients. Type of primary prosthesis, interval between TKA and periprosthetic fracture, type of fracture, prosthesis stability and mode of fixation of fracture, any revision surgery and complication were noted. The details of revision surgery were also recorded from the operative notes in terms of implant used or any additional procedure such as bone grafting, revision total knee arthroplasty with semiconstrained or fully constrained & distal femur replacement. Post operatively, Sequential x-rays of the knee were taken to asses union, malunion, nonunion and any sign of implant failure. The functional status of the patient before periprosthetic fracture was assessed from the records and compared with the latest follow-up using Knee Society Score (KSS) and Oxford Knee Score (OKS). All periprosthetic fractures were classified according to the prevalent classification system. Supracondylar femoral fractures after total knee arthroplasty were classified by Statistical analysis was performed by the SPSS program for windows, version 17.0. Continuous variables are presented as mean and categorical variables are presented as absolute numbers and percentage. Data were checked for normality before statistical analysis. Normally distributed continuous variables were compared using the paired         There were 13 (25%) male patients and 38 (75%) female patients in our study. Scottish national database also showed that women are 2.3 times more likely to suffer a fracture than men We found 13 (25%) intraoperative cases of periprosthetic fractures among 7390 primary TKAs performed at our centre. Periprosthetic distal femoral fracture during TKA is rare. Alex HF Pun et al. reviewed 1346 primary cemented TKAs with the NexGen LPS implants and reported 5 femoral avulsion fractures of the medial femoral condyles. Osteoporosis is a significant risk factor for postoperative periprosthetic fractures. Paraschou et al. Patients with severe varus/valgus deformity requiring a semi-constrained implant are at higher risk of intra-operative fracture. Although displacement has been considered the major factor in determining nonsurgical or surgical management for supracondylar femoral fractures proximal to a total knee arthroplasty, sufficient evidence now supports surgical management in most cases. Nonsurgical management is reserved for undisplaced fracture and in patients who are medically unfit to tolerate surgery. Intramedullary nails and precontoured Distal Femoral locking plates are usually the best treatment for these fractures according to literature. Traditional plate fixation is prone to varus collapse. Tibial fractures are often accompanied by component loosening or instability and sometimes by component malalignment, malposition and joint instability thus requires revision arthroplasty with stemmed components. Technical factors such as implant and limb alignment, asymmetric resection or over resection of the patella and loss of blood supply leading to osteonecrosis undoubtedly place the patella at risk for fracture. Management of periprosthetic fractures after Total Knee Arthroplasty is difficult. In view of less healing capacity of osteoporotic bone in elderly patients with prosthesis in distal aspect union in supracondylar femoral fracture is challenging for surgeon. Our ultimate goal is to restore knee alignment and early range of motion. Although periarticular distal femoral locking plates have shown good results with minimal invasive technique but most of times plate or nail osteosynthesis leads to loss of fixation and varus angulation. Nonunion and implant failure are major complications in supracondylar femoral fractures. Multiple attempts to fix these fractures lead to deficient distal femur and unstable TKA implants results in flail knee. Revision TKA group did not have an increased complication rate and interestingly the recovery of patients was found to be quicker. Knee function (KSS & OKS) in revision group was better than fixation group and also revision patients were more satisfied as compared to fixation group. We conclude that in presence of poor bone stock, far distal fracture configuration, comminution, severe osteoporosis, difficulty in achieving stability with plates & old age-revision TKA is a viable option with stemmed components. If distal bone stock is deficient then we can choose megaprosthesis for distal femur. In cases with simple proximal fracture where indirect reduction with minimally invasive techniques are possible then precontoured distal femur locking plates should be preferred. For periprosthetic tibial fractures with fixed prosthesis, minimally invasive techniques with percutaneous plates fixation should be preferred. Level IV study. There is no funding source for this study. This study does not contain any study with animals and all patients were included in the study only after their written consent. The authors of the study have no conflict of interest.