Development of a complete hydrometallurgical process at the laboratory scale for recovering copper from the copper electroplating second rinse bath solution containing ~2.5 g/L copper (CESRBS) by solvent extraction route using LIX 984N-C dissolved in commercial kerosene was investigated. By using LIX 984N-C, an electrolyte from CESRBS with ~97 g/L copper content, which was addable to the copper electroplating bath, was generated by 30 vol.% LIX 984N-C in commercial kerosene at the O/A ratio of 1/8 and equilibrium pH value of 2 with two-stage counter-current extraction, and stripping of loaded organic by copper electroplating first rinse bath solution (7.8 g/L Cu) with 550 g/L sulfuric acid addition and with the O/A ratio of 2 at two-stage counter-current stripping process. The copper in stripping solution precipitated as CuSO4 3H2O salt. If the copper sulfate is produced without contaminated with organic phase, it could be recycled to the copper electroplating bath. A complete flow sheet of 30 vol.% LIX 984N-C process for the recovery of copper from CESRBS was demonstrated.The application of the solvent extraction (SX) process is considered as an attractive option for the removal and recovery of metals from electroplating rinse bath solutions. Because currently, the spent baths are treated by alkaline precipitation, but this process generates a large amount of hazardous plating sludge and thus requires dumping sites the regulations for which are quite stringent in Turkey. Ion exchange and electrodialysis were studied in order to remove and recover each component in the baths in order to extend the bath life; however, many problems still remain unsolved, such as the low exchange capacity for the ion exchange, and the low durability and unsatisfactory selectivity of the electrodialysis membrane. From the standpoints of environmental protection and resource recycling, it is urgent to develop an effective technique to treat the electroplating copper plating bath without sludge generation and recover copper ( Heavy metals are present in the wastewater as either cations or anions. Cations are usually extracted into an organic diluent by acidic or chelating extractants. Thus, for example, aromatic oxime molecules, known commercially as LIX 84, LIX 984N, LIX 860 (Cognis) and Acorga P50 (Avecia), may be used as extractants to remove Cu(II) or Au(I) whereas organophosphates, such as 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-ethylhexyl ester (HEH(EHP)), mono(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (H2MEHP), di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) or di(2-ethylhexyl) di thiophosphoric acid (DTPA) may be used as extractants to remove Pb, Cd, Zn(II), Ni, Co, Cr(III), Ag(I) and rare earth metal species ( Metal anions can be extracted by ion-pair formation with long chain alkyl amines in an organic diluent, as long as salts or acids are present in the aqueous feed ( Other instances where solvent extraction processes can be applied to wastewater treatment include the use of a tertiary amine, tris (2-ethylhexyl) amine (TEHA) or a phosphine oxide mixture (CYANEX 923) for the recovery of mineral acids from hydrometallurgical process waste streams ( During many plating operations, a substantial amount of bath solution adheres to the plated workpiece as they leave the plating tank. In this manner, valuable materials are lost as “drag-out” into the subsequent cascade rinse tanks ( Chemical properties of electroplating rinse bath solutions depend on various factors such as the surface area of workpiece, used raw materials and their concentration in the plating bath and the cleaning period of rinse bath. Therefore, various electroplating rinse bath solution samples were taken from different companies, and their chemical composition and pH values were measured. According to these analysis, the second (as feed solution) and the first (as stripping solution) rinsing bath solutions of a copper electroplating process from the MAKEL Group company were chosen as the most suitable and representative feed and stripping solutions for this study. Chemical analysis and pH of them are given in LIX 984N-C solvent extraction reagent, supplied by Cognis Ireland, was dissolved in a commercially available kerosene without further purification in order to prepare the organic phase. LIX 984N-C reagent, a 1:1 volume blend of LIX 860N-IC and LIX 84-IC, is a mixture of 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime and 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime in a high flash point hydrocarbon diluent and easily forms water insoluble complexes with various metallic cations. It is a more concentrated form of LIX 984N. Therefore, it might be considered as a new SX reagent developed by Cognis. For this reason, there is not any copper SX data about it in the public domain. Only, Generally, some parts of the first rinse water bath were recycled to the plating bath, in order to properly recover some copper. However, the wastewater from the second rinse bath contains the most important copper source to be recovered as seen Each one of the experiment, unless otherwise stated, was done at room temperature by mixing a 25 ml of organic mixture with a 25 ml of aqueous phase in a 100 mL separatory funnel at a constant shaking speed of 300 rpm for 15 min by using a mechanical shaker (IKA yellow line RS 10 control). The organic phase to aqueous phase (O/A) ratio was taken as unity, unless stated otherwise. At the end of each experiment, the separated and filtrated aqueous phase was analyzed by AAS to determine the metal concentration in the aqueous phase, and the metal concentration in the organic phase was calculated by subtracting it from the total. Percent extraction and stripping efficiency of copper were calculated from these results. The variation in multiple readings from the same sample was generally within 4%, while that of the duplicated experiments was from 2% to 5%. Analytic grade NaOH and Na Equilibrium pH of CESRBS was adjusted to different values ranging from − For original CESRBS, pH, and phase ratio, the amount of copper extracted increased with increasing extractant concentration, as a result of which the distribution curves shifted to lower pH values as shown in By itself, % extraction metal versus pH curve has really no meaning, simply because it is dependent on the O/A ratio, loading capacity etc. There are two methods to determine the loading capacity of a solvent, in the first method the O/A ratio is studied and in the other, the organic phase is loaded several times with fresh aqueous at previously determined constant SX conditions. The latter process was carried on until the saturation of the solvent with the metal was obtained. Loading capacity of 10 vol.% LIX 984NC organic phase was determined by the second method. Organic phase (containing 10 vol.% LIX 984N-C) was loaded 7 times with fresh CESRBS at the O/A ratio of unity and at equilibrium pH range of 1.7–2.1. The results of these studies are presented graphically in The O/A ratio studies were done to find out the theoretical number of extraction stages and the enrichment of copper in loaded organic phase during extraction. Extraction of copper by using 10, 15 and 30 vol.% LIX 984NC organic phases from CESRBS was carried out by varying the O/A ratio from 1/30 to 10 at the equilibrium pH of 2.10 A two-stage counter-current extraction simulation (CCES) was done at the O/A ratio of 1/4 and 1/8 by using 15 and 30 vol.% LIX 984NC according to the results of McCabe–Thiele diagrams. First of all, organic phases were loaded with copper by using CESRBS, and then they were stripped by the aqueous phase containing 600 g/L H The quantity of loaded organic (LO) phase (Cu The last group of experiments was carried out by keeping the acid concentration constant at 550 g/L for 30 vol.% LIX 984NC LO and the stripping duration was 45 min while the O/A ratio was changed between 6 and 1/6. A stripping McCabe–Thiele diagram for 30 vol.% LIX 984N-C LO are plotted in According to the results of O/A ratio tests and McCabe–Thiele diagram, a two-stage counter-current stripping simulation of copper was carried out at the O/A ratio of 2, and the results are given in The laboratory scale solvent extraction by 30 vol.% LIX 984N-C dissolved in commercial kerosene and stripping of LO by the copper electroplating first rinse bath solution containing 550 g/L sulfuric acid experiments were performed in order to produce an electrolyte from CESRBS with a high copper content which could be recycled to the copper electroplating bath. So, the spent rinses were successfully treated and recycled, both the rinsing water and the utilizable raw material (copper sulfate and pregnant electrolyte) were recovered, which can in turn be looped back to the rinsing and process baths, respectively, as long as sufficient concentrations are attained as shown in the working flow sheet ( A complete hydrometallurgical process was developed at the laboratory scale for recovering copper from CESRBS by solvent extraction route using LIX 984N-C dissolved in a commercially available kerosene. An electrolyte from CESRBS with ~ The percent copper extraction increased with the rising of equilibrium pH in all organic phases. Greater than 99% copper recovery for 5, 10 and 15 vol.% LIX 984NC organic phases was obtained at equilibrium pH values of 2.31, 1.85 and 1.69, respectively. Increment in the extractant concentration of organic phase caused shifting of the distribution curves to lower pH values. The copper extraction capacity of 10 vol.% LIX 984N-C from CESRBS was determined as 7.4 g/L The possibility of enriching the copper concentration in the loaded organic phases containing 10, 15 and 30 vol.% LIX 984NC were predicted as 2.75, 4 and 8 times, respectively, at two counter-current extraction stages. A two-stage counter-current extraction with organic phase containing 30 vol.% LIX 984N-C extractant is optimum for the recovery of copper from CESRBS at the O/A ratio of 1/8 and at an equilibrium pH of 2.0–2.5 to achieve high copper content. The optimum sulfuric acid concentration was determined as 500 g/L due to advantage of CuSO 2-stages of stripping were necessary to successfully strip more than 99% copper from LO using 550 g/L sulfuric acid at the O/A phase ratio of 2. The author wishes to acknowledge the financial support provided by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) with project No. 106M356 and CÜBAP with project No. M323.