Although the first references are from the 15th Century when both Hussites and crusaders are said to have used rockets during the Hussite Wars (also known as the Bohemian Wars) there is no strong evidence that rockets were actually used at that time. It is worth noting that Konrad Kyeser, who described several rockets in his Bellifortis manuscript written 1402–1405, served as advisor to Bohemian King Wenceslas IV. Rockets were in fact used as fireworks from the 16th century in noble circles. Some of these were built by Vavřinec Křička z Bitýšky, who also published a book on fireworks, in which he described how to build rockets for firework displays. Czech soldiers were also involved in the creation of a rocket regiment in the Austrian (Austro-Hungarian) army in the first half of the 19th century.
                  The pioneering era of modern rocket development began in the Czech lands during the 1920s. The first rockets were succesfully launched by Ludvík Očenášek in 1930 with one of them possibly reaching an altitude of 2000 metres. Vladimír Mandl, lawyer and author of the first book on the subject of space law, patented his project for a stage rocket (vysokostoupající raketa) in 1932, but this project never came to fruition.
                  There were several factories during the so-called Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia in 1939–1945, when the Czech lands were occupied by Nazi Germany, where parts for German Mark A-4/V-2 rockets were produced, but none of the Czech technicians or constructors were able to build an entire rocket. The main goal of the Czech aircraft industry after WW2 was to revive the stagnant aircraft industry. There was no place to create a rocket industry.
                  Concerns about a rocket industry appeared at the end of the 1950s. The Political Board of the Central Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist Party started to study the possibilities of creating a rocket industry after the first flight into space and particularly after US nuclear weapons were based in Italy and West Germany in 1957 and 1959. The first project involved the meteorological rockets Sokol I and Sokol II in 1960, which were never completed, as the rocket industry came under the exclusive sphere of interest of the Soviet Union. In Czechoslovakia only a Rocket Research and Test Institute was created by the Czechoslovak Ministry of Defence in 1963. The first Czechoslovak rockets to find practical use were launched in 1965. This study has been created as a part of the scientific project: Výzkumný záměr MSM 0021620827 České země uprostřed Evropy v minulosti a dnes, blok V/d: Česká vysokoškolská vzdělanost.There is a possibility that the inhabitants of the Czech lands first came into contact with rockets during the Mongol invasion of Central Europe in 1241. There were two streams of attacking Mongol forces—the northern stream in Silesia and the southern in Hungary. We know for sure that the Mongols already knew rockets as weapons at that time. There is a strong indication that the southern Mongol force used rockets during the Battle of Móhi (also known as the Battle of Sajó River) on April 11 1241. The question arises whether rockets were also used at the Battle of Liegnitz, which involved the northern Mongol force and took place on 9 April 1241 in Silesia. We know for sure that in this battle troops from Moravia fought the Mongols, who defeated the Christian forces in both battles. Evidently Bohemian and Roman King Wenceslas II was in charge of defence and created a strong army, which was unfortunately just one day's march away from the battlefield near Liegnitz. After their victory the Mongols did not seek battle with Wenceslas's fresh, strong troops and instead invaded through what is known as the Moravian Gate area of Moravia. Areas were plundered by Mongols around Silesian towns such as Opava (German Troppau) and Moravian towns such as Olomouc (German Olmütz). But on the other hand the Mongols almost certainly did not capture any of the fortified towns in Moravia despite besieging them. The Mongol troops from Silesia then united with the Mongol force in Hungary The most significant book on weaponry in the middle ages is without doubt the Bellifortis manuscript by Konrad Kyeser. This manuscript was most probably written between 1402 and 1405. Konrad Kyeser, who was born in 1366 in Eichstätt in Bavaria, was connected with the University of Law in Prague Old Town where he graduated in 1390. Konrad Kyeser, who had war experience from the 1396 crusade against the Ottoman Empire, probably served as advisor to Bohemian and Roman King Wenceslas IV and at first he wanted to dedicate the Bellifortis manuscript to this King, and not only because the book was written during his stay in Bohemia. Eventually the manuscript was dedicated to Roman King Ruprecht III. This was probably connected with the arrest of Wenceslas IV by his brother Sigismund, late Roman Emperor and Bohemian King, in 1402. There is an indication that Konrad Kyeser, who sided with Wenceslas IV, was exiled from Bohemia in 1402. This manuscript is the first demonstrable sign of knowledge regarding Rocketry in Bohemian noble and university circles, at least from the court circle around Wenceslas IV. Kyeser's manuscript dealt with fireworks for warfare and fireworks for pleasure. There is a description of several types of rockets—a vertical flying rocket, a horizontal flying rocket, a rocket launched by a tensed rope and a rocket launched to deliver a message. We cannot tell if any of these rockets were actually used. We can only point out that some knowledge of rocketry was present in Bohemian court circles at the beginning of the 15th century The first known manuscript of Bohemian provenance describing how to make a small rocket is that of Vavřinec Křička z Bitýšky. Vavřinec Křička's manuscript primarily describes how to cast the muzzle of a gun and/or water tubes for fountains in bronze. Only one page deals with the rocket. It is a simple description in Old Czech of how to prepare an entire bronze tube and how to fill it with gunpowder. It is worth noting that there is nothing significant that could be added by contemporary understanding. The manuscript was most probably written in 1569–1576 Fireworks started to be common in Bohemian and Moravian noble circles from first half of the 16th Century. It was a period of Bohemian history accurately described by Czech cultural historian Zikmund Winter as the Golden Period of Czech Towns. For example, Count Adam Junior of Valdštejn's private diary mentioned how small rockets from fireworks displayed by noble Bohuslav of Michalovice on July 24 1607 set fire to five houses in Prague's Lesser Town (now the Hradčany municipal district in Prague) Apart from fireworks we know that there was also an interest in using rockets for warfare. At least the members of the ruling Habsburg Dynasty were keen on this subject. Among the documents relating to this royal family and held in the Prague National Archive there is a book entitled "Novissimum fundamentum et praxis artilleriae, oder Nachitzigerbesten Mannier neu vermehrter und gantz Grundlicher Unterricht" written by Captain Ernst Braun from Danzig (now Gdańsk in Poland). This six-volume work was printed in 1682 by Johann Friedrich Gräfen, comprising an entire Encyclopedia of Contemporary Understanding of Artillery Warfare, including Usage of Rockets Regular rocket unit was created in the Austrian army after the Napoleonic Wars. The Austrian army used rockets developed by Sir William Congreve in regular Army units called Feuerwerks–Corps from 1817 and in the navy from 1821 (later known as Raketeur–Corps from 1851 and Raketeur-Regiment from 1857). The man behind the implementation of rocket weaponry in the Austrian army was Major Vinzenz von Augustin. Major Augustin was impressed by the usage of British rockets during the Battle of Leipzig (also known as the Battle of the Nations, which took place 16–18 October 1813) and he also persuaded Field-Marshall Count Jan Josef Václav Radecký of Radec, then Chief of Staff to Austrian army Generalissimo Prinz Karl Friedrich Schwarzenberg. Radecký of Radec, who was born in Bohemia and came from an old Bohemian noble family, also convinced Austrian Chancellor Prinz Klemens Wenzel von Metternich of the need to recruit rocket troops to the Austrian army. Congreve rockets were improved in the Austrian army (and later in the Austro-Hungarian army). But after the 1866 war army command decided that rocket troops had no future in the Austro-Hungarian army. The last combat usage of rockets is documented in the Austro-Hungarian army in 1869 The birth of Czechoslovakia in 1918 brought with it great interest in aviation, which was significantly sponsored by the Czechoslovak government. But there was no interest in nascent rocketry. If it were not for two enthusiasts born in Western Bohemia – Ludvík Očenáček and Vladimír Mandl – there would be practically no connections between Czechoslovakia and rocketry. We could of course mention that Frank J. Malina lived with his parents from 1920 to 1925 in Czechoslovakia and read Jules Verne´s novel From the Earth to the Moon when he was 12 years old, which greatly affected his future. But such information is really on the very margins of our comprehensive Research The Czech inventor and entrepreneur Ludvík Očenášek was born on 4 August 1872 in Kříše, Western Bohemia, then in Austria–Hungary. He had no University degree and was literally a self-made man who later in his career completed his education at a middle vocational school. His wide range of interests is unbelievable. He designed an aircraft rotary engine in 1905, similar to most Mark Gnome wide rotary engines. This engine survives to this day in the National Technical Museum collection in Prague. He constructed an aircraft in 1910 and 1911 and successfully took off in it in 1911. After it crashed he abandoned experiments in aviation. It seems the main reason for this was his lack of money. Ludvík Očenášek was without doubt a patriot who fought extensively for Czech and Czechoslovak independence and before and during WWI took part in actions against the Austro–Hungarian Empire. He was in close contact with the Czech National Movement. According to his own Memoirs (first version written in 1919 and the sece subsequent Czechoslovak president Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk and other influential leaders of tond and last in 1928) he invented an artillery weapon that he called From 1928 Očenášek corresponded with Hermann Oberth, a leading German expert in rocketry at that time, and later invited him to Prague. This meeting actually took place. Ludvík Očenášek reached his zenith in rocketry in 1930 when he succesfully launched seven solid-propellant rockets on March 2. Unfortunately we lack all information besides that which claims some of these rockets reached an altitude of some 2000 We can only add that Ludvík Očenášek refused to collaborate with Nazi Germany on the development of rockets. He was active in the anti-Nazi resistance and at the age of 72 he was wounded in a fight during the Prague Uprising of May 1945. After WW2 he patented several new inventions. He died on 10 August 1949. His obituary was printed for example in the New York Times on August 13 1949 Dr. Vladimír Mandl was born on March 20 1899 in Pilsen as the son of a local attorney. Vladimír seemed to be keen on engineering but studied at the Charles University Faculty of Law in Prague. He graduated in 1921. He maintained his interest in engineering and particularly in flying; he was successful in obtaining his pilot's license and his scientific career combined law and engineering. Beginning with the 1933–1934 academic year, Dr. Mandl started to give courses as associate professor on Industrial Law at the Czech Technical University Faculty of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering in Pilsen. Dr. Mandl also participated in building the aeronautical collection of the National Technical Museum in Prague. As late as September 1940 Vladimír Mandl wrote to Vladimír Karmazín, Curator of the Aviation Collection at the National Technical Museum in Prague, about the completion of the Czech Air Museum. Of the scientific works of Vladimír Mandl the most significant is his book written in German entitled He was also active in engineering. He patented his High Altitude Rocket Project ( Unfortunately Vladimír Mandl also went down in history as one of the most influential Czech intellectuals with strong anti-semitic opinions. He mainly wrote to the nationalist oriented daily Venkov. His anti-semitic articles started to appear there from December 1938 after the Munich Crisis and the occupation of parts of Czechoslovakia by Nazi Germany, Hungary and Poland. It is worth noting that there is no evidence that Mandl collaborated with the Nazis. He died on 8th January 1941 in Pilsen These two were literally the first heralds of the coming new age of astronautics in Czechoslovakia, though they were themselves outside the mainstream of Czechoslovak industry and science at that time. Neither of them had any successors. Nazi Germany occupied rump Bohemia and Moravia on 15 March 1939 and the so-called Because of allied bombing the Nazis transferred some important factories and research institutes into Bohemia and Moravia, far behind the frontline and in relative safety. The Wilhelm Schmidding Factory from Cologne opened a new factory in Podmokly in Northern Bohemia. The primary objective of this factory was to develop a rocket engine and the appropriate fuel. Experiments were performed with liquid, solid and gas fuels. Artillery rockets were developed and constructed at the Brno Ammunition Works and the Škoda Works in Pilsen from 1942. Unguided artillery missiles developed at both factories were almost ready to go into mass production. Only the end of WW2 stopped these projects. It is worth noting that the development of rockets at the Skoda works was of interest to American scientists after May 1945, when the territory was liberated by U.S. Forces. Explosia Semtín, the largest pre-war producer of explosives, later accompanied Brno Ammunition Works and Škoda Works and was involved in research into rocket fuel, particularly solid Propellants What was known as Waffenunion Skoda–Brünn was created in 1943. It actually brought together the laboratories and research centres at Škoda Works Plzeň and the Brno Ammunition Works, while the Research and Development Centre at Explosia Semtín and Optikotechna Přerov were incorporated later. A new research centre for rocketry found convenient space in the old buildings of the former Institute of Mining Engineering (Vysoká škola báňská) in Příbram, some fifty kilometres south–west of Prague. This New Research Centre reached its peak in 1944 when the German Jet Engine and Rocket Research Institute was transferred here from Grossendorf. This Institute was headed by Rolf Engel, a collaborator of Hermann Oberth from the thirties, who later became an SS member, with the rank of SS-Hauptsturmführer. His assistant was Swede N.W. Larsson. Many Czech technicians and scientists worked there. Ing. Stalšovský, Ing. Mikš, Ing. Baláš and Ing. Zbožínek were especially involved in rocketry. They performed individual calculations and basic research for the Germans without knowing any more about the subject of research. It was the same situation as this at the Brno Ammunition Works and the Škoda Works, where nobody knew the exact purpose of the envelopes that they were producing. Shortly before the end of WW2 the German scientists left the Research Centre in Příbram and practically all the documentation was destroyed. Rolf Engel escaped and after WW2 was involved in rocketry in France. From 1951 he led rocket development in Egypt After WW2 the Czechoslovak aircraft industry had other problems besides rocket development. The aircraft industry reached its peak in Bohemia and Moravia in January 1945 when 120,399 employees were involved in it. All production of planes, engines and spares naturally went to the Nazi Luftwaffe. After the end of WW2 a great depression hit the aircraft industry. The number of employees fell to 14,159 in February 1946 and 3,868 in May 1947. The Czechoslovak authorities endeavoured to save some positions for specialists and looked for ways to revive the aircraft industry. There were some attempts to get involved in the development of jet fighters (for example the planned Czechoslovak Letov L-52 jet fighter) and jet engines, but practically no interest in Rocketry Only one institution tried to capitalise on German research into rocketry under the Protectorate after WW2. This was Vojenský technický ústav (Military Technical Institute), particularly its Department Six. It is little surprise that this Institute has its official headquarters in the former Wilhelm Schmidding Factory in Podmokly. Although Czechoslovak technicians found numerous spares for planes and helicopters under production as well as some rocket parts in former Nazi factories, very little rocket research documentation survived. Only a few pieces of information remained with no significance for rocket development Some attempts at rocket development were made. It is worth noting that these primarily involved experiments involving rocket fuel and associated devices. There is a strong suspicion that this actually involved the research previously performed by Explosia Semtín and Zbrojovka Brno during WW2. For example, Brno Ammunition Works patented a Under an agreement between the Warsaw Pact states during the fifties all space rocket research and development was left to the Soviet Union. Czechoslovakia was permitted to perform research on field rocket artillery weaponry and primarily developed artillery multiple launch rocket systems (MLRSs). The development of anti-aircraft rocket systems was of marginal interest. The Czechoslovak Rocket Research and Test Institute was created in 1963 The situation seemed to have changed in the late fifties when US nuclear weapons were deployed in what was then West Germany and Italy. The Political Board of the Central Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist Party started to study possible ways of creating a rocket industry, but practically nothing was actually accomplished. The only significant project involved the development of SOKOL I and SOKOL II meteorological rockets in 1960, but this project did not result in any practical use. The first Czechoslovak meteorological rockets were not launched until 1965. These were the SONDA meteorological rockets, but their successful launch lies beyond the scope of this study, which only aims to clarify the beginnings of rocket development in the Czech lands (Czechoslovakia)