We report the effect of cationic polyacrylamide (CPAM) addition on the structural assembly of silica nanoparticles (NPs) within a nanocellulose fibre matrix. Paper like composites are fabricated by first forming complexes of NPs with CPAM, then adding those to a suspension of nanocellulose fibres; followed by filtration, pressing and drying of the final suspension. Complementary small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and microscopy (SEM, TEM) investigations of these composites showed a lognormal bimodal distribution of NP sizes. Data analysis allows understanding interparticle interactions within assemblies of SiO2 NPs at the nanometer scale with respect to different dosage of CPAM. Increasing CPAM dosage increases retention of NPs within the cellulose matrix with stronger interparticle interactions and produces composites with smaller pores. The correlation length of NPs, indicative of the size of the NP clusters increased from 30 to 70nm as the CPAM dosage increased from 16.5 to 330mg/g NPs. Retention and assembly of SiO2 NPs by varying CPAM dosage results from the balance of different interaction forces between NPs, CPAM and nanocellulose fibres. Understanding the effect of CPAM dosage on the various NP and composite structural conformations enables us to engineer novel hierarchically and functional cellulose based structured materials.Cellulose nanofibres are fast becoming widely available low-cost organic nanomaterials with specific properties such as tuneable opacity, low thermal expansion, high stiffness, high strength and flexibility. Cellulose is the most abundant, renewable and biodegradable biopolymer, efficiently produced by well-established manufacturing processes and infrastructures Nanocomposites are usually two phase materials consisting of a continuous polymeric phase reinforced by a discontinuous phase consisting of high surface area nanofillers Since both silica NPs and nanocellulose are negatively charged, an electrostatic repulsion is opposing the retention of NP’s in the composite. In such cases, cationic polyelectrolytes are widely used in paper industries as retention aids Generally, for characterization, direct methods such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) are used, but they evaluate a limited area of the composite and it is difficult to measure interparticle interactions between NPs In this study, a novel structural characterization approach is developed to elucidate NPs interactions within the respective formed assemblies dispersed in the cellulose matrix. We prepared nanocellulose/SiO Microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) was purchased from DAICEL Chemical Industries Limited, Japan (grade Celish KY-100G). The MFC was supplied at 25% solids content and stored at 5 MFC suspensions (0.2 MFC sheets were prepared Composite preparation involves a two-step method ( MFC and SiO Two instruments were used for SAXS measurements. SAXS analyses were first made on a Laboratory Bruker N8 Horizon using a CuKα (λ SAXS measurements were also made in a transmission mode on a Pilatus 1 SEM was performed using a FEI Nova NanoSEM 450 FEG. Secondary electron images were captured. This mode produces high-resolution images and avoids any problems associated with sample charging. A small square (3 TEM was performed using FEI Tecnai G2 T20 TWIN. For sample preparation, copper grid of 3 The zeta potentials were determined by performing measurement using a Nanobrook Omni (Brookhaven Instruments) in a cuvette cell at 25 SAXS measurements were performed to determine the statistical description of the internal composite structure of SiO  SAXS measurements with a synchrotron can probe a wide structure size range at a high resolution and statistics, which is unachievable with a laboratory SAXS instrument. The quantitative analysis of size, size distribution and number density of the particles was evaluated by non-linear fitting of the curves by using the software SASFit Evidence on the assemblies of SiO The structure factor calculated from the SAXS curves accounts for the correlation between the NPs and interparticle interactions SEM images of the SiO We combined SAXS and microscopic (TEM, SEM) methods to characterize at the nanoscale the structural assemblies/aggregates formed by SiO SAXS and TEM data analysis corroborate the formation of different size of aggregates of SiO SAXS data analysis show that these assemblies of SiO Structure factor analysis reveal the information on the correlation between the aggregated SiO However, at the low CPAM dosage, the structure factor peak is broad, lower in amplitude and shifts towards lower Surface coverage of NPs by CPAM directly depends upon the conformation CPAM adopts on the surface of the spherical NPs upon adsorption. The total specific surface area of SiO A series of novel SiO Financial support is from Supporting information Available: Theory of the SAXS method and the equations used for a non-linear fitting procedure of the measured SAXS curves. Moreover, the TEM image of bimodal distribution. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: