A model is presented to evaluate mineral processing on basis of gangue recovery and valuables recovery. It combines mineralogical limiting curves with upgrading curves in the Fuerstenau diagram. These curves are used to assess mineral liberation and mineral beneficiation compared with the ideal result. Two new parameters (ratio of separation and ratio of liberation) are calculated based on a comparison of areas enclosed by the mineralogical limiting curve, the upgrading curve, the curve representing a total liberation of valuables, and the curve representing a perfect mixture of valuables and gangue.
                  An assessment of the success of mineral processing is possible using these parameters. The assessment shows whether the quality of a separation product is influenced by the separation process itself or by the achieved liberation of the feed.
                  A series of experiments on the magnetic separation of a greisen-type ore proves the applicability of this model to mineral processing. SEM-based image analysis and ICP-OES measurements have been used to obtain the necessary data.Grade and recovery of mineral concentrates depend on the liberation of valuable minerals and their separation from associated gangue. The success of liberation can be assessed by the degree of liberation ( The success of separation is related to the liberation distribution of feed particles, the performance of the separation technology applied, as well as the inherent characteristics of the feed material. The input of a separator can be described by an idealized process, called perfect separator, which represents the technical limit (mineralogical limiting curve) defined by the liberation of the feed ( A new model is described below to overcome the lack of parameters. It is based on the work of Our model uses the plot of valuables recovery ( To assess the quality of separation processes The mineralogical limiting curve The separation parameter Knowing the mineralogical limiting curve of the feed, a liberation parameter Using the ratio of separation and the ratio of liberation an additional parameter can be calculated which allows an assessment of the whole process chain consisting of a liberation and an upgrading step (Eq. To consider particle size, the parameters have to be studied for different size fractions. Product grades ( A series of experiments was done on the magnetic separation of a greisen-type ore to evaluate the newly introduced parameters. The average composition of the bulk sample used was about 67% quartz, 20% zinnwaldite, 8% topaz, 3% muscovite, and 2% others. This material can be reduced to a binary system of valuable mineral (zinnwaldite) and gangue. This simplification is valid due to the magnetic susceptibilities and the grades of the associated minerals. The ore was comminuted to an upper particle size of 1 The sized feed samples were analyzed by mineral liberation analysis ( As expected, the liberation parameters decrease with increasing particle size ( Although liberation achieved of particles bigger than 500 The magnetic separation works well for fractions bigger than 100 All fractions show better ratios of liberation than ratios of separation. Therefore an optimization of the processing should focus on the separation step. Nevertheless the liberation of coarse particles can also be improved. The parameter The As it was described above, a small difference between As it is shown with this series of experiments, the model is applicable to mineral processes of one valuable component and no circulating mass. Beyond that, typical mineral processing included processes with several valuable products. The model can handle several product processes (X–Y-ore) because the Fuerstenau diagram can be used to study the separation of components by changing the gangue. Having the information about the mineralogical limiting curve and the upgrading of the components, the parameters ( Because the model needs to have information about intermediate points of the separation, which are difficult to get in full scale processes, it will be more useful in laboratory scale testing. The benefit of this model has to be shown with further investigations on ores which are more difficult to liberate, as well as on valuables which are more difficult to separate. A model to assess the success of separation based on gangue recovery and valuables recovery was taken and refined. Two new parameters have been described, one to evaluate the achieved liberation and one to evaluate the achieved separation. These parameters were generated on an equal mathematical basis which enables a direct comparison between both process steps. A third parameter was calculated based on the two newly introduced ones, which could be used to assess a whole mineral processing chain with regard to liberation and upgrading. To show the applicability of the model a series of experiments was done on the magnetic separation of a greisen-type ore. To study the influence of particle size, the parameters were calculated on size fractions. The new parameters enabled a distinction between a need in optimization of the liberation step or in the separation step due to particle size. The applicability of the model to typical situations in mineral processing was discussed. Since it is difficult to get intermediate points of separation in full scale processes, this model should be most useful in laboratory scale testing. Further work has to be done with other ore types to evaluate the model. We like to thank the Federal Ministry of Education and Research for the funding of the project “