Polishing experiments were carried out on eight different carbonate stones with a machine designed for simulating industrial scale tile polishing process. Polishing was performed at 0.8, 1.3, 1.8 and 2.3m/min belt speeds under fixed rotational speed and pressure of a polishing head. During the tests, calibrated stone tiles were sequentially polished with 60, 80, 120, 220, 320, 400 and 600 grit SiC abrasive stones at each belt speed. After polishing of each abrasive size, the quality of surfaces was assessed by measuring the surface roughness and gloss. As abrasive grit size gradually reduced to 320 grit, the roughness on the stone surfaces decreased greatly while gloss readings did not change significantly. But after 320 grit, gloss values increased greatly while change in roughness values was not significant. Reducing the belt speed resulted with a significant decrease in roughness for each grit size of abrasive, but after polishing with abrasive size larger than 320 grit, the influence of belt speed on the reduction in roughness values became less. Among the carbonate stones, micritic limestone tiles, which were homogenous in mineral composition with strong and hard structure, resulted with good surface finish. But clay minerals existing in other limestone and heterogeneous porous structure of travertines had an adverse effect on surface quality of tiles. Results from polishing tests suggest that belt speed value of 1.3m/min provide optimum polishing quality conditions since optimum consistency in roughness and gloss of tile surfaces was reached at this belt speed. This findings were very valuable information for operating factories in which polishing is carried out. The gloss reading on stone surfaces was found to increase exponentially with decrease in surface roughness. Good correlation was found between surface roughness and gloss quality of micritic limestones and marbles compared to travertines.Natural stone has been commonly used as a decorative material for cladding the outside walls and the floors of buildings. Ornamental value of stone tiles is increased with the successive polishing and then smoothing of stone surfaces using progressively finer size of abrasive Marble blocks are cut as slabs and tiles with circular diamond saw blade or gang saw and being dimensioned depending on its purpose of use. The slabbing process leaves a rough surface with visible grooving marks in different degrees. The material above the deepest grove should be removed for the surface of stone to take on a defect-free polish The polishability characteristics of stones are very important for marketing. As observed in stone industry, some stones can be polished perfectly, depending upon the mineral type, crystal size and denseness, cutting direction with respect to crystallization, and fillings in the discontinuities Polishing process costs more than 40% of the total cost of the product. Improved polishing process enhances the quality of the final product and may reduce the cost. For this purpose, researchers carried out investigations on the mechanisms of polishing by different sizes of abrasive particles under fixed polishing conditions by analysing the surface quality of stone tiles with roughness and gloss measurements In this study, polishing experiments were carried out on the tile surface of eight different carbonate stones with an automatic belt polishing machine specially designed for laboratory experiments. Resin-bonded silicon carbide abrasive stones were used. During the experiments, rotational speed of the polishing disc and disc pressure against the stone material were kept constant. Effect of contact time of abrasives on stone tile surfaces was tested at four different conveyor belt speeds. During sequential polishing process at each belt speed, roughness and gloss measurements were recorded after each stage of polishing. Eight different types of stones were studied (see The surface quality of stone tiles was assessed by measuring roughness and gloss values after each polishing stage. These two parameters allowed us the evaluation of the effect of polishing stage (particle size of SiC abrasive stone), type of natural stone and belt speed (polishing duration) on the surface quality of tiles. In this study, the roughness of the tiles was measured with a Mitutoya surftest SJ-201 P portable surface roughness tester. In surface roughness measurements, roughness values such as Ra, Rz and Rq were recorded. Ra described as the arithmetic mean of the absolute departures of the roughness profile from the mean line was used in this study since this value is a universally accepted surface roughness value and appropriate for evaluating the effect of factors on the surface quality. Surface glossiness can be defined as the ratio of the density of the incoming light to the density of the reflected light. Surface roughness and irregularities inhibit the proper reflection of the light and decrease the brightness. Depending on the material properties, it is also possible that light can be partially refracted through the stone, thus causing loss of reflection capacity After each polishing stage, water drops remaining on the stone surface were blown off and the surface roughness and the surface gloss were measured at 10 random points on the polished surface. Mean values were calculated to give an overall description for each separate polishing stage. All stone plates had a rough surface with visible groves, which was left during sawing and then after the calibration process with diamond abrasives. Successive polishing stages removed the grooves left by the preceding stage. Thus, more smooth surface finish is obtained after each stage. The results of the mean roughness and gloss values of tile surfaces for micritic limestones, travertines and marbles at each stage of polishing are shown in The higher the conveyor belt speed, the larger will be the quantity of polished slabs. A lower belt speed resulted in a longer contact time between the polishing disc and the stone surface. Longer polishing time increased the quality of surface depending on the grain size of abrasive. But wear of the abrasive stone would be much greater at lower belt speeds, and decreases with increase in the belt speed. This means that longer polishing duration results in much more disc wear so increase in the polishing costs. Results from polishing tests on eight different carbonate stone suggest that belt speed value of 1.3 The mean values of measured surface gloss and roughness at each separate polishing stage and the fitting curves showing the correlation between glossiness and roughness for micritic limestones, travertines and marbles are illustrated in Very valuable information for stone industry is obtained after polishing experiments on building stone tiles. Polishing tests with abrasive stones containing a sequence of progressively smaller SiC abrasive particles showed an exponential trend of decreasing roughness and increasing gloss of carbonate stone tiles. The coarser abrasives (larger than 320 grit number) caused major change in surface roughness, while the finer abrasives (smaller than 320 grit number) produced major change in glossiness. Among the carbonate stones, micritic limestone tiles, which are homogenous in mineral composition with strong and hard structure, resulted with good surface finish. But clay minerals in a limestone (TG) and heterogeneous, porous travertines (GE and CL) had an adverse effect on surface quality. Results from polishing tests suggest that belt speed value of 1.3