In the study described here, the surface structure of a self-assembly octyl hydroxamic acid at a calcium fluoride (CaF2) surface is evaluated using sum-frequency vibrational spectroscopy (SFVS). Of particular significance are the results that show octyl hydroxamic acid adsorbs at the fluorite surface from octanol solution and has more ordering and molecular conformation than the octyl hydroxamic acid adsorbed from solution. At the fluorite/0.1 M octyl hydroxamic acid octanol solution interface a bilayer-like structure consisting of an octyl hydroxamic acid layer in contact with fluorite and a tilted alcohol layer was observed by SFVS. The alcohol molecules are oriented with respect to the hydroxamic acid monolayer with the OH groups directed towards the bulk alcohol phase and the terminal CH3 group oriented to face the alkyl chains of the hydroxamic acid monolayer.Although long chain alcoholic solutions of alkyl hydroxamic acid have been demonstrated as selective collectors for phosphate flotation by bench scale and pilot-plant experiments Alkyl hydroxamic acid is regarded as an Recent research results demonstrate that a water-insoluble alcohol solution of alkyl hydroxamic acids can be used as a selective collector for phosphate flotation significantly increasing the separation efficiency especially for coarse feed material. Further the use of the insoluble alkyl hydroxamic acid collector simplifies the standard double float process strategy In order to further understand the adsorption features for the alkyl hydroxamic acid alcohol solution at phosphate mineral surfaces, sum-frequency vibrational spectroscopy (SFVS) was used in this study. The most prevalent phosphate mineral in phosphate rock is apatite, which has a general formula Ca 1-Octanol (99%) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Deuterated octanol (CD SFVS is a technique for the investigation of surfaces and interfaces The resonant component is given by By using the amplitudes determined from the fits of the SFVS spectra in Eq. A hemicylindrical prism of CaF Tunable IR light was obtained from an OPO/OPA (optical parametric oscillator/optical parametric amplifier) system from Laser Vision (Bellevue, WA). The OPO was pumped with the fundamental output of a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (Continuum Surelite II) generating 1064 nm pulses at 10 Hz with a pulse duration of 7 ns and an energy of 500 mJ/pulse. The fixed 532 nm light was generated by doubling the frequency of the 1064 nm pump source from the Q-switched Nd:YAG laser using a KTP (KTiPO The SFVS spectra were taken for octyl hydroxamic acid (OHA) in D As a comparison, a SFVS spectrum for the same concentration of OHA in D Previous flotation experiments showed that the flotation recovery for apatite using hydroxamic acid as a collector was increased in the presence of a long chain fatty acid alcohol The SFVS spectrum with the The second possibility is a bilayer structure with a monolayer of hydroxamic acid molecules adsorbed at the fluorite surface and another monolayer of alcohol molecules oriented at the hydroxamic acid molecules, but with their OH group facing the hydroxamic acid molecules. This possible structure is shown in Finally one monolayer structure with a mixture of hydroxamic acid and alcohol molecules might be a possibility as illustrated in Of the above three structures, Long chain alcohol solutions of alkyl hydroxamic acid have been demonstrated to be a selective collector for phosphate mineral flotation in bench scale experiments and pilot-plant demonstration. The surface structure of adsorbed alcohol and octyl hydroxamic acid at a calcium fluoride (CaF Furthermore, a bilayer-like structure consisting of a straight hydroxamic acid layer in contact with fluorite followed by a tilted alcohol layer was observed by SFVS at the CaF Appreciation is given to Professor John C. Conboy, University of Utah, for his advice and discussion, and for use of the SFVS instrument in the Department of Chemistry. Financial support by the University of Utah, the Florida Institute of Phosphate Research, and DOE Basic Science Grant (FG-03-93-ER 14315) is gratefully acknowledged.