Bubble-particle attachment is one of the most fundamental sub-processes in froth flotation. It is of critical importance in achieving the separation of value from non-value. This sub-process is affected by many factors such as the chemistry of the pulp, action of the reagents, hydrodynamics and operational factors. Understanding the effects of these factors on bubble-particle attachment is thus crucial as they may in turn affect the mineral recoveries attained. With the current drive towards zero effluent discharge on mineral concentrators water quality is an important factor to understand as it can change the pulp chemistry and subsequently affect mineral recoveries. This study thus considers the effect of specific ions found in process water on the bubble-particle attachment of chalcopyrite and galena. Adsorption studies and zeta potential measurements were conducted to interpret the outcomes of the bubble-particle attachment tests. Pulps containing Ca2+ resulted in lower bubble-particle attachment probability and recovery of galena and chalcopyrite. Adsorption studies complemented the bubble-particle attachment findings well and showed that in Ca2+ containing waters, less xanthate was adsorbed on both the chalcopyrite and galena surfaces. The zeta potential measurements showed an increase in mineral potential with Ca2+ containing salts compared to the very negative mineral potential in NaNO3. This work provides evidence of the passivation of the mineral surface with Ca2+; which hindered the adsorption of xanthate on the mineral surface in Ca2+ containing solutions and subsequently resulted in poor bubble-particle attachment.Froth flotation is used as a method of separation in several industrial applications such as in the treatment of wastewater and domestic sewage by dissolved air flotation, de-inking of paper and in mineral processing. In mineral processing, the surface properties of the valuable particles are selectively altered such that they attach to air bubbles and are subsequently removed. The bubble-particle attachment sub-process is thus critical in achieving the desired separation of valuable particles ( Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Studies have shown that an increase in the ionic strength of process water results in higher solids and water recoveries ( Previous studies have considered complex synthetic water recipes to replicate conditions on a typical concentrator ( The effect that these inorganic electrolytes have on the final mineral recoveries may be due to many factors such as changes in the physicochemical properties of the solution, surface charge, wetting characteristics and collector adsorption (  This study considers the effect of specific ions present in process water on bubble-particle interactions by means of fundamental bubble-particle attachment and flotation methods. The results of the bubble-particle interactions from both the fundamental and flotation perspective are then further investigated by studying the impact that these specific ions have on collector adsorption and on the mineral surface potential. The aim of this study is therefore to determine if there are specific ions in plant water that are either beneficial, detrimental or have no effect on the bubble-particle attachment sub-process. The chalcopyrite and galena, obtained from Ward's Science in 1 kg batches, were crushed using a hammer to 100% passing 1000 µm. The crushed minerals were pulverized and sieved through 75 and 38 µm sieves respectively. The fraction of particles greater than 75 µm was re-pulverized and re-sieved. The −75 + 38 µm sample was split using a rotary splitter and the split samples were individually purged with nitrogen and stored at −30 °C. The −75 + 38 µm fraction was used for both the microflotation tests, attachment time tests and adsorption tests. The fraction below 38 µm was sieved through a 25 µm sieve and the particles below 25 µm were used for the zeta potential measurements. This fraction was similarly split, purged with nitrogen and stored at −30 °C. CaSO The attachment contact time apparatus (ACTA) used in this investigation was developed at Aalto University and has previously been described by The microflotation cell developed by 0.075 g of mineral particles was mixed with 60 mL of the particular water type; the dilute mixtures were equally divided in six containers and the pH was adjusted to 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 with dilute HCl or dilute NaOH. After 15 min on the magnetic stirrer the pH was measured again and adjusted where needed. 1 mL of the suspension was transferred to the Malvern Dip Cell and inserted in the Malvern ZetaSizer where measurements were taken. All measurements were performed in triplicate to reduce experimental error. 3 g of pure mineral sample of fraction 75 + 38 µm was mixed with 30 mL of the particular water quality under study and the pH of the mixture was adjusted to 6.5. 50 g/t of SIBX (15 µL), was added to the flask containing the mineral slurry, this is equivalent to the collector concentration used in the microflotation and ACTA tests. The maximum amount of xanthate in the slurry was thus 5 g/t which is equivalent to 5 mg/L. The top of the flask was covered with tin foil and placed in an Ecobath shaker at a controlled temperature of 20 °C and speed of 141 rpm for 15 min. After 15 min in the water bath a plastic syringe was used to draw out about 15 mL of the suspension. A 0.45 µm filter was attached at the end of the syringe and the filtrate was collected in a sample container. The xanthate concentration was then measured by placing the filtrate in a quartz cuvette and reading the absorbance at wavelength 301 nm by means of a UV–Vis spectrophotometer. Prior to measuring the absorbance of the filtrate, calibration curves were constructed with solutions of known concentrations, as measured by the peak absorbance observed at 301 nm. The concentration of xanthate in solution for unknown samples could be calculated from the calibration curve. Adsorption tests were done in triplicate to minimise experimental error. The chalcopyrite and galena recovery in microflotation tests in the three single salt solutions and plant water at equivalent ionic strength both in the absence (dashed line) and presence (solid line) of a collector is illustrated in The fundamental bubble-particle attachment tests are shown in In In the case of the anions, it is the SO Both the microflotation and fundamental bubble-particle attachment techniques indicate that Ca  The adsorption of SIBX on the galena surface was predominantly high in the ionic solutions particularly in the single salt solutions, with only 0.01 mg/L of SIBX not adsorbed on the galena with the NaNO As illustrated in Synthetic plant water yielded the lowest galena recovery with and without SIBX, whilst this water quality resulted in the highest chalcopyrite recovery. The mechanism behind this result is not fully understood however, this may be due to the differences in mineral properties; as shown by Microflotation tests of galena and chalcopyrite showed that Ca Both techniques thus reinforced the negative effect of Ca In contact angle measurements Across the pH 2–12 range, zeta potential measurements of both minerals showed a less negative potential on the surface in Ca Collectorless microflotation results show that Na It is thus expected that the Ca(NO This work proved that less xanthate is adsorbed on chalcopyrite and galena surfaces in Ca Two techniques assessing the bubble-particle attachment of chalcopyrite and galena were used, one fundamental and one simplifying what happens in the pulp phase in a flotation system. Both bubble-particle attachment techniques showed that Ca Adsorption test results further displayed that Ca  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is financed by the