Catalytic approach for methane decomposition can be seriously considered as a promising process for COx free hydrogen generation. In this study, catalytic methane decomposition was performed using Fe-based catalysts, and catalytic performance tests were carried out in a CH4:N2 flow at 750 and 800 °C. The analyses of reaction products were carried out by a mass spectrometer. For the preparation of Fe-based catalysts, sol-gel method was utilized. Yttria (Y2O3) and alumina (Al2O3) were used as support materials. Theoretical molar ratios (Fe2O3/Y2O3/Al2O3) of the samples C1–C5 were 1:0:0, 1:1:0, 1:1:5, 2:1:4 and 3:1:6, respectively. The characterization analyses of fresh and spent catalysts were performed with XRD, SEM, TPR, TG-FTIR and BET surface analysis techniques. Surface basicity of catalysts was determined via CO2-TPD measurements. In the presence of Fe2O3/Y2O3 and Fe2O3/Y2O3/Al2O3 catalysts, methane conversions of 29% and 4% were achieved at 750 °C. Adding alumina into Fe2O3/Y2O3 catalyst leads to the formation of garnet type crystal structure which reduces catalytic activity.Presently, a major part of energy demand is supplied by fossil fuels. Combustion of which leads to emission of greenhouse gases and global warming [ CDM reaction is given in Eq. Ni catalysts are most commonly used catalysts in this process, and this type of catalysts exhibit a good performance below 600 °C. Due to endothermic reaction nature of CDM, higher temperatures are required for obtaining high methane conversions. However, considering the low stability of Ni catalysts at elevated temperature (T > 600 °C), modifying these catalysts (use of promoters or support material) is a convenient approach in order to enhance catalytic stability and activity. In contrast to Ni catalysts, high-temperature catalytic methane conversion can be achieved by using Fe catalysts [ In our previous study, the catalytic performance of yttria (Y The sol-gel method was used for the preparation of iron-containing catalyst samples. For Fe Crystal phase analyses of fresh and spent catalysts were performed on Philips Panalytical X'Pert-Pro X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) apparatus. BET surface area of each catalyst was determined by Micromeritcs Gemini VII BET under N Catalytic methane decomposition was carried out in a tubular reactor made from steel which was loaded with a 0.2 g of powder catalyst. Each catalyst was tested in a feedgas (flow rate: 500 mL/min, GHSV of 3.9×10 The methane conversion (X Crystal phases of fresh (condition of the catalyst before reduction) and spent catalysts were given in BET specific surface areas of fresh catalysts were given in  TPR curves of the catalysts as prepared are presented in The CO The activities of all catalysts are presented in   In The weight loss of spent catalysts can be seen in Metal oxide supported Fe-based catalysts samples were prepared by sol-gel method, and the impact of metal oxide supports such as yttria and alumina on catalytic activity was investigated. Considerable methane conversion was observed at high temperatures (above 750 °C). Addition of yttria to pure iron oxide increased the catalytic activity and stability at higher temperatures. Though yttria addition into the Fe-catalyst structure led to an increase in its specific surface area, alumina supported Fe The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The present research was supported by