Background
                  An intramedullary augmentation technique using a titanium cage with different types of hardware can be considered a new option in the management of proximal humeral fractures. This study aimed to report the perioperative, early, and late complications of proximal humeral fractures using the intramedullary augmentation technique.
               
                  Methods
                  From 2005 to 2017, 142 displaced proximal humeral fractures were treated in the same unit by the aforementioned technique. Perioperative, early, and late complications were evaluated in all patients. Clinical evaluation was performed according to the Constant and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand scores. Only 115 patient records could be considered to have long-term follow-up (7-12 years).
               
                  Results
                  Extra-articular migrations of K-wires, plate cutout, and screw penetration were not observed. A transitory axillary nerve palsy with inferior humeral head subluxation was observed in 41 patients (29.8%). Of the 142 patients, 2 (1.4%) manifested early signs of infection, and 1 underwent a reoperation after 30 days. Complete bone healing was obtained at a mean of 3.5 months in 140 of 142 shoulders (98.6%). We achieved long-term follow-up on only 115 patients because 14 had died, 6 lived abroad, and 7 could not participate due to illness. The results were good or excellent in 99 patients (86%), fair in 12 (10.4%), and poor in 4 (3.4%). K-wires were removed in 15 of 79 patients (11.5%). Nonunion or malunion occurred in 1 patient (0.8%). Asymptomatic avascular necrosis developed in 8 patients (6.9%) after 5 years, and secondary glenohumeral osteoarthritis occurred in 6 (5.2%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Intraoperative and postoperative analyses with short-, medium-, and long-term outcomes show that the intramedullary augmentation technique improves fracture treatment with significantly good anatomic reconstruction in complex and unstable cases. The bone healing rate is significantly high, and the technique is associated with a significantly low percentage of complications.The management of proximal humeral fractures is still controversial. Nonoperative treatment is a well-known option and has shown good clinical results in minimally displaced fractures and in certain displaced fractures specifically in elderly patients. Currently, there are different approaches to avoid locking plate failure, from a calcar screw technique to cement augmentation. In 2008, Gardner et al Our study aimed to report the advantages or disadvantages and inoperative, postoperative, early, and late clinical and radiologic complications of the aforementioned hybrid technique in a group of patients treated from 2005 to 2017 with long-term follow-up. From 2000 to 2017, 937 proximal humeral fractures were treated in our unit with different techniques, from pinning to reverse shoulder prosthesis. Moreover, from 2005 to 2017, 142 nonconsecutive patients (93 women and 49 men) with an average age of 64 years (range, 28-80 years) having proximal humeral fractures (87 on right side and 55 on left) were treated with the described technique in the same unit performed by a senior author (R.R.). The surgical procedure was performed 1-21 days (mean, 4 days) after trauma. A true anteroposterior-view radiograph and computed tomography (CT) scan were performed in all patients to classify the fractures based on the Neer classification of proximal humeral fractures. By performing CT scans, a better understanding of the analytical complexity of the fracture was obtained. A hybrid technique was performed in all patients considering 3 analytical aspects of fracture: complexity of the calcar lesion, bone loss, and number of greater tuberosity fragments. We analyzed a total of 142 patient records to assess the patients' general and specific surgical aspects until they were discharged from the hospital. Subsequently, we studied the patients' clinical and radiographic aspects at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months, followed by once a year, starting from the second year after surgery. All 142 patients were followed up until 2 years by use of the same criteria, but only 115 patient records could be considered to have long-term follow-up, between 7 and 12 years, because 14 patients died, 6 were lost to follow-up because they live abroad, and 7 were unable to participate because they were affected by dementia or other important comorbidities. We had 32 two-part fractures, 51 three-part fractures, 40 four-part fractures, and 19 four-part fracture-dislocations according to the Neer classification. Findings of evaluations of perioperative and early postoperative complications regarding 26 two-part fractures, 40 three-part fractures, 38 four-part fractures, and 10 four-part dislocations were available for long-term follow-up ( We used the intramedullary da Vinci cage (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) in all fractures. To achieve an anatomic and stable bone reconstruction, we used this technique associated with other devices such as nonabsorbable osteo-sutures, K-wires, and plates (DePuy Synthes, Raynham, MA, USA), and when necessary, we performed filling for cancellous bone loss with calcium triphosphate. We used different types of flexible plates: tubular malleolar plates, titanium nonlocked plates, and Philos proximal humeral locking plates (DePuy Synthes). We used the titanium cage associated with K-wires in 74 patients (52.1%), with a plate in 55 (38.7%), with a plate and K-wires in 5 (3.5%), and with free screws in 8 (5.6%). Radiographs were performed 3 weeks after patient discharge and was compared with perioperative C-arm and postoperative controls. Additional radiographs were obtained at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months, as well as subsequently every 6 months starting from the second year after surgery. Clinical evaluation was performed according to the Constant and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores. In the case of 3- and 4-part fractures and fracture-dislocations, we performed CT scan control at 6 months, 1 year, and 5 years to assess the reconstruction and the head orientation achieved with the operation, as well as the position of the bone substitute, and to rule out the risk of necrosis. Preoperative and postoperative radiographs were analyzed by 2 dependent and 2 independent observers (A.G. and S.V.) to evaluate the fracture type according to the Neer classification, as well as bony union and the humeral shaft angle according to the Paavolainen method. Adult patients with closed unstable proximal humeral fractures without vascular or neurologic post-traumatic signs of complications and stable fractures with bone loss were included in the review. Patients with open or pathologic proximal humeral fractures, with other fractures, or with fractures involving the distal humerus or forearm were excluded from the study. All patients were operated on using both an interscalene brachial plexus block and general anesthesia. A deltopectoral approach was used in all shoulders. The mean operative time was 85 minutes, with mean blood loss of 225 mL (±75 mL). In 2-part fractures, once the fracture lines of the surgical neck had been clearly identified, we placed the arm in extension and pulled up the humeral head using contemporarily both a 6-mm Hohmann retractor and 2 suture wires through the supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons to achieve the head reorientation. Subsequently, we exposed the diaphyseal canal at the surgical neck level. We filled the canal with a cylindrical or pyramidal trapezoidal bone block or a triangular vertex of an appropriate trial using the Da Vinci cage trial and subsequently reduced the fracture, having an endosteal support of the bone or the titanium cage located between the humeral head and the diaphysis to achieve fragment stabilization. We completed this step using temporary 2 or 3 K-wires (2 mm) through the fragments and a C-arm control. Once stable and correct reduction of the fracture was obtained, we performed definitive implantation of the hardware. This technique was applied with great care in the case of a 2-part fracture. In 7 patients (21.8%) with multifragmented calcar fractures, we used a thin elastic plate; in 3 patients (9.3%) with less than 5 mm of displacement and low calcar and greater tuberosity comminution, 2-3 cannulated screws were implanted from the diaphysis to the head under or through the cage or bone block, whereas in 22 patients (68.75%), we used 3 K-wires crossed in the cage. All these steps were assessed with intraoperative C-arm controls. In 3-part fractures, we used the same technique with the wires through the tendons, managing the corrective displacement of fragments to allow fracture reduction, and at the end of these maneuvers, we achieved bone loss filling with the augmentation. At the end of the procedure, the greater tuberosity was reattached to the head and diaphysis with stitches (94% of cases) and stabilized using a thin plate after intraoperative radiography was performed to ensure the correct humeral head reconstruction and orientation. In this group, we used 3 K-wires crossed in the cage and osteo-suture in 26 patients (50.9%) ( In impacted valgus fractures, the head was up as far as the intra-articular fracture line of the greater tuberosity using a smooth tool ensuring that a correct position was achieved by checking this maneuver through the interval rotator window. The space between the head of the lesser and greater tuberosities was filled with a trapezoidal solid-shape bone augmentation or da Vinci cage allocated with an inferior vertex in the shaft and the larger base along the internal surface of the calcar. Subsequently, we reduced the greater and lesser tuberosities on the shaft, and augmentation was created, with its position temporarily held with nonabsorbable No. 2 sutures. If the fragments were well reduced and the head position was correct and stable, the trial cage was removed and replaced with a definitive one, maintaining the stability of the fracture with temporary K-wires. If bone loss was still observed in some parts, a bone substitute was used, and finally, a low-profile plate and screws were applied. In the 4-part varus fractures, the identification of the calcar was the most difficult step because it is often multifragmentary, specifically on the posterior side of the hinge. In this series of patients, we used a locking plate in 20 (50%), a flexible plate in 15 (37.5%), and screws and K-wires in 5 (12.5%). A 4-part fracture with anterior or posterior dislocation was treated in 19 patients. In these cases, it was important to perform CT scans to study the length of the calcar in the vertical and axial planes. The first step was to remove the humeral head from the extra-articular position, which is usually in the subscapularis fossa in anterior fracture-dislocations and in the posterior glenoid space in posterior ones, and put it temporarily on the surgical table. In this step, it is significantly important to identify the superior-inferior and anterior-posterior orientation of the humeral head and mark those points on the head of the cephalic cup (superior, inferior, anterior, and posterior). Once proper correspondence between the head and diaphyseal fracture lines was identified, the head was reattached to the humerus using the cage. If the head orientation and its relationship with the greater tuberosity were correct, the cage was filled with bone chips; subsequently, the greater and lesser tuberosities were reconstructed around the cage. Finally, all aspects were stabilized with transosseous No. 2 or No. 5 nonabsorbable sutures, wires, and screws or a small plate and screws. We used flexible plates in 13 patients and screws and K-wires in 6. The postoperative management of all shoulders was immobilization in a sling, with a minimum period of 3 weeks for 2-part fractures and a maximum of 4 weeks for 4-part fractures. Mobilization of the elbow, wrist, and hand was allowed the day after surgery. After 5 weeks, the patients started their rehabilitation in water according to the protocol described by Liotard. Intramedullary titanium cage augmentation and the hybrid osteosynthesis technique were performed to treat all fractures as scheduled during preoperative planning. Intraoperative or immediate postoperative complications due to the devices used were not reported. Secondary vascular complications were not observed during or after surgery. Secondary volumetric modification was not reported on deltoid muscle morphology. We observed 1 axillary nerve palsy (0.7%) after 3 months. Among the first 15 patients treated between 2005 and 2006, 1 superficial infection (0.8%) and 1 deep infection (0.8%), resistant to antibiotic therapy, were observed. The latter was treated successfully by removal of the infected and necrotic head and cement spacer implantation, whereas the former was treated by administration of a specific antibiotic for 6 months. There were no cases of sepsis in 127 patients treated from 2006 to 2017. A transitory axillary nerve palsy with inferior humeral head subluxation, as was commonly reported in the literature, was observed in 41 patients (29.8%). The complete resolution of this transitory malfunction was observed in 40 patients with a minimum time frame of 3 months and in 1 patient with a maximum time frame of 16 months. In these patients, the diagnosis was clinically established 3 months after surgery using an electromyographic examination for the deltoid paralysis. The aforementioned patient was followed up for 7 months and treated with physiotherapy but without spontaneous resolution; hence, the patient subsequently required surgical treatment performed by a microsurgery team in another hospital. The axillary nerve was enveloped in a posterior scar between the humeral diaphysis, the posterior tip of 1 free screw, and the posterior aspect of the deltoid. Neurolysis was performed and a partial graft was created with the peroneal nerve, and complete resolution of the deltoid paralysis was obtained after 1 year. This patient was clinically reviewed after 10 years because he lives abroad, and during the assessment, a nonunion of the humeral neck was observed, but shoulder function was quite good without signs of humeral head necrosis. He refused any other surgical treatments to resolve the bone malunion of the humeral neck ( Shoulder stiffness and postoperative hand and forearm algodystrophy were significantly evident in patients with a history of personal or familiar thyroid diseases and a diabetic and genetic predisposition to hyperglycemia. The average time to complete resolution was 5 months (3-9 months). A total of 115 patients underwent long-term follow-up (7-12 years). Of the patients, 27 had 2-part fractures, 40 had 3-part fractures, 38 had 4-part fractures, and 10 had 4-part fracture-dislocations. A significant axial malrotation was not observed in our patient series, and 97 patients (84%) achieved an anatomic reconstruction. We observed a varus displacement (8°-10°) of the head in 4 cases (3.5%) and tuberosity nonalignment in 2 (1.7%). In case of a multifragmented greater tuberosity, we frequently observed bone volume reabsorption in the case of plate implantation ( Cases of screw cutout related to the plate were not observed. Late K-wire migration was observed in 25 of 71 patients (35.2%). Pain due to K-wire migration was observed in 9 of 71 patients (12.6%), and surgery with local anesthesia was required to remove the K-wires. In a significant number of patients, K-wires were relatively stable owing to the wires' cross-configuration through the cage. In the long term, 3 patients (15.8%) with anterior fracture-dislocations had an active motion reduction, with a decrease in motion from 135° at 5 years to 90° at 10 years ( In this retrospective study of 142 patients treated for complex proximal humeral fractures with an intramedullary titanium cage and with different hardware, healing was achieved in 140 of 142 patients, excluding 2 patients in whom healing did not occur owing to infection. The mean Constant and DASH scores were 87.5 and 57, respectively, at 2 years' follow-up. Overall, the result was good in 115 patients with long-term follow-up. The da Vinci system has shown a high capacity to allow stable reduction of fragments and technical facilitation in most complex cases owing to the presence of intramedullary support. The treatment of proximal humeral fractures is still debated among shoulder surgeons in a trauma community specifically for the high number of early and late complications using locking and poly-axial plates or nails specifically in elderly patients. The anatomic reconstruction of the head fragments using pins, locking plates, and nails, specifically in 3- and 4-part fractures, is quite difficult owing to the presence of small bone pieces and their secondary dislocations and instability after the stabilization because of the presence of a multifragmented calcar. Solberg et al In 2013, Tepas et al In 2007, on the basis of the observation of the difficulties with the locking plate, Gardner et al The results of our study are interesting because of significantly low percentages of complications—0% for perioperative complications, 0.8% for nonunion, 1.6% for infection, and 1.7% for secondary displacement of fragments—and significantly low percentage of reoperations in 142 patients systematically followed up for 2 years. Moreover, these data are encouraging in relation to the use of locking plates alone. We would like to re-emphasize that the deltopectoral approach, which was used in all cases, was not associated with the risks of axillary nerve damage or with any other complications. It allows all types of fractures and fracture-dislocations to be treated. Moreover, it can possibly reconstruct complex cases with posterior displacement of the head and greater tuberosity without damaging either the axillary nerve or vascularity. We associate our bone block technique using the da Vinci cage and minimal osteosynthesis, specifically in complex cases of multifragmented greater tuberosities, in which we combine the use of K-wires and small tubular flexible plates or free screws and osteo-suture. Our overall results demonstrate a small number of complications, such as screw penetration in the articular rhyme (0%) or temporary penetration of pins in the joint space (12.6%), and plate cutout or secondary articular glenoid damage was not observed. In this study, significantly good results (86%) were observed in 115 patients at long-term follow-up. One of the most important early and late complications is pin migration, specifically when this method is used percutaneously or in open surgery, but when the pins are used through the holes of the cage, secondary migration for bone reabsorption was minimal. A closer analysis of our results shows that secondary varus or valgus head displacements are significantly rare. Head varus displacement was between 8° and 10° in approximately 4% of cases, and relative secondary displacement of the greater tuberosity associated with multifragmentation was observed in 2% of cases. The use of the da Vinci cage in combination with thin and adaptable plates or locking plates has markedly improved our clinical results owing to the significant stability of the system resulting from the replacement of poor cancellous bone with a titanium cage. Considering the significantly low percentage of calcar displacement or nonhealing at follow-up in the case of complex instability and the high percentage of anatomically stable reorientation of the humeral head owing to the intramedullary support, we believe that the da Vinci cage can be used as a reliable means to provide a stable support in the reconstruction of the anatomy both in patients experiencing the most complex types of fractures and in elderly patients. Moreover, the da Vinci cage reduces complications such as articular screw penetration, particularly when locking plates with angular stability are used. In our 115 healed patients, 8 cases of partial avascular head necrosis (7.4%) and 1 case of a collapsed humeral head were observed. Our long-term follow-up emphasizes an increased percentage of proximal bone healing in 4-part fractures and fracture-dislocations, which are often considered irreparable, with less secondary necrosis as reported in the literature. The 1% rate of complete necrosis of the humeral head in our 104 healed cases is comparable to the results of Neviaser et al, One of the strengths of our study is that all patients were treated in the same unit by a single experienced surgeon in the shoulder field. The rate of follow-up is significantly interesting if we consider the difficulties involved with the long-term re-examination of trauma patients by the independent observers. The intramedullary augmentation technique using different sizes of a titanium cage associated with different types of devices for minimal osteosynthesis (sutures and K-wires) or with locking or nonlocking plates enhances the surgeon's ability to reconstruct all types of proximal humeral fractures, particularly when they are complex, are displaced, or have an insufficient calcar or multifragmented tuberosities. The results of this study show the use of this technique allows for good reduction and stable fixation and limits the number of complications. The majority of patients had no or minimum pain during daily activities, and very good active range of motion and shoulder strength were achieved, even in elderly patients. Raffaele Russo is a senior consultant of Arthrex. All the other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.