Inadequate disposal of tailings resulting from processing and other mining and metallurgical activities causes often severe contamination of surface streams and groundwater reservoirs, due to oxidation of the inherent sulfide phases and the subsequent generation of leachates characterized by high acidity and elevated concentration of hazardous elements. A relatively low cost alternative to pump and treat approach aiming at prevention of contamination or clean up of contaminated groundwater involves the application of in-situ permeable reactive barriers (PRBs). A number of low cost compounds may be used as reactive media in order to provide alkalinity, activate precipitation and sorption mechanisms and finally lead to clean up of the contaminated plume.
                  Laboratory column tests were conducted to study and assess (a) the potential of limestone and red mud barriers to remove several inorganic contaminants from synthetic solutions simulating acidic leachates under dynamic flow conditions and (b) the volume of reactant required for efficient operation under the conditions examined over long periods of time. The speciation/mass transfer computer code PHREEQC and the MINTEQ database were used for geochemical modeling of the process.
                  Both reactive media tested caused within the PRB the development of conditions that favored removal of heavy metal ions mainly by precipitation, co-precipitation and adsorption. Fe is mainly removed as goethite and ferrihydrite, Al as boehmite and gibbsite, Cu, Mn, Zn, Co and Ni as metal hydroxides and Cd by sorption/co-precipitation on/with iron and aluminium compounds. Sulfates are removed as gypsum. The toxicity of both reactive media at the end of the treatment period regarding all heavy metals studied is limited.
                  The experimental results underline the potential of limestone and red mud permeable reactive barriers to remove, over a long period, high loads of inorganic contaminants from acidic leachates generated at mining sites and endangering the quality of aquatic systems. They also provide useful information on the efficiency of PRBs operating under field conditions.Acid mine drainage (AMD) is generated by the oxidation of residual sulfide minerals contained in mine tailings and waste rock. The resulting effluents are acidic and contain elevated concentrations of sulfates, iron and hazardous trace elements. Migration of AMD results in severe contamination of soils, surface- and groundwater ( Conventional AMD treatment technologies include mainly the application of active systems, which in most cases are characterized by high capital and operating costs, require long term maintenance and proper disposal/treatment of the produced secondary hazardous sludges. In case groundwater is contaminated, the most established remediation technique is pump and treat. A relatively low cost alternative to pump and treat approach involves the installation of permanent, semi-permanent or replaceable permeable reactive barriers (PRBs) in the path of contaminant plumes ( So far, a wide range of reactive media have been tested in order to clean up acidic leachates and contaminated groundwater. Zero valent iron seems to be the most popular because it removes both inorganic and organic contaminants ( When limestone dissolves in aqueous media provides alkalinity and assists in neutralization of acidic solutions and immobilization of metals through precipitation and/or adsorption. Laboratory as well as field scale applications have shown that sulfates and several inorganic contaminants such as lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), arsenic (As), zinc (Zn), and copper (Cu) can be effectively removed from contaminated plumes or leachates as stable phases ( Red mud is a waste material produced during digestion of bauxite for the production of alumina by the Bayer process. It consists of different forms of iron and aluminium oxide minerals, calcium and sodium silicates, various titanium compounds, etc. The amount of residue generated per ton of alumina produced, varies greatly depending on the type of bauxite used, from 0.3 tons for high grade bauxite to 2.5 tons for very low grade. Red mud is either disposed of on land or under seawater using a variety of techniques. Due to its texture and composition, it is characterized by high surface reactivity, but as yet it has scarcely been evaluated as a means of removing inorganic contaminants from AMD or contaminated plumes ( Fly ash is the waste material recovered in huge quantities from electrostatic precipitators during coal and lignite burning in thermal power plants. It is composed of amorphous ferro–alumino-silicate minerals and has an extremely high surface area. It can be classified as Class C or Class F on the basis of its chemical composition. Class C fly ash [SiO In the present work column experiments have been carried out to study the efficiency of limestone and red mud barriers to remove inorganic contaminants such as Fe, Zn, Mn, Al, Ni, Cu, Co and Cd from synthetic sulfate solutions simulating AMD. Tests were performed under dynamic flow conditions similar to those prevailing in an in situ reactive wall emplacement. The experimental results provide useful information for the elucidation of clean up mechanisms taking place during interaction of reactive media and plumes contaminated with high loads of heavy metals as well as for the design and estimation of the effective life time of a PRB system. Laboratory column experiments were carried out at room temperature using limestone (LS) and red mud (RM) as reactive media. Quarry quality limestone consisting of calcite (78 wt.%) and dolomite (11 wt.%) was finely crushed (0.5–1.0 mm) in a laboratory mill. Red mud, obtained from Aluminium de Gréce S.A, had the following mineralogical and trace element composition: Al Column tests were performed in two 5 cm inner diameter and 40 cm long Plexiglas columns set up in series ( The simulated AMD used as feed in this study contained 1.5 g/l Fe, 100 mg/l Al, 20 mg/l Zn and 5 mg/l Mn, Cd, Cu, Ni and Co. It was prepared in HCl cleaned glassware by dissolving the required amounts of iron sulfate monohydrate, Fe Upward flow of the simulated AMD feed was maintained through the columns using a peristaltic pump Gala/4W in order to precisely simulate typical groundwater flow rates of 30 cm/day (∼1 ft/day). The actual daily experimental flow rate was monitored by collecting timed volumes of solutions in pre-weighed polyethylene bottles. Average flow rate used was 30 Column tests using limestone and red mud as reactive medium were run for 93 and 88 pore volumes respectively until each medium showed clear signs of exhaustion, such as reduced reactivity indicated by pH measurements and formation of precipitates along the columns profile. This “precipitation front” progressed gradually to the upper parts of the second column. Sampling ports installed along the column walls at a distance of 20 cm (sampling port A) and 60 cm (sampling port B) from the inlet allowed sampling and determination of leachates quality during operation. Samples were collected from each sampling port very carefully to avoid disturbance using large glass syringes as well as from the effluent and analyzed for pH and redox potential (Eh) immediately after sampling with a pH/Conductivity meter (Metrohm 691 pH meter). Solutions were filtered through 0.45 μm filters (Gelman Science sterile aerodisc), acidified and if necessary kept at 4 °C and then analyzed for Fe, Zn, Mn, Al, Ni, Cu, Co and Cd by Flame Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (Perkin Elmer 2100). Sulfate concentration was measured gravimetrically according to DIN 51 724 T2 method ( Activities of aqueous species and saturation indices were determined using the US Geological Survey equilibrium computer code PHREEQC ( Experimental results regarding pH, Eh and clean up efficiency for each heavy metal ion studied are seen in the following figures.    Geochemical calculations predict that near saturation conditions prevail in the treated feed with respect to ferrihydrite (Fe(OH) Fe may also precipitate as schwertmannite, Fe  PHREEQC simulation indicates that the concentration of dissolved Mn in solution along the columns profile is mainly determined by the precipitation on rhodochrosite, MnCO Zinc concentration in solution shows a similar to manganese trend. It seems that limited immobilization of Zn takes place due to sulfate reduction whereas the final concentration equals the initial one due to the decreased reactivity of limestone towards the end of the runs. Previous studies indicate that Zn may precipitate as hydroxide at neutral pH values or be absorbed on the surface of precipitated goethite ( Finally, it seems that limestone is not very effective in fully removing Mn and Zn from acidic leachates over a long period at the concentrations tested in this experimental study.  PHREEQC simulation indicates that at pH values between 6.0 and 7.0 Cu precipitates as copper hydroxide Cu(OH)  As seen from this figure, the efficiency of limestone in removing these specific heavy metal ions from solution at the concentrations tested is relatively reduced. Effluent concentrations gradually increase from the beginning of the test and almost reach initial feed values after 12 weeks (93 pore volumes). Recent experimental studies have shown that nickel is readily adsorbed on calcite in undersaturated solutions when pH ranges between 8 and 9 and sorption of Ni By taking into account that the leachates pH remains at lower than 8 values for most of the experimental period, it can be assumed that Co Over the entire experimental period (12 weeks) approximately 49.45 l of simulated acid mine drainage were treated by 730 g of limestone (67.74 m Experimental results regarding pH, Eh and clean up efficiency for each heavy metal ion studied are seen in the following figures.  Geochemical modeling indicates that when pH ranges between 12 and 7, as in the first stages of the experiment, effluents are slightly undersaturated with respect to calcium released from red mud calcium oxide. At the same time, the effluent is slightly supersaturated with respect to gypsum indicating thus a tendency for precipitation of this phase when pH is still maintained at high values (alkaline to neutral) and high concentration of sulfates is introduced into the system from the feed. The abrupt change of lime saturation indices, dropping from 246 when pH is 8 to 0.31 when pH reaches 7 (at sampling port A, when 36 volumes are fed into the system) suggests limited concentration of calcium ions in solution due to depletion of lime or coating of reactive medium particles. When pH is around 7 the effluent is slightly undersaturated with respect to hematite and boehmite and supersaturated with respect to goethite, ferrihydrite and gibbsite, indicating thus a tendency for precipitation of those compounds. When pH drops to 6 the effluent is slightly undersaturated with respect to gibbsite but still remains supersaturated with respect to goethite and ferrihydrite.   Al concentration started to increase at both sampling ports (A and C) after almost 70 pore volumes and after 88 pore volumes reached nearly 300 and 100 mg respectively (     PHREEQC simulation shows that when pH ranges between 6.0 and 7.0 Cu concentration in solution is controlled by the precipitation of copper hydroxide Cu(OH)  Over the entire experimental period (11 weeks) approximately 45.3 l of simulated acid mine drainage were treated by 730 g of limestone (62.1 m Calculations regarding Fe were based on measurements over the entire treatment period, while for all other elements averaged effluent concentrations over approximately 4 week periods (29 pore volumes treated) were taken into account. Comparison of the two PRB systems examined shows that both of them exhibit almost similar efficiency in removing Fe, Zn, Cu, Cd and sulfates from highly acidic leachates, whereas limestone PRBs are clearly more effective (3.5 times higher efficiency) in removing Mn and slightly better in removing Al, Co and Ni. Experimental data supported by geochemical modeling predict that the pH dependent sequences of metal hydroxide solubilities are Co Ni>Mn Zn Limestone and red mud permeable reactive barriers are efficient in decontaminating acidic leachates generated at mining sites and loaded with quite high concentrations of hazardous heavy metal ions. Experimental column studies confirm that most of the contaminants, at the concentrations and the experimental conditions tested, can be effectively removed over a long period and provide useful information for the design of PRBs installed in the field for the treatment of acidic leachates and the subsequent prevention of groundwater contamination. The main clean up mechanisms induced by both reactive media are a) precipitation of ions as a separate phase, mainly hydroxides or sulfates for Fe, Al, Mn, Zn, Cu, Co and Ni and (iii) co-precipitation/sorption mainly for Cd. It has to be underlined though that more than one mechanism is involved in each case since various heavy metals are present in the system and the prevailing conditions within the experimental columns are modified with time. Limestone, when attacked by acidic solutions, releases Ca Much better clean up efficiency regarding both reactive media is anticipated if solutions with lower acidity and heavy metal ion concentration are treated. Treatment of highly acidic leachates creates adverse conditions within the reactive media mass accelerating thus reduction of reactivity and the effective life time of a PRB system due to (a) fast consumption of alkalinity (b) decrease of the reactive surface area due to precipitation of various compounds and subsequent coating of the reactive particles (c) re-solubilization of previously formed precipitates and (d) desorption of heavy metal ions. Monitoring of the leachates quality along the flow path allows prediction of the optimum residence time required within the reactive zone to achieve remediation goals, enabling thus calculation of the required thickness of each permeable reactive barrier zone. Careful design and control is required though to optimize performance and avoid operational difficulties under field conditions. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the European Commission, in the Framework of the Copernicus II ENVIMAN project, Contract No. ICA2-CT-2000-10010, entitled “Environmental management of hazardous mining wastes and effluents”.