Biochar has been increasingly used as an amendment to enhance soil structure and improve soil hydraulic properties. Nevertheless, there are very limited physically based studies to investigate solute transport in biochar-amended soils at pore scale. In this study, for the first time, synchrotron-based X-ray micro-computed tomography (SR-μCT) was used to obtain high-resolution pore geometries of two clayey soils and their biochar amended samples, then the three-dimensional lattice Boltzmann (LB) method was implemented to simulate solute transport using the pore structure information. By using the innovative method of combining SR-μCT and LB simulation, we found that biochar amendment reduced the spatial variability of pore water velocity and increased the dispersion coefficient by one order of magnitude. In addition, we observed that anomalous dispersion was more likely to occur in soils with biochar amendment. Furthermore, soils after biochar amendment had relatively higher thresholds of both the transition zone and advection-dominated zone for the dispersion coefficients. These results are crucial in understanding nutrient transport processes and contaminant migration occurring at pore scale.Agronomic management of clayey soils is quite challenging because of their poor structure and low hydraulic conductivity. To ameliorate the physicochemical properties of clayey soils, biochar has been increasingly used as a soil amendment. As a porous, low-density and carbon-rich material, biochar amendment may improve soil physical and hydraulic properties ( Biochar, as an amendment can change the pore size distribution of clayey soils and subsequently impact water and nutrient transport. Field-scale and column-scale experiments of biochar amended soils have been extensively studied in recent years. For example, In contrast to the widely implemented studies at macro scale, there are very limited studies to evaluate the effect of biochar amendment on solute transport at micro scale. Soil aggregates are the basic units of soil structure which are typically present in soils rich in clay and organic matter. They are agglomerates of clay, silt and sand particles, organic substance, fungi and bacterial biomass ( Real soil pore structures are highly heterogeneous with complex solid boundaries, and it is well recognized that pore-scale processes are generally difficult to monitor and cannot be quantified by macroscopic models ( Differing from the traditional macro-scale models, the lattice Boltzmann (LB) method provides a convenient tool for the computation of advective and diffusive transport of solute in complex porous media ( In our previous work ( Two clayey soil samples, Ultisol and Vertisol, were collected from two typical rice production regions in China. The Vertisol was obtained from Jiangsu province in northern China (34°17′39.4″N, 118°25′32.1″E), locally known as Shajiang black soil. The Ultisol was obtained from Zhejiang province in southern China (30°8′24″N, 119°58′25″E), locally known as red soil. Both soils were collected from the topsoil layer (0–20 cm), then air-dried at room temperature, grounded and passed through a 2-mm sieve before biochar amendment. Representative physical and chemical properties of the two soils are shown in The woodchip biochar (WCB) used in this study was prepared by pyrolyzing organic woodchip in a reactor at 500 °C for 2 h. The morphological characteristics and elementary composition of the WCB was investigated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and X-ray energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). WCB is a porous material, which has typical xylem pores. Its pores are mostly elliptic, with thick walls and smooth inner walls. In the FESEM images, WCB is similar to the honeycomb (Fig. S-1). The elliptical pores are usually 5–15 μm long and 2–5 μm wide, and the thickness of pore walls is 1–2 μm. The EDS analytical result showed that WCB is constituted by C, O, Si, Ca, and the atomic ratio of C is 93%. The total organic carbon (TOC) of WCB is 642, and pH is 8.4, alkalescency. The biochar (4% by dry weight) was added to soil samples, mixed thoroughly to create the amended soils. Each treatment was settled in a pot with 1.5 kg soil. Both the amended and unamended (control) soil samples were then incubated in a glasshouse at 25 °C to 28 °C for 180 days. During the incubation, deionized water was added at the top of the soils every week for maintaining the soil moisture at about 70% of their respective field capacities (measured at the matric potential of –33 kPa) ( The selected macroaggregates from each of the four treatments [Ultisol without amendment (U), Ultisol with biochar amendment (UB), Vertisol without amendment (V), and Vertisol with biochar amendment (VB)] were scanned using a SR-μCT at the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). The scanning was conducted by using a PCO2000 charge coupled device (CCD) camera with 3.7 µm pixel resolution. For each aggregate, 720 projections of 2048-by-2048 pixels were obtained for CT reconstruction. Then the filtered back-projection (FBP) algorithm was applied to the projection images for reconstruction ( The SR-μCT images were converted to binary files and directly used as the internal boundaries in our 3D-LB model for pore-scale water and solute transport simulations. Initially, the pore space was fully saturated with water. An external pressure gradient was applied to induce the water flow. In the LB method, a fluid is treated as mesoscale particles moving in a lattice domain with discrete lattice velocities at discrete time steps. The fluid variables (such as density and velocity) can be obtained through the distribution functions over all discrete lattices. In this study, we adopted a D3Q19 lattice Boltzmann model (19 velocity directions in 3D space) to simulate water flow ( For the fluid flow part, the macroscopic fluid density Complex boundaries (geometries) of porous media can be easily handled in the LB scheme. A no-slip boundary condition at the solid surface can be realized through the “bounce-back” condition, which mimics the phenomenon that a particle reflects its momentum when colliding with a solid surface ( To simulate solute transport, another distribution function ( Eq. The molecular diffusion coefficient In the water flow simulation, extra layers were added to the inlet and outlet for buffering ( The value of The total number of grids for each sample is as high as 64,000,000 in this study, which makes the LB simulations rather computationally expensive. To accelerate the simulation, GPU parallel computing was used to perform the simulations, with combining the technology of Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) developed by NVIDIA and Message Passing Interface (MPI). Each simulation was implemented with 2 nodes, and each node with 4 NIVIDIA TESLA GPU accelerator K20M (2496 cores, 5 GB memory size, 706 MHz GPU clock).  Spatial variability in pore water flow was evaluated in terms of the first moment (mean) and second moment (variance) of the velocity distribution. The coefficient of variation (CV, the ratio of standard deviation to mean) of the longitudinal velocity ( Similar results were observed for the magnitudes of velocities ( Mechanical or hydrodynamic dispersion phenomenon originates from the fact that the fluid moves faster in larger pores than it does in smaller ones and faster at the centers of the pores than along the walls (laminar flow), as well as that flow pathways are with different lengths ( The temporal evolutions of the normalized longitudinal dispersion coefficients ( To further investigate the behavior of the solute plume, the normalized longitudinal dispersion coefficients ( Soil structure is indicative of a soil’s ability to hold and transmit water and nutrient that are required for plant and microbial growth. Although some possible explanations have been proposed, the mechanisms for improvements in soil fertility after biochar amendment are not well understood ( In this study, selected aggregates from two clayey soils (an Ultisol and a Vertisol) with and without biochar amendment were scanned by SR-μCT, and the digitized image data were then used as internal boundaries in the high-performance LB method to simulate water and solute transport at pore scale. Our results showed that woodchip biochar amendment decreased the spatial variability in pore water velocities and increased the dispersion coefficients in the aggregates by nearly one order of magnitude. Furthermore, anomalous dispersion was more likely to occur in soils with biochar amendment, and soil samples after biochar amendment had relatively higher Pe thresholds for both the transition zone and advection dominated zone. The SR-μCT is a non-destructive method to obtain high-resolution real pore architectures, based on which the LB method can be directly implemented. This approach of combining SR-μCT and LB simulation to study solute transport provides a new way to observe the poorly understood contaminant and plant nutrient transport processes at pore scale. Our current study is limited to water and solute transport in saturated condition, and future investigations should be conducted to characterize the transport in unsaturated soil. This work is supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: