White pigment (titanium dioxide, TiO2) is used in various fields due to its exceptional stability, and optical and electronic properties. The complete removal of Fe3+ during the manufacturing process of white pigment is essential. This paper introduces a method to prepare high purity TiO2 by addition of EDTA (disodium ethylenediammine tetra-acetate) to chelate Fe3+ and prevent its hydrolysis to form Fe(OH)3. The extent of hydrolysis of the TiO2+ ion rose with increasing solution pH and greater time under the experimental conditions, reaching 94.8% at a solution pH of 1.68 and a hydrolysis time of 150 min. Under the experimental conditions, the hydrolysis of Fe3+ was restrained by EDTA addition into the solution. The TiO2 content of the product rose an increase of the EDTA/Fe3+ molar ratio, yielding a purity of 99.9% TiO2 as the ratio increased to 3. EDTA addition reduced the initiation of TiO2+ hydrolysis and the required amount of deionized washing water because larger meta-titanic acid grains were produced which were easily filtrated and washed.White pigment (titanium dioxide, TiO Titanium resources are decreasing due to unceasing exploitation. Nowadays, mostly low-titanium-content ore is used. For example, China is investigating low-titanium magnetite in Panzhihua ( Many investigations are being conducted on the acid dissolution process of titanium resources with high impurity content. Selective solvent extraction is being investigated ( The flow sheet for white pigment manufacture consists of two indispensable stages: acid dissolution and hydrolysis. The hydrolysis stage also involves the crucial process of enhancing the TiO In the white pigment industry, the meta-titanic acid precipitate that is formed after hydrolysis is purified through three tedious washing processes: water washing, acid washing and rinsing. In the water washing process, the solution pH ranges from 1–2. In the acid washing process, the concentration of the dilute H The above three processes produce 8–10 tons of 20% H In this paper, we investigate EDTA as a novel additive to restrain Fe The basic reaction for the preparation of TiO A stoichiometric ratio of TiO In white pigment industries, the original TiO In this work, Fe A 250 ml three-necked flask was employed with thermometer, stirrer and reflux condenser and 70 ml TiO The solution pH, which affects the hydrolysis rate, extent of hydrolysis and TiO The hydrolysis curves presented in The relationship between TiO The chelating effect of EDTA with Fe The specimens in EDTA enhanced the TiO The extent of hydrolysis of the TiO This work was supported by a grant from the Post-Doc. Program, Chonbuk National University (2006), in Korea. The author thanks Mr. Hongsheng Chen sincerely for his great help.