The potential for recycling of carbon fibre reinforced epoxy composites in water at supercritical or nearcritical conditions was studied. Experiments were devised in order to identify the significant process parameters that affect fibre reinforced composite recovery potential including temperature, time, oxidant and catalyst concentration. Experiments were performed in a batch-type reactor (10mL) without stirring, with temperatures ranging from 523 to 673K, pressures from 4.0 to 27.0MPa and reaction times from 1 to 30min. The efficiency of resin removal reached ca. 79.3wt.% under supercritical water conditions with further improvement through the use of potassium hydroxide as alkali catalyst (up to 95.3wt.%). The tensile strength of the reclaimed fibres was between 90% and 98% than that of the virgin fibres. A second-order kinetic equation was implemented to model the reactive extraction process.Carbon fibre reinforced composites (CFRCs) have gained great attention due to their interesting combination of properties, strength, durability, high strength-to-weight ratios and corrosion resistance. CFRCs are therefore extensively used in aerospace and automotive sectors. At present, global demand of carbon fibres is ca. 20,000 tons per year and growth in consumption has increased from 5.8% between 1997 and 2002 to a 7–8% per year Several potential technologies for the recycling of CFRCs, both mechanical and chemical, have already been assessed Solvolytic processes such as glycolysis Supercritical fluids (SCFs), and especially supercritical water (SCW) are also potential media for the recycling of fibres and resin since they can be inexpensive reaction media, recyclable, non-toxic and relatively easy to handle. SCW also possesses an interesting combination of properties such as low viscosity, high mass transport coefficients, high diffusivity and solvation power. These properties permit to use water as reaction medium instead of hazardous-volatile organic solvents, for instance, in total oxidation reactions This paper presents the findings of an investigation into carbon fibre epoxy composites recycling using nearcritical and supercritical water. The effect of reaction conditions, in terms of temperature, solvent concentration, oxidant concentration and exposure time were investigated, as well as the potential of chemical additives to enhance the reaction rate and improve the efficiency of the process. The carbon fibre pre-preg material used for this study was a cured, unidirectional material comprising Toray T-600 fibres and MTM 28-2 epoxy resin supplied by Advanced Composite Materials Group Ltd., Heanor, UK. Waste off-cuts (1 A non-stirred batch autoclave was used for each experiment, as shown in A Perkin–Elmer Pyris-1 TGA was used to quantify the amount of resin remaining in the reclaimed fibres after treatment. The fibres heated at 10 Samples of treated and virgin fibres were analysed using a FEI-Quanta 600 to determine the morphology and diameter of the fibres as well as visual signs of residual resin impurities. Fibres were mounted on carbon discs and gold coated to a thickness of 13 The tensile strength and tensile modulus of single filament specimens were determined according to the standard method ISO 11569 A design of experiments (DoE) approach was used to study the influence of the operating conditions on the recycling efficiency (i.e. the yield of eliminated resin, wt.%). Temperature, solvent volume, reaction time and H Statistical analysis of the results (listed in  Temperature appears to be the most important factor since yield increases from 21.8% to 79.3 The degradation process of the resin occurs at the surface of the resin that reinforces the carbon fibres. Due to the low thickness of the resin coating, it can be assumed that the kinetics of the surface reaction is proportional to the weight of the remaining resin over the carbon fibre. From a phenomenological point of view the process has two main steps, first, mass transfer from the bulk fluid to the surface and vice versa and second, the surface reaction. This implies that the estimated rate of reaction must consider both steps and it will be an effective rate of reaction. The differential equation which describes the process is as follows: One of the limitations, which appears when using a batch system to determine the kinetics of the process, is that nonstationary heating (start-up) and cooling periods (stop) may influence the degradation curve. For this case, the initial period took approximately 12 The data were fitted to a second-order kinetics with an averaged absolute deviation of 1.9%, the results are included in the next section. As it has been shown previously, the DoE analysis reveals that the most important variable is temperature, although both the reaction time and the initial composite/solvent ratio have a significant weight over the yield of the process (% of removed resin). Whilst the statistical analysis of the experimental data is quite useful in the preliminary stage of process optimisation, providing semi-quantitative information about the impact and relationship of the process variables. Recycling carbon fibre reinforced composites (CFRCs) consists basically of a reactive extraction process where the polymer matrix is decomposed by thermal-solvolysis i.e. the solvent behaves as a reagent compound. The choice of the solvent, as reactive extraction medium is therefore key to the efficiency of the process since it will determine the solubility and degradation rate of the resin and/or its products of degradation; temperature, pressure and catalyst/additives effect are the other key aspects for the yield of the process. The Arrhenius equation in logarithmic form has been used: As seen in Previous studies on chemical recycling of polymer waste in supercritical alcohol revealed that the use of an alkali catalyst significantly improved the kinetics of depolymerization, especially when the mechanism of depolymerization involve transesterification reactions, (e.g. Polycarbonate Basic conditions clearly modify the whole degradation pathway. Studies on the mechanism of thermal degradation of these systems have already been carried out The reclaimed fibres were analysed by SEM (  The recycling of carbon fibre reinforced composites by thermal hydrolysis was investigated in a batch reactor for temperatures ranging from 523 to 673 A simple degradation model function of the mass of the resin coupled to a second-order kinetic equation was successfully applied to model the reactive extraction of the epoxy resin from carbon fibre reinforced composite achieving enough accuracy. Carbon fibres of good mechanical quality were recovered from composite waste using SCW, with a removal efficiency of 79.3 The use of H The use of an alkali (e.g. KOH) in supercritical water catalyses the degradation kinetics allowing for the elimination of over 90 This paper uses resin removal as the primary indicator of recycle efficiency. In fact, there are three separate objectives for recycling of carbon fibre composite materials: firstly, the efficient removal of resin from the fibres; secondly, the capture and recycle of the resin side-products, removed from the composite; and thirdly, the retention of the mechanical properties of the fibres. Any given technique (i.e. mechanical, fluidised bed, microwave or supercritical fluid) exhibit different rates of success with each of these aims, depending on the operating conditions used. Some techniques may be moderate in all three, whilst others might be highly successful with one or two, to the detriment of the other. Selecting the appropriate technology and the optimum operating conditions will depend on the end use of the recovered resin and fibres. For any given end use, it might be possible to devise a recycle index with specific weighting on the success of say, mechanical strength, with total resin removal and resin recovery being of less importance, for example. This ‘recycle index’ would then allow each technique, at any given set of operating conditions to be quantified and evaluated. More work would be necessary to generate such an index, but the concept is definitely worth pursuing because there are tons of these materials ‘just waiting for being recycled’. The authors wish to thank to Advanced Composites Group Ltd. for their support in the pre-preg composite material supplied. The financial support of the EU Projects SUPERMAT, INTERREG ATLANTIC III and CTQ 2006-0299/PPQ is gratefully acknowledged, as well as the funding and technical support of both the University of Valladolid (Spain) and the University of Nottingham (UK).