Numerically simulated specimens with a three-dimensional pre-existing surface flaw are subjected to stress waves until failure via finite element analysis. Different types of cracks are reproduced, including wing cracks, anti-wing cracks, shell-like cracks and spalling fractures. The effects of different flaw dip angles on the initiation and propagation of wing cracks, anti-wing cracks and shell-like cracks are analysed under dynamic loading conditions. The numerical simulation results indicate that the dip angle of the flaw plays an important role in the crack behaviour and failure patterns of flawed specimens under dynamic loading. Wing cracks and anti-wing cracks emerge and present similar crack propagation patterns on the surface of the specimen when the pre-existing flaw dip angle is less than 60°. In contrast, only wing cracks appear in specimens with flaw dip angles of 75° and 90°. Shell-like cracks are reproduced inside of the specimens in all cases except the specimen with a flaw dip angle of 90°. In addition, the further propagation of shell-like cracks proceeds after the wing and anti-wing cracks stop propagating. Meanwhile, the numerical simulation also identifies the acoustic emission (AE) counts and energy of the specimen, which are closely related to the flaw dip angle during the dynamic failure process. The flaw dip angle has a slight effect on the dynamic strength of the specimens. Furthermore, the cracking patterns of specimens with a single pre-existing flaw under dynamic and static loading conditions are compared based on numerical investigations. Dynamic loading can produce more cracks and lead to more complex cracking behaviour. Moreover, loading rates can significantly influence crack propagation patterns and AE characteristics of rock specimens. Under high loading rates, the specimens fragment more efficiently. In addition, for specimens subjected to high loading rates, the more shear fractures occur, the greater the cumulative AE energy and the fewer the AE counts. Finally, heterogeneity also plays an important role in the distribution of micro-cracks in the material and the crack propagation patterns. Crack branching occurs in relatively heterogeneous rocks, which affects the further propagation of cracks initiated early. The stress concentration zone is not the only decisive factor and may be replaced by the degree of heterogeneity to determine the crack initiation and propagation. The results of this study can provide a valuable reference for studies on the failure process of heterogeneous brittle materials under dynamic loading.With the development of underground projects, the dynamic properties of rocks have received increasing attention in many areas. Rock is a heterogeneous material with many original defects and strong brittle characteristics, and understanding how fractures initiate and propagate under dynamic loading conditions is of great importance to point out the instability mechanisms of structures no matter for the rock engineering, mining engineering and earthquake prediction. In recent decades, scholars have carried out numerous dynamic tests to investigate the mechanisms of crack initiation and propagation processes under dynamic loading conditions Due to the non-transparency of rock, observing the fracture process of pre-existing flaws in laboratory experiments is difficult. However, numerical simulation can provide an alternative way to investigate the failure process, avoiding the inconvenience of tracing crack evolution in the laboratory. Many numerical methods have been devised to study the cracking process under dynamic loading conditions In rock engineering, however, fractures generally exist on the surface of solid rock. Rock specimens with penetration flaws under dynamic loading conditions have been well researched, while specimens with surface flaws have been less investigated. A specimen with surface flaws under dynamic loading conditions generates three-dimensional (3D) fractures, which cannot be treated as simple two-dimensional questions. Crack propagation inside a specimen is a crucial issue in 3D dynamic fractures, whereas limited attention is paid to the detailed crack behaviours. Further investigation of dynamic fractures in heterogeneous rock specimens with a pre-existing surface flaw in three dimensions under dynamic loading is essential. Liang et al. developed the RFPA3D numerical analysis, which ia an extension of RFPA2D to research the 3D fracturing processes of rock specimen with single pre-existing flaw In the present study, RFPA In this study, a FEM-based numerical tool, rock failure process analysis code (RFPA), is used to simulate the failure process of rocks with pre-existing flaws. Due to the wide application of RFPA, other detailed principles can be found in many articles Many studies have shown that the dynamic strength of rock materials generally increases with increasing loading rates In this study, RFPA3D_dynamic numerical analysis, which is an extension of RFPA3D, need to examine the stress wave propagation in numerical model. To validate the model and application of the software, the laboratory test on granite by Li et al. is selected to validate the feasibility of the numerical method on simulating the stress wave propagation characteristics Through comparison between the reflected wave histories measured by Li et al. Ten specimens are prepared to numerically investigate 3D crack behaviours under dynamic loading conditions, as detailed in To reveal the effect of flaw dip angles on dynamic fracture characteristics, cases from 1 to 7 are selected using pre-existing surface flaw dip angles that vary from 0° to 90° at an interval of 15°. By comparison of the results for cases 4, 9 and 10, the influence of loading rates on crack development and AE characteristics is considered. For rock material, due to its heterogeneity, each model contains an unequal number of weakening elements, and the heterogeneity indices m are only 3 and 5 to simplify the analysis of different heterogeneities. The specimen with m = 3 represents heterogeneous rock material, and the specimen with a higher homogeneity index of m = 5 represents relatively more homogeneous material. By comparing the results from cases 8 and 4, the effect of different degrees of heterogeneity is investigated. In addition, according to a study by Liang et al., shell-like cracks are defined that initiate from the inner contour of the existing flaw along the loading direction to distinguish them from wing cracks in the 2D study The As depicted in Owing to the existing flaw, which can block and reflect the stress waves, some of the compressive stress waves transform into tensile stress waves. Meanwhile, stress concentrates around the edge of the flaw, including the two tips of the flaw where cracks ultimately emerge. These tensile stress waves are superposed with the initial incident waves to promote crack initiation and drive the crack propagation direction. When the flaw dip angle is 0°, the reflected tensile stress waves are opposite to the incident waves. The direction of the maximal compressive stress is also along the vertical loading direction. With increasing flaw dip angle, the direction of the maximal compressive stress also changes because of the variation in reflected tensile stress waves. When the flaw dip angle increases to 90°, the contact area between the stress wave and the surface flaw is the smallest, which affects the propagation of the stress wave to a minimum degree. Therefore, a fracture zone appears only at the upper tip of the flaw. It should be highlighted that the flaw inclination angle significantly influences the crack initiation processes and initial propagation direction.   According to In general, compared to the internal and surface initiated cracks in the specimen, the shell-like cracks have lengths less than those of wing cracks or anti-wing cracks when t is less than 45 μs. These results indicate that the crack propagation inside the specimen requires more energy than on the surface due to the dispersion effect in the three-dimensional state. As a result of the superposition of incident and reflected stress waves, the crack propagation patterns for specimens with different flaw dip angles are presented in As depicted, the crack propagation behaviours in The crack propagation paths inside the specimens are presented in To more clearly present the path of the internal crack, half of the specimen with a flaw dip angle of 45° is cut away to see the cross section A-A′, as shown in With stress waves propagating in the specimen, the incident stress waves reflect from the boundaries of the specimen and convert to tensile stress waves, which drive the wing cracks, shell-like cracks and secondary cracks that propagate to different boundaries of the specimen. Many new horizontal tensile fractures appear throughout the entire specimen and coalesce, inducing a macroscopic splitting failure mode. Although rock spalling fractures under dynamic loading have been investigated theoretically and experimentally by many researchers, this study is the first to account for the mesoscopic mechanism of spallation under a three-dimensional stress state Due to the dynamic loading, wing cracks and anti-wing cracks emerge and lead to the “X”-shaped propagation mode, as presented in The simulation results, which are in good agreement with the physical results, show that the RFPA can simulate crack propagation and stress wave attenuation in the dynamic loading case. Therefore, in the present study, this numerical code, which is able to simulate the responses of rock subjected to dynamic loading, is used.  Dip angles not only have a certain influence on crack behaviours and specimens but also affect AE characteristics in the rupture process of the specimen. The cumulative AE counts and energy are obtained via the numerical model. As presented in In the authors' previous research, the entire process of cracking from crack initiation to specimen failure under static loading is investigated by FEM First, the wing cracks (anti-wing cracks) can propagate to the top or bottom of the specimen, and the propagation length of wing cracks (anti-wing cracks) is generally larger in the dynamic loading case. Second, the number of cracks in the dynamic loading case is much higher than that in the static loading case. Dynamic loading thus brings about a higher degree of fragmentation, which is in agreement with many studies To reveal the fracture characteristics of rock under different loading rates, the failure process of the specimen with a flaw dip angle of 45° is analysed and discussed under three different impulsive stress waves, as shown in In addition, the appearances of dynamic fractures are generally accompanied by releases of energy, as illustrated in The relationship between the loading rate and AE counts is a negative correlation, but the loading rate is positively correlated with AE cumulative energy. The numerical simulation results show that different loading rates are associated with AE counts and AE energy release. Additionally, the number of AE events decreases with increasing loading rate, whereas the cumulative AE energy increases gradually with loading rate. This situation is possible because rock-like material is damaged easily under tension but not under compression or shear. Due to the superposition of incident and reflected stress waves, at a relatively large loading rate, the rock sample can reach higher stress; thus, more shear fractures occur. Accordingly, due to the larger loading rate, tensile cracks are reduced, leading to lower AE counts. In other words, shear cracks need more external energy and generally appear more in the case of a large loading rate. The crack propagation patterns of rocks are significantly affected by the heterogeneity parameter value. Therefore, heterogeneity is a necessary factor for investigating crack evaluation of heterogeneous materials. In this study, all investigations to this point have assumed that the homogeneity index (m) is 5. Additional numerical simulations are performed for m = 3, which represents a relatively heterogeneous rock, to survey the influence of rock inhomogeneity on the crack propagation patterns associated with specimens containing pre-existing flaws under impact loading. The minimum principal stress distribution and the crack propagation behaviour at selected times in Although the loading conditions and the other parameters are the same for two specimens that have different homogeneity parameters, the crack propagation processes are very different. From these numerical simulations, the cracking behaviour of the relatively heterogeneous specimen can be determined: the horizontal tensile cracks, which attach the wing cracks and anti-wing cracks, appear earlier than in the highly heterogeneous case. Meanwhile, multiple branches of the wing cracks and anti-wing cracks are observed on the surface of the specimen. Furthermore, the number of short horizontal tensile cracks causing specimen instability is shorter, and the crack lengths are shorter. Moreover, as a result of the crack branching behaviour, the further propagation of wing cracks and anti-wing cracks ceases. In addition, the stress field during the failure process becomes more complicated, and local stress concentrations appear in many regions of the specimen, as shown in  Based on the above numerical results, further details of the fracture characteristics of single-flawed specimens under dynamic compressive stress are discussed.  The failure of the specimens under static loading case is due to the development of the anti-wing cracks or wing cracks, which induces a macroscopic shear failure mode. The existence of the pre-existing flaw will cause stress concentration around it. The effective shear stress on the crack surface is the driving force for crack initiation and propagation of the pre-existing flaw tip. The crack would gradually propagate and extend along the shear direction as the stress increases, until the rock specimen total failure. Therefore, the specimens are usually broken into two major halves at failure. The results indicate that the anti-wing cracks initiated around the pre-existing flaw dominate the static failure. While, under dynamic loading condition, the macroscopic failure mode generally presents “X”shape crack bands, which are composed of a series cracks, mainly attributed to the development of the wing cracks, anti-wing cracks and some newly initiated short cracks expect the specimens with the falw dip angles of 75° and 90°. For the specimen with the flaw dip angle of 75°, the failure of the specimens is only due to the development of the wing cracks. Meanwhile, for the specimens containing a β = 90° flaw, the cracks bands which composed of a large amount of cracks form a “Y” shape failure pattern. By comparing the failure patterns under static and dynamic loading, we found that the failure patterns of the specimens is directed only by the development of the anti-wing cracks or wing cracks in static loading case. The failure patterns under dynamic loading condition indicated the wing cracks, anti-wing cracks and short tensile horizontal cracks dominate the dynamic failure of the specimens containing a single flaw. In addition, the failure of the specimens is also due to the appearance and development of the horizontal cracks, inducing a macroscopic splitting failure, which results from the reflected tensile stress waves. Furthermore, the number of cracks in dynamic loading cases is much higher than that in static loading cases. More cracks lead to a higher degree of fragmentation, which is in agreement with many studies The different crack behaviours under dynamic are more complicated, and a detailed study considering crack patterns from initiation to failure is left for future work. The single-flawed specimens manifest different dynamic strengths with various flaw inclination angles, as depicted in A comparison of the static and dynamic axial strengths obtained from the numerical experiments conducted by RFPA3D shows that the values of dynamic axial strength are apparently higher than those of static strengths with different flaw inclination angles. The effect of the angle on the strength under dynamic loading conditions is more pronounced than that under static loading conditions. The dip angle has significant influence on the cracking behaviours of single-flawed specimens under dynamic loading from numerical results. No anti-wing cracks are observed in specimens with inclination angles β varying from 75° to 90°. When the inclination angle is less than 45°, anti-wing cracks appear and initiate at the tip of the pre-existing surface flaw, and the anti-wing cracks initiate at a certain distance from the pre-existing surface flaw instead of at the tips with an inclination angle β of 60°. The propagation of shell-like cracks is also largely dependent on the flaw dip angle. When the dip angle is increased from 0° to 45°, the shell-like cracks propagate along the vertical direction and then towards the front boundary of the specimen. Simultaneously, the shell-like cracks can propagate to the top of the specimen with dip angles of 0° and 15°. The shell-like cracks propagate to the front boundary directly from the inner edge of the pre-existing surface flaw with dip angles of 60° and 75°. No shell-like cracks are initiated when the dip angle is 90°. Specimens with different flaw dip angles reveal different failure modes under dynamic loading conditions. In addition, the crack behaviour evidently has significant influence on the rock dynamic axial strength. The decrease-increase tendency, as mentioned in the first part of the article, is closely related to the crack behaviours of specimens. The dynamic strengths with dip angles of 75° and 60° are mainly determined by wing cracks and secondary cracks. When the inclination angle β varies from 0° to 45°, the dynamic strength is also related to the anti-wing cracks, which lead to a reduction in strength and change the fracture mode of the specimen. In this study, numerically simulated rock specimens containing a pre-existing surface flaw with different dip angles are investigated. Numerical results in this research reproduce many phenomena that have already appeared in numerous rock dynamic experiments and demonstrate other experimental phenomena that cannot be observed due to experimental conditions. The following key conclusions are drawn from our numerical simulations: The flaw dip angle has a significant effect on the occurrence of crack type and the crack propagation pattern, as well as the dynamic axial compressive strength. The dynamic compressive strength increases significantly when the dip angle is greater than 45° and has limited influence when the dip angle is less than 45°. Comparing the dynamic and static cases, dynamic loading can lead to more serious rock fragmentation, more complicated crack behaviours and higher dynamic axial compressive strengths. Notably, spalling fractures under dynamic loading conditions are induced by the coalescence of the short horizontal cracks caused by the reflected waves. Crack branching and curving usually occur in heterogeneous specimens during the failure process. In addition, the numerical results indicate that the attenuation of the stress wave is more evident in the relatively heterogeneous case. Since heterogeneous specimens contain more weakened elements, which represent the fractures and voids in rock, these specimens absorb more energy from the initial incident stress waves. Loading rates have a strong influence on crack types and crack patterns. The higher the loading rate is, the more serious the fragmentation degree of the rock specimen. Under a high loading rate, multiple cracks form near the pre-existing flaw and propagate upward and downward, which causes the specimen to fully fracture. The work was financially supported by the