Background
                  Standard radiographs are limited in the evaluation of fracture characteristics and preoperative planning of OTA/AO 43C3 fractures. Therefore, CT imaging is an accepted as a useful method. CT is however expensive and has high radiation, and traction radiographs could be an alternative. This study aimed to compare fracture fragment and comminution zone visualization between traction radiographs and CT and any potentially resulting differences in consecutive treatment and surgical approach recommendations.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty orthopaedic surgeons assessed traction radiographs and CT images of 12 OTA/AO 43C3 type fractures. Each observer was required to identify the anterolateral, posterolateral, and medial malleolus fragments and the lateral, central, and medial shoulder comminution zones. They then had to recommend treatment (nonoperative, ORIF, closed reduction and external fixation, percutaneous screw fixation, or primary tibiotalar arthrodesis) with the best surgical approach (medial, anterolateral, posterolateral, posteromedial, or combined). Intra- and interobserver reliability, correct identification of fracture fragments and comminution zones on both images, and consistency of treatment recommendations and surgical approaches were analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  The agreement of each observer’s assessment of the presence or absence of specific fracture fragments and comminution zones was substantially increased for CT as compared to traction radiographs, particularly for the posterolateral (p = 0.000) and anterolateral fragment (p = 0.000), and the lateral (p = 0.000), central (p = 0.000), and medial shoulder comminution zone (p = 0.000). The interobserver reliability when assessing the three fracture fragments and comminution zones on the traction radiographs was moderate, whereas it was substantial when assessing these characteristics on CT. The medial malleolus fragment was more often correctly identified on traction radiographs than CT images (p = 0.001). The ability to correctly identify lateral, central, and medial shoulder comminution zones was higher for CT than traction radiographs (p = 0.000). The treatment and surgical approach recommendations after traction radiograph and CT evaluation were similar (p < 0.05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Traction radiographs may be a useful alternative to CT imaging in the preoperative planning of pilon fracture repair. Despite less reliable fracture fragment and comminution zone identification on traction radiographs, treatment recommendations and surgical approach were not influenced.Pilon fractures are mostly high-energy distal tibial fractures affecting up to 10% of patients with lower extremity fractures [ Although CT is very advantageous in preoperative fracture detail imaging, there is a need for alternative methods due to its high cost, availability difficulties and high radiation exposure. Traction radiographs may be an alternative to CT in pilon fractures. It allows better visualization of individual fracture fragments than standard radiographs [ This study primarily aimed to analyse the interobserver and intraobserver reliability in the evaluation of the fragment and comminution zone characteristics of 43C type distal tibia fractures when assessing anteroposterior and lateral traction radiographs as compared to axial, coronal and sagittal CT images. Secondarily, we wanted to compare the treatment recommendations resulting from either traction radiographs and CT. We hypothesized that specific fracture fragments would be interpreted differently on the traction radiographs as compared with CT, and that intra- and interobserver agreement with regard to the recommended treatment would be strong. After the approval from our hospital’s institutional review board, we reviewed the medical files of 15 patients with surgically treated OTA/AO 43 C3 type fractures. The inclusion criteria were an intra-articular distal tibial fracture of the AO/OTA 43C3 type in an adult (18 years and older) with two traction images and axial, sagittal and coronal CT images of adequate quality available for review. Exclusion criteria were an open physis, previous ankle injury or operation, open fractures, poor soft tissue condition, and suboptimal traction radiographs and CT images. Two sets of images were excluded because of at least one missing traction radiograph in the picture archiving and communication system (PACS), and one was excluded because of inadequate CT images. After these exclusions, 12 OTA/AO 43C3 type fractures were included in the study. The traction radiographs included two standardized anteroposterior (AP) and lateral images taken with a spanning external fixator applied. Traction images were performed under general or regional anesthesia in the operating room. All images were captured with a radiographic image intensifier (Shimadzu Collimator type-R 300, Kyoto, Japan) at an image distance of 51 cm from the intensifier and stored in the PACS. The CT images were made using a sixteen-slice scanner (Siemens Somatom Emotion, Erlangen, Germany). All images were formatted in the axial, sagittal and coronal planes respective to the axis of the tibia with bone-level windowing. Twenty observers (15 orthopedic surgeons and 5 orthopaedics residents in their 4 The images were made available to each observer in the form of two PowerPoint presentations (Microsoft® Office 2011 for Mac; Microsoft, Redmond, WA) created by the first author (A.M.). The first presentation comprised individual all 12 cases with the two traction radiographs in AP and lateral view. Each observer was asked to review the set of images for each patient and describe a) the presence or absence of a posterolateral, anterolateral, or medial malleolus fragment, b) the presence or absence of a lateral, central, or medial shoulder zone of comminution, c) the surgical approach they would choose, and d) the overall treatment plan they would recommend. An illustration was supplied to them detailing each fragment and zone of comminution. They could choose a medial, anterolateral, posterolateral, posteromedial, or combined surgical approach. The choices of treatment were nonoperative, ORIF, closed reduction and external fixation, percutaneous screw fixation, and primary tibiotalar arthrodesis. The second presentation consisted of the CT images for each case chosen by the first author (A.M.). These images included axial, coronal and sagittal slices including the subtalar joint distally and 5 cm from the fracture proximally, which could be scrolled through by the observer. The sets of images in each of the presentations did not contain any patient information or final treatment radiographs. Two randomizations took place to obtain a random order of patients in each of the two presentations. The sets of traction images were randomized prior to their inclusion in the first presentation, and the CT images were separately randomized prior to inclusion in the second presentation. The observers first received the presentation with the radiographs for assessment. Once they had concluded the evaluation, they received the CT images for assessment. The time between completion of the evaluation of the traction radiographs and receiving the CT images was two weeks. The individual observer responses for the fragment and comminution zone identification were graded as correct or incorrect regarding traction radiographs and CT images compared with the gold standard CT evaluation read by a more than 10-year experienced radiologist. The treatment options offered were purposefully kept general because of the wide variation in the observers’ experience. The goal was to obtain a decision for either of the main five treatment options mentioned above. No differentiation in the type or mode of external fixation (static, dynamic, or joint spanning) was required. Treatment recommendations resulting from either traction radiographs or the CT were compared. The descriptive statistics used for the data were mean, standard deviation, median, lowest and highest value, frequency, and ratio. Intraobserver and interobserver reliability for the assessment of traction radiographs and CT images regarding fracture lines and comminution zones identification were calculated with Fleiss’ kappa coefficients. Kappa values were assigned to the subdivisions on the basis of the strength of agreement in the following manner: poor (0.01–0.20), fair (0.21–0.40), moderate (0.41–0.60), substantial (0.61–0.80), and nearly perfect (0.81–1.00). The chi-square test was used for qualitative independent analysis. The qualitative dependent analysis was performed using McNemar test. Descriptive information was calculated to show changes in the treatment modality and surgical approach decisions. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS for Windows, version 22 (IBM corp., Armonk, NY). The agreement of each observer’s assessment of the presence or absence of specific fracture fragments in traction radiographs compared with CT images was as follows: for the posterolateral fragment, it increased from 48% to 75.5% (p = 0.000) and for the anterolateral fragment from 54% to 79% (p = 000), respectively. For the medial malleolus fragment the increase was not statistically significant (51% to 58%, p = 0.125). The interobserver reliability in the identification of the three specific fracture fragments and comminution zones on the traction radiographs was moderate overall ( The medial malleolus fragment was correctly identified more often on the traction radiographs than on the CT images (82.5% vs. 71.5%, p = 0.001) The ability to correctly identify the anterolateral and posterolateral fragments was higher for the CT images than for the traction radiographs (77% vs. 62% (p = 0.000) and 79% vs. 58% (p = 0.001), respectively). The agreement of each observer’s assessment of the presence or absence of specific comminution zones on the traction radiographs compared with the CT images was as follows: for the lateral comminution zone, it increased from 59.5% to 77% (p = 0.000). For the central comminution zone, it increased from 46% to 82.5% (p = 000). It was increased from 44% to 71.5% (p = 0.000) for the medial shoulder comminution zone ( The ability to correctly identify lateral, central, and medial shoulder comminution zones on CT images was higher than on traction radiographs (75.5% vs. 59% (p = 0.000), 79% vs. 54% (p = 0.000), and 71.5% vs. 44% (p = 0.000), respectively). A total of 240 treatment recommendations were analysed. When the traction radiographs were evaluated, operative treatment was recommended in 98.75% of cases. ORIF was the most often recommended method of fixation (215 of 240 cases, (89.6%)). The treatment recommendations based on CT evaluation were similar. Operative treatment was recommended for all patients (100%). ORIF was the most preferred treatment method of fixation (224 of 240 cases, (93.4%) ( With regard to the surgical approach, a combined approach was chosen in 196 of 240 cases (81.7%) when traction radiographs were evaluated and in 205 of 240 cases (85.4%) when CT images were evaluated. The preferred surgical approach based on traction radiograph assessment compared with CT image assessment is shown in The most important finding of this study was that CT imaging is superior to traction radiographs in the correct identification of fracture fragments and comminution zones in OTA/AO 43C3 fractures. However, both evaluation methods led to consistent treatment recommendations and surgical approaches. The interobserver reliability in the identification of the three specific fracture fragments and comminution zones was moderate. However, it was substantial for the assessment of CT images. The higher radiation dose delivered to the patient in CT as compared to radiography examinations is one of the disadvantages of CT imaging. Also, CT is more expensive than radiography. These are the reasons why we explored the alternative of traction radiographs. Ultra-low-dose CT scanning protocols may be used to decrease radiation exposure [ Sirkin [ The available anterolateral osteosynthesis plates were tested in both Y- and T-shaped fracture patterns, and none was found to be superior to another due to their general deficiency in capturing all pilon fracture fragments [ The risks and benefits of any approach must be carefully taken into consideration. Extensile or dual approaches, although leading to perfect visualization of fracture fragments, perfect articular reduction, and stable fixation, carry a risk of nonunion, especially in anterior-posterior fixations [ Several concepts have been developed for the surgical management of pilon fractures [ CT imaging provides detailed information about fracture lines, fragment features, comminution zones, additional pathologies, and any requirement for combined reduction and stabilization techniques [ Using specific fragment and comminution zone data and a standardized fracture classification to select patients, implementing two randomizations, not providing information on the final treatment to limit the bias of observers, using the gold standard imaging technique as the reference, and using orthopedic surgeons with widely varying experience levels as observers were the strengths of this study. There are some limitations to this study. First, our sample size was relatively small. Secondly, there were only comminuted articular fractures. Thirdly, treatment options and surgical approaches were not detailed. The similar treatment option and surgical approach recommendations may be associated with the limited choice surgeons had. In conclusion, while CT evaluation proved superior to traction radiographs in the identification of fracture fragments and comminution zones in OTA/AO 43C3 type fractures, both assessment methods resulted in similar treatment and surgical approach recommendations. Therefore, traction radiographs may be a useful alternative to CT imaging in the preoperative planning in settings where (ultra-low-dose) CT is not available, too costly or high radiation doses are a concern. Prospective controlled clinical studies assessing the link between our results and clinical outcomes are needed. Abdulhamit Misir, Turan Bilge Kizkapan, Kadir Ilker Yildiz, Erdal Uzun and Mustafa Ozcamdalli declare that they have no conflict of interest.