The balance between cell survival and cell death is at the hub of the pathogenesis of autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases. Immunogenic cell death and the accumulation of cellular debris constituting a reservoir of autoantigens promote abnormal inflammation. At the opposite, dysregulation of cell survival can trigger the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chronic activation of autoreactive immune cells. The choice between survival and the initiation of a cell death program results from the subtle integration of numerous signals. Metabolic cellular activity, environmental stress, and the effects of immune cells and inflammatory mediators must undergo integration to ensure tissue homeostasis. Macroautophagy, often referred to simply as autophagy, is a major contributor to the cell survival/death balance Autophagy involves the formation in the cytoplasm of double-membrane structures known as autophagosomes, which engulf either portions of the cytosol or, more selectively, protein aggregates or damaged organelles. Fusion of the autophagosomes with the lysosomes results in degradation of the autophagosome cargo by the lysosomal enzymes. Autophagy was initially described as a survival mechanism under conditions of metabolic stress, first in yeast and subsequently in superior eukaryotes. When nutrients are scarce, autophagy recycles cell components, which are used to generate new macromolecules and energy. Thus, autophagy promotes cell survival and often antagonizes apoptosis. Under normal conditions, the basal level of autophagy also makes a key contribution to the survival of long-lived cells, by eliminating nonfunctional organelles and protein aggregates. Finally, autophagy plays specialized roles in various physiological processes such as inflammation. Autophagy contributes to clear microorganisms and to regulate the production of proinflammatory cytokines and the survival and activation of lymphocytes ( These properties suggest that autophagy may be involved in the development of autoimmunity and of autoinflammation in general. Polymorphisms of genes governing autophagy (autophagy-related [ATG] genes) are associated with the development of several diseases such as Crohn's disease, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Autophagy is induced by environmental stress due, for instance, to hypoxia, infection, or metabolic imbalances. Furthermore, the level of autophagy diminishes with advancing age. Thus, the development of joint diseases characterized by an age-related inflammatory component (e.g., osteoarthritis) and/or promoted by environmental stress (e.g., SLE and RA) is associated with autophagy dysregulation. Finally, several drugs used to treat inflammatory diseases can modulate autophagy, and we must therefore improve our understanding of how autophagy impacts chronic inflammation. Several studies have documented a functional link between autophagy dysregulation and cartilage autoinflammation. Joint tissues are generated and degraded via the orchestrated effects of several cell types. Osteoblasts and the cells they differentiate into, i.e., osteocytes, ensure the generation and subsequent mineralization of the bone matrix. The fibroblasts in the synovial membrane and the chondrocytes, which are the only resident cells in the cartilage, generate the cartilage matrix. The bone and cartilage are also continuously degraded, according to a subtly regulated process in the healthy joint. Osteoclasts degrade both the bone and the directly overlying calcified cartilage Osteoclasts are cells of monocyte lineage whose activity results in resorption of bone tissue and of calcified cartilage in direct contact with bone. Osteoclast differentiation and activation are strongly stimulated by proinflammatory signals produced in abnormally large amounts by the synovial membrane of rheumatoid joints. Autophagy was first shown to promote osteoclastogenesis in response to receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANK-L) Fibroblasts contribute to cartilage formation not only by continuously producing collagen, but also by degrading collagen. RA synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) release mediators that have proinflammatory effects or induce the resorption of mineralized cartilage and bone by the osteoclasts. These proinflammatory mediators, which are also released by synovial macrophages, can indirectly promote the degradation of hyaline cartilage by chondrocytes. RASF expansion is stimulated by TNF-α released by the synovial macrophages. RASFs are resistant to apoptotic stimuli. CHOP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein) is a protein that induces apoptosis during endoplasmic reticulum stress. Compared to synovial fibroblasts from joints with osteoarthritis, RASFs express lower levels of CHOP The potential role for autophagy in chronic inflammation has been extensively investigated in patients with Crohn's disease, in which severe bowel inflammation is often accompanied with symptomatic arthritis. Several studies suggest a link between the In contrast, several studies evaluated the level of adaptive immune activity in patients with RA and SLE. The results usually indicated increased autophagic activity of B cells and T cells in SLE, which might promote the survival of autoreactive T cells, particularly memory T cells Another study addressed the role for T-cell autophagy in RA In sum, autophagy is a major modulator of inflammation in joint disease ( The author declares that he has no competing interest. I am grateful to the organizations and institutions that fund my research activities: the