The measurement of cyanide using a silver nitrate titration with p-dimethylaminobenzylidene rhodanine indicator has been used for many years by the gold industry and has been adopted in many operations as the trusted free cyanide determination. However, this work shows that there are several interferences, particularly copper and thiosulfate, where the interference increase with increasing concentration of these species. In comparison, cyanide determination using a silver nitrate titration with potentiometric end-point has no interferences as long as the titration pH is adjusted above 12 to eliminate the interference of zinc. A potential issue with the identification of the potentiometric end-point at low copper and/or thiosulfate concentrations is highlighted.
                  With the gold industry now treating more complex gold ores, this work clearly demonstrates that the rhodanine indicator determination for free cyanide in cyanidation leach solutions containing copper and/or thiosulfate will over-estimate the free cyanide concentration and cannot be compared directly against an online cyanide analyser using a potentiometric determination. As no simple direct correlation exists between the two methods for these complex cyanide solutions, it is recommended that gold operations treating complex gold ores and using online cyanide analysers adopt the potentiometric end-point method in the laboratory which allows for direct comparison.Cyanidation is the dominant hydrometallurgical means for the recovery of gold from ores. The addition of cyanide to this process has generally been monitored using a laboratory silver nitrate titration with p-dimethylaminobenzylidene rhodanine indicator. In recent years, some gold operations have implemented online analysis and control systems to optimise the addition of cyanide. A common online analyser uses a silver nitrate titration with potentiometric end-point detection. These methods determine what is typically referred to as the “free” cyanide concentration. As gold producers begin to treat more complex gold ores (typically these are ores containing reactive sulfide minerals and/or soluble copper) using cyanidation, interferences are becoming more significant with large differences being observed between the two end-point detection methods. With a lack of understanding as to these interferences, some operators disregard the online potentiometric determination believing the rhodanine to be a more reliable and/or valid determination since it has been used for many years. This paper aims to improve the understanding of the interferences on these methods for measuring cyanide and thus establish the validity of each method for use with the cyanidation of complex gold ores. Reviews of methods for the determination for cyanide ( A potentiometric end-point determination uses the measured potential of a silver wire in the titration solution as an indicator of changes in solution speciation as silver nitrate is added. In order to interpret the potential measurements and identify the potential end-point it is vital to know the solution species present and the influence these may have on the cyanide determination. This not only includes the metal cyanides but also other anions in solution which can complex with silver ions (for example sulfide and thiosulfate ions). Traditional analyses for elements such as AAS and ICP can quantify the metal ions, but techniques such as HPLC are required to quantify the various anion species that can be present in cyanidation solutions ( The present paper investigates in detail the titration of cyanide by silver nitrate with rhodanine and potentiometric end-point determinations and quantifies the interference of various solution species commonly found in the cyanidation of complex ores. Solutions were prepared from analytical grade reagents and deionised water. Cyanide solutions were prepared using NaCN. Copper and zinc cyanide solutions were prepared from CuCN and Zn(CN) Unless stated otherwise, titrations were conducted with 20 For titrations conducted using rhodanine, 0.1 Potentiometric titrations were conducted using a Metrohm 716 Titrino auto-titrator controlled by a computer using TIAMO software. The potential of a silver wire was measured against a standard reference electrode (SCE) and recorded along with the volume of silver nitrate solution added as the titration proceeded. In identifying titration end-points, the TIAMO software calculates an Equivalence point Recognition Criterion (ERC) which is the first derivative of the titration curve combined with a mathematical function that is more sensitive for flatter inflections than for steeper ones. The potentiometric titration of a cyanide solution ( For the cyanidation of oxide gold ores the interferences are typically minimal and thus gold operations obtain similar cyanide measurements in the laboratory using rhodanine indicator as an online measurement using a potentiometric end-point. However, with the gold industry now processing more complex gold ores by cyanidation, the interferences and thus the difference between these two end-point determinations have become more evident. The interferences are largely related to the presence of sulfide minerals in the ore which can result in sulfide ions in solution with the subsequent formation of thiosulfate and thiocyanate from the oxidation of sulfide ions (   The cyanidation of complex gold ores typically sees greater dissolution of base metals, particularly copper. With copper present in the cyanide solution the silver nitrate titration chemistry becomes more complex as there is an equilibrium between copper cyanide species and cyanide ions in solution and thus as the free cyanide concentration decreases the copper cyanide complexes can release cyanide ions to complex with silver ions. The change in the potential of a silver wire during the silver nitrate titration of cyanide solutions in the absence and presence of copper is shown in  Distinguishing the potentiometric cyanide endpoint from that of the third cyanide complexed with copper or thiosulfate is, however, difficult at low concentrations of these species.  Various free cyanide and copper concentrations were measured using the potentiometric and rhodanine methods to explore a possible relationship between these methods when copper is present.  Also, the cyanide concentration of interest in the leaching of gold is the cyanide available in solution that can leach gold. Some weak acid dissociable cyanide ions, such as the third cyanide complexed with copper, are also available to leach gold, though the gold leach rate is much slower than for free cyanide ( Zinc, if present in the gold ore, may also dissolve during cyanidation. For the potentiometric titration, the presence of zinc ions complicates the results, particularly if the pH is less than 12 ( During titrations at pH values below 12, the zinc complexes weakly with cyanide and two additional weak transitions (maxima in the ERC) are observed at the addition of 2.2 and 3.6 Rhodanine titration of the zinc cyanide solutions at the various pH values found that the measured cyanide was independent of pH and equivalent to the total cyanide in solution. This indicates that the cyanide ions complexed with zinc are only weakly bound and are easily released to complex with silver ions. As the cyanide complexed with zinc is only weakly bound (weaker than the third cyanide associated with copper which was discussed above), the cyanides complexed with zinc are most likely readily available for gold dissolution. Thus, with the addition of sodium hydroxide to the titration the determination provides a cyanide measurement that can be considered to be the available cyanide for gold leaching.  During a rhodanine end-point determination the presence of interferences in a complex cyanidation leach solution results in a visible change to the sharpness in the end-point colour change, as previously discussed. Thus it is only with comparison to the potentiometric determination that interferences can be quantified and a complete solution analysis is needed to identify the interfering species. Variability between the two end-point methods for plant solutions over a 12 The cyanide measurement using silver nitrate titration with rhodanine indicator has been used for many years by the gold industry and has been adopted in many cases as the trusted determination. However, as shown in this work with the use of UV absorbance, there are several interferences, particularly copper and thiosulfate. In comparison, the cyanide determination using a silver nitrate titration with potentiometric end-point was found to have no interferences as long as the titration pH was adjusted above 12 to eliminate the interference of zinc. A potential issue with the identification of the end-point at low copper and/or thiosulfate concentrations was highlighted. The rhodanine indicator determination has been shown to be unsuitable for complex cyanidation leach solutions due to interferences and can therefore not be compared directly against online cyanide analysers using a potentiometric determination. For complex cyanide solutions the two methods will trend each other, but as no simple direct correlation is possible, they do not offer a reliable cross-check. It is thus recommended that gold operations treating complex gold ores adopt the potentiometric end-point method in the laboratory. This allows direct comparison with online analysers using a silver nitrate titration with potentiometric end-point.