In this paper, a theoretical technical study was carried out using Brazilian available biomass materials (rice husk, coffee husk and elephant grass) compared to natural gas applied to an electric arc furnace (EAF) steelmaking process. Rice and coffee husk are biomass residues from the agriculture while elephant grass (Pennisetum Purpureum Schum) is an abundant, fast growing plant, which is used for cattle breeding. The ultimate analysis of the biomass materials was carried out in the research department of a Brazilian Steelmaking Industry. The results of the ultimate analysis were used to determine the lower calorific value and the mass flow rate of the biomass materials used in the cogeneration system. The actual steelmaking process uses natural gas to both improve the “cold spots” inside the furnace and contribute to minimize the use of electrical energy in the heating process. The feasibility study considers a combined heat and power plant (CHP) to generate electricity and heat to the electric arc furnace (EAF) process. This study used the First Law of Thermodynamics to determine the operational parameters of the cogeneration plant considering three cases of different operational parameters in the Rankine cycle. The technical results show that the natural gas consumption and exhaust gas generation were the lowest among the fuels in the three cases analyzed. Regarding the exhaust gases generation, some aspects should be highlighted: the combustion of biomass is considered carbon neutral; the exhaust gases generated may be used to scrap preheat; also, biomass is a renewable fuel in contrast with natural gas, which is a fossil fuel. Thus, an economic analysis, considering only the operational cost of the plant, was conducted exhibiting that elephant grass had the lowest operational cost, accounting for a reduction of about 9% in the second case and 15% in the third case compared to natural gas. Although the biomasses have lower LCV than natural gas, they showed a great promise of their use in the EAF process indicating their feasibility as an excellent alternative for the process of producing iron.mean specific heat at constant pressure [kJ/kg K] thermal (chemical) power available in the fuel [kW] specific enthalpy [kJ/kg] kinetic specific energy [kJ/kg] lower calorific value [MJ/kg] fuel mass flow rate [kg/s] steam mass flow rate [kg/s] potential specific energy [kJ/kg] specific heat [kJ/kg] heat input at the boiler [kW] heat transfer from the condenser [kW] heat transfer to the process [kW] temperature [°C] specific work [kJ/kg] balance of plant electrical power required for the Rankine cycle [kW] net work output [kW] turbine work output [kW] boiler efficiency [–] cogeneration efficiency [–] blast furnace/basic oxygen furnace combined heat and power direct reduction iron electric arc furnace open hearth furnace organic Rankine cycle Steel is essential to the modern world, and its use is critical in enabling man to move towards a sustainable future. In 2012, more than 1.4 billion tons of steel were manufactured, 45% of steel were produced in China, 28% in the developing regions (excluding China) and 26% in the developed regions. There will be continuing growth in the volume of steel produced, particularly in developing areas such as Latin America, Asia, Africa and the Indian sub-continent, where steel will be vital in raising the welfare of developing societies According to Arens et al. According to Karali et al. In 2013, more than 30% of steel produced worldwide comes from the Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) process Chen et al. Morfeldt et al. Strezov et al. Bioenergy is a renewable and clean energy source that is derived from biomass. It has been attracting great attention these days due to the declining fossil fuel reserves and the ever-increasing greenhouse effects produced through fossil fuel utilization. In Brazil, sugar cane, coffee and rice are cultivated in large scale. In addition, elephant grass ( Yunos et al. In conclusion, steel consumption will peak at around 2020 while EAF process will achieve 50% in the steelmaking process until 2050 According to Jones et al. The first step in the production of any heat is to select the grade of steel to be made. The EAF steel mills utilize steel scrap and up to 30 percent of other iron-bearing materials to produce steel. EAF steel plants primarily produce carbon steels as well as alloy and specialty steels. Preparation of the charge bucket is an important operation, to ensure not only proper melt-in chemistry but also good melting conditions. The scrap must be layered in the bucket according to size and density to promote the rapid formation of a liquid pool of steel in the hearth while providing protection for the sidewalls and roof from electric arc radiation. The melting period is the heart of EAF operations. The EAF has evolved into a highly efficient melting apparatus and modern designs are focused on maximizing the melting capacity of the EAF. Melting is accomplished by supplying energy to the furnace, which can be electrical and/or chemical energy, as can be seen in Chemical energy is supplied via several sources including oxy-fuel burners and oxygen lances. Oxy-fuel burners burn natural gas using oxygen or a blend of oxygen and air. Heat is transferred to the charge by flame radiation and convection by the hot products of combustion and within the charge by conduction. The reaction of oxygen with carbon in the bath produces carbon monoxide, which either burns in the furnace if there is sufficient oxygen, and/or is exhausted through the direct evacuation system where it is burned and conveyed to the pollution control system. Once the final charge is melted, the furnace sidewalls are exposed to intense radiation from the arc. As a result, the voltage must be reduced. Alternatively, creation of a foamy slag will allow the arc to be buried and will protect the furnace shell. In addition, a greater amount of energy will be retained in the slag and is transferred to the bath resulting in greater energy efficiency. Refining operations in the electric arc furnace have traditionally involved the removal of phosphorus, sulfur, aluminum, silicon, manganese and carbon from the steel. De-slagging operations are carried out to remove impurities from the furnace. During melting and refining operations, some of the undesirable materials within the bath are oxidized and enter the slag phase. Once the desired steel composition and temperature are achieved in the furnace, the tap-hole is opened, the furnace is tilted, and the steel pours into a ladle for transfer to the next batch operation (usually a ladle furnace or ladle station). During the tapping process, bulk alloy additions are made based on the bath analysis and the desired steel grade. De-oxidizers may be added to the steel to lower the oxygen content prior to further processing. This is commonly referred to as “blocking the heat” or “killing the steel”. Most carbon steel operations aim for minimal slag carry-over. A new slag cover is “built” during tapping. The theoretical energy consumption to heat and melt one ton of iron from 25 °C to 1600 °C is about 387 kWh. In the early 1960s, furnaces with a capacity of 300–400 kVA/ton were employed. A major development occurred aiming to optimize the melting capacity of these furnaces, having attained the capacity installed of 600–750 kVA/ton up to over 1000 kVA/ton in the Ultra High Power (UHP) furnaces specific energy consumption of about 52.3% (from 630 kWh/ton to 300 kWh/ton); running time of about 80% (from 180 min to 30 min); specific consumption of the electrode of about 85% (from 6.5 kg/ton to 1 kg/ton). Kirschen et al. The determination of the total energy input into an EAF is complex because energy is supplied to the EAF from multiple sources: Electrical energy as well as chemical energy that is released from the combustion of natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas or oil, and due to the oxidation of elements in the melt during refining, for example C, Si, Al, Fe, Cr, and Mn. The latter energy contribution is not only dependent on the oxygen input but also on the chemical composition of the raw steel melt and slag. The electrical energy requirements of EAF steel plants are in the range of 350–550 kWh/ton. Decreasing the mean electrical energy requirement and decreasing the mean specific natural gas consumption (i.e. 21 m Fossil fuels, including primarily coal, oil and natural gas, are considered to be non-renewable sources of energy considering the rate of their formation (millions of years) and consumption. Burning fossil fuels releases net carbon dioxide (CO According to CONAB Coffee took an essential part of the Brazilian history. The plant, originally from Ethiopia, was first brought to Brazil by some French settlers who established in the state of Pará in the early 18th century. Brazil is the largest producer of coffee in the world, controlling more than 30% of the international production. The exports of coffee from the 2011/2012 harvest invoiced USD 7841 billion, a 5.6% increase compared to 2010. Around 10% of all the coffee exported was the Arabica type, followed by the Robusta variety with 5%. According to CONAB Elephant grass is a plant species native to Africa with growth rates as high as 40 tons of dry biomass per hectare annual The chemical energy stored in biomass can be extracted through combustion to produce energy that can be used as heat or power. Sustainable managed biomass resources are considered green because they are renewable and do not contribute to global warming. Carbon dioxide generated from the combustion of biomass is consumed as plants regrow, so that as long as the resource is sustainable managed, the net contribution of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere is zero Thus, the ultimate analyses of rice and coffee husks and elephant grass (napier grass) were carried out by the research and development department of USIMINAS Cogeneration or Combined Heat and Power (CHP) is defined as the sequential generation of two different forms of useful energy from a single primary energy source, typically mechanical energy and thermal energy. Cogeneration provides a wide range of technologies for application in various domains of economic activities. The overall efficiency of energy use in cogeneration mode can be up to 85 percent and above in some cases. According to Hammond and Norman Cogeneration systems are normally classified according to the sequence of energy use and the operating schemes adopted. A cogeneration system can be classified as either a topping or a bottoming cycle on the basis of the sequence of energy use. In a topping cycle, the fuel supplied is used to first produce power and then thermal energy, which is the by-product of the cycle and is used to satisfy process heat or other thermal requirements. Losowska Born and Granderath According to MetalPass According to Jones et al. An alternative to reduce the consumption of electricity is the scrap preheating through exhaust gases from the EAF process. According to Schmitt The cogeneration system proposed for this study consists mainly of a biomass boiler, steam turbine and condenser, as shown in According to Wark and Richards The cogeneration system operates in a Rankine cycle. The basic ideal Rankine cycle consists of (i) isentropic compression in a pump, (ii) constant pressure energy addition by heat transfer in a boiler-superheater, (iii) isentropic expansion in a turbine and (iv) constant pressure energy removal by heat transfer from a condenser. After the saturated steam leaves the boiler, the fluid passes through another energy input section, a superheater. The heat transfer process of superheating leads to a higher temperature at the turbine inlet without increasing the maximum pressure in the cycle. Based on Carnot engine analysis, superheating would be expecting to increase the thermal efficiency and alleviating the moisture problem in the turbine exit Expressions for the work and heat interactions in the Rankine Cycle are found by applying the steady-flow energy equation on a unit-mass basis To each separate piece of equipment. If we neglect kinetic (ke) and potential (pe) energy changes, the basic steady state energy equation for each process reduces to ( In this paper, the heat input at the boiler is given by the conversion of biomasses or natural gas as the fuel in the burner. When a fuel is burned, chemical energy is released in form of heat. The amount of heat released by a unit of fuel is its calorific value. The product of the lower calorific value (LCV) by the mass flow rate of fuel (m Boiler efficiency (η The heat exported in steam is calculated using the steam tables, from knowledge of the feed water temperature [°C], the pressure at which steam is exported [kPa] and the steam flow rate [kg/s]. The turbine work output may be written as In addition, the heat transfer from the condenser is The cogeneration system thermal efficiency is the ratio of all the useful energy extracted from the system (electrical and process heat) to the energy of the fuel input. Thus The following considerations and assumptions were made for the energy analyses presented herein: Steady state in all cycle equipment Dry air with volumetric composition of 79% of nitrogen and 21% of oxygen Air excess for biomass combustion of 30% and for natural gas combustion of 5% Electrical power produced by the cogeneration system of 500 kW (as shown in section Cogeneration System), which is the total equivalent energy input for 1 ton of hot metal per hour produced in the EAF steelmaking process; Cogeneration system operation in electrical parity; Biomass and natural gas boiler steam parameters and steam turbine isentropic efficiency given by   The electrical power produced by the cogeneration system is the total equivalent energy input for one ton of hot metal produced in the EAF steelmaking process.  The economic analysis was performed according to the biomass and natural gas consumption showed in The steel industry has faced several challenges during the years. There has always been an aspiration towards higher economic profitability for the system. The energy crises caused a dramatic rise in energy costs, which led to an increased awareness in energy conservation. In recent years, climate change issues have become more important for the industry. On the other hand, the Brazilian strategy for agricultural expansion has been providing a potential raw material for use in this industrial segment. In this paper, a feasibility study was carried out using Brazilian available biomass materials (rice husk, coffee husk and elephant grass) compared to natural gas. Rice and coffee husk are biomass residues from the agriculture while elephant grass is an abundant, fast growing plant. Three cases were proposed with differences in the equipment efficiencies (commercial efficiencies) and the cogeneration system was theoretical analyzed using the First Law of Thermodynamics and the equivalent commercial energy input for one ton of hot metal produced in the EAF steelmaking process. The energy comparison study showed that natural gas fuel consumption is the lowest in the three cases and also exhibits small variations related to them. An economic analysis was done using the results of the energy consumption in each case and the Brazilian commercial fuel price, showing that elephant grass had the lowest operational cost. Although natural gas is the fuel used in the steelmaking process, biomass has advantages from an environmental viewpoint since the combustion of biomass is considered carbon neutral. They demonstrate an excellent alternative for the process of producing iron. Also, some benefits of using biomass can be summarized as: Help in the reduction process of iron mineral due to the production of carbon monoxide (CO); Foaming of slag; Improvements of wear of the refractory and electrodes; Heating of cold spots inside the EAF process; Reduction of the running time (tap to tap); Reduction of electricity costs; Reduction of the need for natural gas into the EAF process. Moreover, the use of biomass cogeneration system allows the recovery of thermal energy in the boiler exhaust gases to preheating scrap. This alternative can bring some benefits such as increased productivity, removal of moisture from reduced electrode, and reduced refractory. All of these advantages can help improve the competitiveness of individual steel plants and reduce the natural gas consumption by the use of biomass. Suggestions for future work include the scale-up of the cogeneration system to meet the electricity and thermal demands of the steelmaking process, and the second law of thermodynamics analysis for the steelmaking and cogeneration system. The authors would like to acknowledge Research and Development of Usiminas for the ultimate analyzes, federal university of Ouro Preto, REDEMAT (Master and Doctor Program at UFOP-CETEC-UEMG), and Gorceix Foundation.