The effect of several low molecular weight polymers (MW<100,000) on the surface properties of a medium-volatile bituminous coal in concentrated aqueous suspensions was investigated through adsorption, flotation, electroacoustic, and rheological measurements. The dispersing capabilities of the tested polymers, i.e. polystyrene sulfonate, humic acids, carboxymethyl cellulose, dextrin, hydroxyethyl cellulose, and hydroxypropyl cellulose depend not only on their ionic/nonionic character but also on the ability to increase the wettability of the coal surface. The anionic polymers (carboxymethyl cellulose, polystyrene sulfonate, and humic acids) adsorb less densely on the coal surfaces compared to the nonionic ones. Despite the lower adsorption density, the anionic polymers are much stronger coal dispersants since their action is a combination of steric and electrostatic repulsive forces. In contrast, the nonionic cellulose ethers can act only through steric effects.
                  Good coal dispersants are also strong flotation depressants. The poor dispersing performance of hydroxypropyl cellulose correlates well with the inability of the polymer to depress the natural floatability of the bituminous coal.
                  The results are discussed in terms of the extended Deryaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek theory of colloid stability. The data demonstrate that rendering the coal particles hydrophilic is the common mode of the dispersing action of both anionic and nonionic polymers.Coal–water slurries (CWS), often referred to as coal–water fuels (CWF), are concentrated suspensions of fine coal in water. After suspending coal particles in water, CWS must meet certain rheological requirements in order to be efficiently pipelined and stored. Firstly, the viscosity and the yield stress must be low, and secondly the settling of solids has to be minimal On an industrial scale, various polyacrylates, polyolefine-, polystyrene sulfonates, and their derivatives (MW The rheological properties of concentrated coal–water slurries also depend strongly on coal surface properties. So far, the most successful industrial CWF formulations have involved bituminous, naturally hydrophobic coals Several upgrading techniques for low rank coals have recently been developed in order to facilitate CWF preparation from such coals This paper demonstrates the effect of several low molecular weight polymers on the surface properties of bituminous coal particles, and the resulting rheological response of concentrated coal–water slurries. A batch of a medium-volatile bituminous coal (F4) from the Fording mine (British Columbia, Canada) was used throughout the study. This coal has extensively been used in our labs as a model high-rank, low-ash coal. A detailed infrared spectroscopic analysis of surface functional groups on the F4 coal has recently been reported in another study The run-of-mine coal was dry-pulverized and screened on a 212-μm sieve. The particle size distribution of the ground material was measured using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. The data are shown in Several polymers were used in this work. Some properties of the samples are shown in The molecular weight of the dextrin sample was determined using gel permeation chromatography In the adsorption tests, 50 All determinations were carried out using a Cary 50 (Varian) UV–vis spectrophotometer. The polysaccharides were assayed using the general method developed by Dubois et al. In order to investigate the effect of polymer adsorption on the magnitude of the surface charge of the coal particles, electroacoustic measurements were carried out using a Zeta Probe (Colloidal Dynamics, Warwick, RI). The tests were run on coal suspensions at 30 The tests could theoretically be performed at the same solids content as that of the suspensions used in the rheological tests (55 The ESA effect occurs when an alternating electric field of known frequency and amplitude is applied to a suspension of fine, charged particles. As the particles oscillate in the applied electric field, the dynamic mobility/zeta potential of the particles is determined by the magnitude of particle motion. Oscillations of very small, sub-micron particles easily keep up with the frequency of the field, but the motion of large particles lags significantly behind the applied field and the phases of the two sinusoidal signals do not match. While the magnitude of the ESA signal decreases with particle size, the phase lag increases. In zeta potential measurements with the use of electroacoustic instruments, this mobility spectrum is obtained by measuring the ESA signal of a suspension over a range of applied field frequencies. The Zeta Probe works at seven frequencies in the range from 0.3 to 3 As reported by the manufacturer, the operating frequency range of the Zeta Probe allows the instrument to determine particle sizes up to 10 Since the tested suspensions contained very coarse particles, for which these inertia effects were certainly very significant, it was decided to report only the raw ESA signal rather than some “apparent” zeta potentials. All flotation experiments were carried out in a standard Denver laboratory flotation machine. A modified 2-dm Steady-state rheological measurements were performed with the use of a Haake RV20 rotational viscometer. An elongated fixture suitable for testing settling suspensions was used as the measuring geometry. Details on its design and operating parameters can be found elsewhere Coal–water suspensions were prepared at a solids content of 55 After preparation, the suspensions were transferred directly into the measuring fixture. In order to obtain the flow curves for the suspensions, the shear rate was increased from 0 to 120 The Bingham model assumes the following form: Apparent viscosities at a shear rate of 100 As Dextrin also reaches a high adsorption density but at significantly higher concentrations compared to HPC and HEC. Somewhat unexpectedly, the three anionic polymers adsorb in much smaller quantities than the nonionic types although PSS did not attain an adsorption plateau in the concentration range studied. As mentioned earlier, vacuum-filtration on a 0.45-μm filter affected the measured concentrations of dextrin and HPC solutions suggesting that these two polymers form colloidal dispersions rather than true solutions. It is therefore plausible that the high adsorption densities exhibited by the two polymers are a result of heterocoagulation of the coal and polymer “particles”, and not due to true adsorption of individual polymer molecules onto the coal surfaces. The mechanism of polysaccharide adsorption (dextrin, carboxymethyl cellulose) onto hydrophobic solids received a lot of attention in the literature. Miller et al. suggested that dextrin adsorbs on coal surfaces through hydrophobic interactions It is quite evident from the results that the addition of a short aliphatic chain to the cellulose backbone significantly increases the affinity of the cellulose ethers towards the bituminous coal surface in the order CMC Anionic polymers assume extended conformations in aqueous solutions at low ionic strengths. Due to their size, such fully stretched macromolecules would also less densely adsorb on solid surfaces which correlates well with the CMC and humic acids isotherms in As The relatively low adsorption of the anionic polymers has a dramatic effect on the surface charge of the coal particles, as shown in The electroacoustic results are consistent with the “hydrophobic wall” concept of Arbiter et al. The flotation response of the F4 coal to varying polymer dosages is shown in It can be seen that the floatability of the F4 coal decreases with the addition of all the polymers except HPC. The depressing action of humic acids HEC, CMC, PSS, and dextrin are very strong coal depressants with humic acids being somewhat weaker. Our earlier study on the effect of humic acids on the rheology of coal suspensions demonstrated that humic acids decrease the advancing and receding contact angles of water on the F4 coal surface, thus increasing the wettability of the coal  As seen from According to the extended Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory of colloid stability the degree of particle dispersion/aggregation is governed by a balance between repulsive (electrostatic, hydration, steric) and attractive (van der Waals, hydrophobic) interparticle forces The interparticle force balance, and hence the rheology of suspensions, can be manipulated by the addition of various reagents. As follows from the extended DLVO theory, net interparticle repulsion can be induced in several ways: by increasing the surface charge (electrostatic repulsion); by introducing an adsorbing polymer (steric repulsion); by increasing the wettability of the solid surface to eliminate “hydrophobic attraction”. Steric repulsion takes place when an As Since the nonionic polysaccharides do not affect the surface charge of the coal particles ( The existence of long-range hydrophobic forces was questioned by several authors and a large body of evidence has accumulated to indicate that “hydrophobic coagulation” occurs due to the presence of gas microbubbles on the particle surfaces that act as bridges and induce particle aggregation In all practical systems, however, it is highly unlikely that “de-gassing” or “de-aeration” will be used as a means of controlling the extent of aggregation of hydrophobic particles. The strong coagulation of hydrophobic particles, regardless of the nature/origin of the forces involved, will still be a technical issue in CWS preparation. Also, measurements of three-phase contact angles are the most common way of assessing the hydrophobicity of a solid surface and such experiments are inevitably made in the presence of air. In this context an interesting observation was reported by Ryan and Hemmingsen It may therefore be postulated that the ability of a dispersant to render a bituminous coal surface hydrophilic is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for the good dispersion of coal–water slurries. Based on the experimental results, it also seems that the ability of the polymers to increase the wettability of the coal surface is the common mode of the dispersing action of the tested polymers regardless of their ionic/nonionic character. Polymeric dispersants for CWS strongly affect the surface charge and/or the wettability of the coal surfaces. By adsorbing on the coal surfaces, anionic polymers quickly decrease the surface charge towards more negative values thus increasing electrostatic repulsion between the particles. Anionic polymers stabilize coal particles towards aggregation by a combination of steric effects and electrostatic repulsion. Polyelectrolytes are thus stronger coal dispersants than nonionic polymers which can act only through steric forces. Coal dispersants are also strong flotation depressants and the ability of the polymers to make the bituminous coal surface hydrophilic is a necessary condition for coal dispersion in concentrated coal–water slurries. By increasing the wettability of the coal surfaces, dispersants reduce the frequently observed tendency of hydrophobic coal particles to spontaneously aggregate in aqueous suspensions. Because of their similar effect on the surface properties of coal, both coal depressants and dispersants can be treated as the same type of reagents. The author would like to thank Mr. Xiaodong Ma (M.A.Sc. student) for carrying out the spectrophotometric determinations of polymer concentrations.