In this study, a detailed characterization of an extremely complex arsenical silver ore using mineral liberation analysis and diagnostic leaching for identification and occurrence of silver phases is presented. Mineralogical analysis of the ore has shown that silver is present mainly as acanthite and to a small extent as Fe-Pb-Ag-Zn arsenate/oxide. Acanthite was observed to occur as very fine grains (53% finer than 7 μm, d80: 11 μm) associated with various Pb-Fe-Sb arsenates and silicates (quartz, feldspar, kaolinite, mica/chlorite and clay). Around 33.1% of acanthite grains are present as free grains whilst 12% are locked-up within associated phases. Cyanide leach tests indicated that the extraction of silver from the ore was limited to 71% Ag over a cyanide leaching period of 24 h. This low extraction was presumably due to the limited exposure of fine acanthite grains to cyanide solution since ultra-fine grinding of the ore led to an enhanced silver extraction. It can be inferred from the findings of diagnostic leaching tests that the refractoriness of the ore can be attributed essentially to the encapsulation of acanthite within HCl-soluble phases (in particular, complex Pb-Fe-Sb-Zn oxides, arsenates and sulphates) (22%) and HF-soluble silicates (6%). It can be inferred from these findings that ultrafine grinding (even finer than few microns) or acid leaching can be used for achieving high silver extractions. This study also highlights the effective utilization of MLA in combination with diagnostic leaching for comprehensive characterization of refractory gold/silver ores and providing invaluable insights into their refractory behaviour.Silver occurs in major, minor and variable amounts within a large variety of minerals in nature, presenting complex silver mineralogy ( Therefore, a detailed study of silver mineralogy is often key to the development of effective solutions for processing and extraction of silver bearing ores. However, the literature appears to focus essentially on gold rather than silver in refractory ores ( Silver phases including electrum (Ag-Au alloys) and acanthite readily dissolve in cyanide solutions (Eqs. Diagnostic leaching is a powerful characterization tool to identify the causes of refractory behavior of gold and silver ores ( Diagnostic leaching has been extensively applied to identify the refractory nature of gold ores ( Detailed characterization of ores for minerals liberation size, mineral associations and modal mineralogical analysis is pre-requisite for plant design and mineral processing operations ( In this work, the detailed characterization of a refractory arsenical silver ore was performed to provide an insight into the refractory behavior of silver in cyanide leaching of an arsenical ore. Diagnostic leaching approach was adopted to identify the silver-bearing phases. The mineral liberation analysis (MLA) was undertaken to determine the occurrence and liberation of silver. The exploitation of diagnostic leaching coupled with MLA was demonstrated as suitable tools for characterization of refractory silver ores. In this study, an arsenical silver ore sample obtained from Kutahya/Turkey was used. The chemical analysis of the sample was carried out using ICP-ES (Inductively Coupled Plasma-Emission Spectroscopy) after four acids (HNO The ore sample was reduced in size down to the required fineness by crushing in a jaw crusher (−4 mm) and then grinding in a rod mill (−100 μm) at 50% pulp density prior to leaching experiments and ultra-fine grinding. For detailed mineralogical characterization, the ground ore sample was riffled using a Quantachrome Mini-riffler to prepare representative sub-samples. A number of polished resin mounts were then prepared for MLA, which was performed using an FEI Quanta 600F scanning electron microscope (SEM). Ultra-fine grinding of the (ground) ore were conducted in a laboratory scale pin-type vertical stirred mill (Union Process) at 26% By a combination of image analysis employing atomic number contrast imaging (from back-scattered electrons–or BSE-signal intensity) and Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (EDS) using two Bruker 5010 SDD detectors, minerals and other attributes were directly measured on the MLA system. BSE signal intensity is proportional to the mean atomic number of minerals. The Field Emission Gun MLA was set at an accelerating voltage of 25 kV and a spot size of 5.5. XBSE (Extended BSE) measurements were performed for characterization of modal mineralogy and mineral associations. Sparse Phase Liberation (SPL) analysis was used for silver searches. Cyanide leaching tests were carried out in a glass reactor equipped with pitched-blade turbine impellers using a multi-stirrer experimental set-up under the standard conditions of 1.5 g/L NaCN, 25% Diagnostic leaching procedure used for the ore sample is presented in Acid and cyanide leaching residues were digested by hot acid mixture (HCl, HNO The detailed mineralogical studies have revealed that the ore has extremely complex mineralogical composition and associations. Acanthite (Ag Modal mineralogical analysis performed by the Extended BSE Liberation Analysis (XBSE) measurement has indicated that the ore is composed mainly of quartz (40.36%), feldspar (16.2%), mica/chlorite (12.21%), clay (8.8%), barite (8.14%) and dolomite/ankerite (1.03%) ( A variety of complex oxides, arsenates and sulphate-arsenates minerals were observed in the ore ( Mineral liberation analysis by free surface has shown that only 33.12 wt% of acanthite is present as free mineral in the ore. A significant part of acanthite (~54.9%) appeared to occur as binary and ternary associations with various mineral phases ( The classified images of MLA particle X-ray mapping (PXMAP) are illustrated in  Effect of particle size on silver extractions are shown in   The nitric acid treatment was observed to have no impact on the extraction of silver in subsequent cyanidation ( A detailed characterization of an arsenical silver ore was presented in this study. Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA) of the ore has shown that silver is present mainly as acanthite, which occurs as free grains (33%), finely disseminated and closely associated with and/or occluded (12%) in other mineral phases such as silicates (quartz, mica/chlorite and feldspar) Pb-Fe and Sb-Pb-Fe arsenates. The ore appeared refractory in character since the extraction of silver was low (i.e. 71% Ag for d The authors would like to express their sincere thanks and appreciation to the