In flotation processes, gas dispersion plays a critical role for particle collection (recovery) and froth mass transport (selectivity). To evaluate this effect at industrial scale, the bubble surface area flux (SB
                     ) is typically estimated from the plant superficial gas rate (JG
                     ) and bubble size distribution (BSD) measurements, where BSD is represented by the Sauter mean diameter (D
                     32). However, the same SB
                      value can be obtained from different combinations of JG
                      and D
                     32. Also, the same D
                     32 value can be obtained from different BSDs. For this reason, it is necessary to determine the overall BSD to adequately evaluate the gas dispersion.
                  Commercial sensors can obtain representative and reliable samples of the BSD in flotation equipment at pilot scale. Nevertheless, the accuracy of the mean, standard deviation and D
                     32 parameter estimations at industrial scale strongly depends on the cluster and large bubbles detection and quantification.
                  In this study, BSDs were measured in several flotation plants using the McGill bubble viewer device together with the USM-IMA software. Data were recorded from 10m3 to 300m3 mechanical cells in rougher, cleaner and scavenger copper/molybdenum flotation circuits.
                  Using the USM-IMA semi-automatic software, which is able to detect the size of single, clustered and large bubbles from recorded images, a strong dependence was observed between the Sauter mean diameter and the standard deviation of the population in the range of D
                     32
                     =0.9–5.0mm and JG
                     
                     =0.5–2.0cm/s. This result indicates the existence of a gas dispersion pattern in mechanical cells; thus, the BSD can be described with a unique parameter. This pattern represents a powerful tool for mechanical flotation cell modelling (design) and diagnosis (control).A key variable in two (gas–liquid) and three (solid–gas–liquid) phase reactors performance is the dispersion of the non-continuous phase to maximise the mass transfer and/or the reaction rate by increasing the concentration and the specific area of the dispersed phase (bubbles, drops). In this sense, the flotation process can be considered as a reaction (pulp) plus separation (froth) (e.g., The significant effect of bubble size on flotation efficiency has been discussed in several works. Eq.  To evaluate the gas dispersion in large flotation cells (the mechanical term), the bubble surface area flux ( In addition, The bubble size distribution (BSD) depends on the bubble generation mechanism. In mechanical flotation cells, where the specific power is 0.6–1.3 The gas dispersion evaluation in flotation systems is typically carried out by means of the  Based on direct measurements of the superficial gas rate and bubble size distribution measurements using the UCT bubble size analyser (  Several methods for bubble size distribution (BSD) estimation, either by direct measurement or calculation using correlations, have been reported in literature (e.g., Bubble size analyser devices have been developed for the measurement and estimation of bubble sizes in pilot and industrial flotation equipment using optical methods or visual techniques, together with image processing software. For example: UCT bubble size analyser developed at Cape Town University, South Africa ( USM bubble size sampler developed at Santa Maria University, Chile ( McGill bubble size analyser (MBSA) developed at McGill University, Canada ( HUT bubble size sampler developed at Helsinki University of Technology, Finland ( The last two techniques rely on imaging bubbles rising in a chamber that is designed for observing bubbles in a single inclined plane. These methods have a good trade-off between bubble sampling and observation display. In this study, the bubble size distribution (BSD) was measured and analysed in several flotation plants using the McGill bubble viewer along with the USM-IMA software. This device allows recording and processing several thousand bubbles with good repeatability. Measurements were conducted in mechanical cells of 10–300 The USM-IMA is a semi-automatic software ( Recently, Based on data from several measurement campaigns, carried out in self-aspirating and forced air industrial cells, a statistical modelling for gas dispersion is proposed in this paper. Several tests in pilot and industrial equipment have confirmed that the experimental data for bubble and droplet distributions generated under breakage conditions are well fitted by a lognormal distribution. For each measurement, there is a good agreement between the histogram of the industrial BSD and the lognormal distribution, where the parameters were derived by the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) ( The bubble Sauter mean diameter,   From the results shown in A physical explanation for the linear relationship between Considering the typical ranges for the However, a Sauter mean bubble size between 0.5–2.5 In practice, BSDs with Sauter mean bubble diameters greater than 3 Thus, a CBVD threshold must be defined for including this type of problem. For example, at least 85% of the gas flow rate should consist of bubbles smaller than 4 The gas dispersion diagnosis must operate in two levels to obtain an appropriate bubble size: (i) If Bubble size distribution measurements were conducted in several mechanical cells (10, 42.5, 100, 130, 160, 250 and 300 A pattern in the shape of the bubble size distributions was observed, despite the different operating conditions and cell sizes. Moreover, a strong dependence between the diameter mean value, E[ The identification of the gas dispersion pattern is useful for process modelling and establishing process control criteria for industrial flotation cells. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by