Extracellular matrix proteins (ECMs) serve as both a structural support for cells and a dynamic biochemical network that directs cellular activities. ECM proteins such as those of the SIBLING family (small integrin-binding ligand glycoprotein) could possess inherent growth factor activity. In this study, we demonstrate that exon 5 of dentin matrix protein 3 (phosphophoryn (PP)), a non-collagenous dentin ECM protein and SIBLING protein family member, up-regulates osteoblast marker genes in primary human adult mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), a mouse osteoblastic cell line (MC3T3-E1), and a mouse fibroblastic cell line (NIH3T3). Quantitative real-time PCR technology was used to quantify gene expression levels of bone markers such as Runx2, Osx (Osterix), bone/liver/kidney Alp (alkaline phosphatase), Ocn (osteocalcin), and Bsp (bone sialoprotein) in response to recombinant PP and stably transfected PP. PP up-regulated Runx2, Osx, and Ocn gene expression. PP increased OCN protein production in hMSCs and MC3T3-E1. ALP activity and calcium deposition was increased by PP in hMSC. Furthermore, an αvβ3 integrin-blocking antibody significantly inhibited recombinant PP-induced expression of Runx2 in hMSCs, suggesting that signaling by PP is mediated through the integrin pathway. PP was also shown to activate p38, ERK1/2, and JNK, three components of the MAPK pathway. These data demonstrate a novel signaling function for PP in cell differentiation beyond the hypothesized role of PP in biomineralization.The tissue microenvironment consists of soluble and immobilized growth factors, ECM Reports in the literature show evidence of type I collagen involvement in the ECM-directed differentiation of bone cells ( DMP-1, a SIBLING protein and NCP localized in dentin and bone ECM, was shown to stimulate mouse embryonic mesenchymal stem cells toward an osteoblastic lineage (   The thermocycling conditions were three cycles of 94 °C for 70 s (denaturation), 52 °C for 70 s (annealing), and 72 °C for 2 min (extension) followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for 70 s (denaturation), 62 °C for 70 s (annealing), and 72 °C for 2 min (extension). The obtained PCR fragment was inserted into the pGEX-4T-3 vector and transformed into the bacterial host BL21. Cells were cultured in Luria-Bertani medium with ampicillin for 4 h at 30 °C. Protein expression was induced by 1 m    Gene expression values were calculated based on the comparative ΔΔC      We should note that 50 ng/ml rPP was the optimal dose for gene expression experiments, although treatment of cells with 250 ng/ml rPP yielded the optimum induction of MAPK components in comparison with the lower concentration of 50 and 100 ng/ml for rPP. For the gene expression experiments, 50 ng/ml rPP was probably sufficient because of the time of rPP-treatment and the high sensitivity of the qPCR assay. For the Western blotting technique, a shorter treatment time seemed to require a higher dose.   rPP up-regulated       Previous studies have suggested that PP functions in mineralization because of its calcium binding properties and its highly acidic and anionic character ( We reason that PP functions in the formation of mineralized tissues in two principal roles ( Signaling via integrins/MAPK activates many of the same pathways as growth factors, converging for an enhanced effect (   An increase in OCN protein release was detected in both hMSCs and MC3T3-E1 cells. We were unable to detect an increase in OCN protein release due to rPP or tPP in NIH3T3 cells. We speculate that NIH3T3 cells, like fibroblasts, do not have the capacity to produce the OCN protein or secrete it, although they do express the Although neither an increase in ALP activity nor an enhancement of mineralization occurred in MC3T3-E1 cells due to rPP, it is possible the rPP plays different roles at various stages of maturation, as was evidenced by the varied responses in gene expression across cell types. Furthermore, whereas tPP induced expression of Because α In conclusion, we have demonstrated that PP not only stimulates differentiative gene expression in a variety of cell types including mesenchymal stem cells, pre-osteoblasts, and non-osseous fibroblasts but also enhances matrix mineralization, the end-stage of osteoblast differentiation. The evidence demonstrated here suggests that cellular responses to PP differ with cell type and origin and may be based on the method of PP delivery, the dosage, and the post-translational modifications of PP. We suggest that the non-collagenous ECM proteins such as the SIBLING proteins of the bone/dentin microenvironment have important and specific functions related to cell fate, mineralization, and tissue morphogenesis. Future studies will be focused on understanding the degree to which PP functions in these two distinct yet related roles. Specifically, the phosphorylation state of PP will be investigated as it pertains to the function of PP in either or both of its roles as a regulator of dentinogenesis/osteogenesis. Elucidating the intricate signaling pathways of ECM proteins that orchestrate the development of mineralized tissues will support the design of novel tissue-regenerative therapies. In turn, PPs may possess the ability to harness growth factor activity and, together, enhance their signaling capacities. We thank Dr. Jeffrey Hollinger for use of the rhBMP-2 and BTEC facilities and acknowledge the critical review of the manuscript by Drs. Arthur Veis and Adele Boskey.