This study aims to predict rock properties using soft computing techniques such as multiple regression, artificial neural network (MLP and RBF) models, taking drill bit speed, penetration rate, drill bit diameter and equivalent sound level produced during drilling as the input parameters. A database of 448 cases were tested for determination of uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Schmidt rebound number (SRN), dry density (ρ), P-wave velocity (V
                     
                        p
                     ), tensile strength (TS), modulus of elasticity (E) and percentage porosity (n) and the prediction capabilities of the models were then analyzed. Results from the analysis demonstrate that neural network approach is efficient when compared to statistical analysis in predicting rock properties from the sound level produced during drilling.Rock properties are important ingredients for planning and design of mining and civil excavations. The process of drilling, in general, always produces sound as a by-product. The drilling process and its results are affected by various parameters of the rock. Drilling has a direct and close relation with the rock mass and thus would be affected by the geo-mechanical characteristics of the rock. The acoustic identification of rocks during drilling process was studied by Zborovjan et al. Based on the above discussion, it is evident that, very limited work is reported in the literature regarding the application of sound levels for estimation of rock properties. Furthermore, understanding rock material characterizations and solving relevant problems are quite difficult tasks because of their complex behaviour, which sometimes cannot be identified without intelligent, numerical and analytical approaches. Because of that, some prediction techniques, like artificial neural networks (ANN) and regression analysis, can be utilized to solve those problems. Within recent years there has been a steady increase in the successful and potential application of regression and neural network modelling in many different areas of the geosciences. For example, Kahraman Many researchers used artificial neural networks (ANNs) in the geotechnical engineering and other disciplines These applications show that neural network model has superiority in solving problems in which many parameters influence the process and results, when the process and results are not fully understood. Prediction of the physical properties of the rock is of similar nature and hence an effort has been made in this study to develop multiple regression and neural network models to predict intact rock properties from sound level produced during rock drilling. The application of ANN model is an effort to comprehensively understand the modelling capability of ANN for these kinds of problems, which will really help in better prediction with the available experimental data. Development of new prediction models is given in detail, and outputs of these models are discussed in this paper. The aim is to arrive at an efficient system to predict the physico-mechanical properties of intact rock. For laboratory investigations, seven different rock types were collected from different parts of India representing a variety of rock strength. During sample collection, each rock block was inspected for macroscopic defects so that test specimens are free from fractures and joints. In the laboratory, rock drilling operations were performed on BMV 45 T20, CNC vertical machining centre. The experimental setup was in a fiber and glass paned room of 5 The instrument used for sound measurement was a Spark 706 from Larson Davis, Inc., USA. The instrument was equipped with a detachable 10.6 In order to construct an artificial neural network model, the database was obtained by a series of laboratory tests on rock samples. The experimental program included tests for dry density, percentage porosity, Porosity, density and strength tests were performed according to ISRM suggested methods Test samples for rotary drilling, having a dimension of 20 For each combination of drill bit diameter, drill bit speed and penetration rate, a total of 64 sets of test conditions were arrived at (drill bit diameter of 6, 10, 16 and 20 For 15 It may be argued that sound produced from the CNC machine itself may affect the sound level measurement during rock drilling. It is important to mention that if the sound level difference between two sources is more than 10 In order to develop multiple regression and artificial neural network models, the database was obtained by a series of laboratory tests on rock samples. During the extensive study seven rock types were collected, and 7×64=448 cases were obtained. Out of 448 patterns, approximately 70% (320 patterns) were used in the training set and remaining 128 patterns were employed for testing of the models For collected rock types, the variation of equivalent sound level ( In this study, values account for (VAF) (Eq. In order to propose an indirect estimation by empirical equations, the statistical methods are traditionally used. Multiple regression analysis is widely used for modelling and analyzing the experimental results. The general purpose of multiple regression is to learn more about the relationship between several predictor variables and a dependent or criterion variable. The performance of the model depends on a large number of factors that act and interact in a complex manner. The mathematical modelling of sound level produced during drilling is influenced by many factors. Therefore, a detailed process representation anticipates a second order model. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) technique was used to find out which input parameter significantly affects the desired response. All obtained relationships were found to be statistically significant according to the Student’s Multiple regression models to predict various rock properties are as follows (Eqs. In recent years, some new soft computing techniques such as artificial neural networks, fuzzy inference systems, evolutionary computation etc. and their hybrids have been successfully employed for developing predictive models to estimate the needed parameters. These techniques have more attraction in many research fields because a wide range of uncertainty can be tolerated by them and soft computing techniques are now being used as alternate statistical tools. Though the statistical relations are good enough to predict the properties fairly well, they are limited by the degree of non-linearity they can model. Moreover statistical relations constrain the data along a particular geometry which may not always be favourable to capture the non-linear relations existing between various parameters. Artificial neural networks have been found to be very efficient in handling non-linear relationships and intelligent prediction of the required parameters. Furthermore, ANN’s can accommodate multiple input variables to predict multiple output variables. An ANN consists of massively interconnected processing nodes known as neurons. It receives the inputs from the external sources and combines them, performs generally a nonlinear operation on the result and then gives out the final result. A schematic representation of the ANN model used in this study is shown in Multi layer perceptron (MLP) and radial basis function (RBF) are two of the most widely used neural network architecture. They are robust predictors with the ability to generalize for imprecise input data. General difference between MLP and RBF is that RBF is a localised type of learning which is responsive only to a limited section of input space. On the other hand, MLP is a more distributed approach. In this study, the two different architectures of ANN (MLP and RBF) were also used to predict the rock properties. All the input and output parameters were scaled between 0 and 1 (Scaled value=Unscaled value/Maximum value). This was done to utilize the most sensitive part of neuron and since output neuron, being sigmoid, can only give output between 0 and 1 the scaling of output parameter was necessary. All data were then divided into two data sets such as: training (70% of all data) and test (30% of all data) Multi layer perceptron (MLP) is commonly used network architecture which contains an input layer, some hidden layers and an output layer. In MLP, the weighted sum of the inputs and bias term are passed to activation level through a transfer function to produce the output and the units are arranged in a layered feed-forward topology called Feed Forward Neural Network. The number of hidden layers and neurons was also a crucial parameter in the operation of the ANN. A single hidden layer was used in order to maximize management efficiency and minimize the total error. Moreover, as stated by Hornik et al. Various training functions can be used to train the networks to reach from a particular input to a specific target output. As each input is applied to the network the network output is compared with the actual target value and the error is calculated. The error between the network output and the actual output is minimized by modifying the network weights and biases. The goal is to minimize the average of the squares of the errors which is called Mean Square Error of the output. In this study, the network was trained using Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm ( A number of trials were conducted initially to fix the number of neurons in the hidden layer. The number of neurons for which MSE is minimum, was selected as the optimum number of neurons in the hidden layer. The variation of MSE with the number of neurons in the hidden layer is shown in Radial basis function (RBF) neural network is based on supervised learning. RBF networks were independently proposed by many researchers and are a popular alternative to the MLP. RBF networks are also good at modelling nonlinear data and can be trained in one stage rather than using an iterative process as in MLP. The construction of a RBF network in its most basic form involves three different layers. The input layer is made up of source nodes to receive the signals or data. The second layer is a hidden layer of high enough dimension that serves a different purpose from that of a multilayer perceptron. The output layer supplies the response of the network to the activation patterns applied to the input layer. The performance of an RBF network depends on the number and positions of the RBFs in the hidden layer, their shape and the method used for learning the input-output mapping. In this study, the input layer consists of 4 nodes. The RBF units are defined by two parameters – center and width of the RBF unit. The output The output nodes are nonlinear with sigmoid activation function. Seven nodes are used at the output layer to denote different rock properties. The learning strategies for RBF considered in this paper can be classified as (i). strategies based on random selection of RBF centers from the training data and (ii). strategies based on unsupervised selection of RBF centers. The performance of the network for different strategies adopted for changing the centers of the hidden units are explored in this paper. In the first strategy, centers were fixed and selected at random. This approach does produce reasonable results, when the training data are distributed in a representative manner. In the second strategy, cluster dependent weighted fuzzy In this study a comparative evaluation was performed between the two learning strategies and two approaches were used to determine the widths of the basis functions for prediction of rock properties. The learning rate parameter η and momentum coefficient α were maintained constant at 0.8 and 0.4, respectively. The upper limit on the learning cycles was kept at 2000 epochs to observe the network convergence behaviour and the network goal was fixed at 10 This is the simplest approach in which the locations of the centers of the hidden layer basis functions may be chosen randomly from the training data set. The activation functions of the hidden units are Gaussian functions given by Eq. Select the number of RBF units (c) arbitrarily & Initialize their centers from training pattern randomly & iter=iter+1, choose the input–output pair ( Compute the hidden layer output Compute output using Compute the error The change in weights are calculated as follows: If Stop.  In another study, widths have been kept constant for all the RBF units and the network was trained for different values of widths. The performance of the network for the width chosen is shown in In this method, the centers were initialized from the input patterns using the CDWFCM algorithm. The CDWFCM algorithm has been proposed by Hadjahmadi et al. Select number of centers Generate an initial set of prototypes iter=iter+1, If iter<  In another study, widths have been kept constant for all the RBF units and the network was trained for different values of widths. The performance of the network for this width chosen is shown in In this paper, uses of multiple regression (MR), multilayer perceptron (MLP), radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) with fixed centers selected at random and RBF centers initialized using cluster dependent weighted fuzzy From the result of multiple regression analysis, it is found that, there are statistically meaningful relationships between rock properties with drilling parameters and equivalent sound level produced during drilling and the obtained models have high prediction performances. The RMSE and MAPE values for all variables in the case of regression models were found to be higher than those for the ANN models, thereby establishing the superiority of the ANN models. The prediction accuracy (VAF) for the regression models was lower when compared to ANN models for all the variables. The performance of both the networks is comparable, as both are robust and accurate in estimating rock properties. MLP requires less number of hidden units when compared to RBF networks, for the same level of performance. The generalisation capability of CDWFCM algorithm with fixed width was found to be better than the MLP and other methods of RBF, as the RMSE and MAPE values were lower and VAF value for the prediction of rock properties was higher. In order to show the deviations from the experimental values of rock properties, the error between the predicted values from constructed models and the experimental values were also calculated and are shown in In this study, drill bit parameters and equivalent sound level produced during drilling were used to predict various rock properties. Rock properties of various collected rocks were measured in the laboratory by ISRM suggested methods. Rock drilling experiments were conducted using CNC machine with different bit diameter, speed and penetration rates. For all the conditions, equivalent sound levels were recorded. The above experimental results were used to develop the prediction models using multiple regression and ANN techniques. At constant bit speed, penetration rate and at particular bit diameter, equivalent sound level produced during drilling will increase with increase in rock’s density, hardness, Multiple regression models were developed, which show statistically meaningful relationships with high prediction performances, between rock properties with drilling parameters and equivalent sound level produced during drilling. MLP neural network was trained using RBF neural networks have been applied for predicting the rock properties. Two center initialisation strategies for the RBF units in the hidden layer have been investigated, namely, random selection of centers and CDWFCM algorithms. For both center initialisation approaches, networks were trained by using fixed and varying widths. The generalisation capability of CDWFCM algorithm with fixed width strategy was found to be better than other methods as RMSE and MAPE values were lower and prediction accuracy (VAF value) was higher. Results from the analysis demonstrate that regression and neural network techniques yield similar result and in general neural network approach is efficient in predicting rock properties from the sound level produced during drilling. This study can be extended by considering the effect of rock joints on sound level produced during drilling, since the changes of rock formation and existence of discontinuities are two main factors that limit the field application of this work. For this, non-natural joints can be incorporated by cutting the intact rock.