Coal spontaneous combustion is a great threat to mine safety, and gas is the key index to describe coal spontaneous combustion. Taking the coal samples of different kinds of coal as research object, the temperature programmed oxidation experiment was carried out, and the gases produced by coal samples at different temperatures were collected and analyzed by gas chromatography. This research studied the variation characteristics of gas species and gas concentrations in different coal samples during heating oxidation. The experimental results show that different coal samples produce different kinds of gases in the process of heating and oxidation. The order of gas production is CO, C2H6, C2H4, C3H8, and the relationship between gas production and temperature is approximately exponential. With the increase of coal metamorphic degree, the turning point temperature of sharp rise in coal sample gas production rate become higher, the oxidation ability of coal sample decreases, and the quantity of gas production decreases during the same time period.The spontaneous combustion process of coal can be divided into three stages: slow oxidation stage, accelerated oxidation stage and intense oxidation stage, which correspond to different kinds and concentrations of gas products This research studied coal heating oxidation by comparing different kinds of coal samples, and it shows the gas variation characteristics during different temperatures In this experiment, 6 coal samples were selected. Coal samples were collected from these productive mines: a mine in Xilinhaote (long flame coal), Donghuantuo Coal Mine in Tangshan, Hebei province (gas coal), a mine in Hegang, Heilongjiang province (1/3 coking coal), Qianjiaying Coal Mine in Tangshan, Hebei province (fat coal), Tangshan Coal Mine in Hebei province (coking coal) and Jinxing Mine in Shanxi province (lean coal). The experimental system includes heating and oxidation, gas injection and analysis, data processing and other components. The experimental devices consist of a furnace body, a temperature control switch, thermocouples, a flue gas analyzer, a computer, a USB data acquisition card, a fan, a heater and a digital display temperature regulator. The coal samples are placed in the heating furnace. The furnace wall is equipped with thermal insulation materials, and a fixed flow of air is bubbled into the tank to ensure that the amount of oxygen is sufficient. Measure the furnace temperature by the thermocouple mounted on control switch. When the furnace temperature turns to be lower than the set value, the switch turns on and the furnace starts to heat. Otherwise, the switch turns off automatically and the furnace stops heating. The data of coal temperature and furnace temperature during the experiment were collected and recorded by the acquisition card and computer. Firstly, the coal samples were selected according to the order of metamorphic degree from low to high (long flame coal, gas coal, 1/3 coking coal, fat coal, coking coal, lean coal). Then the coal samples were broken and sifted, and the pulverized coal was weighed and proportioned according to grain diameter. Constant temperature heating was used in the experiment. First, the coal samples were heated to 100 °C and maintained 24 h to remove moisture from coal samples. After the coal samples were cooled, the heating temperature was set to 120 °C, and the temperature of the coal samples will keep rising and then exceed the heating temperature. The coal temperature will gradually decrease after it was no longer rising, until the temperature turned to the setted ambient temperature. Then stopped heating. Similarly, the coal samples were heated at constant temperature at 140, 160 and 180 °C respectively. At last, the gases at different coal temperatures were collected and analyzed by gas chromatography. Based on the experiment, the variations of gas produced from different coal are revealed. From  In the process of heating and oxidation of coal samples, the degree of oxidation of coal samples is gradually deepened with the increasing of temperature, and the production of C   In the whole oxidation process from low temperature to high temperature, CO is the main index of coal oxidation. The order of gas production is CO, C The order of inflection point temperature for the sharp increase of gas production rate of different kinds of coal is as follows: long flame coal < gas coal < 1/3 coking coal < fat coal < coking coal < lean coal. The inflection point temperature increases with the increase of coal metamorphism. After the inflection temperature section, the oxidation began to become intense, and the concentration of CO increased rapidly, indicating that the coal sample developed towards deep oxidation. The order of CO and C With the increase of coal metamorphic degree, the oxidation ability decreases gradually, and the order of oxidation ability is: long flame coal > gas coal > 1/3 coking coal > fat coal > coking coal > lean coal. The authors gratefully acknowledge the