The influence of silver and iron concentration and the presence or absence of oxygen was investigated in the silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite leaching. The leaching tests were performed at two different temperatures (35 and 68 °C) in stirred flasks (180 rpm) containing 0.5 g of mineral and 100 mL of Fe3+/Fe2+ sulphate solutions at pH 1.8 and at an initial redox potential of 500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl. The addition of a great excess of silver favoured the transformation of chalcopyrite into copper-rich sulphides, such as: covellite, CuS, and geerite, Cu8S5. These sulphides prevented the formation of CuFeS2/Ag2S galvanic couple and, thus, the regeneration of silver. In addition, oxygen in solution plays a key role in the regeneration of silver ions acting as the main oxidizing agent for Ag2S.Chalcopyrite, the main copper mineral at present, is very recalcitrant to oxidation which is probably related to both its crystalline structure and electrochemical characteristics ( The addition of silver ion has been considered for the catalytic hydrometallurgical treatment of chalcopyrite. The reaction model proposed by The copper extraction is higher with silver ions because of the product formed, a mixture of S° and Ag Previously, the authors reported the beneficial effect of silver ions on the chalcopyrite dissolution with ferric sulphate and on the Fe A chalcopyrite mineral (approximately 80% of CuFeS The mineral was dry ground using a ball mill and a BET surface area of 0.07 m The leaching solutions, with an initial redox potential of 500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl, were prepared by mixing stock solutions of ferric and ferrous sulphate, keeping constant a total iron concentration of 5 or 0.5 g/L at pH 1.8. The stock solutions were prepared with 0 K (modified 9 K medium of All leaching tests were performed in an orbital shaker at 180 rpm and at constant temperature (35 or 68 °C). Aerobic tests were carried out in 250 mL Erlenmeyers covered with hydrophobic cotton that allowed the access of oxygen but reduced water loss evaporation. 100 mL hermetically closed flasks were used in anaerobic tests. A low pulp density of 0.5% (100 mL of leaching solution and 0.5 g of mineral) was chosen to prevent sharp changes of the redox potential of the liquid medium at the start of leaching. Silver was added in solution as silver sulphate before starting each test. Periodically, water evaporation was restored, pH adjusted when above the initial value, redox potential recorded and 1 mL of liquid sample removed for analysis of metals in solution by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Cu and Fe The silver product formed in the silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite leaching, reaction (1), would cover the chalcopyrite surface protecting it from passivation of jarosites and other ferric hydrolysis products. In a previous study using 1 g Ag/kg Cu, the authors observed that behaviour during the whole experiment except for the last stage, in which the lack of catalysis was attributed to silver loss ( Higher amounts of silver could also prevent chalcopyrite from passivation. Three different silver concentrations were tested: 1, 10 and 50 g/kg Cu, at both temperatures (35 and 68 °C) and using a Fe At 35 °C, the copper dissolution from chalcopyrite was suppressed with a large excess of Ag  As mentioned, chalcopyrite particles were totally covered by a film of jarosites after 11 days ( Small amounts of a scattered precipitate, probably Ag The X-ray diffractogram of that residue ( These new copper sulphides would be the result of solid state transformations from chalcopyrite and would explain the appearance of particles free of passivating products in the SEM micrograph shown in The solid transformation from chalcopyrite into other copper-rich sulphides can be described as follows: Reactions (3) and (4) are thermodynamically favoured according to their standard free energies, ΔG° In addition, that transformation, following reaction (4), supports the hypothesis of The sulphides formed could be dissolved by ferric ion, according to the following reactions: However, the copper dissolution rate of these copper-rich sulphides was very slow at 35 °C ( The model derived from reactions (3) and (4), unlike the model proposed by The addition of silver in excess, but in less proportion, 10 g Ag/kg Cu, was insufficient to provoke the complete solid state transformation from chalcopyrite into other copper-rich sulphides. Unlike at 50 g Ag/kg Cu, the copper dissolution rate was slightly slower than for the test with 1 g Ag/kg Cu and silver was an effective catalyst. Thus, a large excess of silver added favours the solid state transformations from chalcopyrite into copper-rich sulphides, which, unlike the former sulphide, are not preferentially dissolved after contact with silver sulphide. The dissolution of silver sulphide can be depicted by reaction (2) ( Therefore, the coupled semireactions would be: This sequence of reactions assumes that, for the CuFeS Different authors have reported that the rest potential of silver sulphide in sulphuric acid at pH 2 is around 0.50 V (SHE) ( At 68 °C and an initial redox potential of 500 mV, the effect of silver concentration was different from that at 35 °C ( SEM backscattered electron micrographs of the leaching residue at 68 °C after 11 days of attack are shown in In this way, The effect of iron concentration on the catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching was investigated in a series of tests using solutions of low (0.5 g/l) and high (5 g/l) total iron concentration, with an initial redox potential of 500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl, both at 35 °C and 68 °C. The experimental results ( These results are coincident with the observations of The favourable effect of ferric ion in the catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching, at low and high temperature, could be explained in terms of silver ion regeneration (reaction (2)), which is only favoured at high Fe The SEM study of the residues obtained in the catalyzed leaching at 35 °C, with low ( The effect of oxygen in the silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching at 35 and 68°C was investigated under aerobic and anaerobic conditions ( At both temperatures, the absence of oxygen delayed remarkably the copper extraction from chalcopyrite ( After 5 days of leaching, the copper dissolution rate becomes faster as shown by an increase of metals in solution, and by a drop of the redox potential and an increase of pH. Later, the copper rate slows down probably due to the passivation of chalcopyrite by ferric hydrolysis products. Conversely, the copper dissolution rate in aerobic conditions is faster from the start of leaching and also the subsequent sharp drop of potential and the increase of pH. The effect of oxygen in the catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching was more pronounced at 68 °C than at 35 °C. Chalcopyrite was almost completely dissolved after 3 days of leaching, compared with the low copper extraction in anaerobic conditions at 68 °C (65% Cu, after 24 days). Since the redox potential remains at relatively high values (> The pronounced effect of oxygen on the catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching at both temperatures tested, suggests that oxygen participates in the rate-controlling step. A scheme of the steps taking place in the chalcopyrite leaching with Fe According to this  The silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching can be described by the following reactions: Initially silver ions are deposited on the chalcopyrite surface as silver sulphide, releasing cupric and ferrous ions. Then, the silver sulphide is dissolved by ferric ion and oxygen, regenerating silver in solution through the CuFeS A large excess of silver favoured the transformation of chalcopyrite into copper-rich sulphides such as covelline, CuS, and geerite, Cu An increase of Fe The importance of oxygen in the catalyzed chalcopyrite dissolution resides in that the solubilization of the silver sulphide layer is thermodynamically more favoured by oxygen than by ferric ion. The chemical control observed in the uncatalyzed chalcopyrite leaching with Fe The authors wish to express their gratitude to the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation for funding this work.