With the continuous depletion of high-grade nickel ores such as millerite and niccolite, nickeliferous laterites have become the major source for the production of nickel metal. However, only 42% of the world’s production of nickel comes from laterites, since the concentration of Ni is relatively low (ca. 2wt.%). In addition, other metals, such as magnesium, iron and silicon can be found in laterite, which make the concentration of nickel even more difficult.
                  In this study, a low-grade nickeliferous laterite ore was first calcinated and then processed by using a wet magnetic separator in order to recover nickel. Since, the ore contains both Ni and Fe, the calcination of laterite is effective in altering the crystalline structure of Fe species and therefore its magnetic properties, which in turn enable the selective concentration of nickel by magnetic separation that is an easy and environmentally-friendly technique. The experimental results have indicated the importance of carefully controlling: (1) the calcination temperature; (2) the pulp density and (3) applied magnetic field strength. The main finding of this work was that magnetic separation is effective in recovering 48% of nickel from laterite, increasing the Ni grade in the recovered product from 1.5% to 2.9%, when prior to the separation the ore was calcinated at 500°C for 1h.Nickel [Ni] is ferromagnetic metal, which has a relatively high melting point (ca. 1453 Nickel, a transition element that exhibits a mixture of ferrous and nonferrous metal properties, is both siderophile (i.e. associates with iron) and chalcophile (i.e. associates with sulfur). The bulk of the nickel mined comes from two types of ore deposits ( laterites where the principal ore minerals are nickeliferous limonite [(Fe, magnetic sulfide deposits where the principal ore mineral is pentlandite [(Ni, Among these, laterite comprises 73% of the world’s resources of nickel and will be in the future the dominant source of nickel. In addition, with the continuous depletion of high-grade nickel ores, such as millerite [NiS] and niccolite [NiAs], nickeliferous laterites have become the major source for the production of nickel as it represents about 60% of the total, i.e. 130 million tons of nickel reserves ( Generally speaking, flotation is the conventional method for processing nickel-bearing sulfides ores, which Ni content is higher than 30%. It is carried out at pH 8–10 range in order to separate Ni from Cu; and the reagents added are: potassium amyl xanthate [C Nickel from low grade ores (i.e. Ni content is less than 2%), on the other hand, is generally recovered through extractive metallurgy that is a practice for extracting metals from ores. These include reduction roasting followed by ammonia leaching, or high pressure leaching with sulfuric acid ( In this study, the concentration of nickel from low-grade laterite was carried out by using a simple, cost-effective and environmentally-friendly process such as the wet magnetic separation. Since, the laterite ore usually contains Fe which has magnetic properties, the concentration of Ni is not an easy task. In order to enable the selective concentration of nickel by magnetic separation, the calcination of laterite was carried out prior to the magnetic separation. The aim was to alter the crystalline structure of Fe species and therefore its magnetic properties. Magnetic separation utilizes the force of a magnetic field to produce differential movements of mineral particles through a magnetic field; this and the fundamental differences in the magnetic susceptibility of minerals constitutes the basis of separation to effectively obtain purification or concentration of mineral products. Two types of separators are used, i.e. dry and wet types. Dry separators are primarily used for coarse, strongly magnetic materials. Wet separators, on the other hand, are used to separate strongly magnetic material in finely ground mixture, with the water medium holding the small particles apart for individual action by the magnetic field ( Magnetic separator used in this study was a high intensity wet magnetic separator (HIW L-4 type), a commercial product of ERIEZ Ltd., Japan. A low-grade laterite ore from Indonesia was used in this experimental work. Chemical composition of laterite was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF: Supermini, RIGAKU). In addition, the structure of the synthesized adsorbents was analyzed by means of a X-ray diffractometer (XRD: MO3XHF, Mac Science) with Cu Kα ( The procedure of this experimental work is indicated in The chemical composition of the laterite analyzed by XRF is given in  Since the nickel in laterite is uniformly distributed and has a particle size of several nm (   In an attempt to increase both the content and the recovery of Ni in the recovered product, laterite ore was calcinated at different temperature prior to the magnetic separation. Within this frame, the thermogravimetry (TG) and derivative thermogravimetry (DTG) analysis, a powerful analytical tool that is extensively being used for the investigation of the thermal properties of solid matter, was used for examining the thermal nature of the laterite. In order to better understand the results of the TG/DTA, an X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out. The aim was to observe the structure evolution of the ore as a function of the calcination temperature. Thus, the sample was heated at 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700 or 800 Moreover, Next, the effect of the calcination of the ore on the efficiency of the magnetic separation when concentrating nickel was investigated. The experimental results are given in Nevertheless, when the ore was calcinated at 800 The magnetic separator used in this study has a conventional electromagnet to generate a magnetic field. Generally speaking, the energy consumption of the magnetic separator is affected by the thickness and the number of the scrolls of coil of the electromagnet. Especially, the higher magnetic field strength, the higher is energy consumption. When the magnetic separator operated at 0.5 Considering the experimental results given in In this study, the concentration of nickel from low-grade laterite was carried out by magnetic separation. The ore was first calcinated and then processed by using a wet magnetic separator in order to recover nickel. Since, the ore contains both Ni and Fe, the calcination of laterite is effective in altering the crystalline structure of Fe species and therefore its magnetic properties, which in turn enable the selective concentration of nickel by magnetic separation. The main finding of this work was that the calcination of laterite followed by the wet magnetic separation is an effective circuit for concentrating nickel. It was found that when the ore was calcinated at 500 The authors were supported in parts through the Global COE Program, “Global Center of Excellence for Mechanical Systems Innovation,” by the