Nickel–metal hydride batteries (Ni–MH) contain not only the base metals, but valuable rare earth metals (REMs) viz. La, Sm, Nd, Pr and Ce as well. In view of the importance of resource recycling and assured supply of the contained metals in such wastes, the present study has focussed on the leaching of the rare earth metals from the spent Ni–MH batteries. The conditions for the leaching of REMs from the spent batteries were optimized as: 2M H2SO4, 348K temperature and 120min of time at a pulp density (PD) of 100g/L. Under this condition, the leaching of 98.1% Nd, 98.4% Sm, 95.5% Pr and 89.4% Ce was achieved. Besides the rare earth metals, more than 90% of base metals (Ni, Co, Mn and Zn) were also leached out in this condition. Kinetic data for the dissolution of all the rare earth metals showed the best fit to the chemical control shrinking core model. The leaching of metals followed the mechanism involving the chemical reaction proceeding on the surface of particles by the lixiviant, which was corroborated by the XRD phase analysis and SEM–EDS studies. The activation energy of 7.6, 6.3, 11.3 and 13.5kJ/mol was acquired for the leaching of neodymium, samarium, praseodymium and cerium, respectively in the temperature range 305–348K. From the leach liquor, the mixed rare earth metals were precipitated at pH∼1.8 and the precipitated REMs was analyzed by XRD and SEM studies to determine the phases and the morphological features.Consumption of rare earth metals (REMs), a group of 17 elements comprising of 15 lanthanides, and Sc and Y, has increased significantly in recent years due to the applications in the high technology areas and the ever increasing usage in various sectors. The high tech applications of the rare earths include the usage in magnets (electronics and computers, wind turbines and others), phosphor powders (fluorescent lamps/tubes), Ni–metal hydride batteries (hybrid electric vehicles, cameras, laptops, medical equipments/appliances), catalysts, and in other industries such as glass and metal alloys. Resources of several REMs are neither abundant nor evenly distributed across the world, although a few of them like cerium is more abundant in nature than the most common base metal – copper ( Recycling of spent nickel–metal hydride batteries is thus an interesting area from the point of view of resource recovery especially the base and rare earth metals. Several hydrometallurgical processes have been worked out on different scales to recover various metals from spent Ni–MH batteries in recent years. Apparently most of the works reported in the literature have stressed upon investigating primarily the leaching of the base metals present in the spent Ni–MH batteries by H The spent Ni–MH batteries (average wt. 57 The spent batteries were subjected to physical separation by agitation and crushing in scutter cutter with water media to separate steel case, battery electrode and nylon separator. Based on the characteristics such as particle size and specific gravity of the materials, the heavy particles mainly the steel case settled down and nylon separator being lighter floated out, leaving the electrode material dispersed in the water. After removing the float fraction (nylon) from water, the suspended fraction (black powder) was wet screened. The electrode powder (<45 Considering the high metal yields and the economic prospects for the selective recovery of valuable metals, sulfuric acid was considered as a lixiviant ( The electrode powder of the spent batteries ( The effect of H As can be seen in On optimizing the concentration of acid, the effect of time on the leaching of rare earth metals was examined at 348 The effect of pulp density (25–150 Effect of temperature on the dissolution of different rare earth metals present in the spent Ni–MH powder was studied using 2 In order to achieve the best recovery of all the REMs, multiple leaching options could be considered. Thus in stage-I maximum amount of lanthanum can be dissolved at a lower temperature (323 Effect of varying the temperature with time on the leaching of rare earth metals is shown in The shrinking core model considers that the rate controlling step of the dissolution process is either the diffusion of the lixiviant through the ash layer existing on the solid particles which could also be the diffusion through a solid product layer formed, or the surface chemical reaction on the solid particles ( To analyze the kinetics of the present work, data were fitted against both the models. The plots of 1 Although the low activation energy values suggest that the acid leaching of the metals follows the diffusion or mixed control models, it is quite evident that the plots of the kinetic equation are best represented by the chemical control model. The corresponding correlation coefficients (⩾0.98) for this model (chemical control) rather than the activation energy values aptly explain the rate controlling mechanism of the heterogeneous dissolution reactions in the present system ( Effect of various parameters on leaching of base metals from the spent Ni–MH batteries were also examined and results are reported separately ( The mechanism of leaching can be established by analyzing the change in the phases of the leach residues as compared to the untreated sample by XRD analysis and the morphological features by SEM–EDS. The XRD patterns for the phase analysis of the untreated powder and the residues generated during the leaching are shown in SEM–EDS micrograph ( Having established the leaching parameters, the leach liquor obtained under the optimum conditions was taken for the recovery of rare earth metals by precipitation. The composition of the leach liquor was found to be (g/L): 6.0 Sm, 4.3 Nd, 2.15 Pr, 2.2 Ce and 1.75 La along with 53.0 Ni, 4.45 Co, 2.5 Mn, 1.85 Zn and 1.65 Fe. Rare earth metals were precipitated by adding 3 The spent nickel metal hydride batteries are an alternative source of the rare earth metals like La, Ce, Sm, Nd and Pr along with some base metals. Optimum conditions for the leaching of the REMs from the spent battery material have been worked out to be: 2 The authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, India for giving permission to publish the paper and for providing the financial assistance under the