The electrical conductivity of aqueous kaolinite suspensions was studied as a function of both temperature and KCl concentration and interpreted in terms of surface conductance and electrokinetic potentials. The surface conductivity in the inner part of the double layer shows a temperature behaviour, which differs significantly from that of the diffuse part. While the latter is characterized by a temperature-independent activation energy, the ionic transport in the inner double layer appears to be influenced by additional, temperature-dependent processes at temperatures below 15 °C. Possible mechanisms for this observation are discussed and it is shown that an increase of temperature leads to more pronounced ionic transport in the double layer, which is then dominated by the diffuse portion. Finally, we estimate the counterion mobility in the inner part of the double layer and find these quantities to display a different temperature dependence than the corresponding bulk mobilities.The understanding of electric double layers and the theoretical description of electrokinetic phenomena have matured in the last decades. One of the main steps forward was the recognition of surface conductance and its incorporation into electrokinetic theories, because After the first treatment of surface conductivity by Bikerman The temperature dependence of double layer parameters in general is of interest in a number of fields such as microfluidics Several publications In this article we will present temperature dependent conductivity measurements on aqueous kaolinite suspensions, which are interpreted in terms of surface conductivity and its contributions as well as electrokinetic potentials. It will be shown that the temperature dependence of the diffuse layer surface conductivity is distinctly different from the one in the inner part of the double layer. This highlights that different transport mechanisms operate in the respective parts of the double layer. The detailed preparation and characterization of the K-kaolinite sample is documented elsewhere Electrical conductivities have been measured with a WTW LF-3000 meter and a Campsec-K25 four-electrode cell. The detailed description of the measurement equipment can be found in All solutions and suspensions have been tempered to ±0.1 °C of the desired temperature in a double-walled glass vessel, which was connected to a recirculating water bath with heating and cooling capacity. Suspensions have been prepared by immersing an appropriate amount of sample (volume fraction This procedure requires that no temperature-induced changes occur during the experiment. In preliminary experiments the temperature reversibility was tested by measuring the 25 °C point at the beginning, after the suspension was cooled to 5 °C and after it was heated to 35 °C. No discernible hysteresis was observed. The ratio of suspension conductivity Isoconductive points points ( As  In a previous work it was shown that these curves can be consistently interpreted by the following relation The pronounced temperature dependence of the isoconductive point indicates that temperature changes have a significant impact on the ionic transport within the double layer. This is also captured in the temperature dependence of the Dukhin number ( Regarding surface conductivity (see  Morimoto and Kittaka  Because transport phenomena in the different parts of the double layer should be influenced by structural modifications of the solvent, it appears interesting to estimate the ionic mobilities in the inner part of the double layer. The most direct way to calculate ionic mobilities in the inner part of the double layer is to have the surface charge density, the diffuse double layer charge density and the surface conductivity available, see The first method is based on the determination of the isoconductive point and relies on the observation that As it is not entirely clear whether the assumptions leading to Eq. The error bars for the second method (Eq. Before discussing absolute values of the counterion mobility it is interesting to note that the general trend of the inner-layer mobility is in qualitative agreement with the relative double layer mobilities of Sen and Goode Regarding the absolute values it is observed that the mobility ratios from Eqs. (6) and (7) at 25 °C show excellent agreement with independent determinations of Ref. At 35 °C the results show more scatter. While Eq. Regardless of the inconclusive picture at higher temperature, it can be stated that the ionic transport in the inner part of the double layer is influenced in a different manner by temperature changes than the transport in the diffuse layer. A probable explanation for these observations are solvent structure originated effects, which in turn will influence the ionic mobility and the adsorption characteristics of the interface. Finally it is mentioned that, in contrast to the inner part of the double layer, the temperature induced changes in diffuse double layer parameters are less spectacular. The absolute magnitude of We observed that the ionic transport in the diffuse and inner part of the double layer responds quite differently to changes in temperature. While the surface conductivity of the diffuse layer is characterized by a temperature independent activation energy, the inner layer contribution to the surface conductivity is influenced by additional temperature dependent processes at temperatures below ≈15 °C. Estimates of the ionic mobility in the inner double layer show that this quantity is reduced with respect to its bulk value at low temperatures. These findings are relevant, e.g., for interpreting spectral induced polarization measurements in geothermal regions or well logs, where temperature is an additional parameter The results obtained in this study show that the double layer is most non-diffuse at low temperatures and high electrolyte concentrations. This observation, in connection with the reduced counterion mobility at low temperatures, provides an opportunity to tune the contribution of the surface conductivity of the inner layer with respect to the diffuse layer. Especially electrophoretic mobilities should respond to such changes, because they chiefly depend on the ratio It would be very desirable to have more results for the temperature dependent properties of the inner double layer. The viscosities ( Hasted and co-authors Diffusion coefficients of K The temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient appears to be affected only little by concentration with