Since the early seventies high chromite and low base metal sulphide (BMS) contents of the UG2 reef imposes technological challenges to mineral processors and extractive metallurgists. Forty years later, particle size distribution and size by size mineralogy are considered as key factors to the continuous improvement of the UG-2 ore metallurgy. With the successful development of ultra fine grinding technologies, a compromise has to be found between fine grinding to achieve platinum group minerals liberation and to avoid the overgrinding of gangue minerals, especially chromite gangue which is detrimental in smelting process. Indeed, fine chromite grains, despite of being naturally hydrophobic mineral, can be recovered in flotation concentrate by entrainment. In addition, overgrinding also increase liberation of naturally floatable gangue (talc) which contaminate the concentrate and need to be controlled during flotation.
                  In this paper, innovative techniques of single particle image analysis from both dry and wet samples have been tentatively used to assess the chromite particle size distribution and the chromite grade of samples taken from a secondary milling circuit. Preliminary results demonstrate excellent potential for online particle imaging making use of both the particle geometry (size, shape) and the optical properties (translucency).The largest part of the world production of platinum group elements has been provided by the Merensky Reef since the early decades of the twentieth century. However, it is well documented that about 58% of Pt reserves are located lower in the sequence of the Bushveld Ignous-Complex, in a chromitite layer called the UG-2 reef ( The traditional route to concentrate PGM from a UG2 ore is a mill-float/mill-float approach designated under the acronym MF2 ( Up to now, the efficiency of the second stage mill-float in the UG2 processing is limited due to grind compromise and to the slow floating behaviour of fine grains associated with little or no BMS. Chromite is naturally hydrophilic and thereby has a poor ability to float. However chromite can be recovered by entrainment or inadvertent activation. A wide spread idea is that UG2 chromite is very prone to attrition (which may result of a misleading interpretation of the low Bond Working Index of chromitite) but, no evidence has been provided yet on this point. It is nevertheless well-known that the high density of chromite disables efficient classification ( Another attempt to limit overgrinding is by the insertion of a hydrocyclone at the secondary ball mill load. The hydrocyclone aims to divert the finest particles (typ. It is important to stress that the MF2 is an open circuit operation, meaning thereby that any perturbation in the milling conditions will immediately impact on the recovery of the PGM. For this reason, process engineers look forward to the possibilities of online particle size distribution analysis as a tool to monitor the circuit and optimise its performance. Digital image analysis of individual particles has long been recognised as a powerful tool to measure both size and shape parameters ( Among the whole range of available instruments, one should clearly distinguish those that perform imaging of free-falling particles, from those that take images of particles at rest on a plane. Only the last ones can claim the accurate measurement of both the true length and true width of particles. Systems imaging free-falling particles (designated as dynamic image analysers) cannot assign measures to length or width because particles are seen under uncontrolled orientation. This is also the case with laser diffraction instruments, sedimentation analysers, etc.  A whole range of particle image analysers has been developed by Occhio Instruments as a spin-off of the University of Liege, with a particular attention paid to the quality of image acquisition, the efficiency of particle dispersion/orientation and the accuracy of the particle measurement algorithms ( A whole range of particle image analysers has been developed by Occhio Instruments as a spin-off of the University of Liege, with a particular attention to the quality of image acquisition, the efficiency of particle dispersion/orientation and the accuracy of the particle measurement algorithms ( The standard monitoring of an MF2 circuit implies a regular (at 8 Additional samples of the SRT were also collected to allow testing of different particle size distributions. Fine and dry powders in the range of 1–300 The Occhio 500 Nano ( Existing standards describing image-based particle analysis do not cover the case of particles suspended in a liquid. The presence of the fluid will generally result in a more complex imaging system and a serious loss of image quality. Despite this, it cannot be doubted that there is a real need, in particular in mineral processing, to be able to monitor particle size distributions from slurry samples without having to dry the products. The Occhio Flow Cell FC200 ( The standard imaging technology of the Occhio FC200 is based upon a telecentric superzoom lens, a high resolution progressive scan camera and a violet backlighting. The short wavelength light has a very low diffraction angle. Thus, when combine with the telecentric superzoom, light scattering artefacts are dramatically reduce which allows improving resolution and optimising the depth of focus. A side effect of this arrangement is to limit translucency. It is important to keep in mind that the instrument used in this study had been designed for the analysis of emulsions or very low particle concentrations in clean fluids. It was not initially intended for use with dense particle concentrations such as the ones at the output of ball mills. For this reason, tentative volume dilutions (1:20) were applied to the samples and image analysis results on slurries illustrated in this paper are considered to still be preliminary. Future improvements will no doubt result from technological changes to the pumping and imaging system. Typical images taken by the dry static image analysis (SIA) and pulp imaging systems are shown in A systematic monitoring of the particle size distribution (PSD) by classical sieving at the underflow of the hydrocyclone shows a significant variability with time for some fractions. The percentile of particles below 106 In order to compare dry SIA to sieving, another series of samples from the underflow (UF) was submitted to a comparative size analysis. It is obvious that the reproducibility of both methods is very good. However, it is also evident that a systematic difference does exist between both methods. This can be better explained by the fact that one of the major drawbacks of imaging systems is the fact that particles finer than the optical resolution will not be properly measured and weighted and hence will not appear in the final size distribution curve. Whereas, in sieving, even though the smallest sieve size is limited to 75 The comparison between the sieve size distribution and the image-based PSD (inscribed disc diameter) indicates a 12% by weight difference at 75 Again, considering that the trend is often more important than the absolute size measure, image analysis appears to be an excellent candidate for real time particle size monitoring. Another sample of the cyclone underflow was further analysed using a combination of laser diffraction for the fine size fraction (<75 The drawback of wet particle image analysis for fine particle detection is that the flux cannot be considered as a strict monolayer of particles, hence fine particles are often hidden behind larger ones and also suffer from being too often out of focus and hence difficult to size due to blur. The results of Finally, one should keep in mind that a higher relative chromite content is expected in the finer fractions, which means differences in density between fractions and further explains the departure between imaging and sieving techniques. In order to investigate the optical characteristics of particles as seen by the image analyser, a series of particles was manually selected. They were assigned a possible mineralogy by a trained microscopist in order to be able to test whether a statistical discrimination could be reached between mineral species from their optical and geometrical properties. A first application of this method is to automatically split the material into liberated chromite particles (showing perfect opacity) and other gangue particles. This allows for plotting two different size distribution curves: one with only liberated chromites and another with the rest of the material. Because SRT particles have been split into liberated and unliberated chromite particles, it is also possible to recompute a surface (volume) ratio between both groups and compare it to chromium assays. In these calculations, it has been assumed that all the chromium atoms are present as spinels with a 1.35 Cr/Fe ratio ( Another reason for underestimation of chromite content using image analysis is that the discrimination of particles from optical properties works best for larger particles than for the finer ones. An additional step to improve the quantitative analysis of chromite content would be to be able to detect unliberated chromite particles ( A scatter plot of global roughness versus particle size ( Fast and accurate measurements of the chromite content, the chromite PSD and the chromite degree of liberation are crucial in the continuous integrated development of UG2 mining, concentration and extractive metallurgy. From the preliminary results presented in this paper it is clear that image analysis is a viable candidate technology for real time monitoring of these key parameters. Improvements have to be made in terms of slurry sampling and slurry circulation through the FC200 flow cell to guarantee a better reproducibility and accuracy of results. Despite non optimal imaging conditions it is encouraging to note that particle translucence is a critical factor to identify liberated chromites, estimate their bulk content and monitor their tendency to be dominant in the finer fractions (<50 This case study also illustrates the possibilities of the evaluation of the grade and liberation analysis of one opaque mineral towards translucent gangue. Examples of opaque minerals of interest occurring in silicates gangue are common in mineral processing: the most obvious being base metal sulphide ores. Future work will concentrate on enhancements in image acquisition and more elaborate image segmentation and analysis tools. It is expected that mineral liberation, as well particle shape and its influence on wettability as shown by The authors would like to thank the UGCT Centre for X-ray Tomography at Ghent University for their very kind and helpful cooperation in acquiring X-ray microtomography data. The support of Kaja Tshimanga (Lonmin) in collecting samples from the concentrator is gratefully acknowledged as is the collaborative work. Finally, the authors would also like to thank Magotteaux Belgium for its continuous support from the first acquisition campaign to current research developments.