The nanocomposites of Fe3O4 or Fe3C or Fe3O4/Fe3C with carbon are exploited as anode materials for Li-ion batteries due to their higher theoretical capacities. The present work depicts the charging capacity of nanocomposites (~5–25 nm) of carbon with Fe3C or MnrFe3-rC/MnsFe3-sO4 (where 0.2 ≤ r + s ≥ 0.7). These composites are synthesized using an inexpensive urea assisted sol–gel route which are then heat treated at 700 °C in an inert atmosphere. The x-ray and electron diffractions validate the presence of Fe3C, Fe3O4, and carbon phases in the samples. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy depicts the oxidation states for the elements of nanocomposite M7FOC. Mössbauer spectroscopy further supports the findings of earlier studies. The electrode kinetics and the electrochemical performance for the materials are assessed by Voltammograms and Galvanostatic lithiation/delithiation plots. The specific charge capacities and Coulombic efficiencies with respect to cycle numbers at room temperature are also evaluated. The optimum specific capacity of ~1261 mAh g−1 is observed for M7FOC sample whereas its reversible specific lithiation capacity is found to be around 841 mAh g−1 after the initial cycle at the rate of C/20.The recent studies advocate the great necessity to develop renewable energy technologies to meet the ever-growing global energy demand and to cope up with the rapid depletion of fossil fuels Further, the consistent escalating energy demands for portable electronic devices and the hybrid electric vehicles have stimulated to venture for Li-ion batteries (LIBs) For this purpose, the researchers replaced graphitic anode by transition metal oxides (e.g., Fe Nevertheless, a carbon encapsulation over the anode (e.g., Fe Therefore, the researchers have explored various nanocomposites of iron oxides and iron carbides for this purpose. For example, Tour et al. fabricated Fe Finding continuous improvement in the discharge capacity for Fe All the chemicals such as iron chloride (99.9%), manganese chloride (99.8%), urea powder and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) were purchased from the Merk and were used without any further refinement. The nanocomposites of Fe Then, the solution was placed on a hot plate and maintained at ~70 °C under continuous magnetic stirring. Further, urea (30 g) and CTAB (2 g) were added to the solution and heated until the solution was transformed into a gel. Then, the obtained gel was heated into an oven at 200 °C for overnight. After that, the resulting solid was filled into an alumina boat for calcination at 700 °C for 3 h in N The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were acquired using BT- Rigaku Miniflex with CuK The electrochemical performance of the samples was evaluated against the Li reference electrode. The powders were mixed with carbon black and PVDF in 8:1:1 wt ratio to prepare the working electrodes of the present materials. The slurry (prepared using N-Methyl-2- pyrrolidone, NMP) was coated on copper foil and dried at 100 °C until the solvent got evaporated completely. The mass loading of the sample on the working electrodes was 0.9–1.2 mgcm The XRD patterns for all the nanocomposites It was also revealed in the XRD patterns, which have shown a small displacement of peak positions towards left. It could be ascribed to the variation in the atomic radii of Fe and Mn as well as ionic radii of Fe The morphological and microstructural properties for the sample M2FOC was investigated with the help of TEM and shown in Hence, the electron diffraction and HRTEM micrograph justify the X-ray diffraction findings. The size of the particles of the nanocomposite was found to be in the range of 5–27 nm, and the average size was ~18 ± 5 nm ( Similarly, the M7FOC composite was also analyzed using TEM/HRTEM to visualize the effect of Mn substitution over the morphology of the nanoparticles ( The SAED pattern for the sample had ring patterns favoring the polycrystalline nature. The patterns indexed with ImageJ software displayed d spacing values of 2.38, 1.85, 1.35, and 1.4 Å, which correspond to the planes (1 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a highly surface sensitive technique used for identifying the chemical state of the elements present in the sample. The XPS spectrum of the Mn-substituted nanocomposite M7FOC is exhibited in These findings were agreeing with the XRD observations which suggested that Mn got substituted in both the carbide and oxide phases. Moreover, the spectrum for the O 1s is shown in Mössbauer spectroscopy was utilized to ascertain the number of phases and their respective compositions based on their magnetic behavior. Mössbauer spectrum was collected for nanocomposite M7FOC at ambient conditions ( The electrochemical performance of the nanocomposites FC, M2FOC, and M7FOC are shown in Similarly, the cyclic voltammograms for the nanocomposite M2FOC at three cycles are shown in The cathodic peak found to be at 0.8 and 0.4 V for the second cycle, and it was at 0.79 and 0.35 V for the third cycle. However, there was a considerable reduction in the current intensity for the 2nd and 3rd cycles w.r.t. the 1st cycle. But, this intensity was nearly the same for the 2nd and 3rd cycles. The shift in the voltage and decreased current intensity may be accomplished to the volume expansion of Fe The specific charge capacity and Coulombic efficiency for M2FOC Likewise, CV profiles for the nanocomposite M7FOC for the three cycles are shown in ( In contrast, the delithiated capacities were ~830, 818, and 836 mAh g For the initial cycle, the CE for M7FOC was ~65.8%, which enhanced to 97.3 and 100% respectively for the 2nd and 3rd cycles ( The literature suggests that the theoretical charge/discharge capacities for Fe In summary, the nanocomposites of Fe  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.