Hot deformation behaviour of AlCoCrFeNi2.1 eutectic high entropy alloy, consisting of fcc (CoCrFe-rich) and BCC (NiAl-rich) phases is studied by generating contour maps of multiple models using high temperature thermo-mechanical simulator compression test data. The workability regimes for thermomechanical processing are identified as 1073–1150 K and 10−3– 10−2.2s−1 as well as 1338–1373 K and 10−3–10−1.2 s−1. Finite element simulation has been used to study the strain distribution and material flow during hot deformation, which assists for predicting actual material flow in forging process. Flow instabilities during hot forming has been avoided by adopting integrated approach.The new alloy design concept of multicomponent high entropy alloys (HEAs) was first christened by Yeh et al. [ The present study of hot deformation behaviour and processing map of multicomponent AlCoCrFeNi High purity commercial metals, namely Al, Co, Cr, Fe and Ni (≥99.9%) were used as the starting materials. AlCoCrFeNi High temperature deformation process was simulated using commercial SIMUFACT The XRD pattern of multicomponent EHEA is shown in The detailed microstructural characterization of multicomponent EHEA was carried out using back scattered electron (BSE) imaging mode in SEM. However, the representative SEM micrograph of the studied EHEA is given in The detailed TEM investigation of the studied multicomponent EHEA has been carried out to decipher the phases formed as well as the size and distribution of phases in the microstructure. However, the representative TEM micrographs of the studied EHEA is given here. The TEM bright field micrograph and corresponding selected area diffraction (SAD) pattern of the EHEA (shown in Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) study was done in argon atmosphere in the temperature range of room temperature to 1500 °C at heating rate of 20 °C/min (Netzsch The uniaxial true stress-strain curves of the multicomponent EHEA has been obtained for the suction cast cylinder with diameter (ϕ) = 6 with aspect ratio of 1.5:1 at different temperatures and at different strain rates. The uniaxial true stress-strain curves of the suction cast (ϕ = 6 mm and aspect ratio of 1.5:1) EHEA has been obtained at different temperatures 800 °C (1073 K), 900 °C (1173 K), 1000 °C (1273 K), 1050 °C (1323 K) and 1100 °C (1373 K) and different strain rates (i.e. 10 The flow stress of a particular material (σ) is correlated with the strain (ε), strain rate ( The activation energy (Q) is the physical parameter, which signifies the plastic deformability. The Q-value can be calculated as follows. The power law equation is given by Taking logarithm of both sides of power law equation After differentiating equation The first term The activation energy (Q) for the multicomponent EHEA has been calculated at a strain of 0.6. The plot between However, it is important to note that this constitutive equation for the studied EHEA describes the correlation between the strain rate and the stress within the temperature range 800–1100 °C. This activation energy is comparable to the commercial alloy such as Ti–6Al–4V consisting The processing map can provide information about the optimum deformation condition and to describe the flow instability domains. The investigated EHEA is subjected to plastic deformation at different temperatures and strain rates to understand the deformation behaviour and develop processing map, a guide to thermomechanical processing. The deformation processing map for the EHEA has been generated using dynamic material modeling (DMM) which is applicable to the materials characterized by dynamic, nonlinear and irreversible phenomena [ The ratio For an ideal linear power dissipater, m = 1 and The variation of power efficiency (η) with strain rate ( The variation of the instability parameters such as  The microstructural characterization of the investigated deformed EHEA at different strain rates and temperatures was carried out to correlate with the observations drawn from the deformation processing maps. The microstructure of deformed sample at last stage of deformation at different combination of strain rates and temperatures is shown in Hot deformation process was simulated using FEM simulation package at different temperatures and strain rates condition. The geometry for FEM simulation is given in  The hot working characteristics of the multicomponent AlCoCrFeNi The average activation energy calculated using power law equation is ∼306 kJ/mol and stress exponent value is ∼5.6. The optimum thermo-mechanical window is 1073–1150 K and strain rate 10 FEM model coupled with thermomechanical simulation using Gleeble The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at