The influence of solid surface roughness (hydrophobic Teflon®) on the timescale of the ascending air bubble (Rb
                     
                     =0.74mm) attachment and the kinetics of the spreading of the three-phase contact (TPC – gas/liquid/solid) line was studied. The moment of the rising bubble collision with a horizontal Teflon® plate immersed in ultrapure water was monitored using fast video recordings (4000fps). It was shown that, depending on the solid surface roughness, the time of the TPC formation was significantly different. Similarly to our previous studies, it was shorter for higher roughnesses. Using high-frequency video acquisition, an additional factor, kinetics of the spreading of the TPC line associated with various bubble shape changes during TPC formation, could be determined. The registered attachment kinetics and bubble shape variations were very reproducible for smooth and very rough Teflon® surfaces, whereas for Teflon® of intermediate roughness, up to five different attachment scenarios were observed, with a relatively large standard deviation of time of TPC formation. Numerical calculations used for simulation of the bubble collisions with a horizontal solid wall with precisely controlled hydrodynamic boundary conditions revealed that the experimentally observed timescales of the bubble attachment and spectacular bubble shape variations can be accurately (qualitatively) reproduced for each roughness of the Teflon® plate studied. Good agreement between experimental and numerical data is, in our opinion, rather strong evidence for air-induced rupture of the liquid film formed between the colliding bubble and the hydrophobic solid plate. This supports the hypothesis that depending on the solid surface roughness, different amounts of air entrapped in solid surface irregularities could drastically change the solid surface hydrodynamic boundary conditions and, consequently, the kinetics of spreading and formation of the TPC.Collisions of gas bubbles with various interfaces play an important role in many applications. For example, in flotation, a widespread physicochemical separation technique based on differences in surface properties of the minerals being separated, the effectiveness of the separation process depends on the outcome of interactions between bubbles and solid particles ( Generally, the probability of the bubble attachment to a solid particle depends mainly on the stability and kinetics of drainage of the intervening (wetting) film separating the bubble and solid surface. The liquid film drainage kinetics are governed by hydrodynamic boundary conditions at the film interfaces. To ensure a desired and controlled outcome of the flotation separation process (as well as a variety of processes involving multiphase flow), the properties of the interacting interfaces should be tuned. Among many other factors, hydrodynamic boundary conditions at both gas/liquid and solid/liquid interfaces are among the most significant. For gas/liquid interfaces in flotation, the boundary conditions are changed by adding various surface-active substances (SAS), whose strong adsorption capability changes the fluidity (mobility) of the interface ( It is rather well established that near rough hydrophobic solid surfaces, the boundary slip could be significantly increased ( This paper presents experimental and theoretical (via numerical simulation) studies on the timescale of bubble attachment to a hydrophobic solid surface and the spreading of the TPC line. Experimentally, the kinetics of bubble collision and attachment were studied in detail at model hydrophobic Teflon® surfaces of different roughness. In the numerical case, to reproduce the experimental observations, the boundary conditions of the hydrophobic solid surface were changed in a well-controlled (patterned) manner. The qualitative comparison between kinetics of the bubble attachment to the hydrophobic solid surface obtained experimentally and numerically was then shown. This comparison provides additional evidence supporting the hypothesis about important the role of air presence at hydrophobic rough surfaces on kinetics of the TPC line spreading and bubble attachment. The experimental setup used for monitoring the bubble collision with a hydrophobic solid surface was described in detail elsewhere ( The Teflon® solid plate, used in our studies as a model hydrophobic surface, was positioned horizontally just beneath the water/air interface at a distance far larger than that necessary for establishment of the bubble’s terminal velocity. The terminal velocity of the bubble at the moment of collision, i.e., its impact velocity, was Prior to the experiments, solid plates were carefully washed with a chromic acid mixture and rinsed with large amounts of Milli-Q® water. The glass elements of the setup (capillary, square column) were washed either with the chromic acid mixture or Mucasol®, a commercially available cleaning liquid, and rinsed with large amounts of Milli-Q® water. The experiments were carried out at room temperature (21 Numerical simulations were performed to reproduce the bubble behaviour during its collision with the hydrophobic solid surface. Details about the selected numerical approach can be found elsewhere ( Sequences of photos illustrating the bubble collision with T2500 and T100 surfaces are presented in A quantitative description of the photo sequences from The bubble interacting with the T600 surface produced more varied results. Here, depending on the experimental run, the TPC formed either immediately during the first strike or during the second or third collision, after a short period of bouncing. This effect is illustrated in As mentioned above, the poor reproducibility of the TPC formation in the case of T600 was a consequence of 5 different attachment scenarios. Below, sequences of photos are presented showing various bubble shape deformations at the moment of TPC formation, recorded experimentally. A similar sequence of photos of the bubble for a different experimental run at the T600 surface is presented in  The qualitative data for the frequency (probability) of each scenario observed at the T600 surface are presented in  We can now estimate the magnitude of forces responsible for the bubble withdrawal from and attachment to the solid surface. In a simplified approach, the attachment force can be approximated by the capillary force ( The added mass coefficient of the bubble can be estimated from a simple linear expression ( In light of the literature data ( The mean values of  At the T2500 and T100 surfaces, only one attachment scenario occurs (see The “necking” scenario shows that immediate TPC formation and fast spreading of the TPC line can be observed if the macrobubble collides with previously dewetted spots at the solid surface (fast coalescence between air/water interface).  The time of spreading of the TPC line to the equilibrium As stated above, the presence of air at the solid surface could modify its hydrodynamic boundary conditions. More air should induce larger hydrodynamic slip of the solid surface. In contrast, the surface with less air entrapped should behave more as a no-slip condition. We decided to use this hint to model the presence of air at a hydrophobic solid surface. By proper patterning of the numerically reconstructed hydrophobic solid surface (slip/no-slip areas; see   A similar comparison is presented in Similarly, the “necking” scenario was also accurately reproduced in numerical simulations, as shown in Three different approaches with respect to the distribution of the slip areas at the hydrophobic solid surface were used to reproduce the experimentally observed bubble attachment scenarios at the T600 surface. For the T2500 and T100 surfaces, only one approach was sufficient. This is additional proof of a more random and stochastic distribution of air pockets at the T600 surface during its immersion into water phase, caused by intermediate surface roughness. Additional data supporting the above discussion and conclusion are presented in Because of a much higher amount of air at the rough T100 surface (gas trapping mechanism – The bubble attachment time and kinetics of the TPC formation strongly depend on the roughness of the hydrophobic solid surface. It was observed that the time of the TPC formation can be drastically reduced when the solid surface roughness increases. Moreover, this effect is associated with different attachment scenarios and spectacular rupturing bubble shapes revealed using ultrafast video recordings. The bubble shape variations during rupture at the solid surface also strongly depend on the solid surface roughness. In our opinion, different attachment kinetics and scenarios are a consequence of different amounts of air present at topographically nonhomogeneous solid/liquid interfaces. As a consequence, the hydrodynamic boundary conditions are air-amount dependent and shift towards more slip or no-slip for T100 and T2500, respectively. This hypotheses is supported by four main findings: (i) lack of scatter of the bubble attachment time to T100 and T2500 surfaces, i.e., for two extreme cases, with respect to the degree of roughness (and entrapped air amount); (ii) strong scatter at the T600 (intermediately rough) surface; (iii) good qualitative agreement between experimentally observed and numerically determined shapes of the bubbles during their approach and rupture (TPC formation) and (iv) discrepancy between the approaching bubble deformation before collision with the T2500 (more no-slip) and T100 (more slip) surfaces. The financial support from the