The increasing electromagnetic energy and multiple reflections of electromagnetic wave (EMW) produce various negative impact on the human body, equipment, information security and even military defense structures. In this study, a new electromagnetic wave EMW absorbing cementitious composite incorporating copper slag and powder was manufactured to accommodate the rapid development of 3D printing technology. The microscale morphology and chemical compositions of adopted absorbents were examined through scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectrophotometry (EDS), and X-ray fluorescence (XRF). Electromagnetic parameters for copper slag and powder were measured in the range of 1–18 GHz. Then seven cementitious composites incorporating 0-30 wt% copper slag were manufactured to access and evaluate the printable capability for extrusion-based printing. Five mass ratios (2–10 wt%) of copper powder were thereafter incorporated to the printability-optimized composite for further enhancement of EMW absorption. Based on the printable capacity, reflectivity tests using network analyzer over the 1–18 GHz range showed that the cementitious composite with 25 wt% copper slag and 6 wt% copper powder performed a favorable EMW absorption capacity with a 10.2 dB peak reflection loss value and a 3.48 GHz absorption band. In addition, the influence of macroscale configuration includes surfaces roughness and thickness on the EMW absorption were elaborated. The results provide experimental basis and references for functionalizing and intelligenting the cementitious composite for application in infrastructures.The rapid development of modern electronic industry and widely use of diverse electronic products, industrial and medical equipment have caused massive increase in the electromagnetic pollution [ Recently, significant improvement has been made in developing largescale 3D printing to accommodate the need of automation in construction, which is of high degree of automation and high accuracy of manufacturing [ Copper slag is by-product obtained in smelting and refining process of copper. The application of this common industrial waste will reveal its environmental-friendly and cost-effective potential [ Copper slag fraction of composite is of great importance to guarantee EMW absorption. Yao et al. [ Appling copper slag as the raw material for extrusion-based 3D printing shall meet certain vital criteria to be compatible with the printing processes [ This study is dedicated to propose a promising cementitious composite to accommodate the urgent requirements for functionalizing the 3D printing by newly well-proportioned using waste slag and copper powder to reveal balanced 3D printable and EMW absorbing performances. Well-proportioned solid waste of copper slag and power are combined adopted to introduce a relatively large amount of Fe and Cu elements to the mixture, intending to enhance the EMW absorbing behaviors. Meanwhile, distinct compatibility between fresh property and 3D printability of functional cementitious composites is optimized by balancing the raw material and mix proportions. Integrating application of EMW absorbing cementitious materials and 3D printing technology is promising to improve the electromagnetic interference shielding performance of civil structures and the automation of construction processes. Raw material including ordinary Portland cement (P·O 42.5 R) and silica fume (SF) are used as the binding materials. Silica fume is employed to modify water-retaining property of the cement composite and terminally enhance cementitious composite flowability. On topic of the electromagnetic parameters, silica fume exhibits much lower permittivity than cement paste, contributing to the improvement in surface impedance matching performance. The silica sand (SS) serves as the fine filling aggregate in mixture with particle size ranging from 0.2 mm to 0.4 mm. Besides, high efficient polycarboxylate-based superplasticizer is adopted to achieve the required flowability and stability for the mixture. Viscosity modifying admixture (VMA) is selected to increase water-retaining property, avoiding the formation of bleeding and disintegration of cement pastes. Additionally, a proper amount of basalt fibers are employed to reduce the formation of shrinkage due to early drying and in particular to improve the toughness of proposed composite materials. It is highly important for the printing concrete since the 3D printing is a non-reinforcement process. The specifications of basalt fibers are listed in In this study, seven mass ratios (5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30% and 35%) of copper slag to cement are firstly adopted to improve the EMP absorbing property of composites, which are denoted by CS5, CS10, CS15, CS20, CS25, CS30 and CS35, respectively. Thereafter, five weight percentages (2%, 4%, 6%, 8% and 10%) of copper powders (70% brass powder and 30% red copper powder) to cement are explored to enhance the EMP absorption efficiency based on the optimized mixture for favorable printing. In the manufacturing process, copper slag, cement, silica sand, silica fume, viscosity modifying admixture are mixed and blended in the container for 300 s. In the first 30 s during this period, basalt fiber is scattered to ensure the fiber is evenly distributed. Simultaneously, the water is blended with superplasticizer along with sufficient stirring to manufacture the liquid commixture, which is later divided into two equal parts. Then, the dry composite mixes up with the first half liquid mixture are stirred for 80 s until the second half liquid recipe is sprinkled. After extra 200 s stirring, the fresh paste is terminally produced and delivered to the 3D printing system to evaluate the printable performance. To uncover the effect of copper slag and powder on the printability and EMW absorbing property, the physical and chemical characteristics of both materials are measured. The adopted of coper powder consists of 70% brass powder and 30% red copper powder. The chemical composition of copper slag and powder are examined by energy dispersive spectrometer technique (EDS) and X-ray fluorescence method (XRF). The microstructure of copper absorbents is meanwhile detected through scanning electron microscope (SEM).  Printability of cementitious material is the ability to smoothly and contentiously pass through a narrow opening without blockage and interrupt as well as the ability to sustain the self-weight of subsequently stacked layers without obvious deformation or even collapse [ After the fresh mixtures are ready, the printing parameters are carefully calibrated and adjusted to strike an ideal balance between the fresh behaviors and manufacturing procedure. For instance, increasing the printing speed will decrease the time for strength development, and the insufficient stiffness is therefore negative to the vertical stacking process. While decreasing the printing speed can facilitate the vertical build up, however, it will make the mixtures difficult to be pump and extruded [ After numerous evaluation of shape-retention and load-sustainability for printed structures flowing the method described in our previous works [ The rheological parameters of initial stress and thixotropy can be applied to characterize the stiffness development and buildable properties of the cementitious materials [ The electromagnetic parameters of copper slag and copper powder are measured through the transmission line method in the frequency ranges of 1–18 GHz as illustrated in The chemical composition of copper slag and powder are examined by energy dispersive spectrometer technique (EDS), and the results are presented in From the chart, ferrites in copper slag occupy 65% of total weight to present considerable electromagnetic property. Compared to copper slag, the copper powder owns higher metal content, Cu and Zn element are found to contribute to more than 99% of the composition. The XRF method releases strong x-ray to obtain fluorescence spectrum by crystal diffraction process between lattice distances of elements, the measured wave length governs the existence of element while spectrum intensity decides element content. However, the exact element valences and corresponding of their metallic oxides cannot be proper demonstrated. As a result, the 54.93% weight ratio may represent the combination of Fe The Fe and Cu elements have excellent EMW absorbing capacity with outstanding magnetic anisotropy and high resonance frequency. The spinel ferrites containing Fe element can be found with tetrahedral and octahedral crystal structures and Cu powder is regarded as face centered cubic structure [ The scanning electron microscope photos (SEM, FEG 450, Quanta, American) give details to the microstructure of copper slag and copper powder at different magnifications in The microstructure of the absorbent edges can contribute to the EMW absorption to a certain extent. The election, cation and anion may be caught by traps among transition zones around the absorbent edges to accumulate as spatial charge under external electric field. Thereby, the electric charge distributed at heterogeneous transition zones generates electric dipole moment and result in interfacial polarization. Besides, the absorbent edges, particle sizes and particle grading pose significant influence in 3D printing capacity. The microstructures influence the bonding strength between aggregates and void content for all cementitious composite, which are strongly related to the flowing speed, extruding friction and mechanical properties of cements. The specific particle size distribution parameters of the two ingredients are demonstrated in To evaluate the printability, in particular the buildability, seven mixtures containing different slag content are deposited to vertically construct 22-layer structures in length of 240 mm and width of 28 mm. Theoretically the 22-layer structures are 110 mm in height when the materials are with zero-slump. Each printing layer comprises of two contiguous filament lines. The round-section paste facilitate the extrusion process and will slump into flat shape section due to the self-weight of subsequent layers, terminally exhibiting distinct load-sustainability. Thereby, The printed structures of cementitious material containing different slag are shown in However, enormous cracks and breakages are observed along the printing direction of filaments within the structure printed by CS30 mixture ( Although the utilization of copper slag as microwave absorbent is beneficial, denouncing environmental-friendly and cost-effective advantages, copper slag still possesses a certain amount of impurities which neither help to absorb EMW nor modify printing performance and limit to the containing of Fe elements. As a result, a supplementary electric and magnetic absorbent with high purity is in great demand to be enriched in the proportion design of EMW absorbing material for 3D printing. Copper powder is the feasible solution due to the high content of Cu and Zn elements which contribute for optimizing the EMW absorbing performances. Thus, based on the previous design of CS25, a further investigation on copper powder content is conducted to optimize the microwave absorbing characteristics and printing property. Five weight percentages (2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, 10%) of copper powders (70% brass powder and 30% red copper powder) are explored to enhance the EMP absorption efficiency based on the optimized mixture for favorable printing, which are characterized by the symbol of CS25P2, CS25P4, CS25P6, CS25P8, CS25P10, respectively. In particular, for the listed five designs, copper slag content remains the same weight proportion of 25% and other components all sustain unchanged. The compatible buildability experiment is conducted to meet the demand of the compatible printability. Besides, in mortar preparation process, the copper powder is blended into dry ingredients prior to mixing and all printing parameters (mortar opening time, nozzle opening, printing speed) are all kept the same as before. Similarly, 22-layer structure deposited by the composite with both copper slag and powder are constructed to evaluate the buildability. As the vertically stacked structures presented in In electromagnetic parameter measurement, wax was utilized as fixing agent and electromagnetic medium. As a result, it is of great significance to subtract its unnecessary influence in order to reveal precise intrinsic electromagnetic parameters. The Bruggeman mixture permeability and permittivity equations demonstrated below in Eqs. In the listed equation, As for copper slag, the real part permittivity As for magnetic loss of copper slag, the heterogeneity degree of copper slag, the duplication level of spin rotation, the domain wall movement all influence the permeability values significantly. The realistic permeability As for copper powder, the real part permittivity As aforementioned analysis, after primary and compatible buildability experiments, the cement group including CS25, CS25P2, CS25P4, CS25P6, CS25P8 and CS25P10 are designed to access the capacity of EMW absorption. Concrete specimens are printed up to three layers (15 mm height) and then cut to 180 mm × 180 mm size slabs. In the test, the printing route direction on slab surface is set to be perpendicular to the plane formed by wave propagating direction and reflected wave direction in order to prolong EMW propagation, as the figure inserted in The continuous deposition process of materials will result in a distinct macroscale configuration of printed models, which is different from the flat surface of mould-casted ones. When specimens are manufactured by 3D printer, the printing routes on surface will give rise to surface roughness. It is necessary to elaborate the influence of surface roughness on the EMW absorbing capacity of materials. Cement roughness influences propagation distance of EMW as well as surface impedance matching. Meanwhile, the influence of thickness of structures on the EMW absorbing behaviors is investigated. This is because sample thickness dominates the EMW energy propagation pathway and may lead to a certain of interference matching. Based on the mix design of CS25P6, a batch of specimens with different thicknesses and preparation methods are prepared, which include casted 3-layer structure (CS25P6L3C), printed 3-layer slab (CS25P6L3), 4-layer slab (CS25P6L4) and 5-layer slab (CS25P6L5). The three, four and five layers slabs are in thickness of 15, 20 and 30 mm, respectively. The corresponding reflectivity experiment result is presented in Meanwhile, the absorption peak at 4.5 GHz shifts to lower frequency about 1.6 GHz then moves to higher frequency when composite thickness increases. It is also observed that 15 mm composite has broader absorption band and more uniform distribution of reflectivity value. Compared to 15 mm thickness, the 20 mm composite has higher EMW absorption in low frequency range (1–3.5 GHz) and part of high frequency range (17.1–18 GHz). The increase of sample thickness substantially prolongs the EMW absorbent element as well as EMW propagation distance. Thereby, the consumption degree and EMW absorbing time will be enhanced to guarantee EMW absorption. However, when sample thickness continues to exceed the critical value, the impedance matching will degenerate. Although the penetrated EMW are exhausted effectively, massive EMW are reflected on surface due to the varied surface matching and degenerates the EMW absorbing capacity. Moreover, based on the engineering manners, mobile base stations nowadays utilize communication frequency bands mainly with advance wireless service band from 1.7 GHz to 2.1 GHz, time division duplexing-long term evolution band from 2.575 GHz to 2.635 GHz. The combination of EMW absorbing concrete design and sample thickness configuration can reveal the function of EMW absorption especially in low frequency range to serve the constructions of mobile base stations or normal buildings nearby. In this study, a promising and 3D printable cementitious composite incorporating copper slag and powder is proposed for EMW absorbing. The following conclusions are drawn: From the SEM investigation, proper addition of large and angular particles of copper slag contribute to the printability of cementitious composites. Otherwise, collapse, interruption or bleeding may be caused by the gap grading and poor water retention. The optimal content of copper slag for favorable printability was determined as 25% by mass ratio. The fresh properties are compatible with the extrusion settings. From EDS results, copper slag is of high content of Fe elements (54.93 wt%) and copper power mainly contains of Cu element (91.97 wt%). The combination application copper slag and power introduce a relatively large amount of Fe and Cu elements to the mixture, significantly enhancing the magnetic and conductive behavior of the manufactured composite. The composite incorporating 25 wt% copper slag and 6 wt% copper powder was proved to demonstrate favorable EMW absorbing performance. A 10.2 dB peak reflection loss value and a 3.48 GHz absorption band over the 1–18 GHz range were approached. Rough surfaces of printed samples result in higher EMW absorption, approximately 2 dB lower than casted ones in frequency ranges in 1–18 GHz. Meanwhile, samples with 15 mm thickness perform broad absorption band and relative uniform reflectivity distribution, while 20 mm samples own higher EMW absorption mainly in low frequency range, which can serve the constructions regarding to mobile base stations. Comparing with the conventional construction, 3D printing concrete with solid waste can reduce the cost of human labors, formworks and raw materials etc., contributing the 3D printing to reach its cost-effective potentials. The high fraction of conductive ingredients of solid waste meanwhile greatly improve the functional benefits of proposed cementitious materials. However, the investigation in the presented study is just a preliminary attempt to verify the feasible and effective of EMW absorbing material for 3D printing. Further researches and studies are needed to explore some new modification approaches of EMW absorbents to maximize the matching and absorbing capacities, the influencing mechanism of various surface roughness and geometrical angularity of wave absorbents on the rheological and thixotropic behaviors of 3D printable materials, the macro-structural geometry as well as post processing approaches on the enhancing of EMW absorbing performances, etc. The study is founded by the