It is well-known that the mechanochemical processing of binary mixtures of transition metals can induce the formation of nanostructured and amorphous phases. Previous kinetic studies have shown that the phase transformation in binary mixtures follows sigmoidal conversion curves irrespective of the intensity of mechanical processing. The rate of such transformations is instead strongly influenced by both the intensity of the mechanical treatment and the physical properties of the reactant powders. In the present work, we give additional information on the amorphisation kinetics of binary mixtures by exploring the effect of composition on the transformation kinetics. Cu–Ti and Fe–Ti mixtures with composition within the amorphisation ranges have been subjected to mechanical processing at fixed intensity. The kinetics of phase transformation has been followed by quantitative X-ray diffraction. The experimental data obtained demonstrate that the amorphisation rate has a strong dependence on the product of the mass fractions of the single reactants.The mechanochemical synthesis of metallic amorphous alloys usually involves the cold-working of powders or intercalated foils, the grinding of intermetallic compounds and the mechanical alloying (MA) of powders This induced us to perform a systematic investigation on the kinetics of metastable phase formation in transition metal binary mixtures, pointing out its relationships with the processing parameters. The development of both an experimental methodology and a modelling approach, for the measurement of the impact energy and collision frequency on the one hand and for reproducing the dynamics of milling devices on the other, allowed us to quantify the rate of the energy transfer, i.e. the milling intensity, and the total mechanical energy transferred to the powders in the course of the mechanical treatment Experimental evidence suggests that a unique mechanism governs the metastable phase formation independent of the alloy chemistry, the structure of the end products, the milling device, the treatment intensity and the vial charge. Sigmoidal conversion curves are observed, characteristic of solid state reactions proceeding at the interface under the effects of impact-induced mass transport and continuous fresh surface generation. Such effects are expected to depend on the mechanical response of the mixture and its tribological properties. The transformed mass fraction is related to the mechanical energy transferred to the processed powders by simple formal kinetic equations The generalisation of the results mentioned above to stoichiometries other than the one corresponding to 40 at.% in TM represented the next task for our research work in order to gain a deeper insight into the MA processes. Accordingly, in this paper we systematically investigate the amorphization kinetics of homogeneous series of binary mixtures Ti–Fe and Ti–Cu at different stoichiometric compositions. Only compositions yielding a final amorphous phase have been considered. In the course of milling treatments, the rate of phase transformation is essentially controlled by the impact energy, The present milling trials were carried out by employing a modified commercial Spex Mixer/Mill mod. 8000, equipped with a variable speed motor allowing to change the frequency of the vial motion from 750 to 1400 cycles min The kinetics of phase transformation was followed by wide angle X-ray diffraction (XRD). The so-called absolute crystalline content of the scattering sample, expressed by the ratio of the integrated intensity under the crystalline lines to the total integrated intensity, has been evaluated according to the Ruland’s method Deconvolution procedures are illustrated in Powders with a 99.99% purity level were used in the milling trials. All the handling procedures were performed inside a glove box with nitrogen, oxygen and residual humidity controlled below 1–5 ppm. Small quantities of powder were sampled from the vial at regular time intervals for routine analysis and scanned over a stick tape on a Siemens diffractometer equipped with a Cu Kα radiation tube. Larger amounts of the milled powder were periodically employed to prepare compacted samples in order to perform more refined X-ray analysis and thus check the reliability of the routine analysis. In this case, the alloying process was restarted from the beginning. Patterns were collected over an angular range of 2 The two binary systems show similar reactive behaviours, probably due to the relatively similar mechanical ductility of Cu and Fe. Solid solutions are formed, respectively, at low and at high Ti contents. Amorphisation ranges are slightly different and the formation of an amorphous alloy is observed at the compositions Cu Both in Fe–Ti and Cu–Ti systems at the different stoichiometries indicated above, the mechanical treatment of the powder mixtures determines the progressive broadening of crystalline peaks and the fading of their intensity. These features are accompanied by the growth of the amorphous halo between the two more intense crystalline signals of Ti and its partners in the mixture, Cu and Fe, respectively. This can be observed in As evident from the figure, no intermetallic compound is formed during the mechanical processing before or concomitantly with the amorphisation process. Irrespective of the system examined and of the mixture composition within the amorphisation range, crystalline equilibrium compounds only become detectable at the latest stages of the transformation process. According to previously reported results, the 2 The positions of the maxima for the Cu–Ti amorphous alloys at different stoichiometry are quoted in Quantitative XRD analysis reveals that the amorphous weight fraction The comparison clearly points out that each system, at a given stoichiometry, has a characteristic rate of phase transformation. Such a rate can be approximately quantified by the reciprocal of the semi-transformation dose, The evaluation of the semi-transformation dose for the mixtures at different composition of both the Cu–Ti and Fe–Ti systems puts into evidence the dependence of the amorphisation rate on the relative concentration of the pure metallic reactants. As shown in Maximum transformation rates are detected at compositions Cu A more realistic, even if still phenomenological evaluation of the amorphisation rate can be performed by fitting the sigmoidal conversion curves, as those reported in The quantity The rate constants for the amorphisation process of all the mixtures considered are quoted in A comparison of the data reported in these figures with the ones reported in The experimental values in The results obtained extend our previous findings on the amorphisation processes of binary mixtures. Even if experimental trials are limited at the moment to only two binary systems, it seems that the behaviour observed could be of a general concern. XRD analysis show that the formation of the amorphous phase always follows sigmoidal transformation curves characteristic of the so-called topochemical reactions occurring at the interfacial regions between two solid phases The composition of the initial mixture deeply affects the transformation rate, which is found to be proportional to the product between the mass fractions of the reactant powders. Finding a rationalisation for this particular feature is not trivial. Actually, such evidence gives partial support to the hypothesis that the amorphisation reaction is controlled by the formation of surface of intimate contact between the reactants. Indeed, under such circumstances the reaction rate should be proportional to the area of interface and this, in turn, to the so-called dispersion of reactant phases, i.e. the intermixing of the solid phases. Even if it is extremely difficult to make experimental measurements of dispersion, and then of the surface area of interfacial regions, it is possible to correlate it with the total surface area of single reactants. It is indeed reasonable to assume that the dispersion is proportional to the product between the total surface areas of reactant phases, expressing the probability of contact between the different species The experimental evidence collected in the present work provides an additional piece of information on the kinetics of amorphisation of binary mixtures of transition metals. Compositional effects of the powder mixtures are restricted to the rate of phase transformation, while the basic mechanism of transformation is not affected. As in mixtures at a fixed stoichiometry and undergoing mechanical processing at different intensity, the formation of the amorphous phase follows well-defined sigmoidal curves which are possible to reproduce through a phenomenological kinetic model. As shown in previous work The authors would like to express their sincere appreciation to Prof. L. Schiffini and Prof. S. Enzo for useful hints in the XRD analysis procedures and for general discussions. Acknowledgement is also made to CNR, PFNMII, Rome and to Sassari University for financial support.