The application of the β-carbonyl amide N,N-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3-oxobutanamide for the extraction of lithium ions from saturated MgCl2 solutions was investigated using tributyl phosphate (TBP) as the second component in a mixed extractant and FeCl3 as the co-extractant. The effects of the extractant concentrations, H+ solution concentrations, phase ratios, Fe/Li molar ratios, and other factors on the extraction were fully investigated. Our results demonstrate that compared to conventional extraction systems, a higher Li-to-Mg separation factor of 450–700 can be obtained, and the formation of phase interface objects can be effectively avoided under low solution acidity without emulsification. The mechanism suggests that (LiFeCl4·2TBP·NB2EHOTA)·4TBP·NB2EHOTA is formed at lower (10%) TBP/NB2EHOTA mixed concentrations. This paper reports the application of β-carbonyl amide extractants for Li separation from salt lake brine with high Mg-to-Li ratios.Lithium is an important element that possesses wide industrial applications, including in heat-resistant glass and ceramics, high strength-to-weight alloys used in aircrafts, lithium batteries, and lithium-ion batteries. Notably, these applications consume more than half of the available lithium. Therefore, lithium plays an indispensable role in social, economic, and political development, as well as in the political and economic relationships between countries ( Salt lake brine contains a significant amount of lithium, together with alkali and alkaline earth metal ions. Lithium has similar ionic properties to magnesium because of their nearly identical ionic radii, which makes the separation of lithium from magnesium difficult in brine solutions saturated with magnesium chloride ( In recent years, the successful application of neutral organophosphorus extractants in the recovery of lithium from mass salt lake brine with high Mg-to-Li ratios has created opportunities to apply the solvent extraction process industrially. Employing tributyl phosphate (TBP) with (FeCl Additionally, several authors have investigated the performance of radioactive metals, such as uranium and thorium, in Li recovery with amide extractants ( However, when these two systems were employed in multi-stage countercurrent extraction, flocculent phase interface objects were produced to varying degrees in the organic/water phase interface layer. The probable reason for this is the strong ability of TBP and N503 to extract H The extraction mechanism for lithium from saturated magnesium chloride solutions with a β-carbonyl amide extractant has not been reported in the literature. Our preliminary study found that the addition of NB2EHOTA to a TBP-kerosene-FeCl The reagents used in this study included lithium chloride monohydrate (+ The instruments used for the analyses included thermostatic water bath oscillators (THZ-82A; Changzhou Langyue Instrument Co., Ltd.), an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICAP6500 DUO; Thermo Scientific, USA), and a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer (670; Thermo Nicolet Corporation, Madison, USA). Extraction was conducted in a 25 The effect of the NB2EHOTA concentration (vol.%) on the lithium extraction was investigated using different volume concentrations of NB2EHOTA in sulfonated kerosene as the extraction organic phase. These results are presented in Experiments were conducted to examine the effect of the concentrations of both NB2EHOTA and TBP (vol.%) on lithium extraction and the Li-to-Mg separation factor by changing the NB2EHOTA and TBP concentration ratios under a 50% total extractant concentration. The experimental results are shown in It was observed that the lithium extraction efficiencies increased as the TBP volume concentration increased, while they tended to be stable after the TBP concentration increased to 25%. Initially, the concentration of Mg Moreover, increasing the TBP volume concentration resulted in a continuous decrease in [H Other factors, such as high lithium extraction efficiencies, lower TBP dosage, and low Mg To further investigate the optimal extraction system, the volume concentration of one of the extractants was fixed at 25% while the NB2EHOTA or TBP concentration was varied from 0.24 When the TBP concentration was 25%, the H To investigate the effect of shaking time on the lithium extraction, the lithium and iron extractions were conducted using 25% NB2EHOTA/25% TBP. The hydrogen ion concentration, which was adjusted using hydrochloric acid, ranged from 0.02 to 0.20  It was observed that the extraction efficiencies of lithium increased initially and then decreased with increasing Fe/Li molar ratio. When the Fe/Li molar ratio was 1.5–1.7, the lithium extraction efficiencies reached maximum levels. The Li/Mg separation factor decreased with increasing Fe/Li molar ratio. This separation factor decreased from 454 to 261 when the Fe/Li molar ratio increased from 1.3 to 1.5. The above phenomenon is caused by the following aqueous solution balance ( An Fe/Li molar ratio >  The third (relatively thick) phase appeared at a phase ratio (O/A) of 1/2. When the phase ratio was increased from 2/1 to 2.5/1, the lithium extraction efficiencies remained unchanged, while the Li/Mg separation factor increased from 534 to 689 with little increase for a single-stage extraction. Therefore, the optimal phase ratio range was 2/1–3/1. The loading capacity of NB2EHOTA/TBP for lithium was determined according to the following loading methods. Experiments were conducted using 0.68  The results shown in Lithium extraction efficiencies increased gradually with MgCl A small amount of KCl and NaCl in old brine can lead to the formation of KFeCl Our experimental results are shown in In the KCl solutions ( It is important to determine the structures of the NB2EHOTA and TBP complexes with Li and (FeCl The apparent equilibrium constant K The distribution coefficient, Therefore, Eqs. and their logarithmic forms are The relationship between the concentration of NB2EHOTA as a single extractant and the lithium distribution was investigated before determining the structure of the complexes of NB2EHOTA/TBP with Li and (FeCl In this case, the extraction experiments were performed by changing the NB2EHOTA concentration while maintaining a TBP concentration of 10 However, The extraction equilibrium equation is written as follows: NB2EHOTA is a β-carbonyl amide compound (R-CO-CH Ligand coordination with a metal changes the force constant of the resulting bond, which modifies its frequency. Indeed, ν From a comparison of the IR spectra in The β-carbonyl amide extractant NB2EHOTA was successfully used to extract lithium chloride from saturated MgCl This system employs a fast phase separation process and effectively avoids the formation of any phase interface objects. It is suitable for extraction of lithium at concentrations of approximately 2.0 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the