The mechanical properties of aluminium hybrid composites reinforced with groundnut shell ash (GSA) and silicon carbide was investigated. GSA and silicon carbide with different mix ratios (10:0, 7.5:2.5, 5.0:5.0, 2.5:7.5 and 0:10) constituted 6 and 10wt.% of the reinforcing phase, while the matrix material was Al–Mg–Si alloy. The hybrid composites were produced via a two-step stir casting technique. Microstructural examination, hardness, tensile and fracture toughness testing were carried out to appraise the mechanical properties of the composites. The results show that with increasing GSA in the reinforcing phase, the hardness, ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and specific strength of the composites decreased slightly for both 6 and 10wt.% reinforced Al–Mg–Si based composites owing to the amount of the oxides of Al, Si, Ca, K2 and Mg present in the composition of GSA. However, the percentage elongation improved marginally and was generally invariant to increasing GSA content while the fracture toughness increased with increasing GSA content. GSA offered a favourable influence on the mechanical properties of Al–Mg–Si hybrid composites comparable to that of rice husk ash and bamboo leaf ash.Materials with good strength to weight ratio are becoming very essential in modern engineering designs especially for automotive and aerospace applications where improved machine efficiency and reduced fuel consumption are critical requirements to be satisfied. Also, modern infrastructures, equipment and machineries that are currently developed require materials that have a good combination of properties to match service demands. Aluminium matrix composites (AMCs) represent a class of materials that offer a wide range of properties that can measure up with the design requirements of some of the aforementioned applications ( In recent times, hybrid reinforced AMCs have attracted the interest of researchers and different design concepts have been adopted to select the appropriate combination of reinforcing materials (  In this research work, we considered the use of groundnut shell ash (GSA) and silicon carbide as hybrid reinforcements in the development of Al–Mg–Si based composites. The microstructural features, density measurements and mechanical properties were investigated to ascertain the viability of using GSA as a reinforcing material in the development of aluminium matrix composites. Al–Mg–Si alloy billets with chemical composition: Al (98.71 Two step stir casting process was utilised to produce the composites in accordance with The composites produced were given designations based on the weight percent of the reinforcing phase and the weight ratio of SiC and GSA in the reinforcement. B1, B2, B3, B4, and B5 were used to designate the 6 The microstructures of the composites produced were examined using a JSM Jeol ultra-high resolution field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM). Prior to the examination, the surface of the samples were prepared by grinding and polishing following standard procedures. Thereafter, samples were etched using Keller’s reagent (95 Samples were machined from the as-cast composites using lathe machine for hardness, tensile and fracture toughness testing following standard procedures. Hardness test was conducted on the prepared samples using EmcoTEST DURASCAN microhardness testing machine at an applied load of 100 The crack propagation resistance (fracture toughness) of the composites was determined using a simplified fracture mechanics approach based on uniaxial tensile testing of circumferential notch tensile (CNT) specimens ( The microstructure and EDS profile of a representative composition of the composite produced are presented in The variation of hardness of the Al–Mg–Si alloy, single and hybrid reinforced Al–Mg–Si/SiC–GSA is presented in Symmetrical to the hardness trend observed in An analysis of the sensitivity of the composite strength parameters to GSA content is presented in  Representative stress–strain curves of the composites from which the tensile properties discussed above were derived are presented in  Based on the aforementioned observations, it suffices to say that the incorporation of GSA as a complementing reinforcement in the development of Al–Mg–Si/SiC–GSA composites did not have an adverse effect on the mechanical properties of the composites. AMCs are mostly reported to exhibit enhanced strength at the expense of ductility and fracture toughness (  Hardness and tensile strength increased with increasing weight percent of the reinforcing phase but the strength and hardness dropped slightly with an increase in GSA content in the reinforcing phase. The percentage reduction in hardness and strength achieved in GSA containing composites were lower than both RHA and BLA reinforced aluminium hybrid composites reported in previous work. Percentage elongation improved marginally with increasing GSA content. The improvement did not follow a consistent trend with increasing SiC–GSA weight ratios. Fracture toughness ( The use of GSA as complementing reinforcement is viable for the production of low-cost high performance aluminium matrix composites. GSA can be utilised as reinforcement based on its overall positive effect on the mechanical properties of the composites even at higher weight fractions in comparison to RHA and BLA.