Suitable additives can improve the viscosity characteristics of copper slag, thereby improving slag–copper separation. In this study, the effects of B2O3 on the performance of copper slag were studied. The results showed that when the content of B2O3 addition was increased from 0 to 4%, the viscosity of the copper slag decreased, and the activation energy of viscous flows decreased. B2O3 could act as a network modifier to simplify the Si–O–Si tetrahedral structure, as verified by an FTIR analysis. In addition, the microstructure of fayalite in the copper slag changed from dendritic to granular with the increase in B2O3 content. B2O3 could form low-melting-point eutectics with high-melting-point components in the slag, which effectively reduced the liquidus temperature and viscosity of slag.Approximately 80% of the world’s primary copper are produced from low-grade or inferior sulphide ores, which are usually treated by high-temperature metallurgy [ An important criterion for the utilization of copper slag is the copper content in the slag [ At present, there are three main methods of copper slag cleaning: mineral processing, hydrometallurgical, and pyrometallurgical methods. Flotation, magnetic separation and gravity separation are the main methods of mineral processing, copper in the slag can be recovered efficiently by mineral processing methods, and flotation has become one of the most effective way to recover useful metals in smelter slag [ Several researchers have studied the effect of B In this study, the effect of B Materials: The copper slag samples were selected from P–S converter slag of a copper smelter plant in Yunnan, China. The samples were grey black in colour. Apparatuses: The viscosity of the copper slag was measured using a high-temperature viscosity measurement setup (Rheotronic II, Theta, America), and the diagram of the viscosity measurement equipment is shown in The torque was measured using a digital rotational rheometer (model DV-III, Brookfield Engineering Laboratories, Middleboro, MA). The Brookfield equipment was connected to a computer to simultaneously record the torque from the rotating spindle. Before the viscosity test, the rheometer was calibrated with two silicone oil standards produced by the Brookfield Company. The viscosities of the silicone oil standards were 100 and 500cps. The heating device of the viscometer was a resistance furnace heated by six U-shape MoSi First, the molybdenum crucible containing 50 g of copper slag was placed in the constant temperature zone of the heating electric furnace using the three-jaw bracket. A vacuum was subsequently created in the furnace using a vacuum pump, after which the furnace was backfilled with high-purity (99.9999%) argon. Throughout every experiment, an inert atmosphere was maintained by Ar gas at a flow rate of 120  ml min Second, the sample was heated to 1250 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C·min Thirdly, after the viscosity measurement, the sample was reheated to 1250 °C and held for 30min, after which it was quickly removed from the furnace and rapidly quenched in water. The quenched sample was characterized by FT-IR. Finally, the heating device of the viscometer was used to heated copper slag with different B The infrared spectra of the quenched samples were collected using a FT-IR spectrometer (TENSOR 27, Bruker Corporation, Germany) to reveal the slag structure. Each 2 mg slag sample was mixed with 200 mg KBr, and the mixture was ground and mixed to prepare transparent sheets for infrared spectrum analysis. The frequency band of spectral measurement ranged from 400 to 2000 cm XRD (D/Max-R, Science, Japan) was used to determine the crystal structure of slag. XRD patterns were acquired using an X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (k = 1.5406 Å). The operating voltage and current were 40 kV and 40 mA, respectively. The diffraction angle (2θ) was scanned from 20 to 85°. Magnetic analyzer equipment (SATMAGAN 135, Rapiscan Satmagan, Finland) was used to detect the magnetite content in the copper slag. To obtain the microstructure information of the copper slag sample, polished sections were prepared following a standard section preparation technique, and the microstructure and modes of occurrence of the main elements of the copper slags were analyzed by electron probe X-ray microanalysis (JXA 8230, JEOL, Japan) coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The standards used for the analysis from Charles M. Taylor Co. (Standard, CA) include wollastonite (CaSiO The liquidus temperature of the copper slag was measured by an SDT-2960 (TA Corporation, America) differential scanning calorimeter. To prevent oxidation during heating, the entire measurement process was carried out under the protection of nitrogen with a flow rate of 70  ml min The copper converter slags are hard grey black solid at room temperature. The chemical analysis results are listed in The XRD pattern of the copper slag is shown in As shown in The viscosities of copper slag with different B The temperature dependence of the copper slag viscosity is shown in The copper converter slag has different Si– To further verify the effect of B To determine whether B The microstructure of the copper slag containing different B The liquidus temperature of the slag samples were studied by the thermodynamic software FactSage 7.1 (databases: FToxid, FactPS, and Factmisc) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), as shown in To further confirm this conclusion, electron probe analysis and backscatter electron imaging technology were used to study the distribution of elements (Ca, Mg, and B) in the copper slag containing 4 wt% B In this study, the effects of B The viscosity of copper slag decreases with the increase of B With the increase in the B The liquidus temperature of the slag decreased with the increase in B      The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support for this study was provided by the