Applying hydrogen energy into iron ore sintering process is an efficient strategy to abate CO2 emission. This investigation mainly focused on revealing the influence of H2-rich gas injection on sintering performance and elucidating the deep mechanism through both laboratory tests and mathematical model. Results showed that injecting H2-rich gas contributed to reducing the proper moisture content and coke breeze rate from 7.00% and 5.60% to 6.75% and 5.30% due to the negative influence of generated H2O and excessive heat supply. Under main operation conditions, increasing the injection concentration of H2-rich gas improved the sinter yield and tumbler index gradually till reaching the proper concentration of 0.80%. The emission reduction of NO and SO2 mainly brought by the decreased coke breeze consumption reached around 10% and 6%. The mechanism of H2-rich gas injection was mainly attributed to the improved thermal patterns of sintering bed, which increased liquid phase formation area and high temperature (≥1200 °C) duration, thereby facilitating the formation of enough adhesive phase calcium ferrite. Moreover, the cooling velocity of adhesive minerals was obviously slowed down, which facilitated the formation of needle-like calcium ferrite with high mechanical strength. The research findings are of great significance for guiding the application of cost-effective H2-rich gas into practical sintering plants.The environmental problem caused by greenhouse gases has aroused the public concern world-widely, and the consumption of fossil fuels was thought to be the main emission source of CO Iron ore sintering is an important stage before smelting iron-bearing materials into iron and steel, which prepared fine iron ores (<8 mm) into lumpy sinter before charging into the blast furnace Practically, applying Hydrogen-rich gas fuel into iron ore sintering process has been regarded as a potentially promising strategy to reduce CO Unfortunately, current research mainly focused on injecting high grade and high gravity CH Mixed iron ores, fluxes (dolomite, limestone and quicklime), solid fuel (coke breeze), and return fines are necessary raw materials for sinter production, the chemical composition of which was given in  A cylindrical laboratory-scale sinter pot with dimensions of 700 mm in height and 180 mm in diameter was used to simulate the practical sintering process, as shown in As for the H Typical factors including sintering speed, sinter yield, tumbler index, and productivity were measured to assess the sinter quality. Among them, sintering speed is the ratio of layer height and sintering time (mm·min Iron ore sintering is a high-temperature process, and the heat supplied by the combustion of coke breeze could make partial minerals melting, which could bind the separately distributed iron ore particle tightly to guarantee the mechanical strength of sinter product. Consequently, the thermal condition of sintering bed exhibited close relationship to sinter quality. Two key thermal state parameters, including duration of temperature for mineral melting (DTMM) and liquid phase formation area (LPFA), were used to quantitatively evaluate the bed thermal conditions. As shown in The LPFA referred to the zone that the sintering bed temperature > 1200 °C, as shown in Moreover, the cooling velocity Eq. Mathematical models have been used to predict quantitatively the sintering performance in past decades. To observe the thermal state of H During conventional sintering process, the primary physical chemical reactions occurred in sintering bed included drying and water condensation, coke breeze combustion, carbonate decomposition, minerals melting and solidification. However, when injecting H The sintering pot trial conditions are used to define the initial and boundary conditions. The inlet gas conditions of base case are listed in To solve the above partial differential equations, the finite volume method is employed. One-dimensional continuous space is discretized into 1000 grid points, and the corresponding algebraic equations are solved by the tri-diagonal matrix algorithm. Moisture content and coke breeze rate are two important operation parameters for realizing smooth sintering. Moisture content was close to the granulation effect of fine-grained iron ores into bigger granules and the sintering bed permeability, while coke breeze rate was related to the proper heat supply for driving the water evaporation, carbonate decomposition, minerals melting, etc. These factors finally decided the quality of sinter product.  Moreover, large amount of heat would be generated during the gas combustion process, and it possibly led to excessive melting of minerals during sintering process, which impeded the smooth flow of flue gas downwards and served as another factor to increase the resistance of sintering bed. Taking them into consideration, the moisture content and coke breeze rate were decreased from 7.00% and 5.60% to 6.75% and 5.30%, respectively, under which the suction pressure showed gradually dropping tendency, and sintering indexes reached the comparable level to base case with injection concentration of 0.6%. Consequently, when injecting H    Moreover,  As for the case using 5.30% coke breeze, less bigger pores could be observed after H The present research focused on revealing the influences of H Taking the potentially negative influence of generated H Under main operation conditions, increasing the injection concentration of H Injecting H The main mechanism of H This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 