Fuels leaking from a broken pipe often impinge onto a hot surface in a ship's engine room, creating the potential for a fire. Previous experiments showed that the ignition often occurs in the air far above the hot surface in this fire scenario. It is hard to repeat the ignition due to the complexity of the movement and boiling evaporation of the liquid fuels on a hot surface. A bracketing method is adopted to measure the minimum hot surface ignition temperature experimentally. The ignition heights are also compared with previous ones using statistical results. A three-dimensional physical model was built to describe the fuel vapor plume above a heated surface. The adopted numerical model is Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS). This large eddy simulation (LES) method was applied to solve the turbulent plume model above the heated surface. The ignition process is analyzed based on the numerical results. It is confirmed that the boiling heat transfer plays a key role in the ignition of the fuels tested on a heated surface.frequency factor molar concentration of each reactant species (kmol/m Smagorinsky constant critical value of the reaction rate activation energy (J/mol) gravity force (m/s latent heat of evaporation (kJ/kg)) mass flux (kg/(m pressure (Pa) heat flux (W/m universal gas constant, 8.314 (J/(K temperature (K) velocity (m/s) coordinates mass fraction density (kg/m reaction rate (J/(kg direction of coordinate axis boiling fuel vapor gas mixture ambient state heated surface oxygen There are always many hot surfaces in a ship's engine room, such as exhaust pipes, and boiler pipes. If any leaked fuel is sprayed over them accidentally, it would be evaporated. The resulting vapor can be heated by the hot surface and may ignite. The first observation of the ignition of the leaked fuel on a heated surface was reported by Johnson and Moussa Bennett and Ballal The numerical simulation of the convective plume above a horizontal heated surface is very complex despite its simple geometry. Fully developed buoyant plumes in unbounded space are well documented in past reports for a point source or line source. However there is not much information about the near field of the plume. A proper model has not been found to describe the buoyant reactive plume above a horizontal heated surface. The auto-ignition of non-premixed flame in a turbulent flow is also contestable, including the complex problems of chemical reactions, molecular and thermal diffusion and turbulent transport. Vaivads et al A three-dimensional model was built to describe the fuel vapor plume on a heated surface. Large eddy simulation (LES) was applied to solve the turbulent plume model above the heated surface in this study. Results obtained with the three-dimensional simulation were discussed to describe the ‘air-borne’ ignition process and to find out the main influencing factors of the leaked diesel on a heated surface. The experimental set-up is shown in A commercial diesel was chosen as the sample fuel. The characteristic parameters are shown in It was found that the measured minimum heated surface ignition temperature (MHSIT) changed over a wide range. So the Bruceton method Ignition results from 320 to 350  The diesel stream impinges on the heated surface and forms a pool. Three different boiling modes are observed during the diesel ignition experiment. According to the pool boiling studies The definition of the ignition delay differs from study to study. The ignition delay for the leaked fuel on a horizontal heated surface is defined as the time interval from the startup of the liquid fuel flow to the appearance of visible flame in the fuel vapor. The ignition delay is established based on the record of the high-speed video camera. The surface was heated from 350 to 600 The ignition height is also measured based on the high-speed video camera recording. A black cloth and a measuring scale were provided in the background in order to record the ignition position precisely. A total of 175 experiments were conducted. The results did not support any relation between the ignition height and the surface temperature or any other factors. The frequency of the ignition heights is shown in Similar to the ignition delay, it is also difficult to describe the relation between the surface temperature and ignition height. The movements of the liquid fuel on the surface and the vapor plume above the surface are complicated. So the numerical simulation is adopted to describe the ignition process and the effect of the surface temperature on ignition height in The diagram of a heated surface model is shown in Pressure remains constant at 1 There is only buoyancy-induced flow around the heated surface. The mixture above the surface consists of the fuel vapor and air, and behaves like an ideal gas. The temperature of the vapor leaving the heated surface is the same as the boiling point of the fuel. The adopted numerical model is the Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS), originally developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) The system is surrounded by a completely quiescent ambient atmosphere based on the assumptions stated in where where a circular area of the plate of radius the area of the plate not covered by liquid fuel: The floor (beyond the edges of the plate): The flow velocity and pressure of the top and surrounding surface are not known prior to solution of the flow problem, but can be extrapolated from the interior. The floor is non-reactive and there is no heat loss or heat gain from it. Neither does it release or absorb any gas. FDS used the Smagorinsky sub-grid scale (SGS) model to represent the unresolved eddy motion, in which the Smagorinsky constant ( The volume of the entire computational domain is 0.6×0.6×0.6 Although a smaller grid size is preferred for better simulation of both large and small scale dynamics, a large grid size is favored in terms of a computational cost. Different grid sizes were tested. The ignition delay does not change if a smaller grid size is used. It shows that the finer grids are not guaranteed to provide better prediction of fuel ignition. Here in this paper, the grid array was chosen as 32×32×32. The evaporated fuel leaving the heated surface reacts with the surrounding air. Ignition will occur as the conditions permit. The detection of the light emission is a criterion of the ignition in the experiments, but it cannot be applied as the theoretical ignition criteria. The true state of ignition is itself hard to be defined, because detailed values of the physical parameters of the chemical reaction kinetics are unknown. In a previous study FDS does not mention the ignition criterion in its document and leaves great flexibility for the user to select some suitable parameter for the discussion of ignition phenomena. Several criteria were tested, and the maximum reaction rate satisfies the requirement. The ignition was thought to occur as the maximum reaction rate of the vapor plume exceeds a certain critical value The combustion model adopted in FDS is the mixture fraction model in which the reaction rate is a function of the mixture fraction. To simplify the calculation, a one-step reaction of hexadecane was chosen to describe the process of the combustion of diesel:  As soon as the fuels begin to boil, a hot plume with active radicals is ejected into the oxygen-containing atmosphere due to natural convection. The fuel impinges on the heated surface and forms a pool on it. So the heated surface is divided into two areas, one covered by liquid fuel while the other is uncovered. First, the liquid fuel boils in the pool on the heated surface. Then the fuel vapors entrain and react with the surrounded air by convection, which is induced by the uncovered heated surface. So the surface will transfer the heat by different ways, i.e. by boiling and by convection, even by radiation. Heat is transferred from both the liquid covered area and the uncovered area of the surface. Three different boiling modes and heat transfer characteristics were shown in The effect of the surface temperature on ignition height is also discussed. Based on the above discussion, it can be concluded that boiling heat transfer affects ignition significantly when the surface temperature is low. Both ignition delay and ignition height will be shortened when the boiling heat transfer increases. The heated surface has two different effects on ignition.   Heights of the maximum reaction point over time for different temperatures of the uncovered surface are illustrated in It can be concluded that the uncovered surface also has a significant effect on the ignition height. The ‘air-borne’ ignition point can ‘land’ on the surface as surface temperature increases and the boiling heat transfer does not change. Other factors that may influence ignition of the leaked fuel in experimental conditions were also studied, such as ambient temperature and fuel pool size. Their results are similar with the ones shown in Diesel leaked onto a heated surface has the characteristic ‘airborne’ ignition. Previous experimental and numerical methods to study near-surface ignition of fuels on a heated surface are not suitable to study this. A ‘bracketing’ statistical method was used to measure the minimum heated surface ignition temperature of the ‘airborne’ ignition in this study. The critical temperature for 0.01% ignition probability was calculated. The unstable ignition heights were also counted statistically. The average heights for different fuels, such as the diesel, hexadecane and dodecane, are approximately equal. Moreover, the ignition process was discussed using numerical simulation. The heated surface has two-way effects on the ignition delay and ignition height. One is the boiling heat transfer from the liquid covered area and the other is the convection from the uncovered area. The ignition delay and ignition height change significantly with the boiling heat transfer between the fuel and the surface. It can be concluded that the boiling heat transfer plays a key role in the ignition of the leaked fuel by a heated surface, especially when the surface temperature is close to the fuel boiling point and the fuel is in nucleate boiling regime. The heated surfaces at such low temperature are often overlooked in the normal operation of the ship's engine room. Future research will focus on providing the suitable surface protection to weaken the boiling heat transfer from a heated surface in order to delay the ignition and lower the probability of fire. This study was supported by