Objective
                  Fractures of the zygoma and orbit are common facial skeleton injuries. Inadequate reduction and internal fixation may result in functional and aesthetic impairment. The aim of this study was to assess the use of intraoperative 3-dimensional (3-D) cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) for determining the intraoperative revision rate and the need for additional reconstruction of the orbit.
               
                  Study Design
                  We conducted a retrospective analysis of 48 consecutive patients (15 females, 33 males) suffering from simple or complex zygomatic fractures, seen between June 2015 and October 2016. Intraoperative 3-D CBCT (Xoran Technologies, Ann Arbor, MI) was performed, and the intraoperative image was overlaid on the preoperative image by using iPlan software (Brainlab, Feldkirchen, Germany) for quality control. Categorical variables were cross-tabulated and compared using Fisher's exact test. P values and 95% confidence intervals were assessed.
               
                  Results
                  In 6 of 48 patients, intraoperative revision was deemed necessary on the basis of the superimposition on the preoperative images. Five of these 6 patients had comminuted fractures (P = .001). In 7 patients, the indication for orbital reconstruction was revised after intraoperative 3-D CBCT.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Intraoperative 3-D CBCT allows for immediate revision and prevents unnecessary orbital reconstruction. Fractures of the zygoma and the orbit are common. Malposition may lead to severe functional and aesthetic impairment. Intraoperative 3-dimensional imaging allows for prompt revision without the need of secondary anesthesia. Three-dimensional (3-D) evaluations using computed tomography (CT) have become the standard in the assessment of patients with maxillofacial trauma and help identify associated soft tissue complications, such as retrobulbar hematoma or incarceration of ocular muscles. CT also provides information for classifying fractures, thus aiding preoperative planning. Meticulous assessment of bone fragments provides ideal support for the surgeon's operative plan. Two-dimensional radiographs, such as orthopantomograms and upper jaw half-axial projections, cannot distinguish complex strut fractures and do not show associated soft tissue complications. Open reduction and internal fixation (reconstruction) of fractures of the zygomatic bone and the orbit are required in cases of dislocation and functional impairment. Although 3-D intraoperative assessment can be achieved by exposing the infraorbital rim, the fronto-zygomatic suture, and the crista zygomatico-alveolaris, bony fragments can, nonetheless, be malpositioned during surgery in some cases. Currently, patient-specific implants and intraoperative navigation are used to minimize malpositioning of the bony segments and changes in orbital volume. As described by previous authors, intraoperative 3-D imaging allows for intraoperative detection and immediate correction of malposition. Moreover, needless orbital reconstruction can be avoided in patients with combined fractures of the zygomatic bone and orbit, and ideal reconstruction of the orbital volume is possible with open reduction and internal fixation of the zygoma. This study assessed whether the superimposition of 3-D CBCT data over the preoperative data leads to changes in the planned procedures planned preoperatively and the need for intraoperative revision of the surgical repositioning achieved after superimposition. The study enrolled 15 female and 33 male patients (age >18 years) who were seen consecutively, underwent surgery for displaced fractures of the midface and/or orbit, from June 2015 to October 2016, and were subjected to 3-D intraoperative scanning with a mobile xCAT unit (Xoran Technologies, Ann Arbor, MI). The patients were assessed in terms of the reoperation rate and the need for orbital reconstruction after open reduction and internal fixation of the zygomatic fractures. We excluded patients who had previously undergone surgery of the midface or bilateral fractures of the midface. Patients unable to give consent were also excluded. All patients underwent pre- and postoperative ophthalmologic examinations. A preoperative multislice CT (MSCT) examination was performed to exclude intracranial injuries, such as bleeding. We used a 0.4-mm voxel size protocol to assess all patients. To assess the scans, a bony window was applied; no other enhancements, such as contrast, brightness, or magnification, were needed. The X-ray tube rotated completely around the patient every 20 seconds, yielding images measuring 14 × 21 cm. The maximum tube voltage was 120 kV, and the maximum current was 6 mA. The effective radiation dose for this protocol was 0.51 mSv. As the radius of radiation was small and the gantry was shielded with lead, we did not need to employ architectural radiation protection measures, and the xCAT 3-D scanner could be used in any of our operating rooms. The scanner was 81 cm wide, 119 cm deep, and 152 cm high. Sterile coverage was achieved with a shell ( To fix the zygoma internally, miniplates were placed on the inferior and lateral orbital rims and on the zygomatico-maxillary buttress by using an intraoral, blepharoplastic, transconjunctival, retroseptal approach. Fractures of the orbital wall or floor were reconstructed by using either laser-sintered patient-specific implants or manually bent titanium mesh. The nonaffected zygoma and/or the orbit were mirrored preoperatively to define the ideal postoperative positioning of the affected side ( The parameters assessed were the associations between the need for intraoperative revision and comminuted fractures and the type of fracture (complex vs simple). Associations were also assessed between the cause of injury and the presence of comminuted fractures and between the cause and the type of fracture. Furthermore, associations between the use of intraoperative navigation and the need for intraoperative revision, between age and comminuted fracture, and between age and type of fracture (complex vs simple) were described. Categorical variables were cross-tabulated and compared by using Fisher's exact test. All statistical analyses were performed by using R software (R Development Core Team, Vienna, Austria). The study fulfilled all criteria established by the Ethics Committee of Zürich (approval no. 2016-02030) and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients gave written informed consent. Forty-eight patients with midface fractures, who underwent surgery guided by intraoperative 3-D X-ray imaging with the xCAT unit, were included ( In 7 cases, the latero-orbital, zygomatico-alveolar, and infraorbital zygomatic buttresses exhibited severe comminution. Eight patients required orbital floor reconstructions (with mesh bent manually on 3-D models) because the defects were found to extend to the orbital floor after repositioning of the zygomatic bone. The ophthalmic findings were hyposphagma in 30 patients, preoperative double vision in 6 patients, and contusion of the bulb in 28 patients. No optic injuries or lacerations were recorded. We placed patient-specific implants in 3 patients with injuries to the zygomatic arch, and we inserted lag screws into the posterior aspect of the zygomatic arch in another 3 in accordance with the preoperative plan. No changes were necessary after the intraoperative CBCT evaluation. Intraoperative navigation (via registration of intraoral splints) was employed in 17 patients, but the use of intraoperative navigation did not prevent undercorrection of the zygoma and the need for intraoperative revision surgery. Although we had prepared 7 models to facilitate bending of mesh to restore the orbital floor, the intraoperative xCAT 3-D data showed that no orbital intervention was necessary after open reduction and internal fixation of the zygomatic bone ( Multidetector CT (MDCT) has become a standard modality for the diagnosis of maxillofacial trauma and has replaced 2-dimensional (2-D) radiography because with MDCT, the overlapping phenomenon does not occur, and soft tissue assessment is possible. Two-dimensional radiography is prone to missing retrobulbar hematomas and incarceration of the intraorbital muscles, which may lead to severe functional impairment, such as loss of vision or motility disorders of the eye bulb. Furthermore, accurate 3-D fracture assessment is important for surgical treatment. Although pre- and postoperative 3-D imaging has become standard for all patients with craniomaxillofacial trauma, intraoperative 3-D scanning is relatively new. The viewing conditions are simple and self-explanatory. After switching to the bony window protocol, no further enhancements are necessary to view the intraoperative 3-D images. With an effective dose of 0.51 mSv, the radiation dose is lower than that of standard MSCT but the quality of resolution of high-contrast structures (e.g., the thin orbital wall) is comparable. Thin bony structures are effectively and reliably visualized; MSCT is redundant in this context. Intraoperative CBCT can be performed without architectural adjustments, and only a modest amount of space (i.e., a width of 81 cm, depth of 119 cm, and height of 152 cm) is required. The xCAT 3-D scanner can easily be rolled from one operating room to another, which allows for use in simultaneous surgeries. In Switzerland, CBCT can be performed by the surgeon without further assistance, which might not be the case in other countries. However, CBCT does not allow adequate assessment of soft tissues; MSCT is essential to this end. The cost of intraoperative imaging included in the flat rate of the diagnosis-related group of surgical conditions is $US200 per 3-D scan. The savings for postoperative CT, which is no longer needed, would amount to $US300. The maintenance costs are $US3500 per year and the purchase cost of a CBCT device is $US300,000. One hour in an operating theater costs up to $US1400, but the time required for operative revision in a patient with midface trauma is usually the same as that required for primary intervention. Additionally, the fact that the patient does not require secondary anesthesia or secondary hospitalization must be considered. Three-dimensional imaging has become indispensable for postoperative assessment of midface fractures. Intraoperative CBCT is easy, fast, and safe in patients undergoing open reduction and internal fixation of zygomatic fractures and reconstruction of the orbit. Such imaging permits immediate correction of inappropriate positioning after intraoperative superimposition of the result on preoperative images, eliminating the need for secondary anesthesia and needless reconstruction of the orbital floor after closed reduction of the zygoma. The radiation dose is less than that of regular CT and CBCT can be performed by the surgeon alone.