The replacement of natural coarse aggregate (NCA) with recycled coarse aggregate (RCA) in concrete mixtures offers various advantages, including conservation of natural resources, reduction of CO2 emissions, and cost reduction. However, multiple related variables and objectives (e.g., mechanical, economic, and environmental objectives) need to be considered when optimizing mixtures of recycled aggregate concrete (RAC). This cannot be achieved through traditional laboratory- or statistics-based methods. This study proposes a hybrid intelligent system based on artificial intelligence (AI) and metaheuristic algorithms for designing optimal mixtures of RAC. To verify the proposed model, a data set containing 344 different RAC mixtures was collected from previous literature. A semi-supervised cotraining algorithm using two k-nearest neighbor (kNN) regressors with different distance metrics is developed to label the unlabeled data in the collected dataset. Different AI models are incorporated into the system for modeling the relationship between RAC strength and its influencing variables. A multi-objective optimization (MOO) model based on AI algorithms and on a multi-objective firefly algorithm is used to search for optimal mixtures of RAC. The results show that kNN-based semi-supervised cotraining can effectively exploit unlabeled data to improve the regression estimates. In the test set, A Random Forest and Backpropagation Neural Network achieve the best prediction accuracy for predicting, respectively, uniaxial compressive strength and splitting tensile strength of RAC, indicated by the highest correlation coefficients (0.9064 and 0.8387, respectively) and lowest root-mean-square errors (6.639 MPa and 0.5119 MPa, respectively). The Pareto fronts of the multi-objective mixture optimization problem are successfully obtained by the MOO model. The proposed system can also be used to optimize mixture proportions of other cementitious materials in civil engineering.With rapid urban development, an increasing amount of concrete is being consumed globally. Meanwhile, substantial construction and demolition (C&D) waste is being generated, resulting in significant environmental problems ( However, in comparison with NCA, RCA has higher water absorption and porosity, and lower strength and density ( To address this problem, Artificial Intelligence (AI) approaches are increasingly used to predict concrete mechanical properties. AI can accurately model relationships between inputs and outputs ( Besides high prediction accuracy, an AI model should have a good generalization ability. To this end, a database containing a large amount of training data should be constructed. The labels (outputs) of these training data should be known during training. However, unlabeled data are very common when constructing data sets for RAC. The reason is that different applications consider different properties for their experimental schemes. Little research has been done on replacing missing values in the dataset. To address this problem, this study uses semi-supervised cotraining methods to label the data samples with missing output values ( After modeling the objectives, optimization algorithms are used to search for optimal mixture proportions of RAC. Recent studies focus on finding the minimum cost of a concrete mixture at a specified UCS. This is only a single-objective optimization. However, RAC applications would benefit from a multi-objective optimization (MOO) model to find the trade-offs among competing objectives. However, a MOO problem is substantially different from single-objective optimization; only under some special conditions can single-objective optimization problems be extended to MOO problems ( To solve these problems, this study constructs a hybrid intelligent system based on AI models and the firefly algorithm. The significance of the work is as follows: We first propose a semi-supervised cotraining algorithm using two We develop several AI models with hyperparameters tuned with the firefly algorithm. The robustness and generalization ability of the models is tested by Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis. The best model is selected as the objective function for the optimization process. We develop a MOO model to optimize mixture proportions of RAC. The model obtains Pareto fronts that show trade-offs among cost, CO C&D waste can be divided into five categories: concrete, metal, wood, mineral, and unsorted mixed fractions ( To address this problem, a number of empirical models have been proposed for predicting the mechanical properties of RAC. Some scholars have used statistical approaches to model the relationship between the mechanical properties of RAC and influencing variables, including effective water-to-cement ratio, RCA replacement ratio, water absorption of the RCA, and bulk density of the RCA and NCA ( To overcome the deficiencies of statistical models, AI models have been used to predict the mechanical properties of RAC. Such models not only reveal the complex relationships between mechanical properties and RAC mixture design, but also perform well in previously untrained data domains, as long as they have been rigorously trained on high-quality datasets ( However, AI models often fail to predict outputs accurately in data with complex input-output relationshipsif their hyperparameters are not poperly selected ( An accurate prediction model can help engineers evaluate the mechanical properties of RAC without time-consuming and costly laboratory experiments. The optimal concrete mixture proportions that minimize cost and CO The mechanical properties of RAC are different from those of NAC. RCA has higher water absorption and lower density than NCA ( The correlation matrix of the input variables is plotted in An Artificial Neural Network (ANN) consists of an input layer, an output layer, and one or more hidden layers. These layers are composed of a collection of neurons. The relationships between the input layer with The Backpropagation Neural Network (BPNN) is a popular type of ANN. During the training process, the computed output is compared with the actual output. The errors propagate back to adjust the thresholds and weights, which improves the prediction accuracy ( In backpropagation, when the mean square error (MSE) between the calculated and the actual output falls below the defined threshold, the training stops. The MSE is defined as follows: Support Vector Regression (SVR) can map the input space into a higher-dimensional feature space to solve complex non-linear relationships between outputs and inputs ( The optimization objective is defined as follows: The “kernel trick” is adopted in SVR to convert the non-linear problem into a linear problem ( Ensemble methods improve prediction accuracy by combining multiple base learners (usually a fast learner, like Decision Tree) ( The The distance between a testing sample The optimization algorithm is used to tune the hyperparameters and optimize RAC mixtures. We use the firefly algorithm (FA), as described below. FA was proposed by Xinshe A firefly moves toward another firefly with higher brightness based on the following equation: Multi-objective FA (MOFA) is proposed using the weighted sum method, as follows ( A large number of STS values are missing in the collected data set. Because deleting the corresponding mixtures will reduce the generation ability of the proposed AI models, semi-supervised cotraining is used to label these unlabeled RAC mixtures. Semi-supervised learning is widely used to label unlabeled data samples for classification problems ( Pseudocode of the cotraining algorithm. In this study, the hyperparameters listed in The following performance measures are used to assess the predictive performance of the proposed model. Root-mean-square error (RMSE) RMSE measures the difference between predicted and observed values using the following function ( Correlation coefficient (  As mentioned before, the objective functions for UCS or STS are modeled using AI models, while the objective function of the cost can be given as To solve the MOO problem, constraints must be set. The constraints can be divided into four categories, as follows: Range constraints In the concrete mixture optimization problem, the decision variables should vary within a definite range specified by the compiled dataset, which can be written as follows: Ratio constraints Several ratios need to be constrained for RAC mixture optimization problems, including the water-to-cement ratio (w/c); total-aggregate-to-cement ratio (a/c); sand ratio; superplasticizer-to-cement ratio (sp/c). The ratio constraints are listed in Concrete volume constraint The total volume of the components in concrete must equal one cubic meter: To find the most cost-effective solution, we define the efficiency ratio (ER) as follows: The technique for order preference by similarity to an ideal solution (TOPSIS) is a widely used multi-criteria decision analysis approach ( A solution with higher After the database is constructed, different AI models are trained on the database. The model with the highest prediction accuracy is selected as the objective function for the RAC mixture optimization process. Finally, MOFA is used to search for the optimal RAC mixtures that have minimum costs and CO The diversity of two  After tuning the hyperparameters on the training set, the performance of a regressor is evaluated on the validation set by calculating its RMSE values. The RMSE values versus iterations for different regressors are plotted in   To specify the randomness of the model’s uncertainty, a Monte Carlo simulation is widely used (  As per the above results, 500 Monte Carlo simulations (500 combinations of input variables for each simulation) are conducted to show the distributions of RMSE on the training set and test set for UCS, and on the training set and test set for STS ( A specific concrete strength (e.g., 40 MPa) can correspond to several different concrete mixtures. These mixtures have different costs, and the aim of concrete mixture optimization is to find the cheapest mixture that satisfies the strength requirement. As the cost of RCA varies with types and between regions, it is necessary to determine a critical RCA price beyond which the inclusion of RCA is no longer an optimal choice for minimizing the mixture costs.   In addition, The calculated ER values for UCS and STS are listed in  In summary, all the solutions that lie on the Pareto front can be considered optimal. These points are indifferent and non-dominating toward each other. The selected point/mixture design depends on the designer’s priorities regarding the objective to optimize: the cost or the mechanical properties. The efficiency ratio can then be used to guide the decision-making process to obtain the most cost-effective mixture design solution. For the production of RAC, we consider the basic mechanical objective (i.e., UCS), economic objective (cost), and environmental objective (embodied CO For the tri-objective optimization problem, we obtained 50 non-dominated mixture proportions of RAC for the UCS-cost-CO This study proposes a hybrid intelligent system for designing the optimal mixture proportions of recycled aggregate concrete. In this system, AI models are used as objective functions, constructed using a database collected from experiments and published literature. Semi-supervised cotraining is used to label the unlabeled data in the database. The multi-objective firefly algorithm is used to design the optimal RAC mixtures that minimize cost and maximize compressive or tensile strength. The conclusions in this study can be summarized as follows: Semi-supervised co-regression by FA is efficient for hyperparameter tuning. The optimal hyperparameters of AI models can be found within 50 iterations. RF and BPNN achieve the best prediction accuracy on the test set when predicting, respectively, the UCS and STS of RAC, indicated by the highest correlation coefficients (0.9064 and 0.8387, respectively) and lowest root-mean-square errors (6.639 MPa and 0.5119 MPa, respectively). The RMSE decreases by 16%∼18% and 3.6%∼38.5% for UCS and STS prediction, respectively. The robustness of the two models is also verified by using a Monte Carlo uncertainty simulation. The proposed MOO method with AI models as the objective function and MOFA as the optimization algorithm can efficiently find the Pareto front that shows the trade-offs among cost, embodied CO The intelligent system can be used to screen promising RAC mixtures with minimum cost and maximum strength to reduce the time and labor needed to prepare concrete batches in the laboratory. Also, it can be extended to design other concrete mixtures that minimize cost, reduce CO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The first author is grateful to the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at