This study examined the comminution of fresh herbage, subsequent nutrient release, and the characteristics of swallowed boli from three physically and chemically contrasting forages during ingestive mastication by dairy cows. The extent and pattern of nutrient release will determine their availability to rumen microflora, and potentially influence their efficiency of use. The forages evaluated were perennial ryegrass (ryegrass, Lolium perenne L., cv Alto AR37), lucerne (Medicago sativa L., cv Torlesse) and chicory (Cichorium intybus L., cv Choice). Experimental design was a 3×3 cross-over with three forages and three consecutive 1-day measurement periods, conducted twice. Six non-lactating, pregnant, multiparous Holstein-Friesian×Jersey cows (Bos taurus) were used, with the first cross-over applied to three mature (10.1±0.61 years old; BW 631±64 kg) cows, and the second to three young (4.8±0.02 years; BW 505±19 kg) cows. Fresh cut forage was offered to the cows following partial rumen evacuation. Swallowed boli were collected directly at the cardia at the commencement, middle and end of the first feeding bout of the first meal of the day. Forage species did not affect the fresh weight of ingested boli (mean 169 g, P=0.605) but the proportion of saliva in boli varied between forage. Boli of chicory contained the greatest amount of herbage material and least amount of saliva, whereas ryegrass boli were the opposite. Boli fresh weight tended to increase as time in the meal progressed, but the age of the cow was not shown to affect any boli characteristics or nutrient release. Particle size reduction was affected by forage, with 31%, 38% and 35% of chicory, lucerne and ryegrass herbage reduced to <2 mm. There was little evidence of relationship between comminution and any physical or chemical characteristic of the forage, except in ryegrass where extent of comminution was moderately correlated with herbage strength. Proportional release of herbage soluble carbohydrate exceeded that of N during mastication. Differences in loss of N were moderately correlated with the amount of N in the herbage (R
                     2=0.53) but herbage comminution was not strongly correlated with release of either N or carbohydrate. These findings illustrate the complex animal×forage interactions that occur during mastication, and that it is not possible to infer nutrient loss from herbage based on herbage characteristics as the driver for this differ between species.The release of nutrients and extent of comminution during ingestive mastication by dairy cows varies between forages. This information may aid understanding of how forages are digested, and why differences in nutrient use efficiency between forages exist. Furthermore, it was shown that the cow determines the fresh weight (FW) of the boli ingested, but the forage influences the feed and saliva content of the boli. These findings provide information that may enhance understanding of factors influencing foraging behaviour. Although the chemical composition of herbage determines how much of a given nutrient is consumed, this measure does not describe the pattern of availability of that nutrient during digestion. Ingestive mastication (mastication) is the first step in feed digestion, and while there is a significant body of research into the ruminal digestion of herbage, less is known about the degradation of herbage during mastication. For cows consuming forage, mastication is particularly important for disrupting the outer cuticle layer that forages commonly possess. The cuticle is highly resistant to microbial degradation, so disruption is important for permitting access by microbes to internal degradable plant material (Cheng The rate and extent of nutrient delivery to the rumen is relevant to livestock production systems as this can influence efficiency of forage utilisation (Huntington and Archibeque, The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of mastication by dairy cows on three physically and chemically contrasting forages on boli characteristics, extent of comminution and cell nutrient release from herbage. The experiment compared the characteristics of ingested boli, and cell nutrient release from three temperate forages: perennial ryegrass (ryegrass; The forages were sown in October 2014, received 200 kg N/ha per year in 10 applications of 20 kg N/ha as SustaiN™ (N46; Ballance Agri-nutrients, Tauranga, New Zealand) and grown without irrigation. The stage of maturity of the swards during the experiment was ~2.75 leaves per tiller for ryegrass, 35 cm sward height for chicory and lucerne was at in the early-bud stage (44 days of regrowth). Fresh herbage was cut and collected each day at ~0800 h using a Jenquip® forage harvester (NZ Agriworks Ltd, Feilding, New Zealand), set to a cut height ~50% of the mean sward height for each forage to simulate the bite depth of the first grazing bout of dairy cows on fresh pasture (Gregorini The afternoon before sampling (~1700 h), cows were removed from grazing perennial ryegrass/white clover swards and fasted overnight (~16 h) with unrestricted access to water. At 0900 h cows were moved to individual tie-stalls with rubber mats, open ventilation and access to water. The cows’ rumens were partially emptied by hand via the cannula, enabling access to the cardia. Rumen contents were stored in covered bins to maintain temperature. Following partial rumen emptying, 11 kg of herbage was offered to each cow. As the cows ate, boli were collected and the duration of eating recorded. Any feed not eaten after 30 min was weighed to calculate herbage intake and rate (g DM/min). Methodology for boli collection was based on that described by Acosta The composite sample of boli was gently hand mixed. From this, two subsamples of 100±5 g were weighed fresh then dried in a forced-draught oven at 95°C for 48 h before reweighing to determine DM content. Herbage and saliva content of the boli, and the amount of saliva added per 100 g of herbage was calculated using the equations of Reid The DM of saliva ( A 150±5 g subsample was taken for calculation of cell nutrients released from feed during mastication, using the method described by Boudon and Peyraud ( Particle size distribution (PSD) of the boli was measured using a wet sieving apparatus (Turner and Newell Ltd, Manchester, UK) with four counter-rotating sieves, positioned above a stationary (0.075 mm) sieve. Sieve sizes (as the length of the size of the square hole) were 4, 2, 1, 0.5 and 0.075 mm. Subsamples of 25 g (FW) were placed on the top sieve, then 1500 ml of water recirculated through all sieves at 4 l/min for 5 min. Material retained on each sieve was transferred on to weighed filter papers then oven-dried at 60°C for 48 h before weighing to determine the distribution of DM between size fractions. The soluble fraction was defined as the DM passing the 0.075 mm sieve, and was calculated as the difference between the total DM sieved and the sum of the DM retained on the five sieves. The lengths of chicory and perennial ryegrass leaves and lucerne stems that were retained on the top sieve were measured with a ruler to the nearest millimetre. All samples were measured in duplicate. On each of the 6 days of boli collection, 2 kg subsamples from the forages offered were collected. Herbage DM content was determined by weighing and oven-drying triplicate samples of 200±5 g wet weight at 95°C for 48 h. A further sub-sample (200 g) was frozen at −20°C, freeze-dried and ground to pass through a 1-mm sieve (Christy & Norris Mill) for chemical analysis. Botanical composition of the herbage was determined by hand-sorting sub-samples (200 g) into green leaf, dead leaf, stem, petiole and unsown species. Sorted samples were dried in a forced-draught oven at 95°C for 48 h to determine composition on a dry weight basis. For morphological measurement, 100 pieces of each feed were randomly sampled and the length of the stem, and length and width of the leaf blade measured using a ruler, or digital callipers where the leaf or stem was less than 20 mm in size (Mitutoyo digimatic CD-8“CS; Mitutoyo Corp., Kawasaki, Japan). Two methods were used to assess the forages’ biomechanical properties. The first method determined the resistance of plant material to fracture by measuring the force (Newtons/mm Structural carbohydrates, NDF and ADF were measured using the methods of Van Soest Forage physical and chemical data from each of the 6 measurement days were subjected to one-way ANOVA with week included as a blocking factor and forage as a fixed effect. For intake data, the model included cow as blocking factor and forage as fixed effect. Mixed models approach to repeated measures ANOVA was used for boli data. The model included forage, sampling time and their interaction as fixed effects, week as blocking factor, time of day when first bolus was collected as covariate, and cow as a random factor. Analysis of variance was followed by Tukey’s Associations between feed characteristics ( Pre-harvest sward height were 21, 39 and 32 cm above ground level, for chicory, lucerne and ryegrass, respectively. Chicory and ryegrass swards were vegetative, and predominantly green leaf material ( The boli weight, herbage and saliva content of boli, and intake rates of the herbage are presented in Bolus weight and herbage content in the boli tended to increase as the meal progressed when cows consumed chicory and ryegrass but not when consuming lucerne ( Dry weight of the boli and herbage content in the boli did not differ between cows and no boli characteristics were affected by the age of the cow (results not shown). The PSD in boli ( Further separation of the particles retained on the sieve with 4-mm apertures into groups based on fragment length ( There were no relationships between any of the physical or chemical characteristics measured and the extent of forage comminution, when all forages from all sampling dates ( The proportion of forage WSC released during mastication was greater than that of nitrogen ( Sampling time in the feeding bout had no effect on the release of N during mastication, or of WSC from lucerne and ryegrass. However, the proportion of WSC released from chicory increased as the meal progressed ( Understanding of how herbage is processed during ingestive mastication by dairy cows may aid our understanding of nutrient digestion and utilisation. The study reported here aimed to investigate how different forages are ingested and explore what characteristics of the herbage influence the extent of comminution and nutrient release during ingestive mastication. Forage species did not affect the FW of ingested boli of cows fed indoors. Comparison of the physical and chemical characteristics of the three forages used in this study indicate that they were divergent in their physical and chemical characteristics (i.e. fragment size, biomechanical properties and structural fibre concentration). This finding is in agreement with that of Acosta Although weight of the boli did not differ between forages, the herbage and saliva content of the boli did. The saliva content of ryegrass boli was 11% to 18% greater than the saliva content of chicory and lucerne boli, likely reflecting the functions of saliva which are to create cohesion between particles and provide lubrication for swallowing (Hutchings and Lillford, Boli ingested at the start of the meal were smaller (wet weight) than those ingested later in the meal. Our observations agree with those of Gill Dry matter content of the herbage influenced dry matter intake (DMI) rate (g/min), which is consistent with research using fasted cows fed indoors (Cabrera Estrada Mastication, as ingestive chewing and rumination, is the main process responsible for reducing feed to fragment sizes that can pass from the rumen. The extent of comminution differed between forage species in this study, where mastication reduced 31%, 38% and 35% of chicory, lucerne and ryegrass herbage to particles less than the 2 mm threshold thought able to pass from the rumen (Ulyatt An important function of mastication is cell rupture and the subsequent release of rapidly fermentable nutrients such as soluble carbohydrates and nitrogen. Mean loss of nutrients (WSC and N) was at the lower end of the range reported for cows fed indoors (30% to 37% and 19% to 26% loss of WSC and N, respectively) (Boudon and Peyraud, A greater proportion of water-soluble carbohydrate than nitrogenous compounds was released during mastication, which is consistent with other studies (Boudon and Peyraud, This research was completed as part of the Forages for Reduced Nitrate Leaching programme with principle funding from the New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. The programme is a partnership between DairyNZ Ltd, AgResearch, Plant & Food Research, Lincoln University, Foundation for Arable Research and Landcare Research. The authors thank the considerable efforts of the DairyNZ technical team for assistance with boli collection and the care of experimental animals; and to the DairyNZ biometricians for assistance with statistical analyses.  The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest associated with this research.  Care and use of animals were conducted in accordance with the guidelines issued by the New Zealand Ministry of Primary Industries. The experiment was approved and supervised by the Ruakura Animal Ethics Committee (Hamilton, New Zealand); application No. 13556.  None of the data were deposited in an official repository. To view supplementary material for this article, please visit