A retrospective study of the management of 23 cases of ipsilateral hip and femoral shaft fractures, between January 1998 and December 2001, is presented. All except two cases were managed by a single implant, i.e. reconstruction nail. There was delayed diagnosis of femoral neck fracture in two cases where the “miss a nail” technique was used for fixation of the femoral neck fracture. All patients managed by reconstruction nail were simultaneously operated on for both fractures and operative treatment was executed as early as the general condition of the patient permitted. Delay in treatment was generally because of the associated injuries (head, chest or abdominal). There were 22 males and 1 female patient with an average age of 34.5 years. Average follow-up was 30.9 months. There was one case of non-union of the femoral neck fracture, one case of avascular necrosis and one femoral neck fracture united in varus. There were four cases of non-union and six cases of delayed union of femoral shaft fractures. Mean time for union of the femoral neck fracture was 15 weeks and for the shaft fracture was 22 weeks. In this series femoral shaft fracture determined the total union period. Complications involving the femoral shaft fracture were more common than those related to femoral neck fractures. Shaft complications were more manageable with or without secondary procedures as compared to femoral neck complications, which usually require more extensive procedures. This stresses the need to realise the significance and seriousness of both components of this complex injury, in evaluation, management and post-operative care.
                  We conclude that, though technically demanding, reconstruction nail is an acceptable alternative for management of concomitant fractures of the femoral neck and shaft with acceptable rates of complications and good results.Ipsilateral fractures of the femoral neck and shaft are rare and are usually encountered in high-energy injuries. Many of these patients are polytrauma victims and once the initial concern of preservation of life is fulfilled, focus should change towards early management and rehabilitation of the patient. This paper reports our experience of managing 23 such cases, mainly by second-generation interlocking nail or reconstruction nail by a closed technique ( Between January 1998 and December 2001, we treated 250 patients with femoral shaft fractures, of which 23 sustained ipsilateral hip and femoral shaft fractures. The incidence of this complex injury was thus 8% (23/250) in our series. There were 22 males and 1 female patient ( There were 19 cases of intracapsular femoral neck fracture of which 2 were subcapital fractures, 7 were transcervical and 10 were basicervical. Both subcapital fractures were undisplaced (missed initially), but 9 of 17 fractures in the transcervical and basicervical group were displaced. There were four cases of simple, non-comminuted intertrochanteric fractures, which were displaced in three of the four cases. Femoral shaft fractures were more common in the middle-third (13/23), four being in proximal third (4/21) and five in distal third (5/21). There was one segmental femoral shaft fracture. There were four compound fractures—two cases of Types 1 and 2 of Type 2 (Gustilo Anderson). Comminution of the shaft fracture was categorised according to the Winquist and Hansen classification: there were three cases of grade 1; six cases of grade 2; six cases of grade 3; and seven cases of grade 4 ( Management of these injuries was strictly according to the ATLS Patients were permitted early non-weight bearing mobilisation with gradual range of motion exercises. Partial weight bearing was advised after 8 weeks. Full weight bearing was permitted only after appearance of bridging callus or clinical union. Quadriceps strengthening, and knee range of motion exercises were also encouraged. Patients were followed up monthly after suture removal for 6 months, bimonthly till 1 year and trimonthly after 1 year. Status of fracture healing and progress in recovery were recorded. Radiological follow-up for avascular necrosis was continued till a minimum of 1 year. Our average follow-up was 30.9 months (range 12–55 months). Femoral neck fracture was initially missed in two of our patients. It was diagnosed after intramedullary nailing was completed so these cases were then managed with “miss a nail” technique with two screws inserted in the head. In all other 21 cases, closed reconstruction nailing was performed. A single screw in the femoral head was inserted in 2 cases, two screws in the femoral head were used in 17 cases and three screws in the femoral head in 2 cases. Average operative time was 4 There was one non-union, three cases of delayed union (uniting around 10 months), and one case of aseptic necrosis showing early signs around 1 year. One fracture united in varus ( There were four cases of non-union of shaft femur, six cases of delayed union (uniting around 9 months), one case of infection and one case of implant failure (distal locking screw breakage). Overall limb shortening was <2.5 All healed hip fractures (except one with avascular necrosis) showed a good range of motion ( As this procedure has a learning curve, we faced several technical difficulties. Difficulty in establishing an accurate entry point for insertion of the nail was encountered in two cases. The entry point in these cases was in continuity with the fracture of the neck, leading to an anteromedial exit of the guide wire. Anatomical reduction of the femoral neck fracture was not satisfactorily achieved in two cases. Distraction of the proximal femoral fracture at nail insertion occurred in two cases. In two cases, misdirection of the proximal locking screws occurred, once anterior and once posterior ( There were two cases of deep vein thrombosis occurring within 2 weeks following surgery. There was one infection, which required debridement and intravenous antibiotics for 2 weeks. A review of literature shows that nearly every method, device and their combinations have been used for management of this complex injury but no large series has reported the results utilising a single treatment modality or protocol. Incidence of this injury pattern appears to be on the rise; it is 8% in our series as compared to 2.5–6% reported in the literature. This complex injury pattern shows a high incidence of associated ipsilateral knee injuries especially patellar fractures and ligamentous injuries. Concomitant hip fractures in our series were usually undisplaced or minimally displaced and shaft fractures were usually unstable as per the particular mechanism of these injuries. The incidence of displaced proximal fractures (12/23) is also consistent to that reported in other series. There was only one case of non-union of a femoral neck fracture probably due to inadequate reduction of the fracture. The authors feel that inaccurate reduction rather than delayed fixation is responsible for non-union. There was only one case of avascular necrosis ( The average time for femoral neck union was from 14 to 42 weeks (average 15 weeks) and the femoral shaft united in 16–36 weeks (average 22 weeks) which is consistent with that reported in other series. In our study the femoral shaft fracture determined the total union period, overall outcome and also the major share of complications. The three major issues related to these fractures are—optimal timing of surgery, which fracture to be stabilised first and optimal implant to be used. In our experience, early fixation allows optimal intensive care, decreases morbidity and mortality, reduces complications of traction and recumbency and decreases health care costs. Though there is confusion regarding which fracture should be managed first Reconstruction nail uses the advantage of both ideologies, i.e. stabilising the hip fracture and shaft fracture simultaneously and fixing them at the same time. As regards to the technique of reconstruction nailing, we have used the following protocol. After anaesthesia, the patient is placed supine on the fracture table. The proximal fracture is aligned using the maneuver of traction, abduction and internal rotation, and confirmed under the C-arm. After making the entry point at the tip of the greater trochanter, the guide wire is inserted and progressed to negotiate the shaft fracture. Once the shaft fracture is reduced and reamed, the recon nail is inserted and is followed by fixation of the femoral neck by proximal screws and lastly the nail is locked distally. The authors noted that substantial internal rotation has to be performed in order to reduce the hip fracture as anatomically as possible There is no optimal implant described for this complex injury. Various methods of fixation do not seem to alter the final outcome. The authors conclude that reconstruction nail is an acceptable implant for this combination of injury since both fractures could be reduced closed and fixed by a single technique. It provides optimal stability in these double fractures, controls angulation, shortening and rotation of femoral shaft and allows compression and impaction at the hip fracture site. With few complications, which can be minimised, it achieves the goal of anatomical reduction and stable fixation in this complex injury pattern.