Lignite is well known for its hard-to-float property. Many surfactants, including anionic, cationic and non-ionic have been applied to improve the floatation efficiency. In this work, cationic dodecylamine was applied to pretreat the lignite samples with different densities, which are −1.45 g/cm3, 1.45–1.80 g/cm3 and +1.80 g/cm3. The surface charged properties of the raw samples were determined by a zeta potential analyzer. The adsorption performance was characterized by XPS and UV/VIS spectrophotometer methods. From the surface zeta-potential results, three curves of zeta-potential figures versus pH value are similar to each other qualitatively in the pH range 5–8, which indicates that the organic structure has the similar ionization/ protonation ability with inorganic minerals at neutral pH. The negatively charged surfaces attract the cationic dodecylamine molecules at neutral pH for the three density fractions, which is shown by the XPS narrow sweep of heteroatom nitrogen before and after the pretreatment process. On the lignite surface, nitrogen was mainly existed in two forms of pyrrolic and quaternary. After the pretreatment, the quaternary-N peak was increased on the lignite surface due to the adsorption of dodecylamine molecules, especially on the surface of the highest density fraction. Correspondingly, UV/VIS spectrophotometer results showed that the adsorption amounts of dodecylamine molecules were 11.4, 18.7 and 20.0 mg/g on the surface of the samples from low to high density. On the other hand, the flotation result showed that more high ash particles and some low ash ones were both floated with the increase of dodecylamine dosage. Hence, if dodecylamine is to be used in lignite flotation, reagents should be added to selectively depress the adsorption process of cationic dodecylamine on the low or high ash particles.Froth flotation has been applied to separate the organic fraction of fine coals (<500 μm) from mineral fraction for a long time. However, lignite is known for its strong hydrophilicity and hard-to-float property In addition, surfactants have also been applied to adsorb on the hydrophilic sites on the lignite surface to cover the hydrophilic oxygen-functional groups to alter its hydrophilicity. For example, non-ionic surfactants are found to be adsorbed on the hard-to-float coal surface, lignite or oxidized coal, before the flotation process so that the floatability of the organic matter can be improved In this paper, dodecylamine was applied to pretreat the lignite samples with different densities, including −1.45 g/cm The lignite sample was obtained from Inner Mongolia Province, China. Fine fraction (−0.5 mm) was separated in mixed organic liquids, which are benzene, carbon tetrachloride and tribromethane, with densities of 1.45 and 1.8 g/cm The three density lignite samples were analyzed by XRD to determine the phase compositions, using Bruker D8 Advance XRD with a copper anode at 40 kV. The X-ray intensities were measured in the range of 3° ≤ 2θ ≤ 70° with a step size of 0.019° 2θ. The resulting diffractograms were further smoothened and analyzed using MDI Jade 6 software. The three coal samples were further ground to −2 μm under double distilled water in an agate mortar. The dilute suspension of the ground coal particles (−2 μm) was extracted after 2 h sedimentation to measure the Zeta-potential versus pH value. Zeta potential of the fine coal particles was measured with a Zetaplus Zeta analyzer, Brookhaven Company, USA. The pH of the suspension was adjusted by the addition of hydrochloric acid/sodium hydroxide. All of the pH determinations were made by using a digital pH-meter. Each sample was tested 5 times to achieve an average value. The three raw coal samples (−0.5 mm) were pretreated by dodecylamine solutions (0.1% mass ratio) in neutral condition. 25 cm The surface properties of raw and the pretreated coals were measured by XPS. The XPS experiments were carried out at room temperature in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) system with the surface analysis system (ESCALAB250 Xi, USA). Before the data analysis, the binding energies were calibrated by taking the C1s peak energy as 284.8 eV. The data processing (peak fitting) was performed with the XPS peak fit software, using a Shirley type background subtraction and Gaussian/Lorentzian peak shapes. Flotation test was performed in a flotation cell of 1 L with 1200 r/min rotating speed. The slurry concentration was about 70 g/L. After 1 min wetting process, the dodecylamine solutions (0.1% mass ratio) were added to the coal slurry, which was conditioned for 5 min before adding the collector kerosene. The slurry was stirred for another 2 min continuously. Then the frother octanol was added to the slurry, which was then stirred for 10 s before the air was pumped in. Finally, the concentrate and tailing sample were filtered, dried and weighed. The dosage of the collector and frother were 950 and 200 g/t constantly. The effect of dodecylamine dosage on the flotation efficiency was investigated at 600, 700, 800, 900, and 1000 g/t level in the flotation test.   Zeta-potential versus pH curves for the three density lignite samples are given in The surface charge on lower and higher density lignite is induced by ionization or protonation of the surface functional groups in the presence of electrolytes. The XRD results imply that the zeta-potential of the lowest density fraction is controlled by the organic component, while that of the densest fraction is principally dependent on the mineral content, including quartz and gypsum. Here the average surface charged properties of the three density fractions were considered. Generally, variation of the zeta-potential with pH of the suspensions illustrates the potential determining behavior of hydronium and hydroxyl ions. On the lignite surface, ionisable groups are mainly hydroxy and carboxyl groups     From the adsorption amount experiments, the adsorbed dodecylamine molecules on the surfaces were 11.4, 18.7 and 20.0 mg/g (error: ±0.1 mg/g) for the three fractions from low to high density. This phenomenon is similar to that observed for CTAB molecules, which are adsorbed more on the surface of the raw lignite than on that of demineralized lignite  This research is focused on the adsorption performance of cationic surfactant, dodecylamine, on the surface of the lignite fractions with different densities, including −1.45 g/cm This work was supported by the