Rock stress determination with overcoring techniques such as the CSIR triaxial cell, CSIRO hollow inclusion or SSPB’s Borre Probe require in situ recovered strains at a circular pilot hole wall caused by stress relief to be converted into stresses by using the deformability parameters at the measuring point. Ideally, these parameters are obtained by reloading the recovered overcore to which the strain sensing cell is attached, assuming the stress and strain fields match the theoretical distribution one would find in an isotropic linear-elastic homogeneous thick-walled cylinder. The paper focuses on the influence that some of these assumptions have on the determination of the deformability parameters and consequently on the in situ stress tensor obtained with the CSIR triaxial cell. Stochastic numerical analyses are performed using the software FLAC3D to obtain the recovered strains under the CSIR triaxial cell strain gauges for different far-field stress tensors in continuous rock with varying degrees of heterogeneity in terms of elastic moduli. For each applied stress tensor, the overcore reloading process is numerically simulated and the deformability parameters are calculated by using three different approaches. One of these, called the LA method, assumes that the rock material under each strain gauge rosette can show a local anisotropy, while the thick rock cylinder is considered globally isotropic. The influence of these approaches on the calculated stress tensors are analysed by comparing their magnitudes and orientations to those applied to the model boundaries and by evaluating the scatter of the results obtained with each approach. It is shown that the LA method lends much more accurate principal stress orientations and much less scatter for both orientations and magnitudes.Overcoring stress measurements are based on the recovery principle by which the elastic strains measured during the in situ stress relief process can be used to calculate the in situ stress tensor, provided that the deformability parameters at the measuring point are known. Overcoring probes based on the measurement of strains at the wall of a pilot borehole, such as the CSIR and CSIRO triaxial cells or the Borre Probe, measure strains in more than six directions, and the stress calculation method can take advantage of this redundancy. The ISRM suggested method for stress estimation by overcoring techniques Differences in bonding quality or equipment performance from one rosette to the other constitute extrinsic factors. Their influence on the quality of the measurements can be minimised by carefully planning and executing the stress measurements. Assume that one strain gauge rosette is partially bonded and only transfers 50% of the actual strains recovered in the field to the strain gauges. Upon reloading, only 50% of the strains are read and result in a twofold overestimation of the local Young’s modulus Intrinsic factors, however, cannot be avoided. Heterogeneous and/or anisotropic behaviour either at the strain measurement scale or at the overcore scale are examples of intrinsic factors that will affect the measured strains and consequently the estimated stresses. It will be shown that in heterogeneous rocks, considering local deformability parameters (under each rosette) might lead to a better estimation of the in situ stress field with much less scatter than the conventional approach, which uses average deformability parameters to be consistent with the hypothesis of rock homogeneity. As for heterogeneity, anisotropy may be present at different scales. If anisotropy is clearly present at a scale comparable to the recovered cylinder, a solution for taking this anisotropy into consideration has been proposed by Amadei Many researchers have dealt with problems related to heterogeneous media and most of the work done involves finding macro-properties (mechanical, thermal, and electrical) from the knowledge of the micro-properties such as the volume, shape, spatial distribution and properties of the micro-constituents In this paper, a similar approach is adopted but extended to 3D. To begin with, a numerical model of an overcore having an outer radius of 32 This first method is called The average Young modulus The average Poisson’s ratio Back-calculating the local axial stresses This second method is called Local Isotropic or From these parameters, the local stresses can be back calculated and they will obviously be equal to This equality results from the fact the same strains are used twice and they simplify. The local Poisson’s ratios In this section, a comparison of the For this tangential stress With Let Statistically, Δ Looking at what is statistically observed in the stiffer and softer elements ( For the softer elements, with the From these four equations it is easy to demonstrate that in general In order to compare the average stress magnitudes given by the Similarly, using Eqs. With With the As a consequence, the terms On average, the bias on the principal stress mean orientations should be similar with the In demonstrating the differences between the Under these conditions, if the measured local strain state is non-isotropic, it is because the heterogeneous arrangement of the elements causes a local non-isotropic stress state. In other words, the stiffness of each element is non-isotropic because of the variable stiffness of the elements surrounding them. Since, by definition, the stiffness of each element is a combination of its geometry and deformability and of those of the other elements, this stiffness is independent of the loading conditions on the model. One way of considering this stiffness anisotropy would be to associate it to a local anisotropic stress–strain relationship through an appropriate constitutive law. Such a law is one that is simple enough to allow the determination of the parameters it requires yet complex enough to represent as well as possible the observed strains. Let [ With rosette With the boundary conditions generating an assumed isotropic plane stress state at the borehole wall, transverse anisotropy allows getting a perfect match between stresses and strains while the experimental procedure to obtain the independent elastic constants requires two different load types on the thick-walled cylinder. From the assumed local isotropic stress state, the orientation of the local anisotropic axis of symmetry may be determined using the principal strain directions and the local transverse anisotropic Young’s moduli may be calculated using the local major and minor principal strain intensities ( In the second test, the overcore is loaded only in the axial direction allowing the estimation of Poisson’s ratios under each strain gauge rosette Although other relationships have been published, Batugin and Nirenburg validated Eq. The The four strain gauge readings at the borehole wall for each rosette are reduced by least squares to three 2D strain tensors, which are then converted to three 2D plane stress tensors at the borehole wall by using the deformability parameters obtained as previously described for isotropic or transverse anisotropic media. One important difference with the approach suggested in this paper when compared to the ones found in the literature is that the least squares are applied to 2D stress states instead of a 3D strain tensor, allowing the use of "local" deformability parameters under each strain rosette. This procedure leads to a system of 9 equations (three local 2D plane stress states at the pilot hole wall) and 6 unknowns (the far-field stress tensor) which can be written as in Eq. For solving this system, the least-squares method is used. As already mentioned, the stress components at the borehole wall ( The sum of the least-squares errors is The minimum value of If By replacing Eq. Solving Eqs. Variance within a rosette, which may be obtained with the fourth gauge on each rosette, is not considered here. In all the calculations performed, a least-squares approach is used locally to take advantage of the presence of a fourth gauge in order to estimate the plane stress state under each rosette. Studying the influence of heterogeneity on the calculated stresses by using field data meets two major difficulties: first, the existing stress field is not known A series of analyses have been performed with FLAC The size of the heterogeneous volume of rock which extends beyond the size of the overcore, is chosen in such a way that considering homogeneous elements outside this zone does not change the strains at the pilot hole wall and allows the analyses to run much faster. To each of the three heterogeneous models, 24 far-field stress tensors have been applied to the outer boundaries, as indicated in The thick-walled cylinder shown by the dashed white lines on For each one of the seventy two numerical analyses performed, 10 stress measurements are simulated by taking the strains given at three locations (120° apart) on the borehole wall at 10 different locations along the hole ( From the groups of 10 measurements performed along the When evaluating the quality of experimental data, reference to accuracy and precision is often made. For the sake of concision in the presentation of the results, only six load cases have been chosen among the 24 available for presentation in the paper. In choosing two of the six cases, the authors selected them so they would favour more a given stress calculation method. Intuitively, the favourable load cases are the ones which replicate the most the stress ratios used for determining the deformability parameters. These are an isotropic biaxial stress state  In order to compare the principal stress scatter obtained from the three stress calculation methods, the graphs in Using lower hemisphere equal area polar projection, The results in the previous section represent an estimate of the possible range of stress magnitudes and orientations that can be obtained by using different stress calculation methods and also show the accuracy in estimating the actual mean stress tensor if measurements were performed a large number of times. In rock engineering projects, such an estimate is not possible since only a few stress measurements are performed in a volume of rock where one can assume the stress field to be relatively homogeneous. The least measurement number being one, the only available estimator for stress variability in this case becomes the stress variance between rosettes. It should be noted that the numerical models used for this paper only capture the influence of heterogeneity and the way it is considered in calculating the stresses through different approaches. In no way can the results presented here be used directly to estimate biases on principal stress magnitudes or orientations nor of their scatter around a mean value for actual field measurements. The main reasons are that in a rock mass, heterogeneity and anisotropy will exist at various scales with probability density functions that may differ from the Gaussian distribution chosen and may show an eventual spatial correlation. Also, the presence of fractures near the measurement points will tend to induce stress gradients which are not present at the boundaries of the numerical models. Moreover, the coupled effects of these characteristics linked to experimental errors may complicate matters even more, making a direct quantitative transposition of our results with actual field measurements unrealistic. In the analyses presented here, the strain gauge and grain sizes were chosen to be equal and it was assumed that the gauge covers exactly one grain in order to emphasize the effects of heterogeneity. In a more realistic scenario, each rosette could be bonded on more than one grain and the heterogeneity could affect each rosette differently. Another element that is simplified in the models used for this paper is that one boundary principal stress is always parallel to the pilot hole axis. Nonetheless, due to the heterogeneous nature of the models, the local 2D stresses did show non null shear stress components in the global reference system and as a consequence, the estimated principal 3D stress components are not always aligned with the principal applied stresses, which shows the suggested models can handle shear stresses. Consequently, until experimental results confirming the gain in precision for stress magnitudes and both precision and accuracy for stress orientations become available, the conclusions drawn from these analyses should be limited to comparing the relative performance of the three stress calculation methods in the presence of heterogeneity at a given constant scale. Nonetheless, due to the remarkable benefits that arise from the Although field measurements would not allow estimating the principal stress magnitude and orientation biases introduced by the various methods presented here because the true mean stress tensor used in Eq. The conclusions presented here also hold for all the analyses that were not presented in detail in the paper including the models with lower degrees of heterogeneity ( Improving the quality of stress estimation using the