The direct squeeze casting of B390 has been investigated as a function of melt temperature and applied pressure. Commercial finite volume method (FVM) computer code for heat transfer analysis, MAGMAsoft, was used to simulate cooling curves obtained from the direct squeeze casting process. The experimental and modeling results are discussed, and the correlation between cooling rate and microstructure is studied. The effects of applied pressures and melt temperature on the formation of primary Si and Chinese scripts are also discussed in connection with mechanical properties such as hardness and tensile strength.Considerable interest in replacing cast iron with Al alloys have been concentrated in automotive industry to improve energy efficiency and environmental requirements. Among various aluminum alloys, Al–Si alloys, especially hyper eutectic compositions (>12.6% Si) have been known to be suitable for use in wear resistant parts due to high strength and wear resistance as well as low thermal expansion coefficient The raw material used in the present study was an Al–Si alloy designated as B390. The compositions of the alloy are as follows: Cu, 4.25 Plunger type direct squeeze casting unit is used in this study. The unit consists of cylindrical type H13 tool steel die, crucible surrounded by induction coil, 30 The phosphorous content in the B390 alloy was fixed to 100 Each specimen was sectioned longitudinally at mid-width using a wheel cutter, ground by SiC papers and polished with 0.05 In order to calculate and validate experimental cooling rate results, commercial FVM package, MAGMAsoft were used. The geometries of the squeeze casting die and cast part are modeled with built in CAD modeler. After generating mesh, material properties shown in There are some important differences in the composition of the B390 alloy from that of A390 alloy. The silicon and copper concentration are within specified limits, but the manganese content is higher  The slower cooling rate in the billets which may cause shrinkage defect and segregation were generally observed in the central area. It took 60 However, the size of iron intermetallic compound, Chinese script seems to be greatly affected by solidification rate. The length of the Chinese script was decreased from 70   The optimum modification conditions using phosphorus have been obtained through a series of experiments. The most important factors to influence the refinement of primary Si particles were melt temperature and holding time. Fine primary Si particles ranging from 15 to 30