The high rate bio-oxidation of minerals in tanks has received a great deal of interest over the last decades. So far, aerated stirred tank reactors, which are common in the mining industry, have been used for these processes. However, as we are dealing with a biological system, it makes sense to apply reactor types that are especially designed for biotechnological applications. PAQUES has extensive experience with high rate biotechnology in reactors. The Circox® air-lift loop reactor was especially designed for biological processes and is characterised by high mass transfer rates and good mixing. At present, a full-scale sulphate-reducing reactor is running in which metals precipitation results in 20% solids concentration in the gas-lift reactor.
                  From in-house desk studies and experimental work carried out on pilot plant scale and full scale, it is concluded that the Circox® air-lift loop reactor is a viable alternative to stirred tank reactors for the bio-oxidation of minerals. The main advantages of the air-lift loop reactor over the conventional stirred tank reactor are lower capital and operational expenditures and the ease of scale-up.Biological oxidation for the pre-treatment of refractory sulphidic gold concentrates and the dissolution of copper have become established technologies. In addition to heap-leaching facilities for the bioleaching of copper, five tank bio-oxidation plants are operational for the pre-treatment of refractory sulphidic gold concentrates. The total capacity of tank bio-oxidation plants for the pre-treatment of gold concentrates has seen a steady increase since 1986 So far, aerated stirred tank reactors have been used for the tank bio-oxidation process. This traditional reactor type has seen a variety of modifications to make it suitable for bioleaching applications. Feasibility studies have shown that the most important cost components for such systems are mainly determined by the energy costs for oxygen transfer and the investment costs of the reactors In air-lift loop reactors, both mixing and suspension of solids is induced by aeration only. The reactor itself does not contain any moving parts in contact with the process water. In essence, the reactor is comprised of two vertical sections: the riser and the downcomer. Air is sparged at the bottom of the riser and the air bubbles move to the top of the reactor, where they can escape. The degassed process water will flow to the downcomer. As a consequence of the induced density difference, a circulatory flow will occur. A schematic representation of an air-lift loop reactor is shown in PAQUES has carried out mixing and mass transfer studies using Circox® reactors on pilot plant scale (5 m  In The results of K The major advantage of air-lift loop reactors over stirred tank reactors is that they can be constructed at much greater reactor volumes. Air-lift loop reactors can be built at volumes of several thousands cubic meters while stirred tank reactors can be scaled up to a maximum of 800–1500 m In Another advantage of air-lift loop reactors over stirred tank reactors is that the oxygen input efficiency is the same or better at considerably lower shear. Shear rates are significantly lower in air-lift loop reactors than in stirred tank reactors. These low shear rates facilitate growth of biofilms, which can increase the reaction rate. This advantage is thought to be greatest when thermophilic bacteria are used. Because a three-phase settler can be integrated on top of an air-lift loop reactor, the solids retention time can be separated from the hydraulic retention time. This not only enables biomass retention, metal concentrations in the liquid phase can be controlled independently of pulp density as well. In PAQUES has extensive experience with high rate bioreactors. More than 350 full-scale bioreactors are successful in operation all over the world. This includes a total of 80 air-lift loop and gas-lift loop reactors. The bioreactors are used for the anoxic and oxic removal of organic and inorganic (sulphur, nitrogen, metals) compounds from water. PAQUES' technologies are used in various industries including the mining and metallurgical field. The air-lift loop technology is marketed under the brand name CIRCOX®. Since 1987, a total of nine full-scale Circox® reactors has been commissioned successfully for the treatment of waste water. The gas-lift loop reactors are marketed under the brand name IC®. Since 1987, a total of 66 full-scale IC® reactors has been successfully brought on-line. The Thiopaq® sulphate reduction/metals removal technology is the main application of the Circox® reactors in the mining and metallurgical industry. The core of this technology consists of the biological conversion of sulphate to sulphide. The sulphide is used for metals precipitation. Excess sulphide is biologically oxidised to elemental sulphur whilst hydroxide is formed. Recirculation of the effluent from the bioreactors allows for the remediation of acid mine drainage without the addition of alkali or the production of bulky waste products. Both biological reactions take place in Circox® reactors. The anaerobic sulphate reduction is carried out with autotrophic bacteria with hydrogen as the electron donor. The transfer of hydrogen is effectuated in the gas-lift reactor. Air is blown into the second bioreactor so sulphide is oxidised to elemental sulphur. The latest plant incorporates metals precipitation and sulphide production in one reactor. The reactor is run at 20 wt.% MeS solids. Retention of solids and biomass in the reactor is effectuated by a settler that is located on top of the reactor. PAQUES BIO SYSTEMS has extensive experience with gas–liquid transfer in three phase bioreactors. The application of Circox® air-lift loop reactors in bioleaching would introduce a reactor type especially designed to optimise conditions for biological processes to the mining industry. From experimental work carried out on pilot plant scale as well as on full scale and a desk study, it is concluded that the Circox® reactor has many advantages over the conventional stirred tank reactor. The main advantages of a Circox® reactor over stirred tank reactors are lower capital and operational expenditures. Furthermore, solids like, e.g. ZnO (size: 0–250 μm; density: 4000 kg/m Application of the Circox® air-lift loop reactor can make bio-tank technology for the bio-oxidation of minerals more competitive.