A computational chemistry study was conducted to reveal similarities and differences in the adsorption of molecular oxygen on the edge sites of a carbon nanotube (CNT) and a graphene nanoribbon. Two prototypical CNT molecules with a carbene and a carbyne active site were selected, and this in turn defined two corresponding graphene molecules obtained by CNT unzipping. Their electronic and thermochemical properties before and after O2 adsorption were compared using density functional theory at the B3LYP/3-21G∗ level, as implemented in the Gaussian03 software. The sensitivity of the results to the basis set used and the selected CNT diameter was also assessed. Despite significant curvature in a subnanometer-diameter CNT, more similarities than differences were revealed with respect to graphene, both in their charge density distributions and thermochemical properties. Contrary to intuitive expectations, the intrinsic activity of an edge site (at least in the prototypical O2 chemisorption process) is therefore not significantly modified when graphene is rolled up into a nanotube possessing a relatively large degree of pyramidalization. Greater differences exist between armchair and zigzag edges in both CNT and graphene. Both undergo a two-step mechanism of O2 adsorption, but O2 dissociates only on the armchair edge. Non-dissociative adsorption on an isolated zigzag site has both a lower affinity and a higher activation energy than the dissociative adsorption on the armchair site.The discovery of fullerenes The electronic properties of both carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and of a single graphite sheet (graphene) have been the object of close scrutiny over the past two decades and beyond, and a voluminous literature is available Interactions of O It is perhaps not surprising that much of the explosive growth in graphene research, especially by the ‘physics’-oriented community, has led to confirmations (or rather ‘rediscoveries’) of many well established facts about O The present study is offered as a contribution toward this goal, and it follows up on a number of both experimental and theoretical studies of the same issue The analysis of electronic and thermochemical properties of prototypical graphene and CNT molecules was performed using the Gaussian03 program   The Mulliken population analysis distinguishes clearly between basal-plane and edge sites in all cases A comment is in order here regarding ‘chemical’ vs. ‘physical’ distinction between a graphene nanoribbon and a CNT. The latter has been clearly summarized by Dresselhaus et al.  The hardness of the armchair CNT is lower than that of its graphene counterpart; since both are singlet ground states, this suggests that the carbyne site in the nanotube is more reactive than in graphene. The same argument applies to HOMO level differences, 0.69 As expected, when an H atom is removed from benzene or a quinone group is added, the ground state changes and the hardness decreases. The case of C  The high negative values of the thermodynamic parameters shown in As mentioned above, the transition state search in the non-dissociative adsorption stage did not produce a reasonable intermediate structure with one imaginary frequency. Structure TS1 in the second stage was verified by an IRC calculation. The imaginary frequencies (i604.8   The kinetic parameters summarized in The spin pairing and spin conservation issues during adsorption are of great interest here because, of course, the ground state of O In order to verify the generality of the findings reported in the previous sections, we studied the O The actual CNT diameter is in most cases larger than its nominal value (compare For the study of basis set effects, we selected nanotubes C When a zigzag graphene sheet is rolled into a carbon nanotube, a change in the ground state of the carbene active site can occur, from triplet to singlet, in contrast to what is observed with its armchair counterpart. The spin multiplicity of the carbyne-site-containing nanotube remains the same (singlet) as its diameter varies from 0.40 Chemisorption of O Financial support was provided by FONDECYT project 1080334 and CONICYT project PFB-27. Access to the computational facilities of Penn State’s Materials Simulation Center (J.O. Sofo, director) is gratefully acknowledged. The willingness of Rafael González and Prof. Andrés Mejía to help resolve some of the technical problems that AST encountered in the use of the computational facilities at DIQ-UdeC is much appreciated. An insightful comment of a reviewer helped us improve a key argument in the final version of the paper. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 