The history of the biomedical recognition manganese-caused neurotoxicity mirrors changing technologies as much as it does the ontology of parkinsonism. The initial 1837 report of manganese-induced neurologic injury was made by John Couper, a university-based physician in Scotland. He made clear that the outbreak occurred among workers at the Charles Tennant bleach manufactory in the environs of Glasgow. The relatively new technology of chlorine generation using manganese accounted for the novel exposure involved. At the time, this factory was the largest hypochlorite bleaching powder producer in the world. As the 19th century progressed, technological change in steel fabrication requiring higher manganese content greatly increased demand for the metal. Nonetheless, more than six decades elapsed before the next reports of manganese neurotoxicity emerged. Two unrelated outbreaks (both on Continental Europe) were reported within weeks of each other in 1901, one by von Jaksch and the other by Embden. All the cases were heavily exposed to manganese-containing dust. By the eve of the First World War, a total of 9 patients with manganese-caused neurologic illness had been reported in five separate Continental European publications. Meanwhile, new technology led to another exposure source. Magnetic separation techniques allowed the extraction of zinc from mixed ore also containing iron and manganese, leading to exploitation of a unique source of high manganese-content ore found in New Jersey. Not long after that technology’s introduction, in 1912 Casamajor reported the first U.S. cases of manganism, detailing classic findings. Additional cases from the same cohort were reported a few years later, with continued exposure driven by First World War-driven demand for manganese to be used in armaments. The nosology of chronic manganese neurotoxicity remained in flux, with considerable emphasis on shared attributes with Wilson’s disease, a syndrome only then recently described. A landmark 1924 primate study by Mella showed manganese-induced basal ganglion damage; human autopsy study data in the years following further supported the view that manganese toxicity represented a parkinsonian syndrome. As the 1937 centenary of Couper’s first report approached, newer technologies (electric arc welding and battery making) were being linked to manganese-caused disease, even as mineral extraction was expanding as a global source of exposure.Examination of the early history of manganese, and in particular the emerging recognition of its potential to harm the human nervous system, provides useful insights into the scientific and public policy debates surrounding this toxicant in our own times. The key role that changing technologies have played over time in driving worker exposure to manganese is central to this history. The goal of this review is to analyze the first one hundred years of the biomedical recognition of manganese associated neurotoxicity, from the 1837 to 1937, contextualizing reports of adverse health-related effects within emerging technologies and expanding occupational exposure scenarios. Mineral manganese has been used since antiquity in various human artisanal manufacturing endeavors, in pigments, glazes, and, most importantly, in glassmaking. In this early period, there was no clear understanding of what precisely characterized this “black mineral substance.” Indeed, well into the seventeenth century there was confusion between the identification and properties of manganese and magnesium. By the mid-eighteenth century, early experimental chemists began to appreciate that manganese was something distinct. For example, a 1755 comment in the poplar publication, The role of manganese rapidly changed due to the discovery of chlorine and the appreciation of its potential applications in industrial-scale bleaching. In 1774, the Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele described how he had produced a potently acrid gas when he reacted “pyrolusite” (mineral manganese dioxide) with hydrochloric acid. ( A decade later, Berthollet in France proposed that chlorine had properties that might make it a useful bleaching agent. But Scheele’s gas proved difficult to control both in its bleaching action and in its irritant effects when inhaled inadvertently by those attempting to use it. But by the cusp of the nineteenth century, an effective alternative formulation, chlorine-based hypochlorite bleaching powder, was commercially introduced. This product helped revolutionize textile bleaching, changing a lengthy, labor intensive process into a rapid, and efficient undertaking. Manganese, key to Scheele’s isolation of chlorine, emerged as the principal industrial chemical process intermediate in the manufacture of hypochlorite bleaching powder ( The timing of this chemical manufacturing advance coincided with the rapid industrialization of textile spinning and weaving that formed a cornerstone of the Industrial Revolution. This was a very big business indeed and, through bleaching, manganese became a key player in it. As textile bleaching was taking off in the first decades of the nineteenth century, the largest bleach manufactory in Great Britain, and therefore the largest in world, was that of Charles Tennant (the patent holder for hypochlorite bleaching powder), located at St. Rollox, Glasgow, Scotland ( Tennant had several partners in this highly lucrative bleaching business, one of whom was a physician named William Couper. The relationship between the Tennant and Couper families transcended this successful business partnership and ultimately, it underpinned the initial recognition of manganese’s potential for human harm. One of Couper’s sons followed him into medicine: John Couper (born 1794) became a surgeon at Glasgow Royal Infirmary in 1824 and later, in 1833, was appointed Professor of Materia Medica at the University of Glasgow ( In 1828, a previously health young man grinding manganese at the factory was observed by Couper to “exhibit symptoms of paraplegia. The loss of power in the lower limbs was first so slight, that, though perceptible to bystanders, it was scarcely observed…but it slowly increased, till at the end of some months he was forced to quit his work.”( John Couper published his findings early in 1837 in a landmark article titled “On the Effects of Black Oxide of Manganese when Inhaled into the Lungs.” Remarkably, Couper was entirely forthcoming in pinpointing the industrial point source of the outbreak, despite or perhaps because of the familiar connection: “In the chemical works of Charles Tennant and Co., a considerable number of men are in employed in grinding the black oxide of manganese, to be employed in the manufacture of bleaching powder. The surface of their bodies is of course constantly covered with the manganese, the air which they breathe is loaded with it in the form of a fine powder, and they are ever exposed, from neglect of cleanliness, to swallow portions of it along with their food ( Couper concludes his brief report (less than two pages in printed length) with a plea for vigilance and active prevention on the part of colleagues who might encounter similar illness: “These cases also show that the disease produced by manganese, like other varieties of metallic paralysis, is, when fully developed, a very permanent and intractable affection; and that, therefore, the attention of medical practitioners, and of persons who have occasion to use manganese in large quantities, should be directed chiefly to the necessity of arresting the progress of the disease, by removing its cause as soon as the first symptoms make their appearance...It is almost unnecessary to remark, that the black oxide of manganese used in the arts contains no metallic impurity except a little iron. The poisonous action, therefore, must be attributed to the manganese itself ( Couper’s paper achieved immediate and wide recognition. In the year of its initial publication not only was the work reprinted in the “Quarterly Periscope” section of the Although Couper was confident in attributing to manganese the causal role in the neurologic illness that he had characterized, he did not attempt to apply a defining nosology to the affliction described. John Parkinson’s Manganese remained linked to industrial chlorine production until the invention of electrolytic techniques late in the ninteenth century. Manganese also continued to be commercially important in glass manufacturing and as an industrial pigment. We even have contemporaneous documentation of the marketplace role of manganese through its cameo role in George Eliot's novel Shortly after Manganese bronze, though, was merely a harbinger of what would prove to be a far more dominant manganese utilizing alloy technology. The key technologic innovation came about thanks to a young industrial inventor from Sheffield named Robert Hadfield ( Despite established and novel commercial applications of manganese, from the time of Couper’s 1837 report there was a six decade hiatus in the appearance of any biomedical publication documenting a similar pattern of neurologic illness in manganese-exposed workers. A report of a cluster of neurologic disease among zinc smelter workers in Silesia in the mid-1870s has been occasionally invoked as an unrecognized (at the time) cluster of manganese-caused illness, but the there is little to support this interpretation ( All seven cases reported by both Emden and von Jaksch had been exposed heavily to manganese dust and manifested neurologic complaints consistent with those reported by Couper so many decades before. In this simultaneous rediscovery of manganese-caused illness, Embden actually takes precedence, given that he alone correctly attributed the cause of the ailment to manganese and refers to Couper’s work in the very first sentence of his report ( The center of biomedical investigation was about to shift from Europe to the United States, a move attributable to the confluence of a novel technology, unique geological circumstances, and a newly emerging American expertise in industrial toxicology. On Tuesday September 24, 1912 Dr. Louis Casamajor (“chief of clinic” at the New York Neurological Institute, founded only a few years before in 1909 and associated with Columbia University ( One case did come to autopsy, but gross findings only could be reported, as the material had not yet been assessed microscopically at the time of the paper. Casamajor cites Embden, highlighting the similarity between the latter’s clinical description and his own cases. But Casamajor mentioned neither Couper nor von Jaksch. Casamajor states that, “This is a definite pathologic condition, recognizable by a definite symptom complex” yet, despite comparing the mask-like facies to that of paralysis agitans, he refrains from any applying a nosologic label and concludes of the syndrome that, “It cannot be placed under the heading of any known central nervous system disease ( Whatever questions regarding nosology he may have had, Casamajor was very clear that mineral dust, generated through a magnetic separation process was the culprit: “… the air which the workmen breathe is laden with a very fine gray dust. In this mineral fog the men work in long shifts, and at the end of their day they are thickly coated with dust ( Key to the outbreak was the magnetic separation technology highlighted in the report. This permits, in retrospect, precise location of the milling operation in which these workers were exposed. Not very many years before, this magnetic separation technique initially was introduced, allowing zinc extraction from mixed ore also containing manganese. This technology allowed the commercial exploitation of high content zinc ore (Willemite) geologically admixed with another mineral oxide of zinc, iron and manganese (Franklinite). This combination was unique to the “Franklin Furnace” deposit in New Jersey, exploited by a single enterprise, the New Jersey Zinc Company. Zinc was the principal commodity of interest, but manganese-laden dust was a substantial manufacturing byproduct as manganese became an increasingly important commodity in its own right ( Casamajor’s Within six months, Casamajor published his original Congress paper, with only minor edits, in the By the time that As part of that ramping up, the situation for the manganese workers of the New Jersey Zinc Company at Franklin Furnace went from bad to worse. This is well documented in two interrelated papers from 1919 that, when read as a pair, provide a fairly complete picture of an ongoing epidemic of manganism that had continued unabated since Casamajor’s original report. As the first paper notes, “It has been our good fortune to examine all the cases seen by Casamajor with two exceptions, and to these we have been able to add examinations of thirty other cases in various stages of disease ( David Edsall and Cecil Drinker were co-authors on both papers, but their connection to what had originally been Casamajor’s cohort is not stated in either publication. Edsall and Drinker were key academicians in Harvard Medical School’s newly established industrial hygiene unit (later the core of its School of Public Health). Their first paper appeared in a festschrift for Sir William Osler; the second was published later that same year in the inaugural volume of the Edsall and Drinker were particularly interested in the nosological characterization of manganese neurotoxicity. Their thinking on the subject was greatly influenced by a the then fairly recent report by S.A. Kinnier Wilson of a newly characterized disease “progressive lenticular degeneration,” later named Wilson’s Disease in recognition of its original observer. Edsall and Drinker were aware that the disease Kinnier Wilson had described was familiar, attacked persons in adolescence, included associated cirrhosis, and had a fairly rapid downhill course, very much unlike manganism in each of those attributes. In addition, the role that a toxic metal might play in the condition of Wilson’s disease (copper) was not suspected at that time. Nonetheless, it was certainly reasonable to consider this novel condition as a potential model from which insights into manganese toxicity might be gained, and attention to this point had already called for in a report on a case of progressive lenticular degeneration made by a German physician as early as 1913 ( What is striking in the discussion by Edsall and Drinker featured in the Osler collection, however, is their failure also to raise the clinical similarities manganism and paralysis agitans, although later they did acknowledge this in the second of their two papers ( Late in 1921, a report published in Drinker’s Thus, up until 1922 manganese poisoning, although appreciated as a distinct symptom complex, was not conceptualized as a toxic variant of paralysis agitans. In that context, the February 13, 1922 staff clinical meeting of the “Nerve Department” of Massachusetts General Hospital is all the more remarkable. After an initial discussion on epilepsy, “Dr. Hugo Mella next spoke on the Parkinsonian Syndrome.” Mella, a neurology trainee, noted that “It is frequently impossible to determine the etiology, but it may follow on manganese poisoning in glass, glazed brick and bronze workers… ( Even by the time of the 1922 clinical staff meeting, Mella already had initiated an eighteen-month long experimental protocol (beginning in August 1921) in which he administered intraperitoneal injections of manganese to macaque monkeys. The results of this landmark study were published in 1924. The impetus for this line of investigation is stated clearly by Mella: “It was my aim to produce, experimentally, symptoms like those of paralysis agitans. Focal injuries having failed to do this, it was thought that diffuse lesions might be produced by special poisons administered to monkeys. . In attacking the problem at this point the report by Edsall, Wilbur, and Drinker that workmen employed in an atmosphere containing manganese dust frequently develop symptoms similar in many respects to those of the parkinsonian syndrome, seemed to give such a hopeful lead that is was deemed worth while (sic) to try manganese intoxication of monkeys ( The findings of Mella’s non-human primate research mark a turning point in the biomedical understanding of chronic manganese intoxication. He was able to show that he could produce in monkeys a movement disorder whose manifestations “simulate those of human cases now considered to be due to disturbances of the basal ganglion” and that pathological correlations in those centers of the brain were evident in the experimental animals ( Casamajor’s descriptive summary of his autopsy case notwithstanding, there was a paucity of human neuropathological data. In 1927, three years after Mella’s experimental study, however, Rokuro Ashizawa (from the Imperial University of Tokyo) published very detailed microscopic pathologic findings of brain sections from a 33 In 1929, another confirmatory experimental animal study, this time using a dog model, was published by a leading neuropathologist from the Soviet Union, Alexander M. Grinshtein ( Just as the pathology of manganese poisoning was finally being nailed down, new technologies leading to exposure continued to emerge. In 1932, a German occupational medicine physician named Erich Beintker published the first report of manganese associated neurological illness associated with electric arc welding ( Meanwhile, the geography of manganese poisoning still was expanding, moving outward from Europe, the United States, and Japan as worldwide exploitation of manganese deposits presented potential sources of profit. One of the very first such toxic hotspots coming to medical attention was the British Sinai Mining Company. In reporting 11 cases from the mine in 1936, it was noted that “The nature of their work was to drill holes 1/2 The timeline of manganese from a technological and toxicological perspective through 1936 is summarized in