Background
                  Treatment options for nonunion of the femoral shaft fracture after intramedullary nail fixation are controversial. The methods of exchanging an existing nail with a larger-sized nail, dynamization, removal of the nail followed by plating, and bone grafting have all been reported. From those options, exchange nailing seems to be the most popular choice. In our study, we used plate augmentation and bone grafting with retention of the nail. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the effectiveness of this method in treating femoral shaft nonunion after open reduction and internal fixation with intramedullary nail fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  Between January 2003 and December 2009, 22 patients who had nonunion after open reduction and internal fixation with intramedullary nail for femoral shaft fracture were included in our study. There were 13 men and nine women participants, with a mean age of 34.3 years (range, 17–77 years). The mean period of nonunion after surgery was 20.0 months (range, 7–63 months). The patients were classified into three groups, atrophic, oligotrophic, and hypertrophic. We retained the nail and performed plate augmentation for all patients, with simultaneous autologous bone grafting as indicated. We followed up on all patients with plain film examination, and to assess functional recovery status to determine osseous union condition.
               
                  Results
                  All 22 of the patients achieved postoperative bony union uneventfully at a mean time of 22.1 weeks (range, 12–40 weeks). The mean operative time was 105 minutes (range, 60–150 minutes), and the mean blood loss was 340 ml (range, 150–700 ml). All of the patients could walk bearing full weight without pain within 3 months. There were no significant complications such as broken hardware, implant back-out, axial or rotational malalignment, or deep infections.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Plate augmentation with retention of the nail with autologous bone grafting may be an effective and reliable alternative in treating nonunion of the femoral shaft fracture after open reduction and internal fixation with intramedullary nail.Femoral shaft fractures occur most frequently in young men after high-impact trauma, and in elderly women after a low energy fall. The standard treatment is closed reduction with intramedullary nailing, which can achieve a high union rate of almost 99%. Femoral shaft nonunion after intramedullary nailing is not common. There are several strategies used to treat such a condition, depending on the nature of the nonunion. Exchange nailing with a larger-sized intramedullary nail, dynamization, removal of nail followed by plating, bone grafting, and plate augmentation have all been reported. There were 22 patients included in our study, which extended from January 2003 to December 2009. We obtained informed consent from each patient, and our institutional ethics committee approved the study. All patients had sustained unilateral femoral shaft fracture, and they presented with a nonunion fracture site after initial stabilization surgery. Thereafter, all patients had received open reduction for the fracture site and internal fixation with intramedullary nail before visiting our facility. There were 13 men and nine women in our study, with a mean age of 34.3 years (range, 17–77 years). Femoral shaft fractures in 21 of the patients resulted from traffic accidents, and all of the fractures were closed fractures. The different types of comminution were graded using the Winquist-Hansen classification, which revealed eight cases of type 1, four of type 2, five of type 3, and four of type 4. The other case involved periprosthetic fracture of the femoral shaft after long Gamma nailing treatment. Fracture site locations included five patients with fracture in the upper third of the shaft, 12 patients with a middle-third fracture, and five patients with fracture in the lower one-third of the femoral shaft. Of those 22 fractures, nine were hypertrophic nonunion, seven were oligotrophic, and six had atrophic fracture non-union. Sixteen patients had undergone intramedullary nailing with proximal and distal screws locked ( The femoral shaft was defined as the portion of the femoral diaphysis between 5 The intramedullary nail was retained for all patients. We used a direct lateral approach to explore the nonunion site of the femoral shaft. The incision wound follows the previous surgical scar should the patient have had open reduction in the initial surgery. One 4.5-mm, AO broad dynamic compression plate was applied to augment the fracture site, followed by routine decortication procedure. We inserted at least four cortical screws on each side of the fracture, in an eccentric way to avoid the retained intramedullary nail. They were inserted bicortically if possible. Furthermore, dynamic compression is not required in plate application, since we planned to fill the fracture gap by autogenous bone graft. In patients with hypertrophic nonunions, the hyperplastic callus was shaved to flatten the cortical surface, and we recycled them to fill the nonunion defect site. For patients with atrophic or oligotrophic nonunion, we harvested autologous bone graft from the anterior superior iliac crest to fill in the fracture site. All patients were allowed to partially bear weight on the operated leg immediately after surgery. We followed all patients on an outpatient basis, at an interval of 6 weeks. We evaluated the bony union status according to the femur bone roentgenogram. Bony union was defined as the callus bridging of the fracture site of more than three-fourths on both views of the plain radiograph (anteroposterior and lateral views). These patients achieved bony union in a mean time of 22.1 weeks (range, 12–40 weeks), and evident callus formation was seen roentgenographically at a mean time of 10.5 weeks (range, 6–24 weeks). The mean operative time was 105 minutes (range, 60–150 minutes), and the mean blood loss was 340 ml (range, 150–700 ml). Significant callus formation was noticed at a mean time of 8.2 ± 0.8 weeks (range, 6–12 weeks) in patients with hypertrophic nonunions compared with 10.0 ± 0.7 weeks (range, 8–12 weeks) in those with atrophic nonunions and 13.7 ± 3.0 weeks (range, 6–24 weeks) in those with oligotrophic nonunions ( The AO broad dynamic compression plate (at least an 8-hole) was used for fixation to the fractures, and the mean number of fixed cortical screws was 9.0 (range, 8–11). Bone graft material harvested from the anterior superior iliac crest was required, to fill the nonunion sites in 13 patients with atrophic or oligotrophic nonunion types, but was not required in the other nine patients with hypertrophic nonunion, instead the nonunion sites were filled with the scraped hyperplastic callus. There were no significant postoperative complications such as infection, broken hardware, implant back-out, or axial or rotational malalignment more than 5°. The range of knee and hip motion was not limited in any of the patients postoperatively. All patients were able to walk bearing full weight without pain within 3 months postoperatively. Smith and Morgan To enhance fixation stability, exchange nailing with a larger-sized nail Of the three options mentioned, exchange nailing with a larger-sized nail to achieve adequate stability is the treatment of choice for hypertrophic nonunion of femoral shaft fracture. This method can result in high union rates of 78% to 96%, as reported by Forlong and colleagues and Hak and coauthors. Dynamization is a simple treatment method and can be performed under local anaesthesia. However, Wu and colleagues Bellabarba and colleagues Choi and Kim Such a procedure would still be feasible even if the nail was difficult to remove. Especially in those patients with a broken nail or screws, plate augmentation with retaining the nail in situ is an easier, faster, and more effective treatment modality. Ueng and colleagues The mean nonunion time of our patients was 20.0 months (range, 7–63 months). Every patient experiences a long, uncomfortable postsurgical hearing period, and desires to return to normal daily function sequentially after this surgery. Our study findings indicate that plate augmentation can be a reasonable treatment option for all types of nonunion, and it is more likely to have superior results that can even attain a 100% rate of union. This enables us to have greater confidence that a successful result from the operation will be obtained. There are two possible explanations that can explain the excellent results that we achieved; first, plate augmentation increased the stability of the fracture site, helping us to avoid endosteum redestruction. Second, bone grafting could be done in the fracture site precisely and effectively through the same earlier surgical wound. Third, we could perform the operation in one wound (nonunion site), but using another wound as necessary for the autograft of the anterior superior iliac crest in atrophic or oligotrophic nonunions. In addition, the nail was left Our study limitations included the fact that it was retrospective in nature with a small cohort of patients and lacked a control group. However, based on our experience from these 22 patients, the combination of plate augmentation and bone grafting while leaving the nail