The purpose of this study was to test the feasibility of using iron and sulphur oxidizing bacteria for the acid leaching of a high grade Pb–Zn ore material. Three strains (ATCC 13661, NCIMB 13537 and C2-TF) of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and two strains (MT-TH1 and MT-13) of Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans were tested in this study. The bioleaching was monitored by measuring the dissolved metals and by X-ray diffraction analysis of leach residues. The bioleaching efficiency varied between 0.014 and 0.35. The maximum dissolution of lead was achieved with the mesophilic At. ferrooxidans (NCIMB 13537) at 30 °C. The maximum recovery of zinc was achieved with moderately thermopilic S. thermosulfidooxidans (MT-TH1) at 45 °C.In nature, lead sulphides such as galena (PbS) are often associated with zinc sulphides such as sphalerite (ZnS). The separation of zinc and lead is traditionally achieved with selective flotation, but the process is difficult to control when used for complex sulphide ores that contain pyrite or copper sulphides. Bioleaching may be utilized as an alternative process for the extraction of metals from complex ores/concentrates that are otherwise difficult to be treated by conventional extraction processes ( Pakistan has huge reserves of zinc associated with lead and iron pyrite ( A high-grade Zn–Pb ore sample was obtained from the Duddar deposit at District Lasbela in Balochistan province of Pakistan. Dry classification of particles was carried out. The ore sample was ground and separated to various particle size fractions using ASTM sieves. The − The test cultures were three strains of Bioleaching experiments were carried out in duplicate cultures in 500 ml shake flasks containing 200 ml ore suspension using three strains of Solids were retrieved by filtering leach solution samples through Whatman No. 42 cellulose filter paper. The residues were washed with distilled water and dried at 110 °C, followed by grinding in a pestle and mortar for XRD analysis. XRD patterns were determined with a Rint 2000 Rigaku Series X-ray diffractometer, courtesy of Central Hi-Technology Laboratory, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan. XRD analyses of top fill powder mounts were conducted using CuKα radiation and a wide-range goniometer equipped with diffracted-beam monochromator and a Ө compensating slit. Step scans were conducted from 20 to 70° 2 Ө in 0.5° 2 Ө increments using a 4-s count time. After the initial acid demand, the pH values were adjusted to pH 2.0 with H After an initial decline, the redox potential values increased from ~ The DO concentrations fluctuated between 4.0 and 6.0 mg O In order to determine the extent of rate of mineral dissolution in terms of cell attachment, the number of free-swimming and attached, moderately thermophilic bacteria were monitored as a function of time in the Zn–Pb ore suspensions ( The number of bacteria in the ore suspensions decreased from 6 The Fe Because lead precipitates in the presence of sulfate, dissolved lead was not analyzed in leach solutions in these experiments. At the termination of the experiments, solid residues were retrieved and washed with 10% ammonium acetate, which converted PbSO With the mesophilic cultures, zinc solubilization ensued after a three-week lag phase ( With the MT-13 and MT-TH1 cultures, the yield was 2190–2370 mg Zn/l (44–47% yield) ( Bioleaching efficiency is a key parameter to check the most efficient bioleaching system. It is a combination of rate and percent recovery comparable to optimum conditions. The zinc dissolution data were used to calculate the bioleaching efficiency coefficient E The present study was aimed at elucidating the bioleaching of a high-grade Pb–Zn ore by mesophilic and moderate thermophilic chemolithotrophic bacteria. Some important environmental factors such as pH, dissolved oxygen and redox potential were also monitored during bioleaching of the ore. Unlike in previous Zn-bioleaching studies ( The notion whether the mineral dissolution is due to the direct attack by microbial cells or it takes place through some lixiviant, such as ferric iron in this case, has been discussed quite a lot in previous years. There exists a third option according to which both these mode of actions i.e., direct and indirect attack may operate concomitantly which in our view is highly likely for mineral dissolution. Adsorption of bacterial cells, at mineral surface, gives information about the extent of mineral dissolution in solution. Rapid cell attachment to the Pb–Zn ore exhibited the similar pattern observed by other investigators ( Lead has a limited solubility in leach solution because it forms anglesite (PbSO Conventional methods of treating lead/zn ore are very cumbersome, however, biohydormetallugical technologies present a very feasible and practical option of treating such ores where lead is converted into insoluble lead sulfate and zinc is removed in soluble form. Previous studies have not attempted to work out ratios between lead and zinc metal taking into account the bioleachability of the target ore and stoichiometric perspectives are also lacking, which warrant future studies.