The breakage matrix approach proved to be a useful tool in describing the milling processes. Having determined the breakage matrix for any particle size distribution (PSD) of input material, the PSD of output can be predicted. In this paper, the reversibility of the aforementioned approach is examined. Perceived limitations of the breakage matrix approach are considered within the mathematical calculation. It is established that the procedure is determined by the dimension of the breakage matrix (relation between the number of input and output size fractions). The paper shows that the breakage matrix approach can be used to define the PSD of the input material to a milling operation which would give the desired PSD of the output material.Comminution is an important unit operation in many industries that process food, ceramics, chemicals, pharmaceuticals etc. ( Population balance type of modeling is most often used to mathematically describe the comminution process ( The so-called breakage matrix approach can be successfully used for this purpose. Although this approach is applicable to practical experiments, it is less informative than population balance type approaches. Normally, it is used to predict the PSD of the output material from a milling operation. In this paper, the breakage matrix approach is used to define the PSD of input material to a milling operation which would give the desired PSD of output (reverse problem). This could be useful in milling operations where the possibility of controlling PSD of the input material exists. According to our knowledge, the reverse problem is not methodically studied in the breakage matrix context. However, similar problem is studied in determination of bubble size distribution in food ( The idea of using breakage matrices to relate input and output PSDs was first introduced by The breakage matrix is effectively a combination of the selection function  Limitation of the breakage matrix approach is that the breakage matrix determined for one set of conditions cannot be adopted for another set of conditions ( Considering Eq. In this paper it is assumed that the particle breakage is independent of any inter-particle interactions. Also, it is presumed that the PSDs of the input and output occur in different size ranges. Moreover, the study is carried out as a general case where a number of inputs and outputs could be different and the elements of the breakage matrix are arbitrary values between 0 and 1. The paper is organized as follows. In this section the system of linear equations is used to solve the problem. The aim is to solve Eq. Eq. New coefficients are And the system of Eq. Conditions By Further on, it is assumed that the rows of the matrix Note that, condition Practically the condition Same number of input and output size fractions ( Outputs More output than input size fractions ( If there are more output than input size fractions, the values are assigned to arbitrary The presented approach could be unsatisfactory because only the values of More input than output size fractions ( If there are more inputs than outputs, one could freely choose It is necessary to emphasize that in each of the previous cases, some of the obtained inputs In the previous section it was shown how to calculate the input values for the desired output values. However, this procedure does not take into account the possible negativity of solutions. Outputs which give well defined solutions (input values between 0 and 1) further on will be called acceptable outputs. In order to find the set of all acceptable outputs, a system of linear inequalities is imposed: The physical meaning of the condition It is shown that inputs are given by matrix equation This is a classical linear programming problem. The points in the interior of the convex polyhedron ( Vertices of the ( Finally, if the given outputs ( A geometrical approach is particularly useful in dimension By Specially, if The sample of wheat variety Sonata was used in the experiment. Wheat was separated into fractions using the Sortimat (Perten AB, Sweden), and the fractions and whole sample were milled on the laboratory roll stand Variostuhl, model C Ex 2 (Miag, Germany). Slotted sieves were used to separate the grains by thickness into three size fractions: >2.8×20 Batches of 0.5 The conditioned samples were milled on the laboratory roll stand Variostuhl, model C Ex 2 (Miag, Braunschweig, Germany). It is a fully variable test mill with independent roll speed control, interchangeable rolls and adjustable feed rate. Fluted rolls 100 Predictions were compared with the actual size distribution obtained by experimental milling of wheat sample. The precision of the proposed methodology was estimated as percentage of the absolute value of difference between calculated and experimental value relative to the experimental value. Also, the average deviation of the prediction was calculated. The applicability of the proposed model is confirmed by some examples. The data used in the examples relate to the first break milling of wheat. Wheat millability is highly influenced by the dimensions of individual wheat kernels as well as the kernel size distribution ( To illustrate the terminology and the theoretical model the breakage matrix given in the form of Data in The breakage matrix By applying conditions Considering the condition The sample of wheat was blended in the proportions given by the previously calculated vector On the other hand, choosing Further on, the aim is to find all acceptable outputs. Using the procedure given in the previous section it is clear that Geometrically, the interior of the triangle (given in The triangle is bounded by the lines: Using the proposed procedure it is always possible to find a non-empty set of acceptable outputs. The breakage matrix directly determines the range of acceptable outputs (area covered by a triangle). The mentioned outputs generate solutions i.e. the PSD of input material to a milling operation. If the selection of Value of conditional number is 69.033 which provides calculations within precision capabilities of the computers. As expected, for the same output PSD as in the beginning of this example, by formula Nevertheless, SVD method does not take into account condition To illustrate the In this particular case, the results are from the first break milling of wheat and this “unification” has a practical justification. The so called break release is the amount of ground material reported as a percentage of the original material being tested through a certain sieve aperture. In this case the break release values are actually the percentages of the stock passing through the 1180 Note that, now one output ( Following the procedure from the previous sections ( Geometrically, the interior of triangle ( As can be seen from The approach taken in solving This paper demonstrates that the breakage matrix approach is a potential tool in defining the PSD of the input material to a milling operation which would give the desired PSD of the output. The dimension of the breakage matrix determines the number of the output and input size fractions that can be freely chosen. When the number of output fractions is equal to or greater than the number of input fractions ( Even if the previous conditions are satisfied, it is still possible to obtain negative solutions. The linear programming method is used to prevent that. Points in the interior of the convex polyhedron, bounded by the hyperplanes, provide the set of acceptable outputs. Moreover, the vertices of a convex polyhedron are the columns of the breakage matrix. When the number of output fractions is greater than the number of input fractions, the set of equations is over-determined. In that case, by singular value decomposition method, it is possible to calculate the best-fit solution, i.e. to find a set of inputs that would give the closest fit to the desired outputs. The procedure is illustrated by examples where dimensions of the breakage matrix are different (8×3 and 2×3). In both cases the acceptable values are represented by a point in the interior of the triangle. However, there are some differences in the following examples. If the dimension is 8×3, the coordinates of the point represent two output values, while in the case 2×3 they represent one input and one output value. This is caused by a difference in relation between the number of inputs and outputs. Geometrical interpretation could also be helpful in dimension The work presented is supported by the