The operative treatment of displaced bicondylar tibial plateau fractures is challenging. The displaced condyles must be reduced, depressed plateaus must be elevated and adequately supported and early rehabilitation must be encouraged in order to obtain good clinical results. This retrospective study was designed to evaluate the clinical outcomes of patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures treated with dual locked plates using raft screws with MIPO technique and autologous bone grafting. We hypothesized that in this group of patients dual locked plating reduces the complication rates by avoiding loss of reduction due to the accomplished rigid fixation. Twenty-two consecutive patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures (AO Type C) were included in this study. The mean follow up was 26 months. Bone healing was achieved in all patients with 3 cases of superficial and 1 case of deep infection. Secondary loss of reduction, secondary loss of alignment, early post-traumatic arthritis were not observed in this study. The Lysholm knee score showed an average of 80.5 points (range: 61.5–90) at the final follow up assessment. Optimal fixation of the fracture with dual locked plating which allows immediate motion and partial weight bearing may be an alternative concept to prevent secondary loss of reduction to obtain a good clinical outcome.The operative treatment of displaced bicondylar tibial plateau fractures is challenging Various treatment modalities can be used for the treatment of displaced bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Conventional plate fixation with a single incision requires invasive exposure of the fracture zone, which may endanger the soft tissues, leading to unaccetably high rates of complications Our goal in this retrospective study was to evaluate the clinical outcomes of patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures treated with dual locked plates using raft screws with MIPO technique and either autologous or allograft bone grafting, and to investigate the effectiveness of dual locked plating in avoiding loss of reduction. A total of 108 tibial plateau fractures were managed in our hospital between 2005 and 2010. The fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA classification The mechanism of injury was road traffic accidents ( All patients had preoperative antero-posterior (AP) and lateral view X-rays and computed tomography (CT) scans. CT images were reviewed for fracture gap and articular depression. Postoperatively, both AP and lateral views were performed. The mean interval between injury and operation was 4.2 days (range 0–10 days). Fourteen of the patients had surgery performed within 48 Patients were given a single dose of cefazolin sodium (50 All patients were operated by two surgeons (U.O. and A.S.P.). The patient was in the supine position, with the injured leg in semiflexion with a pillow under the proximal fragment. Freeman et al. had demonstrated that biomechanically the medial column forms the fixed hinge of the knee, and due to its specific anatomic form, it usually dislocates posterodistally The anterolateral incision was started 1–2 All patients had a similar postoperative regimen. Active knee motion was encouraged on the 3rd day after surgery. Touch-down weight bearing with crutches was allowed immediately. The patients were discharged after an average 90 degrees of range of motion was obtained. All patients were seen in an out-patient department 14 days after surgery for the removal of the stitches. Subsequently, the patients were seen at monthly intervals in the first 3 months and then in every 3 months up to 1 year. They were maintained on touch-down weight bearing with crutches for the first 2 months. Weight bearing is gradually increased until radiological evidence of complete fracture healing was observed. Plain radiographs were taken to verify adequate articular reduction and implant placement. An intra-articular step-off of at least 5 The mean follow up was 26 months (range: 13–40 months). At their final follow up, a functional assessment using the Lysholm score was performed Three cases with high energy fractures developed superficial infections, which delayed the wound healing, and were managed with a course of oral antibiotics for a week. In one other patient with high energy fracture, deep infection with persistent wound drainage occurred 4 months after surgery which was treated with debridement, plate removal, and cast brace. Although bony union was achieved radiologically and clinically, this patient developed significant postoperative stiffness due to the deep infection. Prolonged intensive physiotherapy was ineffective; he had 5° of flexion contracture and 95° of knee flexion 24 months after surgery. There were no cases of nonunion or thromboembolic complications in this series. The ACL was intact in all of the cases, however, direct inspection during surgery revealed lateral meniscal tears in 6 cases. Four menisci were partially resected and the others were sutured intraoperatively. The immediate post-operative radiographs of two patients revealed nonanatomic gap or step more than 5 The Lysholm knee score showed an average of 80.5 points (range: 61.5–90) at the final follow up assessment. The management of unstable bicondylar tibial plateau fractures usually result from high-energy trauma and due to associated soft tissue injuries and osseo-ligamentous lesions are prone to devastating complications. Additional iatrogenic surgical soft tissue injury may increase the incidence of complications There are several limitations to this study. The sample size of this cohort of patients is small. In addition, there was no control group of patients treated either nonoperatively or with an alternative method. Moreover, patients were selected to receive one stage or two stage operative fixation on the basis of the severity of their soft tissue presentation. The major strength of our study is the satisfactory follow-up rates, which were between 90% and 100% at all time points. MIPO with locking plates have been advocated by some authors to avoid additional iatrogenic surgical soft tissue injury Advanced preoperative radiographic evaluation of the fracture is necessary in order to understand the fracture characteristics and associated meniscal, chondral and ligamentous injuries The medial articular surface may be fractured in varying patterns. In their retrospective study of 83 patients with high energy bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, Barei et al. reported that a shear component of the medial plateau is frequently observed, which can be reduced with indirect reduction methods without requiring an arthrotomy Bone grafting of the impacted plateau fracture is another important factor to avoid loss of reduction and loss of alignment. In their retrospective study of 79 patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures treated by open reduction and internal fixation with a double buttress plate or a combination of locking plate and buttress plate via a 2-incision technique, Zhang et al. concluded that sufficient bone grafting seemed to be more important than the implant type on the functional results The extent of initial soft tissue injury is predictive of postoperative soft tissue problems. Although dual plating may be a solution for the instability of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, the high rate of complications associated with even the MIPO technique is a real concern. Deep wound infection was observed in 8.4% of the patients with high energy trauma in the study of Barei et al. We conclude that management of bilateral tibial plateau fractures is challenging even for the experienced surgeons. Meticulous evaluation of the injury and anatomic reduction are mandatory to lower the postoperative complications. Rigid fixation of the fracture with dual locked plating which allows immediate motion and partial weight bearing may be an alternative concept to prevent secondary loss of reduction to obtain a good clinical outcome. The authors do not have any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence their work.