Combustion synthesis is energy efficient, cost effective and a single step process for producing high purity nanoceramics, compared to conventional multi-stage wet chemical processes. Strontium substituted Hydroxyapatite (Sr-HAp) is a bioceramic having beneficial effects on osteoporotic drug delivery, bone formation and regeneration. Limited research work has been reported on combustion synthesis of Sr-HAp with no detailed investigation on the influence of process parameters on powder quality. In the present study, a Design of Experiments based twenty seven trials for Sr-HAp synthesis and detailed characterization of as-synthesized powders using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) were carried out to optimize the process parameters to obtain the desired powder characteristics. A hypothesis on the formation of one dimensional nanorods based on nucleation growth kinetics has been proposed. As-synthesized powders were found to exhibit better structural and chemical homogeneity with optimum crystallinity fulfilling the criteria for use in biomedical applications.Hydroxyapatite (HAp) is a widely used biomaterial in tissue engineering exhibiting excellent biocompatibility, osteoconductivity and stable bioresorption with no adverse physiological effects on human beings Although several methods such as precipitation Most of the available literatures have been confined either to the synthesis and characterization of Sr-HAp or on influence of Sr This paper therefore, attempts optimization of solution combustion process parameters for synthesis of Sr-HAp using Design of Experiments (DoE) approach. In addition, DoE based models have been validated by the characteristics of powders synthesized under optimized conditions. This paper aims (i) to use statistical methods for systematic investigation of the influence of important process parameters for solution combustion synthesis of Sr-HAp and (ii) to optimize these process variables to yield desired powder characteristics with minimum energy requirement and lowest cost. A Response Surface Methodology (RSM) based DoE technique was employed to determine the correlation between three important process parameters to obtain single Sr-HAp phase with required characteristics. The synthesized powders should have nanocrystals with optimum crystallinity, chemical homogeneity and better purity. A hypothesis on formation of Sr-HAp one dimensional nanorods has been proposed. Precursors used for preparing the solution were analytical grades of calcium acetate (Ca(C Design of Experiments offer powerful mathematical models which can be applied for chemical reactions in industrial chemical synthesis. Response Surface Methodology is a collection of statistical tools used in DoE to optimize the response surface that is influenced by various process parameters and to quantify the relationship between the controllable input parameters. RSM includes the following steps: (i) designing a series of experiments for adequate and reliable measurement of the responses of interest, (ii) developing a mathematical model of the second order response surface with the best fit, (iii) finding the optimal set of experimental parameters that produce a maximum or minimum value of response and (iv) representing the direct and interactive effects of process parameters through contour plots and pie charts Sr substituted HAp {Ca As-synthesized powders were characterized by XRD (Shimadzu LabX-6000 model) using monochromatic Cobalt (Kα) radiation (λ Confirmation experiments using optimized process parameters were carried out and the resulting powders were characterized using SEM/EDS and TEM to confirm the morphology and crystallite sizes. Combustion synthesis technique may be Volume Combustion Synthesis (VCS) or Self propagating High temperature Synthesis (SHS). In VCS, immediate thermal explosion occurs simultaneously throughout the volume of the reactants to yield the desired product in a short duration. The characteristic feature of the SHS mode is that following local initiation, the hot combustion wave passes through the heterogeneous mixture of reactants yielding the desired product, which requires relatively longer duration This reaction is exothermic in nature (heat of combustion Adiabatic flame temperature (T This reaction supplies heat for combustion and also the resulting acetamide acts as nucleating agent for Sr-HAp nanocrystals Combustion synthesized Sr-HAp with 0, 15 and 30% Sr at different temperatures (400 XRD patterns of pure HAp ( Peak broadening and merging of three closely placed peaks corresponding to (211), (112), and (300) planes might have occurred due to one or more of the following: (i) nanosize of HAp particles, (ii) lattice distortion due to Sr Phase identification and degree of crystallinity of the synthesized samples were carried out for Sr-HAp powders synthesized under different conditions [ A second order response surface analysis was adopted to model the relationship between the factors and responses obtained in terms of first order, square and interaction terms. Twenty seven trial experiments based on DoE were conducted and analyzed using ANOVA. Regression coefficients were estimated and used to deduce the relationship between the factors such as %Sr substitution (Sub%), temperature (Temp) and synthesis time (Time) with the responses such as crystallite size (CrySz), phase purity (Pur%) and crystallinity (Cry%). ANOVA for each parameter was performed to check the test for the significance of the regression model. A probability of significance (P) was chosen as 0.05 and when P is < Crystallite size as a response had a lower and upper value of 8 and 71 The above equation demonstrates that crystallite size increased with an increase in both Sub% and time. However, the negative effect of Sub% square term indicated that increase in crystallite size was nonlinear with respect to Sr content. Adequacy measures for the crystallite size model were calculated as R Purity of the as-synthesized Sr-HAp powders ranged from 56 to 100%. ANOVA ( The above quadratic model has the maximum coefficient of correlation R Degree of crystallinity obtained during the synthesis varied between 26 and 93%. From the ANOVA ( Pie chart ( It has been reported that nanocrystals (size: 20 Hence, through a proper prediction of the process parameters, synthesis of Sr-HAp with controlled characteristics may be achieved. This study involves an attempt to optimize the process parameters for synthesizing monophasic Sr-HAp nanocrystals with optimum crystallinity and better purity. Optimum conditions were obtained by response surface overlaid contour plots with specified minimum and maximum response values obtained ( Chemical homogeneity of the Sr-HAp powders synthesized under optimized conditions (at 500 Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) and elemental mapping results (  SEM images shown in TEM micrographs ( Initial Sr-HAp crystals form by seed/embryogenesis based on nucleation thermodynamics in the solution. In general, greater the undercooling in the solution, smaller is the critical radius of nucleus As-synthesized powder aggregates were found to be porous with interconnected porosities as seen in SEM and TEM images ( The present work is among first reports on systematic evaluation of the important process parameters for synthesis of Sr-HAp by solution combustion method. This methodology can probably be extended to other responses of as-synthesized Sr-HAp powders. The following are some of the observations from the present work. (i) Ammonium acetate, an intermediate product and urea may have acted as mixture of fuel in this system and increased the adiabatic flame temperature more than 100 Authors are greatly thankful to the