The study was performed to evaluate and compare the results of open and closed treatments of diacapitular fractures of the mandible.
                  Following open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) 14 patients with 15 displaced condylar fractures, which had caused a shortening of the mandibular ramus, were examined clinically (Helkimo index), radiologically (Orthopantomogram, Clementschitsch [reversed Towne's] view, Submentovertex view) and axiographically (CARDIAX). These findings were compared to a group of 29 patients with 34 similar condylar fractures which had been treated using closed techniques.
                  Following ORIF patients showed better radiological results with regard to the mandibular ramus height, resorption and pathological changes to the condyle, compared to the patient group after closed functional treatment.
                  In both groups some signs of dysfunction persisted, although there were slightly better results in the ORIF group. In 30% of the closed treatment group, lateral deviation during mouth opening, crepitus and occlusal disturbances were noted. No cases of occlusal disturbance were observed in the ORIF group.
                  The axiographic examinations revealed a significant limitation of movement of the fractured condyle in both groups. However, after open treatment, the temporomandibular joint displayed significantly less irregularities in the condylar paths.
                  In cases of complex reconstruction of the mandibular condyle, ORIF appears to improve the function of fractured condyles, when combined with a postoperative therapeutic exercise regime.Fractures of the mandibular condyle are frequently treated using closed functional techniques. Although in many cases good initial clinical results are achieved, serious late complications have been reported such as ankylosis, condylar necrosis, inhibition of mandiblar growth and occlusal disturbances The aim of this study is to compare ORIF of unsupported types of diacapitular condyle fractures and conventional closed functional techniques. The distribution of the condylar fractures and their treatment is depicted in The four contralateral, vertically unshortened condylar fractures (Fracture Type A) were treated using the closed functional method. In these cases a 10-day period of immobilisation was implemented followed by a functional mobilisation schedule for 3 weeks. All concomitant fractures of the mandible were treated according to standard principles of functionally stable osteosynthesis, including five contralateral subcapitular mandibular fractures which were treated using compression screw osteosynthesis For comparison the retrospective follow-up results of 29 adult patients with 34 condylar head fractures treated since 1995 using closed functional methods were used. The average age of the 25 male and 4 female patients was 28 years (range: 13.7–76.9 years). These intracapsular fractures were also the displaced, shortened Type B fractures. The fracture line through the condyle was determined by conventional radiographs on two levels (Orthopantogram, P.A. skull film and CT). Concomitant mandible fractures were also surgically treated including five dislocated and two displaced subcapitular condylar fractures. Two undisplaced condylar neck fractures were treated using the closed method. The intracapsular fractures were immobilised with rigid IMF for 10 days followed by 6–8 weeks of functional treatment. The patients were instructed to eat soft foods for 3 weeks and intensively performed mouth-opening exercises. In eight cases, a functional orthodontic activator from Andresen-Häupl was prescribed for a mean of 8 weeks. The ORIF group was examined after a mean of 11 months and the closed functionally treated group after a mean of 20 months. Clinical examinations involved the inspection, palpation and auscultation of the TMJ. Lateral deviation of more than 2 Changes in the condyle's form and position were assessed by an orthopantogram, P.A. skull film and submento-vertex view ( Condylar paths, in relation to the hinge axis, were electronically recorded using the CADIAX-System (Computer Aided Axis-Recording) and were analysed according to S Post-treatment there were few subjective complaints of minor dysfunction in either group. The results of the Helkimo-dysfunction In the closed functionally treated patient group a rate >30% of moderate and serious dysfunction was observed. In particular lateral deviation during mouth opening exceeding 2 In the ORIF group however, no occlusal disturbances were noted. In comparison to the closed functionally treated patients, lower values of mandibular mobility ( Axiographic evaluation of condylar excursions following open and closed functional treatment of condylar fractures revealed moderate to serious limitations in all directions of excursion compared to the non-fractured contralateral side; data gathered from healthy test patients according to G In all ORIF cases significant improvement in the position of the major fragments was achieved. In three cases additional bony fragments on the dorsal-lateral pole of the condyle were apparent. These were reduced but not fixed on two occasions. The remaining bony fragment was removed. Subsequent movement of these reduced fragments was not observed. The results after ORIF of the condyles are shown in In preoperative radiographs the height of the mandibular ramus was reduced on average 5.7 After operative treatment of diacapitular TMJ fractures the mean middle condylar angle ( In the closed functionally treated group, the mean reduction in condylar height of 5.8 After closed functional treatment, considerable malalignment (notably in the anterior–posterior direction), distinctive changes in condylar form (flattening of the articular condylar surface) and resorption of the fractured condyle were frequently seen ( The management of subcapitular mandibular fractures by open reduction and internal fixation in adult patients is increasing Since the 1990s, the technical aspects of ORIF of intracapsular fractures have improved following the development of special instruments, miniature osteosynthesis systems and new materials. R This cohort study presents patients with the same intracapsular fracture type treated consistently with either an open or closed functional technique and evaluated with the same examination method. The indication for selecting open treatment of the intracapsular fractures was based upon the age and fracture type. Only adult patients with displaced, intracapsular mandibular fractures, with a loss of vertical height of the mandibular ramus were treated surgically. Even with sufficient closed functional treatment of comminuted fractures of the mandible head, this patient group displayed the worst radiological, clinical and axiographic results In all but one of the postoperative patients, optimal repositioning of the fractured part of the condyle and the functionally stable fixation of the fragment using a compression screw or a micromesh was successful. No re-displacement of the fragment was observed as described by R In our cases there was no evidence of necrosis following operative repositioning. N According to the dysfunction index, clinical findings in the operated patients were slightly better, compared to those patients treated by closed functional methods. However, the absence of crepitus, lateral deviation, occlusal disturbances and ramus height disparity in patients after ORIF showed significantly better results. Occlusal disturbances were mainly responsible for the postraumatic dysfunctional complaints following TMJ fractures With regard to the movement of the fractured condyle and mandible, no differences could be seen between the ORIF group and the closed treatment group. Half of the patients axiographically examined by N One interesting aspect of the axiographical examination is the restriction in the condyle's rotational movement components following open fragment reduction; whereas in the closed functionally treated patients a more significant limitation of the translation movement is apparent. The rotary movement, which takes place mainly between the disc and the condyle in the lower compartment of the joint, is restricted due to postoperative scarring. These results also prove that translation limitation in the closed treatment group is mainly the result of the functional loss of the lateral pterygoid muscle. This muscle displaces the proximal fragment inferiorly and antero-medially, contracts and loses its function. Early operative reduction of the musclebound fragment creates favourable conditions for restoring these functions. Apart from understanding the pathogenesis of movement limitations after fracture treatment, this aspect also has therapeutic ramifications for the functional outcome for intracapsular fractures. In most cases, as most of the clinical and axiographical findings demonstrate, sufficient mouth opening due to a compensatory rotary movement of the condyle after closed treatment is achieved After serious trauma, intracapsular fractures are always surrounded by soft tissue, derived from the joint capsule and ligaments. Displacement and/or disruption of the articular disc disrupts the quality and interaction of the parts of the joint. In 75% of our cases following closed treatment, the axiographic condylar path recordings mirror these functional disruptions. This is confirmed in several MRI studies Incidence of temporary facial nerve dysfunction following open reduction varies between 5 and 11%. The frequency of permanent damage is noted by N In future, the use of resorbable slender osteosynthesis material is desirable. To date there is no data regarding long-term damage caused by titanium osteosynthesis material left in the TMJ. Open reduction and internal fixation of selected intracapsular fractures improves prognosis by anatomical bone and soft tissue recovery when combined with physical therapy. In order to emphasize the functional aspect of condyle and juxta-articular surgery following TMJ trauma, the term “open functional treatment” should be used.