Powder production
                        
                        
                           Pressing
                        
                        
                           Sintering
                        
                        
                           Fundamentals
                        
                        
                           Aluminium
                        
                        
                           Copper
                        
                        
                           Iron and steel
                        
                        
                           Magnesium
                        
                        
                           Molybdenum
                        
                        
                           Nickel
                        
                        
                           Titanium
                        
                        
                           Tungsten
                        
                        
                           Ceramic materials
                        
                        
                           Composite materials
                        
                        
                           Electrical and magnetic materials
                        
                        
                           Hard materials and tool steels
                        
                        
                           Mechanical alloying
                        
                        
                           Porous materials
                        
                        
                           Powder forging
                        
                        
                           Powder injection moulding
                        
                        
                           PM parts
                        
                        
                           Hard materials
                        
                        
                           PM applications
                        
                        
                           Microstructure property relationships
                        
                        
                           Powder compaction
                        
                        
                           Metal matrix composites
                        
                        
                           Surface treatment and coatings
                        
                        
                           Process modellingPowder production Pressing Sintering Fundamentals Aluminium Copper Iron and steel Magnesium Molybdenum Nickel Titanium Tungsten Ceramic materials Composite materials Electrical and magnetic materials Hard materials and tool steels Mechanical alloying Porous materials Powder forging Powder injection moulding PM parts Hard materials PM applications Microstructure property relationships Powder compaction Metal matrix composites Surface treatment and coatings Process modelling J.Ting et al. (Crucible Research, Pittsburgh, USA.) Mater.Science/Engineering A, Vol 326, No 1, 2002, 110–121. Factors influencing efficient production of fine metal powders in atomisation are discussed. Atomisation yield outside a condition known as wake closure can produce powder with wide variation of mean particle size. A model is presented to consider interaction between atomisation gas and melt round the melt pour tube. Metal flow rate is shown to depend on a stagnation pressure. The stagnation front determines behaviour of melt exiting the melt orifice and interaction with the gas. Wake closure is sensitive to atomiser geometry. There is an energy of formation of the wake closure structure which the atomising gas must overcome in order to form the wake closure structure. S.Markus et al. (University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.) Mater.Science/Engineering A, Vol 326, No 1, 2002, 122–133. Disintegration of molten metal in gas/liquid atomisation is discussed. It is shown that atomisation takes place in stages. The first is characterised by development of perturbations on the liquid surface which grow and lead to break up of the liquid metal jet. This affects all subsequent stages including spray characteristics. Influence of material properties on initial break up were investigated experimentally, and by analysis of surface instabilities, in a free fall atomiser. High speed video imaging was used in the study. V.A.Pavlovskij. Tekhnol. Met. Vol 9, 2001, 2–6. In Russian. Hydrometallurgical production of Fe and Fe alloy powders is reported. Use was made of hydride calcium methods and intergranular corrosion methods. A promising method is shown to be reduction of purified Fe ore. Properties of parts were determined and shown to depend on method of producing the Fe powders. W.M.Chen et al. Chinese J .Non-Ferrous Metals, Vol 11, No 5, 2001, 852–857. In Chinese. The effects of geometry of the nozzle assembly and process parameters in a close coupled gas atomiser, on particle size and size distribution, of Zn powders were investigated. Size distributions are shown to approximate to a log-normal law. Powders increased in size as with increase in delivery tube diameter and nozzle protrusion and decreased with increased gas pressure and degree of superheat of molten metal. A.Sato. NRIM Research Activ., 2000, 62–63. The importance of recycling of metallic materials is emphasised. Three metallic materials were investigated with reference to their recyclability and improvement in methods for this. The object was to develop a high-strength sintered steel which is suitable for recycling. S.Jianfei et al. (Harbin Inst. of Technology, Harbin, China.) PM Technology, Vol 20, No 2, 2002, 79–85. In Chinese. An experimental and computational study of gas velocity dynamics in gas atomisation is described. Gas speeds are calculated with regard to distance from the metal delivery tube and the protrusion if the tube into the working chamber. K.Y.Wang et al. (Shanxi Metallurgical Research Inst., Shanxi, China.) PM Industry, Vol 11, No 6, 2001, 23–25. In Chinese. It is reported that high purity Fe powders had been made from high purity magnetite ore by reduction. Properties of the powder and processibility are shown to be satisfactory. Density after single pressing exceeded 7.0gm/cm J.W.Zheng, L.Q.Jiang. (Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhejiang, China.) PM Industry, Vol 11, No 6, 2001, 26–29. In Chinese. Studies of production of electrolytic Cu powder are described. Effects if process parameters, including electrolyte composition, cathode current density and temperature, were investigated. Conditions for production of 12mm powder are given. Anode in Cu, cathode is stainless steel, electrolyte contains 180gm/l T.F.Zahrah, R.Rowland. (MATSYS, Inc., Springf ield, USA.) PM Science and Technology Briefs, Vol 4, No 2, 2002, 13–17. It is noted that flow of dry powder materials is influenced by many factors and is therefore somewhat unpredictable. Metal powder flow may be improved by additives, sometimes, to the detriment of compactability. Use of fluidisation in die filling is shown to minimise effects of parameters affecting powder flow. This is attained by injection of dry gas at low pressure. Control of flow die filling is improved by regulating powder flow. This gives increased user control and improved part quality. Y.C.Zhang. (Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang Liaoning, China.) PM Industry, Vol 11, No 6, 2001, 17–22. In Chinese. Spray forming of metals is reviewed. The distinguishing features are identified, production of near net shape parts with rapid solidification, low segregation, fine structures and low costs. Applications in production of a range of ferrous, non-ferrous metals and alloys and composites are considered. H.Danninger et al. (Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria.) Powder Metall., Vol 45, No 3, 2002, 261–265. Effects of mixture composition on densification of Fe-Cr, Fe-Mo and Ti-Cu powder compacts during solid state sintering were investigated. It is suggested that the dependencies of densification on composition show only ‘V’ or ‘S’ shaped curves. The experimental work shows that this hypothesis is correct. The curve shapes are explained on the basis of diffusion interaction of the metals using a multiparticle model of a two-component compact. D.Bouvard et al. ( Inst. Nationale Polytechnic de Grenoble, St. Martin d’Héres, France.) Nuclear Instruments/Methods in Physics Research B, Vol 200, 2003, 287–294. Shape changes during sintering are discussed and it is noted that there is still little data about these. A study, in which microtomography was used to investigate sintering of an Fe based compact and loose Cu powder is described. Samples are sintered in front of a high energy X-ray source. A large number of radiographs are taken at different orientations from which the three-dimensional microstructure is constructed. Data for structural evolution during sintering is obtained. Attention is given to anisotropy induced by the compaction process and evolution of texture during sintering. X.Y.Luo. (Central Iron and Steel Research Inst., Beijing, China.) PM Industry, Vol 11, No 6, 2001,7–16.. In Chinese. Spark plasma sintering is described. Intermittent, high electrical energy is applied to powders in a die. Plasma is generated between powder particles that are cleaned, activated and rapidly sintered. Recent advances in the process are reviewed with regard to types of materials produced. L.C.R.Schneider, A.C.F.Cocks. University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.) Powder Metall., Vol 45, No 3, 2002, 237–245. Compaction and yield of two steel and two Cu powders were investigated to determine the effects of powder type and morphology. A computer-controlled triaxial cell was used to simulate frictionless closed die compaction with radial stress controlled to keep sample radius constant. The yield surface was determined by interrupting the tests. The experimental yield surface agreed with Fleck type predictions, which assumed uniform spherical particles but not for irregular particles. A modified Cam-Clay model is suggested which was able to predict yield surfaces for the four powders studied. H.Kalman et al. (Ben-Gurion University, Beersheba, Israel.) Powder Technol., Vol 122, No 1, 2002, 19–25. Fracture in comminution processes is discussed. It is noted that fracture occurs when the fracture strength is exceeded or when a particle receives cumulative damage, or fatigue. Experiments on fatigue of assemblies of a range of particulate materials is analysed. Fatigue curves are presented for compression stress against number of cycles. D.J.Lee et al. (National University, Taipei, Taiwan.) Powder Technol., Vol 123, No 1, 2002, 1–8. The feasibility of using Voronoi polyhedra in description of microstructure of simulated disordered packed beds is discussed. A transition between regular, solid like, and random, liquid like, packing was detected over a wide range of critical contact angles between particles. Mean asphericity and entropy function are considered to be adequate indices for packing characteristics of the bed. Y.Feng et al. (Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China.) Mater. Chem. and Physics, Vol 78, 2002, 196–201. It is reported that closed-cell Al alloy foams had been made from metal powders mixed with a foaming agent, TiH, compaction to a dense preform and heating to cause the foaming agent to foam. Parameters which influence the properties of foams are identified and discussed. Effects of porosity and cell size on electrical conductivity were investigated and compared with models. Percolation theory could be applied to describe the relationship between conductivity and density of Al foams. A.P.Xian. Chinese J. Non-Ferrous Metals, Vol 11, No 5, 2001, 731–740. In Chinese. It is reported that Cu-Cr alloys had been developed for high-powder vacuum circuit breakers. These were made by PM methods and various technologies were investigated including use of infiltration. Effects of residual gases, carbon and impurities, and structures, properties and service performance were investigated. P.Bowen et al. (University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.) Powder Metall., Vol 45, No 3, 2002, 251–254. It is noted that whilst much work has been carried out on rapid prototyping little has about microstructural evolution and properties. Investigation of these is described. 40mm 316L stainless steel powder was selectively laser sintered in N-30%H. The structure of the sintered alloy comprised an austenitic matrix with inclusions of M N.Tsunekage, H.Tsubakino. (Himeji Inst of Technology, Himeji, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 3, 2002, 172–177. In Japanese. It is reported that sintered steels, with MnS particles 10% of the size usually found in steels, and a larger number of inclusions, had been produced. The ferrite-pearlite structure was refined by the inclusions. Impact strength was increased by the structure refinement and reduced by the larger number of inclusions. To attain an increase in impact properties the number of inclusions must be reduced. T.Sano et al. (Chiba Inst. of Technology. Narashino, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 3, 2002, 178–182. In Japanese. It is reported that AZ91 Mg alloy powder had been made by gas atomisation and consolidated by hot rolling. A density of 98% was attained by 70 per cent reduction by rolling above 350°C. A lower rolling temperature gives higher hardness but may cause cracking. Tensile strength of 330MPa is reported. L.Riester et al. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, USA.) Powder Metall., Vol 45, No 3, 2002, 255–260. It is reported that Mo-Cu alloys had been rapidly consolidated to near full density by plasma pressure compaction to attain better properties. Structure and properties are compared with Mo consolidated from powder under identical conditions. Addition of small amounts of Cu is shown to increase hardness. Effects of process parameters on structure and properties are discussed. T.Igarashi. (Osaka Prefecture university, Sakai, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 3, 2002, 163–171. In Japanese. Mechanisms for improving mechanical properties of Mo are discussed. It is reported that strengthened and toughened sintered Mo materials had been developed. These had fine grains and contained dispersed carbide particles. The carbides inhibited grain growth at 85 per cent of the melting point and increased strength up to 1200°C and brittleness of grain boundaries to −95°C. Superplasticity, of 550 per cent, was detected at 1500°C. W.Dezhi et al. (Central South University, Changsha, China.) PM Technology, Vol 20, No 2, 2002, 75–78. In Chinese. It is reported that the addition of La X.Dangsheng. (Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.) PM Technology, Vol 20, No 2, 2002, 67–70. In Chinese. Ni base alloys were prepared from Ni-Cr alloy powder, elemental Mo, Al, Ti and B with additions of compounds such as LaF M.G.Kutty et al. Ceram. Eng Science Proc., Vol 22, No 4, 2001, 587–592. It is noted that Ti has strength and the ability to osseointegrate when used in dental implants. This is aided by making the implant with a dense core and surface porosity. Investigations of microwave sintering conditions to achieve this are described. The need is to attain optimum surface porosity. Scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction were used in the study. Sintering time is shown to be critical in attaining the required thickness of porous layer. K.H.Lin et al. (National University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan.) Int. J. Refract. Metals/Hard Mater.,Vol 20, No 5/6, 2002, 401–408. Precipitation of an intermetallic phase during heating of W-Mo-Ni-Fe heavy alloys was investigated. The%Mo is critical. If there is more Mo than 8 and 9at% Mo atoms are deposited along with W, Ni and Fe during cooling. The intermetallic phase is considered to be (W4Mo8)(Ni7Fe3) and is deposited at the interface between solid grains and the matrix. G.M.Song et al. (Harbin Inst. of Technology, Harbin, China.) Int. J. Refract. Metals/Hard Mater., Vol 21, No 1–2, 2003, 1–12. It is noted that low strength limits applications of W and W alloys and that there is a need for materials with good high temperature thermomechanical properties It is reported that W-TiC composites, fabricated by hot pressing at 2000°C and 20Mpa in vacuum, had been produced. The highest strength, 1155MPa, was found in W-30vol%TiC at 1000°C. The strengthening effect of TiC particles was more significant at higher temperatures. The TiC particles reduced thermal conductivity and increased thermal expansion. T.Kimura et al. (Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 3, 2002, 198–202. In English. Effects of process conditions of density and textures of Bi0.5(Na,K)0.5TiO M.Fujimoto. (Taiyo Yuden Co. Ltd., Gunma, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 3, 2002, 203–210. In Japanese. It is reported that high-speed laser drilling had been applied in fabrication of multilayer ceramic chip electronic components. Optimisation of laser conditions and energy absorption of the material ensured that ultrafine through drilled holes were formed without damage to the plastic supporting materials. H.Okinaka. (Matsushita Electronic Components Co. Ltd., Kadoma, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 3, 2002, 223–227. In Japanese. It is noted that ceramic parts are commonly statically fired. It is reported that a dynamic rotary method, in which the container, or sagger, is rotated during sintering, had been used. This avoided occurrence of shape defects due to bending and sticking between samples. Placing of parts in the sagger was optimised. J .M.Torralba et al. (Carlos III University of Madrid, Leganés, Spain.) Powder Metall., Vol 45, No 3, 2002, 247–250. Mechanical and wear properties and microstructures of 2014 Al alloy, reinforced with three types of Fe Y.Matsuo et al.(FDK Corporation, Kosai Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 2, 2002, 100–107. In Japanese. It is noted that a lake in Japan is becoming contaminated with sludge. To combat this attempts are described to mix lake sludge with Mn-Zn ferrite powder to make a new electronic material. Various material and process parameters were investigated. It was found that an effective electromagnetic radiation absorber could be made. H.Oko et al. (Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 2, 2002, 108–113. In Japanese. It is reported that thin Mn-Zn films had been deposited of SiO T.Nomura et al. (TDK Corporation, Narita, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 2, 2002, 120–123. In Japanese. It is noted that Fe H.Yamamoto et al. (Meiji University, Kawasaki, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 2, 2002, 141–145. In Japanese. Magnetic properties and structures of Fe-Nd M.Hokouchi et al. (Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 2, 2002, 146–150. In Japanese. Synthesis of Fe Z.Baojun et al (Central South University, Changsha, China.) Int. J. Refract. Metals/Hard Mater.,Vol 20, No 5/6, 2002, 389–394. It is reported that an improved multi-component wax based binder had been developed for injection moulding of WC-8%Co. Good rheological properties were attained at a solids loading of 65vol%. Thermal debinding was used in N-25vol%H and good control of%C was achieved. Solvent debinding was more rapid and flexible. As-sintered properties were measured, transverse rupture strength 2500MPa, Rockwell hardness 90A and density 14.72gm.cm Q.Bai et al. (Harbin Inst. of Technology, Harbin, China.) Int. J. Refract. Metals/Hard Mater., Vol 20, No 5/6, 2002, 395–400. Applications of polycrystalline diamond based cutting tools were outlined and extension to wood working is noted. The current status of polycrystalline diamond cutting tools is reviewed and how these are used in wood working is considered. Experimental and simulated studies are described. T.S.Srivatsan et al. (University of Akron, Akron, USA.) Powder Technol., Vol 122, No 1, 2002, 54–60. Samples of WC, of varying particle sizes, were consolidated by plasma pressure compaction with and without pulses. Structure and density measurements showed residual porosity even after consolidation at 1500°C. Application of pulses during processing resulted in higher density and microhardness irrespective of initial particle size. Effects of particle size and pulsing on structure, distribution of porosity, cracks and hardness are described. K.Tagashira et al. (Muroran Inst. of Technology, Muroran, Japan.) J.Japan Soc. Powder/Powder Metall., Vol 49, No 3, 2002, 183–188. In Japanese. Effects of addition of C to sintered WC-37wt%Fe alloys was investigated. The proposed application is for stress relief layers in sinter bonding of cemented carbide to carbon steel substrates. 0, 0.77, 1.25 and 2.0wt%C was added to the WC-Fe powders, sintered at 1190°C to 1310°C to near full density. The structures comprised ferrite/pearlite-WC but with h phase, (W,Fe)6C particles. Rockwell hardness of 74 to 76A, bend strength of 2.31GPa were attained at 1.25%C. Z.P.Zhou et al. Mining Metall. Eng., Vol 21, No 3, 2001, 82–85. In Chinese. A study of diamond/Cu-10%Sn saw blades is described. Effects of metallic additives and process conditions, on properties and cutting performance, were studied. It is reported that Fe and Ni additives and sintering time are critical factors in determination of diamond particle retention in the blades and hence influence tool life. Z.Zhao et al. (Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.) PM Technology, Vol 20, No 2, 2002, 71–74. In Chinese. Phase composition and particle morphology of combustion synthesised Ti-W-C materials were investigated as functions of composition. At an appropriate composition a single phase (Ti,W)C phase could be produced. Milled powder had a relatively large grain size. At other compositions WC and TiC were synthesised in addition to the (Ti,W)C phase. L.Wei et al. (Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.) PM Technology, Vol 20, No 2, 2002, 82–85. In Chinese. It is reported that a novel Ti(C,N) — based cermet had been developed for surgical cutting tools. Corrosion in sterilisation media, Na hypochlorite and H J.V.Wood et al. (University of Nottingham, Nottingham UK.) Acta Mater., Vol 49, No 19, 2001, 3991–4003. Five possible models, based on coagulation-fragmentation equations, describing particle size of powder during mechanical alloying are analysed. Means to derive parameters from experiment are developed. Predicted and measured particle sizes agree well. Values of some parameters are shown to relate to material properties. P,S,Liu, K.M.Liang. J.Mater. Science, Vol 36, N o 21, 2001, 5059–5072. Production and applications of porous materials are reviewed In addition to PM electroplating is considered as a means of making porous metals and alloys. A wide range of applications is considered and materials include stainless steel and aluminium. R.K.Ohdar, S.Pasha. (National Inst. of Foundry and Forge Technology, Ranchi, India.) J. Mater. Proc, Technology, Vol 132, 2003, 227–234. The powder forging process, press-sinter-and-forge, as a means of eliminating residual porosity, is outlined. This enhances mechanical properties. An artificial neural network approach is used for exploring the prediction of PM process parameters, particularly the sinter-forged density of a metal powder preform. The model used is based on a three-layer network with a back propagation learning algorithm with data determined by experiment. Good agreement is reported between predicted and experimental values. The study is shown to give a new method for optimisation of process parameters. Y.C.Lam et al. (Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.) Powder Metall., Vol 45, No 3, 2002, 233–236. Numerical simulation and experimental verification of thermal debinding of a polymer binder from an injection moulded compact is described. An integrated model taking interactive effects of mechanisms, which avoids assumptions about a receding liquid/gas interface, is proposed.. It is deduced that the distribution of polymer residue is a smooth continuous function of distance. It was observed and predicted that the outer surface is enriched with liquid polymer, in agreement with published data. Experiment and simulation are reported to be in good agreement. R.Purohit, R.Sagar. Int. J. Advan. Manuf. Technol., Vol 17, No 9, 2001, 644-648. Studies to determine the feasibility of making cams from Al-SiC composites are reported. These materials have a high strength to weight ratio. Al powder was mixed with 10, 20, 25 or 30wt%SiC. Cams were fabricated by cold isostatic compaction and sintering and properties determined. Comparison was made with cast cams. C.Wilson et al. Int. J. Powder Metall., Vol 37, No 7, 46–48. It is reported that sinter brazing had been used to manufacture complex near net shape parts and subassemblies for automotive powertrains. Material and process parameters affecting the process are identified. It is shown that by combining two processes, sintering and brazing, economic advantage is gained together with improved process flexibility. C.Allibert et al. (CNRS-INPG-UJF, St. Martin d’Héres, France.) Microstructures of WC-Co were investigated for liquid phase sintered W and C rich cermets. It is shown that addition of C enhanced growth of WC particles. In C rich alloys WC grains were prismatic in shape with smooth WC/Co interfaces. In W rich alloys many of the WC grains were polycrystalline and WC/Co interfaces were curved and stepped In both W and C rich samples the WC grains had a high dislocation density. S.Mallet et al. (CNRS-INPG-UJF, St. Martin d’Héres, France.) Phase equilibria in Fe-Cu-Co alloys was investigated. Alloys were prepared by PM and by casting for comparison. PM allowed attainment of equilibrium but the PM alloys were contaminated with O, changing solubility limits and forming oxide particles. Cast alloys were slow to attain equilibrium even after long annealing. Experiment was supported by thermodynamic calculations. It is shown that phase boundaries could be accurately determined. A.Scanavini, A.de Nicolo. (mG miniGears SpA, Padova, Italy.) In using PM for manufacture of critical parts, such as transmission gears, it is emphasised that a full understanding of design and production issues is required and that there are many difficulties in the way. It is reported that much of the traditional knowledge about gear manufacture has been transferred to PM. The synergy between machining technology and PM is stressed. D.Serillon et al. (Federal Mogul Sintered Products, Voie des Collines, France.) Collaboration between a parts maker and a user over design and production of a PM camshaft pulley was described. Finite element calculations were made at the design stage and validated by static and engine bench tests to correlate predictions against strain gauge and load measurements. Fatigue analysis was based on finite element predictions. It was reported that the work done had resulted in a simplified design methodology for optimisation of design. K.Purazrang, P.Abachi. (Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran.) 0.2% yield strength of Mg-2.5vol%Ag-2%Nd-0.6%Zr-(traces of Cu, Si, Mn and Fe) reinforced with 10 to 25vol% SiC particles was investigated. Mean particle sizes were, alloy powder 45mm and SiC particles 9mm. Effects of three reinforcement particle shapes were investigated. Tensile tests were evaluated in the light of model predictions. The results agreed with a modified Eshelby model The Sekine-Chen model gave predictions higher than measured values. H .Danninger, A.Simchi. (Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran.) Properties of sintered metals, relative to interparticle contacts formed during sintering, were reviewed. A model approach, based on electrical conductivity and load bearing ability, was developed. Fe, Fe-C and Fe-C-Mo alloys were prepared at a range of compaction pressures and sintering cycles to reveal effects of process parameters. Contact areas were determined by micro-fractography. Equations linking conductivity, microstructure and mechanical strength were derived. It was suggested that the results could be useful in quality control of sintered or semi-sintered metals. D.Riera, J.M.Prado. (Centre Technologic de Manresa, Barcelona, Spain.) It was noted that cold die compaction can cause different effects on dimensional and mechanical characteristics of green compacts, due to residual stresses, micro-cracks, etc. Atomised Fe powders were compacted to various densities and annealed below the sintering temperature to relieve residual stresses. Compression stress/strain tests were carried out on as-pressed and annealed samples. It is suggested that the residual stresses have effects at both micro — and macro-scopic levels. A.Rota, T.Hartwig. (Fraunhofer Inst. (IFAM), Bremen, Germany.) The ability of PM to produce parts in a wide range of metals and alloys and sizes was discussed. Production of structures at the micron level by compaction and embossing of a metal-based feedstock was described. Material and process parameters were considered. The techniques were used to make very small parts. W.Shi et al. (National Inst. of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Nagoya, Japan.) It was reported that Ti-hydroxyapatite composites, for bio-medical implantation, had been prepared by hot pressing an d sinter bonded to a Ti substrate. The hydroxyapatite was uniformly dispersed in the Ti at a volume fraction below 15 per cent. Mechanical properties were determined and depended on the thickness of the composite layer. Z.Sparchez. (103–105, Blvd. Muncii, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.) Dimensional relationships in composite blends of two monosized powders, one coarse and one fine, were discussed. The blends were devised so that the fine particles covered the coarse particles and filled the spaces between them. The relationships were used to calculate distances between centres of large particles and compositions to give a specified coarse particle separation. I.Spiridonova, O.Sukhova. (National University, Dnipropretrovs’k, Ukraine.) Metal matrix composites were formed by infiltration of molten Fe-3.5%B, Fe-3.5%B-20%Cr, Fe-3.5%B-5%Ti, Fe-3.5%B-10%Cu, Cu or Cu-20%Ni-20%Mn alloys into a Cr-20%Ti-10%C (a complex Cr-Ti carbide) skeleton. Wetting of the reinforcement was poor in the case of Cu but better with the Cu and Fe alloys. No new phases were formed with Cu or Cu-Ni-Mn but the Fe alloys formed additional carbides, (Cr,Ti) K.Widanka, W.Dudziski. (Wrocaw University of Technology, Wrocaw, Poland.) A PM 0.2%C-2%Ni-1.5%Mo steel was carburised at 920°C or 1040°C and gas quenched. The carburised layer was characterised for structure and hardness. Effects of process conditions on case depth were investigated. A formula for case depth was devised. S.Gheorghe et al. (University of Craiova, Craiova, Romania.) Wear resistance of Cu base alloys was discussed with reference to parameters which affect performance. Samples of sintered Cu-5%Sn-5%Pb-5%Zn-1% graphite were characterised for structure, properties and wear resistance to optimise these for wear resistant self-lubricating bearings. H.Danninger et al. (Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria.) 2%, 3% and 4%Mn steels with 0, 0.1, 0.2 or 0.4%B were pressed at 600MPa and sintered at 1150°C. Properties, coefficient of friction, wear, seizing, density, hardness and microstructure were investigated. It is reported that both Mn and B increase hardness, B increased coefficient of friction, wear decreased with increase in percentage of Mn, wear increased with reduction in hardness, and addition of Mn and B increased resistance to seizing. O.Lame, D.Bouvard. (Inst. National Polytechnique de Grenoble, St. Martin d’Heres, France.) Distortion during sintering was discussed with reference to causes. Dilatometer tests were carried out on Fe base compacts under uniaxial and bending conditions. Tests with interrupted loading were shown to allow measurement of viscosity. Bend tests were with a wide span in three-point loading. Analysis using theory of elastic beams and visco-elasticity provided data concerning evolution of viscosity during sintering. The results were used to predict distortion of a part during sintering by use of finite element calculation. P.Voit et al. (Domaine Universitaire, Grenoble, France.) It was noted that some models used to simulate metal powder characteristics use two parameters and that better results may be obtained by use of three-parameter models. The latter requires three experimental tests to establish the parameters. A difficulty, measurement of radial stress at high temperature, was identified. Tests on Cu powder allowed identification of the Abouf model. A third test was used to evaluate the performance of the model under deviatoric stress. Mechanical dissipation was deduced. P.Stutz et al. (Domaine Universitaire, Grenoble, France.) It was suggested that numerical modelling of HIP is a valid way of optimising processing and reducing cost of development . Consideration was given to equipment, material and process parameters. The experimental work described involved determination of the final shape of a part formed by HIP and numerical prediction. Comparison was made between predicted and measured final shapes. T.Kraft, M.Reiterer. (Fraunhofer Inst. For Materials Mechanics, Freiburg, Germany.) It was noted that CAD systems can generate descriptions of part shapes easily from which tetrahedral meshes can be created. Generation of hexahedral meshes is not possible with current software although these would be superior. Performances of meshes with tetrahedral and hexahedral elements in powder die compaction were investigated. Hexahedral meshes were superior. It was recommended that with tetrahedral meshes the elements should be randomly rather than uniformly aligned. P.Brewin et al. (European Powder Metallurgy Association, Shrewsbury, UK.) It was noted that computer simulation of die compaction of powders presents severe computational challenges and that the demand for more complex part shapes and higher compaction pressures emphasises the importance of implementation of this technology. The potential of the technology was demonstrated by an EU funded project PM Modmet. It was reported that a new, Framework5, project, Thematic Network ‘Dienet’, is in progress. The paper reported on the objectives, the structure of the consortium and the work programme. A.C.F.Cocks et al. (University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.) Die filling was investigated with reference to microscopic, (particle morphology, size and material density) and macroscopic, (angle of internal friction and permeability), characteristics of metal powders and die filling shoe kinematics. The study used transparent shoes and dies and the die filling was observed by a high-speed video system. Tests in air and vacuum allowed the effect of airflow to be assessed. Mechanisms of die filling and the influences of the identified factors are described. Conditions for uniform die filling were established. Implications for industry were discussed.