In recent years, many important discoveries have been made in the marine deepwater exploration in the South China Sea, which confirms the abundant natural gas resources in this area. However, the prediction of deepwater reservoirs is very challenging because of the complex depositional system and the low exploration level with sparse wells in deepwater areas. To reduce the exploration risks, we develop an integrated prediction strategy for the deepwater gas reservoirs using the Bayesian adaptive seismic inversion and the frequency-dependent fluid mobility attribute. In the seismic inversion, an automatically adjusted prior stabilizer is derived to balance between the vertical resolution and the inversion stability according to the noise level, and the trace-by-trace recursive inversion process, using the inversion result of the previous adjacent trace as the initial model for the next, is adopted to ensure the lateral continuity. In the gas detection, the fluid mobility attribute is calculated by the high precision matching pursuit algorithm to directly indicate the gas reservoirs, with no need to use the well-log or horizon data. We then combine the stratigraphic seismic inversion result with the gas indication fluid mobility attribute to comprehensively predict both the distribution and thickness of gas reservoirs. Synthetic data tests on a well model and a designed seismic signal verify the performances of the seismic inversion and the matching pursuit algorithm. The real data fluid mobility attribute gas detection results of two borehole-side seismic traces show good consistency with the well log interpretation results. Finally, the feasibility of the proposed integrated prediction method is demonstrated by a deepwater application in the South China Sea.Deepwater has become a hotspot area of the global hydrocarbon exploration ( As an important rock and stratigraphic attribute, seismic acoustic impedance has the capability of linking seismic data to geology and well log data. Besides, the full stack seismic data has the advantages of high signal to noise ratio and low computational cost compared to the prestack seismic data. Due to these properties, the poststack seismic acoustic impedance inversion is widely used in the industry for both qualitatively and quantitatively characterization of subsurface reservoirs ( On the other hand, according to the Biot's poroelasticity theory ( Therefore, in this paper, we present a new strategy for the integrated prediction of deepwater gas reservoirs from the full stack seismic data by using the seismic acoustic inversion and the frequency-dependent fluid mobility attribute. We first derive an adaptive prior stabilizer based on the Bayesian theory and introduce a trace-by-trace recursive inversion process in the seismic inversion. Then we adopt the matching pursuit spectral decomposition technique to calculate the fluid mobility attribute in the gas detection. The integrated method combines some advantages of both the seismic inversion and the fluid mobility attribute, including high resolution, stratigraphic interpretation and accurate gas detection. Synthetic data tests and a real data application case in the deepwater area of the South China Sea are subsequently adopted to demonstrate the performance of the proposed integrated prediction method. Finally, the conclusions of this investigation and the future work are discussed. For normal incidence reflections, the relationship between the reflectivity function Based on the small reflectivity assumption, equation The aim of seismic inversion is to estimate the model parameter Due to the frequency band-limited characteristic of the seismic data, directly solving for the objective function is strongly unstable. Generally, Tikhonov regularization theory is applied to obtain the stable inversion result. However, the regularization parameter is constant in this method, thus cannot automatically balance between the inversion resolution and stability in the computation of real 3D data ( Bayesian inversion can integrate a variety of prior information and construct objective functions that provide particularly desirable flavors to the solutions we seek ( According to the Bayesian inversion framework, a combination of expression (6) and (7) gives the posterior probability density Then, the maximum posterior solution is defined by minimizing the objective function Taking derivatives and equating to zero, we obtain the final inversion expression as In the expression of prior stabilizer The initial low-frequency prior expectation vector In the study of the reflection of a low-frequency signal from a plane interface between elastic and elastic fluid-saturated porous media, Taking derivatives of equation Let us denote Equation From equation To illustrate the validity of the Bayesian adaptive impedance inversion method, a 1D model test is carried out with time-domain impedance curve from well A as shown in Since the instantaneous spectrum calculation is the key to obtain the fluid mobility as described in the methodology, here we mainly focus on the accuracy comparison of different time-frequency analysis methods commonly used in the industry. The study area, indicated with rectangles in  Firstly, the Bayesian adaptive impedance inversion is performed on the target intervals. Since the total drilling-depth of well A covers the entire target intervals, well B does not, we chose well A to participate in the inversion calculation and well B as the blind well. To further reduce the risk of deepwater gas reservoir prediction, the fluid mobility attribute is then directly calculated from the seismic data using the high-resolution matching pursuit decomposition algorithm.   We have proposed a strategy for the integrated prediction of deepwater gas reservoirs using the Bayesian adaptive seismic inversion and the frequency-dependent fluid mobility attribute and have demonstrated its applicability in a deepwater area of the South China Sea. By introducing the Bayesian theory, an adaptive prior stabilizer was deduced to obtain the best compromise between resolution and stability of the inversion results. Meanwhile, the trace-by-trace recursive inversion process makes use of the correlation advantages of adjacent seismic traces, making the inversion results have good lateral continuity and conform to the geological characteristics. Based on the seismic wave attenuation theory, the fluid mobility attribute calculated by the matching pursuit spectral decomposition algorithm can effectively detect the gas reservoirs, without using well log data and interpreted horizons, which is suitable for the deepwater setting with low exploration level and complex subsurface structure. The integration of these two methods enables us to predict both the distribution and the thickness of deepwater gas reservoirs, which can be used as an important guidance for the further deepwater exploration. The potential area of future research is to combine rock physics models to quantitatively estimate the petrophysical parameters (e.g., porosity, gas saturation, shale volume) based on the predicted deepwater gas reservoirs, and predict the best sweet spot areas to further reduce the risk of deepwater hydrocarbon exploration. This work was financially supported by the