Objectives
                  To describe the rationale, pros and cons, and complications of the anterior-lateral extrapleural retroperitoneal approach for unstable (TLICS>4) thoracolumbar fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Clinical and radiological data and outcomes from a cohort treated surgically via said approach were retrospectively reviewed. All patients were operated on exclusively by 5 neurosurgeons trained in spine surgery.
               
                  Results
                  Between June 1999 and December 2015, 86 patients underwent surgery (median age 42 years, most common level: L1). Approximately 32.5% presented with a preoperative neurological defect. After surgery (mean duration: 275min), 75.6% presented with no neurological sequelae and only one-third required blood transfusion. Median postoperative stay was 7 days. Correction of kyphosis was considered adequate and suboptimal but acceptable in 91% and 9% of the patients, respectively. Complications occurred in 36 patients, the majority being transient. We observed failure of the construct in 2 cases (collapse of an expandable cage and extrusion of a locking screw). No infections, vascular or visceral lesions, permanent neurological worsening or mortality occurred during hospitalisation. One patient ultimately needed additional posterior fixation due to persistence of pain. Median follow-up was 252days (27.9% was lost to follow-up).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The extrapleural extraperitoneal approach provides solid anterior reconstruction, allows wide decompression of the spinal canal, and permits adequate and long-lasting correction of kyphosis. The rates of infection, construct failure, need for reoperation and vascular or visceral lesions are minimal.It is estimated that at least 60% of all spinal fractures occur at the thoracolumbar (TL) junction, i.e. at segment T10-L2, probably as a result of this being the area of transition between thoracic kyphosis, which is relatively rigid, and lumbar lordosis, which is considerably more mobile. Unstable fractures of the TL junction generally occur in the context of high-energy traumas and may be associated with other severe musculoskeletal injuries or potentially fatal visceral lesions. As a general rule, treating an unstable TL fracture consists of nerve tissue decompression followed by rigid internal fixation which has traditionally been performed using a posterior (open or percutaneous) approach with pedicle screws and adjacent vertebrae fusion, or via an anterior-lateral route using an extended, thoraco-phreno-laparotomy approach. The indication for surgery in TL fractures is determined by the morphology of the fracture, the extent of the associated ligament injury and the presence or absence of neurological impairment. TL junction fractures considered susceptible to spinal canal decompression and anterior column stabilisation were operated on using an anterior-lateral approach centred on the thoracoabdominal junction. One alternative to this technique that evades most of the pulmonary morbidity associated with the transpleural approach is what is known as the pure Experimental biomechanics studies endorse reconstruction and anterior stabilisation, as this provides direct spinal canal decompression and greater mechanical stability compared to the posterior approach. On occasions where a combined anterior and posterior approach is initially deemed necessary, an interesting option is what is known as the In this paper we discuss the rationale of the extrapleural retroperitoneal approach for managing unstable TL junction fractures, and its advantages and disadvantages with respect to other procedures. We also describe the results and complications that occurred in a large patient series treated with this technique. A retrospective clinical data review of a consecutive case series was performed on the centre's computerised database, in which the patients had undergone an Lateral X-rays and computed axial tomography (CAT) scans of the affected segments were taken with sagittal and coronal reconstructions in all patients. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also performed on occasions, primarily to assess the extent of posterior ligament complex impairment and the spinal cord injury. All of the patients underwent surgery on the days following the trauma, generally after 24–48 The patients eligible for treatment with this surgical technique were referred from our centre's catchment area (Burgos, Soria and La Rioja), which has an estimated population of around 750,000 inhabitants. The patients who were eventually selected presented a single-level fracture deemed to be unstable, with a  Data on intraoperative complications and postoperative morbidity were compiled prospectively throughout the study period. Patients were monitored at outpatient neurosurgery consultations until their symptoms had resolved or stabilised and until the clinical and radiological confirmation of the affected column's stabilisation (by means of X-rays and CAT scans). A descriptive statistical analysis was also performed on the cohort, ensuring the confidentiality of the patients’ clinical data at all times. The study was approved by our centre's Independent Ethics Committee (ref. IEC 1610). We performed the technique in accordance with the generic procedure described in the literature, The skin and subcutaneous tissue are incised until the latissimus dorsi muscle is reached. Through this, the rib is palpated and all of the muscles above are incised until it is revealed. At this point, the intercostal muscles are detached from the superior and inferior borders of the rib with an electric scalpel, taking care not to injure the pleura, until it is free from muscle attachments. Next, using a dissector, the interface between the bone and periosteum is identified from the rib's superior border and detached along the inner face of the length of the rib, separating it from the parietal pleura. Once the rib is isolated and perfectly dissected, the posterior and anterior ends are cut with shears. This cut should be cautious to avoid the neurovascular bundle that runs alongside the rib's inferior border. The rib may be permanently excised and used as a bone graft for arthrodesis or left Once the rib has been cut, if the surgeon decides to leave it Once the left lateral faces of the fractured vertebra and two contiguous vertebrae have been exposed, the location is confirmed with a lateral X-ray or navigation. The discs are then cut and the corpectomy performed using osteotomes, forceps and curettes, extracting any fractured bone fragments. The posterior wall is reached using curettes and Kerrison punches, until the neurological deficit is reversed, avoiding a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula. At this point, significant venous bleeding may occur due to the rupture of epidural venous plexus vessels, which may be controlled with bipolar coagulation and haemostatic agents. We will leave the anterior and right cortices of the vertebra intact. The discectomies must be as exhaustive as possible in order to favour arthrodesis. Once an adequate intraosseous cavity has been forged, the interbody graft is inserted, which acts as a vertebral body replacement. If this graft is non-expandable (titanium cages, stackable carbon cages, autologous bone graft, etc.), the adjacent vertebral bodies will be distracted beforehand to allow for its insertion. If it is expandable, it is inserted and expanded under radiological surveillance until the deformity is corrected. Generally speaking, a final graft height of around 35 Bicortical screws (measuring around 45 It is always advisable to leave a suction drain at the surgical site. In the event the pleural membrane is ruptured, it may be sutured with Vicryl or a resorbable graft may be fitted to protect the surface of the wound. In cases where the pleura suffers a wider tear, the suction drain left at the surgical site acts as a pleural tube, as long as the device's vacuum is left on at all times in the early postoperative period, with the water seal not being necessary. The rib is subsequently returned to its original position and, after making holes in both ends, is sutured at the level of the sections. The muscle, subcutaneous tissue and skin are then stitched up. Postoperative X-rays (or intraoperative CAT scans) are taken to check that the grafts and screws have been fitted properly, in order to assess the degree of deformity correction and to rule out the presence of a pneumothorax before removing the drain. The patient can usually wander around on the second or third day post-surgery. Standard painkillers are prescribed and opiates should be avoided. The patient is encouraged to perform respiratory physiotherapy exercises as soon as possible in order to minimise the onset of atelectasis or respiratory infections. In order to prevent postoperative deep vein thrombosis, we initially use pneumatic compression boots, followed by low molecular weight heparin. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered at the beginning of the procedure (second-generation cephalosporins or vancomycin), and maintained for 48–72  Between June 1999 and December 2015, a total of 153 patients with unstable TL fractures of traumatic origin underwent surgery. Posterior fixations were performed on 53 patients and simultaneous combined anterior-posterior approaches were used in two. 98 patients were operated on via the anterior-lateral approach. 12 were treated with the Complications occurred in 36 patients (41.8%). The median hospital stay was 14 Kyphosis correction was considered adequate in 91% of cases and suboptimal but acceptable in the rest. The mean segmental kyphotic angle ranged from 17.7° prior to the operation to 5.06° after the operation (measurements obtained on 23 patients with images of satisfactory quality). Moreover, in 11 patients, this measurement was taken at the end of follow-up, with a correction loss of 1.02° (range −7.55 to +3.05). No patient with acceptable correction of the kyphotic deformity required later surgery due to instability or chronic pain.  In accordance with the conclusions issued by the consensus panel of the The variability in the indication for arthrodesis among different centres that operate on patients with thoracolumbar fractures is striking, being greater in urban centres with associated teaching units than in those without such facilities. These differences may be extended to the indication for anterior, posterior and circumferential stabilisation, as shown in the interesting study by Pishnamaz et al. Over the past 5–6 decades, TL fractures have been classified in accordance with anatomical, morphological criteria and based on the mechanism of injury. Most of these systems pose problems owing to their complexity, degree of use and/or lack of reproducibility/reliability. In the series presented herein, a high proportion of patients with unstable TL fractures were treated via the anterior-lateral approach compared to the posterior technique. The reason for this could be that fractures with a TLICSS of 4 or more and significant spinal canal compression and associated neurological injury were over-represented in our case series (33%). As regards the choice of approach, our department's policy tends to favour the anterior approach in single-level fractures with significant kyphotic deformity, especially if spinal stenosis is observed due to vertebral body comminution. Conversely, in principle, we do not consider fractures with minimal deformity and no neurological impairment to be operative if the posterior arch presents no significant injury, even in cases of burst fracture. We believe that the majority of these cases can be managed conservatively, though we understand that they may be deemed operative by other surgeons. Generally speaking, in the absence of a significant posterior ligament complex injury, we consider TL burst fractures to be inherently stable vertebral injuries that do not require surgery or perhaps even a brace. The literature does not clarify the role surgery plays on burst fractures without neurological deficits. A Cochrane review published in 2013 was unable to prove that surgery was superior to conservative treatment in terms of clinical outcomes, and suggested that surgical treatment seemed to increase early morbidity, the need for reoperation and initial costs. With respect to procedure times, the early stabilisation (within the first few hours) of unstable TL fractures provides certain advantages in relation to hospital stays, stays in ICU, general and respiratory morbidity, days of ventilation and hospital costs, The classic transpleural thoracoabdominal approach has been used in unstable TL fractures with favourable clinical outcomes. The literature features several technical descriptions of the aforementioned transpleural approaches, although case series providing clinical outcomes are limited. The extrapleural approach may be carried out via the bed of the tenth, eleventh or twelfth ribs – a subject which is still open to discussion. In their publication on a series of 26 patients with various TL conditions, including 13 fractures, Kim et al. Clinical practice confirms that the vast majority of TL fractures may also be operated on satisfactorily via both an anterior-lateral and posterior approach. The main advantages of the anterior-lateral approach are the low infection rate, solid stabilisation of the anterior wall and better and easier spinal canal decompression. The main disadvantages would be the higher technical difficulty, the possibility of visceral or vascular lesion and the need for other thoracic, cardiothoracic or vascular surgeons to work together to obtain adequate exposure of the surgical field. The infection rate of the anterior-lateral approach (0.7–0.9%) is also significantly lower than that of the posterior approach (at least 2–5%), according to various studies.  In this cohort of patients we noted a 41.8% rate of cumulative complications overall ( We also note the failure of the implanted metal construct in one case (collapse of the expandable interbody cage and subsequent breakage of the lower screws), occurring four It is worth noting that no visceral or large vessel lesions occurred during the procedure. In the literature, serious vascular and visceral lesions are reported in 1–2% of cases that follow this type of approach. The absence of infections in the cohort treated with the anterior-lateral approach is particularly striking. The literature confirms that this procedure offers improved wound healing and fewer surgical site infections compared to posterior fixation. Only 37% of the patients in our series needed a blood transfusion (the vast majority requiring just one or two units of packed red blood cells), taking into account that the median procedure time was 275 In our department, we subjected the last 48 patients who underwent surgery via this approach to neurophysiological monitoring. None of them sustained a neurological injury without neurophysiological impact (false negatives of the technique), or the opposite, neurological indemnity with impaired potentials (false positives). In our opinion, its use does not substantially prolong procedure times, enhances safety during the surgery itself and provides objective confirmation of the degree of neurological injury – a matter that often has medico-legal implications. We also used tomography-guided spinal navigation (Medtronic O-Arm, USA) on the last 15 cases. In our view, navigation is useful for locating the level and the limit of the posterior wall before accessing the spinal canal and for accurately fitting bicortical and locking screws. In our experience, the use of navigation did not significantly prolong the procedure time and provided security in the implantation of the fixation construct. It has recently been suggested that, with regard to reducing the onset of complications, the simple act of prospectively recording the errors made throughout the treatment process is beneficial in reducing their incidence. Although the anterior approach enables wider decompression of the spinal canal than the posterior approach, It is interesting to note the growing role that minimally invasive approaches are starting to play in the management of unstable TL fractures with neurological deficits. 2016 saw the publication of the first prospective, randomised cohort study comparing posterior decompression with MIS pedicle screw fixation to open surgery via the posterior approach in TL fractures with neurological deficits. The role of kyphotic deformity correction on the persistence of chronic pain and the development of future post-traumatic syringomyelia is also subject to debate. The acceptable degree of post-traumatic kyphosis (perhaps between 15° and 30°) is poorly defined and seems to depend on the level: lower in more lordotic segments and higher in less lordotic segments. Compared to the anterior approach, patients who undergo surgery via the posterior approach, with fixations just one segment above and below the fracture, develop a significant increase in kyphosis, owing not to increased vertebral wedging but to the collapse of the discs adjacent to the fractured vertebra. In our series, we noted a relatively high percentage (9%) of patients with suboptimal segmental kyphosis correction, albeit without functional repercussions or persistent pain. We are also unsure of the clinical significance of this mild postoperative kyphosis progression, which in the subgroup studied from our series was 1.41° on average (range, 7.05° to −3.05). Suboptimal kyphosis correction is not shown to predispose the patient to chronic pain or syringomyelia based on the published studies. Finally, in accordance with our experience and comparative studies, we cannot assert whether there are significant differences in terms of stability and clinical course between the different constructs and implants available on the market. We used stackable carbon cages, titanium mesh, autologous bone grafts and expandable grafts with seemingly comparable results, although we should point out that system failures only occurred with expandable grafts. This study incurs the Our policy tends to favour the extrapleural retroperitoneal approach in single-level unstable TL fractures with significant deformity and comminution due to the low infection rate (none in our series), the low rate of construct failure, the ability to perform immediate and solid anterior stabilisation, superior kyphotic deformity correction and the need to fix fewer segments, compared to the posterior approach. In our department, we use the TLICSS as our main guide when deciding whether or not to indicate surgical treatment in a TL fracture, taking into account that vertebral burst fractures without deficits or significant losses of vertebral body height do not clearly benefit from surgery. Nor has it been shown that fractures with partial neurological deficits improve more significantly with one approach versus another. Nevertheless, we do not advocate replacing the posterior approach with the anterior in every case. We believe the anterior-lateral approach to be both safe and effective, and that it may be performed by adequately trained spinal surgeons without the help of other specialists. The technique is relatively easy to learn, and while it implies a slightly longer procedure time, it provides proven stability in the medium and long term, as well as an acceptable surgical risk. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.