The alkaline-carbonatite complex of Angico dos Dias, located in the Northeast of Brazil, is currently exploited to produce phosphate rock concentrate. Coarse particles (above 600 µm) are processed through a dry route accounting for 53% of the run of mine. Chemical and mineralogical compositions, density, particle size distribution, mineralogical associations, and mineral liberation were determined. A wet processing route for the fine particles was proposed in this paper, comprehending the following stages: scrubbing, low-intensity magnetic separation, desliming, milling, anionic direct flotation, and wet high-intensity magnetic separation. X-ray diffraction analysis showed fluorapatite as the main phosphate bearing mineral, silicates and iron oxyhydroxides are the predominantly gangue minerals. Mineral liberation analysis showed that 40.8% of the apatite particles had completely exposed surface and 73.05% had at least 90%. Regarding mineral liberation, 87.6% were entirely liberated and 11.6% were binary association. Energy dispersive spectrum microanalysis results showed the presence of three rare earth elements bearing minerals in the ore. The average P2O5 content of the ROM ore was 15.39%, and its recovery above 212 µm was 76.95%. Below this size, the P2O5 content decrease progressively, whereas the Fe2O3, Al2O3, and SiO2 contaminants increase. The absence of calcite and dolomite could favor the process selectivity in an anionic direct flotation using fatty acids as collectors. Therefore, the proposal for a wet processing design for concentration of apatite covers.Phosphate deposits can be classified according to the genesis process as sedimentary, igneous, or biogenic ones. Different from largest worldwide sedimentary deposits, around 80% of the Brazilian phosphate deposits are igneous alkaline-carbonatite formations, usually weathered According to Woolley e Kjarsgaard The alkaline-carbonatite complex of Angico dos Dias is located in the São Francisco craton, Campo Alegre de Lourdes municipality, Bahia, Brazil (see Santos Considering the strategic importance of the Angico dos Dias phosphate deposit, a series of technological characterization tests were carried out. Chemical and mineralogical compositions, density, particle size distribution, mineralogical associations, and apatite liberation spectrum were determined. A technical and economical wet mineral processing route for this ore was proposed for the first time in the literature. The ore tested were a blend of micaceous and mafic rocks, in a proportion of 65/35% in weight, respectively. Galvani Fertilizers donated 500 kg sample of blended phosphate ore (ROM) from Angico dos Dias Mining Unit. The sample preparation route for mineralogical analysis can be seen in The next step in the sample preparation procedure was sieving the samples in two size fractions: coarse (> 212 µm) and fine (< 212 µm). The coarse fraction was submitted to gravity separation, by heavy-media separation using tetrabromoethane (C XRD analysis were performed in a Malvern Panalytical X'Pert³ Powder operating with a copper tube (Cu-Kα radiation 1.5406 Å), 45 kV, 40 mA, 2θ ranging from 5 to 85° and 14 min collection time. The Rietveld method was applied to the XRD data using the Malvern Panalytical High Score Plus software and the ASTM PDF-4 database for a semi-quantitative mineral identification. The mineral associations and liberation spectrum were evaluated using a FEI Quanta 650 FEG SEM and the MLA (Mineral Liberation Analyzer) software. The GS true-density was determined by helium gas pycnometer using a Quantachrome Ultrapyc 1200e. Galvani Fertilizers supplied the X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) results.  The ROM overall comminution (crushing and milling) resulted in a reduction ratio of approximately 15:1 and a P  According to Luciano and Godoy   The fluorapatite particles liberation spectrum is shown in  The ROM density determined by gas pycnometer, was 2.977 ± 0.008 g/cm³, while the density of the purified apatite (NMFHF fraction) was 3.203 ± 0.008 g/cm³. These results explain why the tetrabromoethane with density of 2.89 g/cm³ was chose as heavy-media. The granulochemical analysis is shown in The P The Angico dos Dias phosphate, formed by the blend of mafic and micaceous lithotypes, is predominantly composed by silicates and iron oxyhydroxides as gangue minerals. The absence of calcite and dolomite is related to the weathering processes responsible for chemical and biological degradation of these minerals and the consequent enrichment of Fe The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors thank