In the present study, after successful synthesis of nano-HA powders by chemical precipitation method, wire-brushing (WB) treatment was effectively employed on Ti–6Al–4V substrates for the modification of electrophoretically deposited nano-hydroxyapatite coatings. The precipitated nano-HA particles were characterized by XRD, FT-IR, and DLS analyses. The morphology and particle size of synthesized nano-HA particles was observed by FE-SEM. The Ti–6Al–4V plates were initially wire brushed at different times and rotational speeds. Microhardness profile and AFM analysis of substrates were then studied. It was found that WB treatment at 16,000rpm for 60s leads to a maximum enhancement in the hardness and roughness of surface. Then, the electrophoretic deposition of nano-HA particles was carried out at constant voltage of 30V and after 60s. The results of adhesion test and potentiodynamic polarization measurements showed that WB treatment on Ti–6Al–4V substrates could efficiently increase the bonding strength between coating and substrate as well as corrosion resistance.Titanium and its alloy have been widely utilized in biomaterial applications due to their relatively excellent corrosion resistance, favorable biocompatibility, and high specific strength (strength per density) In fabrication process of Ti/HA coatings, due to degradation of metallic substrate and decomposition of HA, sintering temperatures should be below 1000 Mechanical surface modification methods, such as machining The present work addresses a fairly complete investigation of the effect of WB treatment on the bonding strength of nano-HA coatings. The optimum WB parameters (i.e. rotational speed and time) were chosen by microhardness and roughness analyses on the WB-treated Ti–6Al–4V substrates. Then, the electrophoretic deposition of synthesized nano-HA particles was studied in the ethanol-based suspension. Finally, the electrochemical corrosion behavior in SBF (simulated body fluid) solution and bonding strength of WB-treated and as-received samples were discussed. Nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite powders were synthesized by precipitation method using Ca(NO The as-received material (AR) was 3-mm-thick mill-annealed Ti–6Al–4V plates with the chemical composition of Al 6.28, V 4.90, Fe 0.29, Nb 0.05, Mn 0.03. Cr 0.02, Si 0.05, Sn <0.05, Mo <0.03, Cu <0.02, Zr 0.01, and Ti balance (all in wt.%). Wire brushing (WB) was carried out using a 64-mm-diameter circumferential brush with 0.3-mm-diameter stainless steel wires. The whole surface of a 10 The suspension was prepared by adding 1  The fraction of crystalline phase ( The FTIR spectrum of HA sample is shown in   X-ray patterns of as-received (AR) and wire-brushed (WB) samples at different rotational speeds are illustrated in The AFM images presented in   The potentiodynamic polarization curves of the coated AR and WB samples in a corrected-SBF solution are depicted in In the present study, the wire brushing (WB) as a surface modification treatment, was performed on Ti–6Al–4V substrate to improve the nano-HA coatings. The chemical precipitation method was used to synthesize nano-HA powders with the size of 65