This paper presents an experimental technique to measure maximum bubble loads, which are then compared with geometrical model estimations. The geometrical models studied assume that a particle monolayer, having a square arrangement, covers the entire bubble surface. Comparison of the experimental and analytical results gave a fairly high statistical correlation (R
                     2
                     =0.89), when a shape factor was used for particle volume estimation (λ
                     =0.32–0.41; [Kelly, E.G., Spottiswood, D.J. Introduction to Mineral Processing, John Wiley & Sons, 1982, p. 491]). This supports the applicability of geometrical models for maximum bubble load estimation.One objective of some researchers interested in froth flotation is mathematical modeling of the mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate. For others, these models are important for optimizing and evaluating flotation process performance. However, these models must previously be validated, by comparison with experimental results reported by reliable techniques. For this reason, the first part of this paper describes the experimental methodology used to measure maximum bubble loads, and the second part compares the analytical predictions against the experimental measurements. This work contributes to the study of bubble loading, and is the previous stage to modeling the concentrate solids mass flow. Some authors have approached the study of maximum bubble loads through statistical correlations, such as neural networks ( A commonly used technique to measure bubble diameter is photography ( One of the first papers reporting a study of maximum bubble loads is that by According to  Recently, The experimental apparatus in this work allows the measurement, through high speed video techniques, of the velocity and diameter of the loaded bubbles and subsequently, the calculation of the density of the aggregate and of the mass of particles that cover the bubble.  The number of particles in a size class of equivalent diameter The product of the number of particles with diameter The summation of the surface areas occupied by all the size classes is the total area occupied by the particle distribution According to these assumptions, the maximum bubble load can be estimated by the equation Finally,  Silica sand with a size distribution between 50 and 300 The slurry was prepared mixing 1  After the conditioning stage, the next step was bubble generation, which must be done with care in order to prevent bubble lost due to natural flotation, particularly when large bubbles are being formed. Following bubble formation, the bubble surface was loaded, placing the silica particles on the bubble with the aid of a spatula. Bubble images were captured before and after loading in order to have a direct measurement of its diameter. For the generation of larger bubbles (larger than 4 To retrieve and weigh the solids load, the bubble was lifted to the water surface in order for the bubble to burst. This step was done with care, placing a spoon under the loaded bubble. To compare the experimental and the estimated load, the solids recovered were dried and weighed. The above procedure was repeated with bubbles of several sizes, in order to have adequate experimental data.  Since one of the objectives of this work was to estimate the maximum bubble load, and this estimation requires the definitions of a packing factor, the next step was the experimental evaluation of this parameter.  The experimentally estimated packing factor was 0.79, and this is the main reason to concluded that rounded particles display a packing factor similar to that of spherical particles arranged in a square (or hexagonal) pattern ( Algorithm used to estimate the maximum bubble load: Assuming a spherical bubble to calculate the surface area The number of particles that the surface of the bubble may accommodate is then calculated.  The bubble load, or the particle weight (  The area occupied by all particle-size classes is calculated by the equation  The use of the model may be of help in predicting the maximum mass flow rate of solids that a flotation column is capable of transporting when operating at its carrying capacity. Under these conditions, it is suspected (and visual observations performed in transparent pilot-scale columns have corroborated this) that bubbles in the froth zone are completely covered by particles. Maximum bubble loads measured with the experimental technique described in this work are in good agreement with the results of an analytical model developed based on geometrical considerations. The correlation between the predictions of the model and the experimental data shows a fairly good statistical correlation ( The authors are grateful to CONACYT (MEXICO) for the financing received and to MSc. J.A. Gonzalez for the technical support in the laboratory. Due to the instability of larger bubbles (larger than 4