The ruminal degradation of amino acids (AA) of a green Italian rye-grass (GRG) and its silage (ERG) was determined on three wethers cannulated in rumen and duodenum using in situ and particle passage techniques. Wethers were fed a diet of ERG, corn silage and concentrate (1:1:1, DM basis) at 40 g DM/kg BW0.75. Two rumen incubations (at 0, 2, 4, 8, 16, 24, 48 and 72 h) with freeze-dried samples (3 g) in nylon bags were performed for each feed. The microbial contamination of incubated residues was corrected using 15N enriched solid associated bacteria isolates as reference. Two different estimates of undegraded AA were established: UPp, considering the particle rumen outflow rate (k
                     p) of the ERG, and UPcp, considering additionally the rate of comminution and mixing (k
                     c) of these particles. Microbial contamination resulted in large errors in the degradation kinetic parameters of all AA. As a result, non corrected UPp and UPcp included a large fraction of microbial origin. For essential AA plus cysteine these microbial proportions ranged 0.365–0.555 (UPp) and 0.461–0.710 (UPcp) in GRG. In ERG these values ranged: 0.403–0.666 (UPp) and 0.481–0.804 (UPcp). Cysteine always supplied minimum values whereas lysine showed maximum values in GRG or very close to these in ERG. Ensiling was associated with large changes in the AA profile. These variations conditioned, in turn, large differences in the changes made by the rumen microorganisms on the AA profile of both forages. However, ensiling only led to little changes in the profile of the rumen undegraded protein, especially when k
                     c was considered. Results show the need to correct for this contamination to obtain accurate AA valuations and also that the AA profile of the undegraded protein of a green forage may serve as a guide for this profile in its silages.Current systems of protein evaluation for ruminants relay on fragmentary information on the supply of amino acids (AA) to the animal. In this regard, the knowledge of the AA composition of the undegraded feed protein, which is scarce at the moment, may help to improve the AA evaluation of feeds. The most used single method to develop systematic studies on AA degradability is the A sample of Italian rye-grass wilting for one day (GRG) and its silage (ERG; chop length Bags with approximately 3 g of feed samples were incubated in the rumen of each animal for intervals of 2, 4, 8, 16, 24, 48, and 72 h. Two series of incubations including one bag of all these time points were conducted for each feed in different days. The microbial contamination of the incubated residues was determined by infusing continuously in the rumen a solution of ( AA were analysed in forages and SAB samples after acid hydrolysis, direct or preceded by oxidation with formic acid and hydrogen peroxide, using norleucine as internal standard. Therefore, the study did not include tryptophan. The results of methionine and cysteine were derived only from the last analysis type whereas those of tyrosine were obtained by the former type. The remainder AA was determined as the average of both analyses, which showed similar results. As a consequence of the shortage of material of some residues, the AA analyses in the All the statistical analyses were performed using the Statistical Analysis System for Windows software, version 6.12 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Degradation kinetics were fitted by an iterative least-square procedure using the NLIN procedure of SAS. Effects of ensiling on degradation characteristics after correction for microbial contamination and on the AA profile of the undegraded protein were subjected to variance analyses using a single complete block experimental design. The variations between these profiles and those of their original forages were studied by a Mean concentrations of total analysed AA in GRG, ERG and SAB were 72.2, 62.7 and 411.3 g/kg DM, respectively, meaning the 74.6, 51.0 and 93.9% of their CP contents. AA profiles of these samples are shown in Some constraints were needed to fit the microbial corrected degradation kinetics. In both feeds the undegradable fraction ( For essential AA and cysteine, the proportions of AA from microbial origin included in the non corrected estimates of the rumen undegraded protein (UP The concentrations and profile of AA found in the tested forages agree with different feed tables ( The need to assume a value of zero for the undegradable fraction of some AA is common when this fraction is very low, as it was observed for most AA ( The very high contamination with microbial AA implies unacceptable errors for the estimates of the rumen undegraded fraction, which in addition were very variable among AA in both forages ( Differences in degradability observed among AA (or the resultant changes between the AA profiles of the feed and its undegraded protein) should be due to simultaneous differences between the feed proteins in AA composition and resistance to the rumen degradation ( Italian rye-grass is characterized by a low content of rumen undegraded AA, especially after ensiling and when the particle comminution rate is considered for this estimate. The lack of correction for the microbial contamination in the rumen leads to unacceptable errors in all AA. Protein changes during silage maturation lead to different behaviours in the AA degradation of the green and ensiled forage, but ensiling has little effects on the AA profile of the undegraded protein. Therefore, the AA profile of the rumen undegraded protein of the green forage would serve as a guide for this same profile in its silages. This work was supported by the CICYT funded Project AGF 1998-0842.