Solid biomass usually undergoes a stage of pretreatment with the aim of being prepared for its energy utilisation. Within pretreatment stage, pelletisation process can be considered. Nowadays the main raw materials used for pellet production are wood wastes from sawmills and wood processing industries. However, searching for other raw materials is necessary in order to guarantee the supply. In this work, poplar energy crop has been studied as raw material. The results showed that poplar is a tough material with regard to its pelletisation and maize starch and/or lignosulphonate (a by-product in cellulose production) addition increases the process stability and decreases the specific energy demanded. It has been observed that with maize starch addition, the specific energy demanded during the pelletisation process is lower than with lignosulphonate addition, but, on the other hand, when lignosulphonate is used, physical quality of pellets is higher than with maize starch utilisation. Finally, the optimum conditions found to pelletise poplar are: milling particle size below 4mm, specific pelletisation surface 5.6cm2/kW, die compression 26mm and 4wt.% (d.b.) of dry additive (3% maize starch plus 1% lignosulphonate).Production and utilisation of biofuels entail social and environmental benefits compared to fossil fuels. Solid biomass is obtained in origin with some characteristics which decrease its quality for its direct energy utilisation. Consequently, a previous stage of pretreatment must be carried out and in that sense, pelletisation process can be considered. During pelletisation, temperature increases as a consequence of a pressure raise and friction forces. An effect of this temperature increase is the auto-agglomeration of the biomass raw material due to the fluidification of the lignin which is an essential component of most of biomass materials. Knowledge of the fundamental agglomeration properties of biomass particles is essential to optimise the densification process. It is also important to understand the compaction mechanism in order to design energy-efficient compaction equipment and to quantify the effects of some process variables on the pellets physical quality Lignosulphonate is obtained as a by-product in cellulose production from wood by sulphite acid process. Binding effect of lignosulphonate is due to lignin-lignin and lignin-water interactions because it is a compound with hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups On the other hand, it has been proved that maize starch can also act as a binder. It has been demonstrated that binding action is improved when starch is gelatinised and mechanical shearing during the densification process improves starch gelatinisation Most of the raw materials processed by pellet production plants in Europe are sawdust and shavings coming from sawmills and wood processing industries. Nevertheless, taking into account the increasing demand of pellets for energy and non-energy purposes, there is a growing interest in the utilisation of alternative raw materials, such as bark, logging residues, agricultural residues and energy crops The objective of this work is to evaluate the pelletisation process of poplar as well as the characteristics of the pellets obtained, in order to define the optimum conditions to pelletise this biomass raw material. The poplar ( The starch used was native maize starch. The Ca–Mg–lignosulphonate was kindly supplied by Borregaard Ligno-Tech Ibérica. Comminution of poplar chips was carried out using two machines: A primary crusher which was a double bearing horizontal axis knife mill with a drive of 35 A secondary grinder which was a single bearing horizontal axis hammer mill with a drive of 11 The facility used in the experiments was a pilot plant ( Two degrees of comminution were tested: a first size defined by a screen opening of 10 After comminution, the milled batches were pelletised. During the tests, which lasted 1 hour, the raw material was put in the pellet press mixed with the suitable quantity of water in order to get a right operation of the machine (i.e. stable power demand and low vibration) and low moisture content pellets (moisture content Five factors were taken into account during the pelletisation tests: Particle size distribution of the raw material, studying the pelletisation of two different degrees of comminution: 10 Specific pelletisation surface. Three different values were used: 9.6, 8.0 specific pelletisation surface. number of die holes which are covered by the rollers. surface of one hole. It is calculated with: S drive power of the pellet press. Die compression (pressway). It is defined as the way between the beginning of the inlet cone and the end of the straight part of the die hole (l Additive addition. Poplar presented difficulties during its pelletisation and it was necessary to add maize starch and lignosulphonate. In order to optimise the kind and the dosage of additive, three different dosages of maize starch and lignosulphonate were added (2.5, 5.0 and 7.0 Physical characterisation of pellets, which was compared to the values stated in EN 14961-1:2010 Process variables recorded in milling and pelletisation tests were the specific mass flow (in kg of dry matter/h The sampling procedure of the milled biomass and the pellets was based on the technical specification UNE-CEN/TS 14778-1 EX is the minimum permitted number of increments, round off to the nearest whole number; is the mass of the lot or sub-lot in tonnes. Thus, the number of increments for milled material was three and the number of increments for pellets was five. All the increments (milled material and pellets separately) were placed into one container to form a combined sample which was analysed in the laboratory. The utilised analytical procedures were based on extensive investigations, norms and scientific literature. The methods utilised for milled material and pellets characterisation at CEDER-CIEMAT are resumed as follows: the determination was based on heating the sample at 105 this test consists of the separation of the sample into defined size fractions that are expressed in weight percent. This procedure was adapted from the norm ASTM E 828-81 “Designating the size of refuse derived fuel-3 from its sieve analysis”. this procedure was adapted from the norm ASTM E 873-82. “Bulk density of densified particulate biomass fuels”. it was calculated by means of the ratio between pellet weight and pellet volume, which was determined using the geometrical measures with the help of a calibre. this analysis evaluates the resistance of the densified biomass to repeated beating (transport and handling). The determination was made according to the Austrian norm ÖNORM M7134. A machine called “lignotester”, which functions by blowing air at 70 Sulphur analysis was carried out by ion chromatography after combustion of the sample in a calorimeter and lixiviation of the ashes with ultrapure water. This procedure derives from the technical specification prCEN/TS 15289 “Solid biofuels — Determination of total content for sulphur and chlorine”. Poplar milling behaviour is characterised by two process variables ( As was explained in The particles obtained after comminution have mainly fusiform shape, as can be seen in A comparison of the bulk density of the milled poplar and pine sawdust appears in Initially, during pelletisation tests, biomass feeding flow to pellet press was regulated to be as high as possible in order to get the maximum production, whenever pellet press power did not exceed the upper limit value and obtained pellets had an acceptable physical quality. Furthermore, poplar was put in the pellet press mixed with the suitable quantity of water in order to soften the material and to get a stable work of the pellet press, but without diminishing the pellets quality. As can be seen in Once completed the tests with 9.6 The values of moisture content at the inlet of the pellet press, specific mass flow and specific energy for the described tests appear in Although the first test could not be carried out with the same die compression, it can be noticed that as specific pelletisation surface is decreased, specific mass flow increases and specific energy decreases. Physical characteristics of pellets are shown in The results obtained in pelletisation tests with poplar biomass showed that the conditions which led to the highest pellet production, the lowest energy demand and the best pellets physical properties were: 4 Firstly, maize starch and lignosulphonate were added separately in three dosages (2.5, 5.0 and 7.0  Comparing the specific energy demand, it can be seen that the addition of maize starch results in a lower energy demand than the addition of lignosulphonate. This fact could be due to the lubricating effect of the starch Physical characteristics of pellets obtained are shown in Taking into account the obtained results, the option of introducing maize starch together with lignosulphonate was considered interesting, since it had been observed that with maize starch addition, specific energy demand was especially reduced, and with lignosulphonate addition, the physical properties of the pellets were particularly improved. Furthermore, Richardson et al. Sulphur content of the pure poplar biomass was analysed, and a value of 0.034% (wt.) (dry basis) was obtained. With the object of confirming if this value would be reasonable, the work of Ciria et al. On the other hand, the used lignosulphonate was analysed and a sulphur content of 6.3 With the purpose of selecting the optimum additives dosage when they are added simultaneously, the pellet press operated in the same conditions than in previous tests (i.e. constant feed flow: 8 dry kg/h With regard to the physical properties of the pellets obtained with the addition of maize starch and lignosulphonate simultaneously ( Comparing these results with those obtained for the addition of additives separately ( Taking into account the quality classification of pellets according to EN 14961-1:2010 Poplar is a tough material and additives are needed to pelletise it in order to carry out a mechanically viable operation. Therefore, the following conclusions can be highlighted: Maize starch or lignosulphonate addition (in dosages of 2.5, 5.0 and 7.0 Considering the same additive dosage, with maize starch addition, the specific energy demanded during the pelletisation process was lower than with lignosulphonate addition. The reduction of the energy demanded was between 42 and 43% for maize starch addition and between 7 and 23% for lignosulphonate addition, depending on the dosage utilised. Concerning the physical quality of pellets and when the same additive dosage was used, the pellets properties in general were better with lignosulphonate addition than with maize starch addition. Regarding the classification established by EN 14961-1:2010 Regarding the tests carried out and the facilities used, the pelletisation conditions selected as optimal are: Milling size: 4 Specific pelletisation surface: 5.6 Die compression: 26 The most favourable dosage of additives, taking into account a sulphur content limit of 0.10 We gratefully acknowledge the Borregaard Ligno-Tech Ibérica Company for providing the lignosulphonate utilised in this work.