Background
                  Currently, no technique has met general acceptance for the restoration of forearm longitudinal stability in chronic Essex-Lopresti injuries. The purpose of this study is to present an alternative treatment method for chronic Essex-Lopresti lesions by radial head replacement and ulnar shortening osteotomy.
               
                  Methods
                  Seven patients with a mean age of 42.4 years were included in the study. Five patients had a staged approach, and 2 underwent both procedures simultaneously. The pain level was assessed with the use of a visual analog scale. Elbow, forearm, and wrist range of motion was evaluated. The Mayo Elbow Performance Score and Mayo Wrist Score were used to assess the postoperative outcomes.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up time was 33 months. The mean pain level was reduced from 8.4 points preoperatively to 3.3 points postoperatively (P < .05). The elbow arc of motion was increased on average from 79° preoperatively to 121° postoperatively (P < .05). Forearm rotation improved from 76° preoperatively to 119° postoperatively (P < .05). The wrist arc of motion improved from 94° preoperatively to 114° postoperatively (P < .05). The mean postoperative Mayo Elbow Performance Score and Mayo Wrist Score were 82 points and 71 points, respectively. The mean ulnar variance was reduced from +8 mm to +3.5 mm postoperatively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study shows that radial head replacement in combination with ulnar shortening osteotomy can be used as an alternative reconstructive procedure in the case of a complex chronic Essex-Lopresti injury. This combination of known procedures yields predictable and satisfactory outcomes and a low complication rate.The Essex-Lopresti lesion is a high-energy complex forearm injury characterized by the triad of radial head fracture, interosseous membrane (IOM) rupture, and distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) disruption. Edwards and Jupiter Early diagnosis of this injury pattern usually results in a predictable and satisfactory outcome, with radial head fixation (in type I) or replacement (in type II) in combination with triangular fibrocartilage complex repair and DRUJ stabilization. The purpose of this study is to present our results in 7 patients with chronic Essex-Lopresti lesions treated with radial head replacement and ulnar shortening osteotomy. Seven patients (five men and two women) with a mean age of 42.4 years (range, 37 to 58 years) were treated operatively by the senior author (D.G.S.) between 2003 and 2009 for the diagnosis of chronic Essex-Lopresti injury ( Five patients had a staged approach; the radial head was initially replaced, and the ulnar shortening osteotomy was subsequently performed at a later date after the onset of wrist symptoms. The other 2 patients who initially presented with elbow and wrist complaints underwent both procedures simultaneously. The mean time from the initial injury to final surgery was 11 months (range, 6 to 24 months). In all patients, preoperative anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the injured elbow and forearm, as well as both wrists, were obtained ( The radial head prostheses ( Follow-up comprised clinical and radiologic examination. Pain levels were determined by a visual analog scale ranging from 0 to 10, with 0 being no pain and 10 representing maximal pain. Range of motion was assessed with a goniometer. At the final follow-up, elbow function was accessed by use of the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and wrist function was addressed with the Mayo Wrist Score. All measurements were assessed by an independent examiner who did not participate in the clinical treatment. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compare the preoperative and postoperative numerical data. All reported The mean follow-up time was 33 months (range, 26 to 52 months). All patients had significant pain relief. The mean preoperative pain score improved from 8.4 points (range, 8 to 10 points) to 3.3 points (range, 2 to 5 points) at the final follow-up ( Range of motion significantly improved postoperatively. The elbow arc of motion increased on average from 79° preoperatively to 121° postoperatively ( The final postoperative Mayo Elbow Performance Score was 82 points on average, with 5 patients achieving good results and 2 achieving fair results. The mean Mayo Wrist Score was 71 points at the final follow-up, with 1 patient reaching a good outcome and the remaining 6 patients having fair results. The mean ulnar variance was reduced from +8 mm (range, +6 to +12 mm) preoperatively to +3.5 mm (range, +2 to +4.5 mm) postoperatively ( There were no major complications apart from a delayed union of the ulnar shortening osteotomy in a smoker, which finally healed nonoperatively at 8 months. Management of the chronic Essex-Lopresti lesion continues to be a challenging therapeutic entity. Several methods have been reported in the literature, but none has met general acceptance. The main goal when treating such injuries is to re-establish the longitudinal relationship between the radius and ulna. Restoration of the proximal radioulnar joint (PRUJ) and DRUJ is the key to regaining painless elbow and wrist function. The pathognomonic lesion in Essex-Lopresti injury is the rupture of the IOM. Radial head replacement can be troublesome especially in neglected cases. Contraction and scarring may result in fixed proximal migration of the radius, making an extensive elbow release prerequisite to a successful radial head implant. Selecting the appropriate implant size is crucial to the elbow and PRUJ stability. An undersized implant can lead to recurrent instability of the elbow particularly in the presence of occult lateral ulnar collateral ligament insufficiency. In contrast, an overstuffed implant can result in persistent elbow stiffness and pain due to chondrolysis of the capitellum. Selecting the correct radial head size is difficult when the head has been excised during a previous operation. In such cases, we prefer the radial head to be slightly undersized. Our goal is to place the radial head implant at or just proximal to the lateral facet of the coronoid, floating on the capitellum, to avoid overstuffing of the joint. To restore radioulnar length relations, after radial head replacement, a leveling procedure at the DRUJ is often necessary. It is crucial to have radiographs of the contralateral forearm to make this assessment. Ulnar shortening osteotomy levels the DRUJ and addresses ulnocarpal abutment. This procedure should not be used alone because it does not address forearm instability when the radial head is absent or deficient. We addressed the first 5 cases in our series in a staged manner, replacing the radial head initially and then waiting a period for soft tissue healing and DRUJ readjustment to the lengthened radial height. Our initial strategy was based on reconstructing the primary longitudinal stabilizer, which is the radial head, believing that restoring the PRUJ would control the proximal migration of the radius and thus solve the problem. Intraoperatively, we noted that replacing the radial head with a metallic implant was not enough to reduce the DRUJ completely. Initially, we elected not to proceed to an ulnar shortening procedure concomitantly and decided to wait for soft tissue healing and DRUJ readjustment to the lengthened radial height. All of those patients continued to have ulna-sided wrist symptoms because of a persistently prominent ulnar head. An ulnar shortening osteotomy was performed at a second stage in these 5 patients. We concluded that both procedures should be performed simultaneously to achieve rapid rehabilitation and prevent the need for a second operation. Subsequently, all chronic Essex-Lopresti cases have been treated as described earlier in 1 stage. Several attempts to reconstruct the IOM have been reported in the literature in both cadaveric models and in vivo with variable results. Forearm instability is an extremely complex problem that must be recognized and addressed early for a successful outcome. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.