In this study, the Overlay Tester (OT) was successfully utilized to comparatively characterize the cracking resistance potential of various hot-mix asphalt (HMA) mixes with different mix-designs and material characteristics in the laboratory, ranging from fine- to coarse-graded mixes. Due partly to their heterogeneous structure and high air void content/variability, the OT test results indicated poor laboratory cracking performance and higher variability for the open- and coarse-graded mixes. Overall, the study findings substantiated the OT’s potential to rapidly screen and discriminate between good and poor crack-resistant mixes in the laboratory, with a proposed mix pass-fail screening criteria ranging from 30 to 750 OT load cycles.Cracking (in particular load-associated) is one of the critical distresses prevalent in today’s hot-mix asphalt (HMA) pavements, often costing the highway agencies millions of dollars in maintenance and rehabilitation activities. In HMA pavements, the majority of cracking occurs as fatigue or reflective cracking. Depending on the pavement structure and location of the maximum tensile stresses and strains within the HMA layers, fatigue cracking can be top-down or bottom-up, or initiated from both locations Cracking, whether fatigue or reflective, is an undesirable structural distress that detrimentally shortens the pavement service life and is normally associated with extensive maintenance and rehabilitation costs. Additionally, water and air ingress through these cracks and further exacerbate the pavement deterioration through moisture damage and oxidative aging, particularly for HMA pavements Over the past few decades, various laboratory test methods have been developed for characterizing the cracking resistance of HMA mixes Similar to the dynamic 2- or 4-point bending test, the Overlay Tester (OT) test also measures the number of load cycles to a predefined failure criteria; for instance 93% drop in the initial peak with the OT, which is synonymous to the 50% reduction in flexural stiffness in the case of the bending test. Unlike the above-mentioned test methods for cracking resistance potential evaluation, i.e., FBBFT, IDT, and SCB, the Overlay Tester (OT) test directly models crack growth and propagation through the HMA specimen thickness. Since its conceptual development in the late 1970s Traditionally, the OT test was utilized as a performance test for characterizing the reflective-cracking resistance potential of dense-graded HMA mixes in the laboratory In the paper, the OT is discussed first and includes the test loading parameters and the specimen fabrication procedures. The experimental design program is then presented and includes the mix-design characteristics for the HMA mixes used in the study. Laboratory test results and statistical data analyses are subsequently presented followed by a discussion and synthesis of the results. A summary of findings and recommendations is then presented to conclude the paper. This section discusses the experimental design plan and includes the OT test setup, loading conditions, and a volumetric description of the mixes evaluated. The OT test is a simple performance test used for characterizing the cracking reflection potential of HMA mixes in the laboratory. For this test, the specimen is glued onto two metallic plates – one mobile and the other fixed during the testing process – with a 2 The standard OT test loading configuration consists of a cyclic triangular displacement-controlled waveform at a horizontal displacement of 0.635 The OT test specimens are 150 For most typical Texas dense-graded HMA mixes, the target AV content for the laboratory molded specimens (for performance evaluation) is 7 During OT testing, the measurable parameters include the applied load, opening displacement rate, time, number of load cycles, and the test temperature. As shown in In OT tests, the number of OT load cycles to crack failure (see Twenty-nine different Texas HMA mix designs were tested using the OT and subsequently evaluated for their cracking resistance potential. These HMA mixes represent six mix types and materials that are commonly used in Texas, namely: (1) six fine-graded; (2) six dense-graded; (3) four gap-graded; (4) five open-graded; (5) five coarse-graded; and (6) three Superpave. The detailed mix compositions and volumetric properties are provided in The OT laboratory test results are presented and analyzed in this section and includes test data variability and the effects of the volumetric properties on the HMA mix cracking performance. The laboratory test results are provided in Considering the coarseness and porous nature of these mixes, respectively, the observations in    In fact,  For the HMA mixes evaluated, no distinctive relationship appeared to exist between the initial load and Test data variability analyses in this study were accomplished based on the COV evaluation of the AV content and With the exception of the SMA and SF mixes, the AV content variability, measured in terms of the COV, was less than 10% for all the HMA mixes evaluated. Considering the heterogeneous nature of HMA, this was plausible and indicative of good workmanship in the laboratory. These results are shown in Interestingly, these were also the mixes (CAM and Type F) with the highest asphalt-binder content in For the In comparing different materials, higher variability was generally observed for the PG 76-22TR, AR, and PG 76-22S asphalt-binders and limestone aggregates. Due to the use of tire and polymer modifiers; PG 76-22TR, AR, and PG 76-22S often resulted in poor workability in the laboratory arising from the stickiness and high stiffness of the asphalt-binder, in particular PG 76-22TR. This ultimately translated into high variability both in the AV and Note that while a COV threshold of 20% was conservatively used in this study, a COV threshold of 30% (i.e., COV ⩽30%) has since been proposed as a more realistic and practical threshold value for this kind of testing. This 30% COV threshold was arrived at after extensive sensitivity evaluation of the different OT variables affecting HMA mix cracking performance, OT repeatability, and variability in the test results Excluding the PFC mixes, In general, the fine- to dense-graded mixes performed superior in the OT test ( As reported by Walubita et al. Material-wise and for the OT test conditions considered, the following observations were made: The open-graded PFC mixes performed poorly, among other reasons, due to their porous nature (i.e., high AV content). For the Type B and SF mixes, some of the contributing factors to their lower number of OT load cycles was their coarse aggregate gradation (NMAS >19 For the asphalt-binder type (assuming all other variables to be equal), mixes with PG 76-22 generally exhibited superior performance, but were associated with poorer workability and higher variability in the test results compared, for instance, to mixes with PG 70-22 or PG 64-22. For the aggregate type (assuming all other variables to be equal), the best OT performance was generally observed for the granite aggregates while the limestone aggregates were generally the poorest (except in a few instances where it performed exceptionally well). As theoretically expected, OT cracking-resistance performance measured in terms As stated previously, the 300 pass-fail screening criterion has generally yielded satisfactory field performance results with most Texas dense-graded and gap-graded (SMA) mixes. However, this tentative criterion might not be universally applicable to all HMA mix types or site specific project requirements. For instance, it is scientifically logical to assume that the OT pass-fail requirements for a fine-graded surfacing mix should obviously be different from a coarse-graded base mix. So, in order to discretely and effectively account for the differences in the HMA mix-designs, functions, and in-situ location of the mixes in the pavement structure as well as to accommodate new by-product materials such as RAP, RAS, WMA, etc., some material specific OT pass-fail screening criteria have been suggested as listed in Note that the more discrete material-specific OT pass-fail screening criteria listed in In this study, the Overlay Tester (OT) test, conducted at ambient temperature (25 Based on the OT test conditions considered, the fine- and dense-graded HMA mixes generally exhibited good cracking resistance in the laboratory and were also associated with low variability measured in terms of the COV. By contrast, the open- and coarse-graded HMA mixes performed poorly (in terms of the number of OT load cycles to failure) and were associated with higher variability, with COV values greater than 20%. This is in part attributed to the inherently more heterogeneous nature of the open- and coarse-graded mixes. In general, the HMA mix cracking resistance was observed to be a function of the mix-design characteristics and volumetric properties including the material type (e.g., PG 76-22S and granite aggregates performed well), asphalt-binder content (the higher the better), AV content, asphalt-binder film thickness ( The variability in the number of OT cycles to failure ( For practicality and to realistically reflect the inherent variable nature of dynamic (repeated) loading crack tests at ambient temperature, the proposed COV threshold for variability in the OT test results is 30% (i.e., COV ⩽30%). However, it cannot be over emphasized that adhering to the recommended laboratory test procedures and specifications as documented in the updated Tex-248-F test specification are some of the key aspects towards optimizing repeatability and minimizing variability in the OT test results. Additionally, the OT test protocol variability and suitability for characterizing the cracking resistance of open- and coarse-graded HMA mixes, which generally have a more heterogeneous structure and high AV content, was evaluated. While the OT test was able to satisfactorily screen and rank the HMA mixes in their superior order of cracking resistance potential, the results indicated that the adapted OT pass-fail criterion (i.e., Overall and considering the 29 Texas mixes that were evaluated, the OT test was found to be useful for application as a routine crack test for HMA mix screening and discriminating between good and poor crack-resistant mixes in the laboratory. The results obtained were plausible with promising potential, particularly for the fine- to dense-graded and SMA mixes. However, while the OT test ranked the fine-and dense-graded mixes as having superior laboratory crack-resistance potential compared to other mixes evaluated, this may not necessarily tie to the actual field performance of the mixes. The ultimate field performance of any given HMA mixes is also a function of many other interactive variables such as the pavement structure (i.e., layer thicknesses, number of layers, location of the HMA layer, etc.), traffic, environmental conditions, construction effects (i.e., construction methods and quality control), etc. All these factors need to be considered when evaluating or predicting the overall expected cracking performance of a mix in the field. The authors are thankful to all those who provided financial (TxDOT/FHWA) or technical support in the course of this research work. In particular, special thanks are due to the following individuals for their help with laboratory testing; Gautam Das, Nick Sweet, Mohammad Rahman, and Zachary L. Rolan. The corresponding author also appreciates the financial support from China Scholarship Council.