Proximal humeral fractures account for about 5% of all fractures with a peak incidence in females aged over 80 and the incidence of these fragility fractures expected to increase. Whilst the majority can be conservatively managed, those with displaced fractures may benefit from surgery.
                  Fractures requiring fixation are a heterogeneous group ranging from simple displaced two part fractures to complex four part fractures and those with disruption of the medial calcar and humeral head blood supply. They require a variety of fixation techniques to achieve anatomical restoration and stability. Locking screw technology permits more stable low profile fixation for these challenging fractures and are now the mainstay of treatment.
                  Whilst these developments aid the surgeon in maintaining stable fixation, successful outcomes continue to rely on the basic principles of initial anatomical reduction and stable fixation with specific attention to the tuberosities to which the powerful rotator cuff muscles attach.Proximal humeral fractures account for about 5% of all fractures with a peak incidence in females aged over 80 and the incidence such fragility fractures expected to increase. Recently locking plate technology which gives angle stable fixation has become the procedure of choice in some centres. However high complication rates have been reported and the conventional indications for surgery have been challenged with non-operative treatment of displaced fractures shown to give equivalent outcomes in some studies. The decision to operate therefore needs careful consideration on an individual patient basis as neither the indications for surgery nor the appropriate implant are yet clearly proven. In this review we discuss the available plating options, surgical techniques and results. In 1949 Bosworth introduced a 120° blade plate to provide angular stability when plating the proximal humerus to mitigate both fracture comminution and poor bone quality. Most authors recommend the beach chair position which permits near all round access to the shoulder and the ability to extend the arm. This position requires careful positioning of the patient's head and there is some risk of cerebral hypo-perfusion for those under general anaesthesia. The two standard approaches to access the proximal humerus are the delto-pectoral and the lateral or deltoid splitting approach. The delto-pectoral approach goes between the deltoid muscle thus protecting the axillary nerve and pectoralis major protecting the medial and lateral pectoral nerves. A retrospective analysis of 63 patients found no difference in clinical, radiological or electrophysiological outcome between the two approaches for locked proximal humeral plating. However Hepp in a prospective analysis of 83 patients, found better Constant scores at 1 year in those patients who had had a delto-pectoral approach but also a higher rate of avascular necrosis. A proper understanding of the normal anatomy of the proximal humerus, common fracture patterns and their classification is essential when undertaking fracture reduction and reduction. The normal head to shaft angle is between 130 and 150° and humeral head retroversion of between 25 and 30°. At the minimum, orthogonal plain radiographs are essential for management but CT scans often provide valuable additional information, as the exact nature of tuberosity fractures and intra-articular head split fractures can be difficult to ascertain from plain radiographs. The advent of 3-D CT reconstruction is a further aid to pre-operative planning. The basic fracture configurations are two, three and four part. These refer to the four main fragments comprising the head, the shaft, and the lesser and greater tuberosities. Two part fractures can be treated by reducing the fracture and fixing the head back onto the shaft, because there is no concern about the tuberosities. However three and four part fractures require specific reduction and fixation techniques. The strong bone of the bicipital groove means that the typical split of the tuberosities in a four part fractures tends to occur just posteriorly to this groove. At operation to gain access for fracture reduction, the tuberosity split can be developed as this split will lead into the tendon itself but taking care not to violate the supraspinatus proximally. The long head of the biceps tendon can be released from its anchor to further improve access and later tenotomized if necessary.    The first is to use medial support screws, sometimes referred to as ‘kickstand’ or calcar screws. These fixed angle oblique screws are a feature of most contemporary locking plate designs. They are designed to run distal to proximal just above the calcar into the head to resist to varus collapse by supporting the calcar. A prospective randomized trial of 72 patients demonstrated benefit in both functional outcome and maintenance of reduction at 31 months, for three and four part fractures, with the use of medial support screws. The second technique is to use structural augments such as fibular strut allograft, cancellous or synthetic bone graft. In cadaveric models with a deficient medial calcar, a locking plate construct with the addition of a fibular strut has been shown to increase stiffness 2.4 times The alternative method is of cancellous and/or synthetic grafting which acts by filling the void behind the humeral head and along the medial hinge to resist collapse. Augmentation with injectable calcium phosphate, or more recently calcium sulphate, have shown good results without the need for cadaveric or autologous cancellous bone. Calcium sulphate is an injectable paste which resorbs more quickly than calcium phosphate being replaced by trabecular bone by six months. Less commonly an intramedullary one-third tubular plate can be used in the same manner as a fibular strut graft. Engaging the screws into the plate can be technically difficult. Some of the most recent plate designs include the option for poly-axial locking screws permitting greater flexibility and precision in screw placement. This would appear to offer benefits when treating fractures with an intra-articular component (head split). In such cases achieving stability of the head fragments of varying sizes can be challenging with mono-axial locking screw designs. However, a prospectively randomized study of 56 patients with three and four part fractures showed no benefit in terms of outcome or complications when compared with standard locking plate designs.  Know the normal anatomy of head shaft angle 130–150° and head retroversion 25–30°. Define the fracture anatomy using the long head of biceps as a guide and work ‘through’ the tuberosity fracture planes. Control the anatomy by provisional Kirschner wire fixation and by suturing the tuberosities. Know your implant and the spread of the locking screws to allow control of tuberosity and head fragments. Recognize medial cortical deficiency and treat it either with medial calcar screws or structural augmentation to prevent varus collapse. There is a high complication rate following plating for proximal humeral fractures of over 20% in most series, with union rates of around 75%. The most common for revision surgery is screw penetration into the joint, present in 69% of 121 patients treated for complications after proximal humerus locking plate fixation in a tertiary centre. Avascular necrosis is a potentially devastating complication of proximal humeral fracture plating, which may require complex revision arthroplasty. It is the product of fracture type, surgical trauma and stability of fixation. Hertel described metaphyseal fracture extension of less than 8 mm as a predictor of avascular necrosis over and above the overall fracture type or displacement. Published results of functional outcomes after proximal humeral plating are difficult to interpret, with most series including a combination of two, three and four part fractures across age groups. Good overall results have been reported with good or excellent outcome scores in 90% of patients in one series and Constant scores reaching 85% of the uninjured side (mean 70.6) at 1 year in a series following up 155 patients. While part of the rationale for locking plate design is to improve stability of fixation in poor bone quality, a significant predictor of failure of these implants is poor local bone mass density, independent of initial fracture type or displacement. Bone mass density is less important than anatomical reduction and restoration of medial cortical support however, in predicting failure. The high complication rates, which appear to be more common in elderly patients at risk of varus collapse, have led some to suggest that consideration should be given to conservative management in those over 60 with three and four part fractures.  The most consistent predictor of poor outcome is failure to achieve anatomical reduction with subsequent varus collapse. Increased age, poor bone mass density and female sex predict poor outcome. The most common complication requiring revision surgery is screw penetration. Avascular necrosis is related to fracture extension into the medial calcar and disruption of the medial soft tissue hinge. A Cochrane review of interventions for treating proximal humeral fractures in adults highlights the lack of convincing evidence for superiority of plate fixation over conservative management in displaced proximal humeral fractures. The same review points to limitations in validating historic evidence in a field where plating technology has evolved and where there is a steep learning curve to achieve the surgical aims of anatomical reduction and stability. There is evidence from a randomized control trial evidence that for two part fractures locked plating gives a better functional outcome than locked intramedullary nailing at 1- and 3-year follow-up, although there is a higher complication rate. Proximal humeral fractures are a heterogeneous group ranging from simple two part fractures to complex four part fractures and those with disruption of the medial calcar and humeral head blood supply. They require a variety of surgical techniques to achieve anatomical restoration and stability. Locking screw plate designs give more stable low profile fixation for these challenging fractures. While there are some determinants of outcome outside the surgeon's control, including age, bone mass density and sex, the most significant factors remain anatomical restoration and medial calcar support. As the techniques are difficult, making for a steep learning curve, and there is a paucity of clear evidence to show benefit over conservative management, especially for older patients, each case should be considered on its own merits.