We have built a new strain gauge based on the moiré technique. This strain gauge mainly consists of two frames that can move with respect to each other. Displacements are recorded by using the moiré technique. We use a pair of similar gratings attached to the frames. The gratings are installed in parallel without physical contact and their lines making a small angle with one another. A moiré pattern is formed due to superimposing of the gratings. A diode laser light passes through the moiré pattern and a narrow slit, and hits on a light sensor. In response to external stress, one of the gratings is displaced and, as a result, the moiré fringes move in front of the slit. Due to the fringes movements, the light intensity on the detector varies and is recorded as voltage. The voltage output can be used to measure the strain. This instrument can detect displacements of the order of micron. In this paper we show the experimental results of our instrument.A strain gauge, first invented by E. E. Simmons and A. C. Ruge in 1938 Mechanical strain gauges are used to measure the movement of buildings, foundations, and other structures in civil engineering. The precision of the common types of strain gauges is low, about 0.1 In this paper we introduce a novel strain gauge that is based on the moiré technique. Moiré pattern is defined as a series of dark and bright patterns formed by the superposition of two regular gratings. The dark and bright regions are called fringes The moiré pattern can be created, for example, when two similar grids (or gratings) are overlaid at a small angle, or when they have slightly different mesh sizes. For two similar and ideal overlaid grids, they can be aligned so that either no light passes, or maximum light gets through the grids. Now, if one of the grids is placed over the other, and their lines have a small angle to each other, a new periodic structure called moiré pattern appears ( Displacing one of the gratings by an amount d in a direction normal to its rulings leads to a moiré fringe shift of The schematic diagram of the moiré micro strain gauge (MMSG) is shown in When one of the gratings is displaced with respect to the other one moiré fringes passes through the laser light without any deformation because the angle of grating is constant. The intensity of the light varies as a result. The variations of light intensity are recorded by a light detector as a time series. The output of the light detector is electrical voltage. Variations of the output voltage are showing displacement of one of the gratings with respect to the other one, as a result of deformation in objects. Due to an external stress on the MMSG, one of the gratings moves with respect to the other one. The moiré fringes pass through the laser light, and the power of light varies on the detector. The light power on the detector varies between two maximum and minimum values as a result of the bright and dark moiré fringes passing in front of the laser beam, respectively. For a displacement larger than the gratings period, the light power on the detector is triangular and periodic. Over a half period the measured power is linearly proportional to the displacement. Theoretical detail concerning linear behavior of the transmission function of the moiré pattern versus displacement can be found in We carried out two experiments to investigate the performance of our instrument. We subjected the strain gauge to an external stress by a micro stepper device. The step of the micro stepper is 1 We have presented a new mechanical strain gauge based on the moiré technique. The measurement range of our instrument is 1