The microstructures, phase characteristics and mechanical behaviour of Cu–Zn–Al alloys modified with Fe, B, and Fe–B mixed micro-alloying additions has been investigated. Cu–Zn–Al alloys were produced by casting with and without the addition of the microelements (Fe, B and Fe–B). The alloys were subjected to a homogenisation – cold rolling – annealing treatment schedule, before the alloys were machined to specifications for tensile test, fracture toughness, and hardness measurement. Optical, scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction analysis were utilised for microstructural and phase characterisation of the alloys. A distinct difference in grain morphology was observed in the alloys produced – the unmodified alloy had predominantly needle-like lath martensite structure with sharp grain edges while significantly larger transverse grain size and curve edged/near elliptical grain shape was observed for the modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys. Cu–Zn with fcc structure was the predominant phase identified in the alloys while Cu–Al with bcc structure was the secondary phase observed. The hardness of the unmodified Cu–Zn–Al alloy was higher than that of the modified alloys with reductions in hardness ranging between 32.4 and 51.5%. However, the tensile strength was significantly lower than that of the modified alloy grades (28.37–52.74% increase in tensile strength was achieved with the addition of micro-alloying elements). Similarly, the percent elongation and fracture toughness (10–23% increase) of the modified alloy was higher than that of the unmodified alloy grade. The modified alloy compositions mostly exhibited fracture features indicative of a fibrous micro-mechanism to crack initiation and propagation, characterised by the prevalence of dimpled rupture.The attractive properties of shape memory alloys (SMAs) have been explored for a wide range of applications such as in sensing, medical, commercial and other industrial applications Cu–Zn–Al alloys are the most studied Cu-based alloys and have been explored for use in applications such as fasteners, springs, couplings and thermal actuators where the use of other alloys would be technically and economically ineffective The Cu–18Zn–6Al based alloys were produced in accordance with Alaneme A Zeiss optical microscope was used for microstructural investigation of the alloys produced to assess the grain structure and phase distribution. The specimens for microstructural examination were metallographically prepared following a series of grinding and polishing process. Subsequently the specimens were etched in a solution of 5 Detailed microstructural characterisation and compositional analysis was carried out using a Zeiss high resolution field emission gun scanning electron microscope (Zeiss FESEM) to complement the optical microscopy analysis. Back scattered electron (BSE) mode, secondary electron imaging and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) were used for microstructural and fractographic analysis of the Cu–Zn–Al alloys produced. The analysis of the crystalline phases present and their intensity was carried out on the Cu–Zn–Al alloys using X-ray diffractometry (XRD). The samples were prepared for XRD analysis following standard procedures. A PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer with PIXcel detector and Fe filtered Co-Kα as source of radiation, was used for the analysis. The analysis was performed from angle 2 The hardness values of the alloys were evaluated on a hardness testing machine using a Digital Rockwell hardness tester adopting a HRA (60 The tensile properties of the produced alloys were evaluated by tensile testing using a universal testing machine. Specimens for the test were machined to tensile test specifications of 5 The fracture toughness of the alloys was determined using circumferential notch tensile (CNT) testing in accordance with Alaneme Three repeat tests were performed for each Cu–Zn–Al alloy composition to ensure repeatability and reliability of the data generated. Optical micrographs of the unmodified and modified alloys are presented in The scanning electron microscopy images of the unmodified and modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys ( The micrographs suggest that although same cooling rate was adopted for all alloy compositions produced, the nucleation and grain growth rates were altered by the presence of the micro-alloying elements. The increase in grain size characteristic of the Fe, B, and Fe–B modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys investigated differs from the observations made in similar studies The X-ray diffraction analysis of selected alloy compositions is presented in The hardness values of the unmodified and modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys are presented in The ultimate tensile strength results of the unmodified and modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys are presented in The percent elongation of the Cu–Zn–Al alloys was observed to increase with the addition of the micro-alloying elements ( The fracture toughness values of the unmodified and modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys are presented in  The microstructure, phase characteristics and mechanical behaviour of Cu–18Zn–6Al alloys containing two different weight percent each (0.05 Needle-like lath martensite structure with sharp grain edges observed for the unmodified Cu–Zn–Al alloy was transformed to grains with significantly larger transverse grain size and curve edged/near elliptical grain shape for the Fe, B, and Fe–B modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys. Cu–Zn with fcc structure was the predominant crystalline phase identified in the alloys while Cu–Al with bcc structure was the second phase observed. The crystalline phases identified are typical of Cu–Zn–Al alloys with shape memory capacity. The hardness of the unmodified Cu–Zn–Al alloy was higher than that of the modified alloys with reductions in hardness ranging between 32.4 and 51.5%. The tensile strength of the unmodified Cu–Zn–Al alloy was significantly lower than that of the modified alloy grades. The percent elongation and fracture toughness of the modified alloy were higher than that of the unmodified alloy grade. The modified Cu–Zn–Al alloys mostly exhibited fracture features indicative of a fibrous micro-mechanism of crack initiation and propagation characterised by the prevalence of dimpled rupture. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.