A highly sensitive and rapid food-screening test based on disposable screen-printed biosensors was developed, which is suitable for monitoring infant food. The exposure of infants and children to neurotoxic organophosphates and carbamates is of particular concern because of their higher susceptibility to adverse effects. The European Union has, therefore, set a very low limit for pesticides in infant food, which must not contain concentrations exceeding 10 μg/kg for any given pesticide. The maximum residue limit (MRL) has been set to be near the determination threshold that is typically achieved for pesticides with traditional analytical methods. The biosensor method could detect levels lower than 5 μg/kg and thus clearly fulfills the demands of the EU. To substantiate these measurements, recovery rates were determined and amounted on average to 104% in food. Matrix effects were eliminated by the introduction of a special electrode treatment. The test was compared with two traditional pesticide multiresidue analysis methods (GC-MS, LC-MS) using 26 fruit and vegetable samples from local markets and 23 samples of processed infant food from Germany, Spain, Poland and USA. Three infant food samples exceeded the MRL of 10 μg/kg when analyzed by either biosensor test or multiresidue methods.Pesticides are widely used in agriculture to increase yield, control microorganisms, which might produce toxic or carcinogenic metabolites, and reduce the costs of food production. According to statistical data published by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), more than 1.2 million metric tons of pesticides were sold to the agricultural sector world-wide in 1995 ( Considering the multitude of risks associated with pesticide intake by infants, the European Union has set a very low limit for pesticides in infant food. According to this regulation infant formulae must not contain residues of individual pesticides at levels exceeding 10 μg/kg ( Consequently, there is a growing interest in fast and more sensitive detection systems. Traditional methods for insecticide detection are based on gas chromatography (GC) or high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with mass selective detectors (MSD) ( Most of the AChE-biosensors described so far are limited to analyzes based on aqueous solutions because of their possible susceptibility towards matrix effects. The few reports on cholinesterase-based biosensors applied to food testing either rely on laborious multi-step sample preparations or prove problematic because of the matrix effects which reduce the accuracy of the results ( In this paper, we describe an amperometric biosensor test based on screen-printed AChE-biosensors, which were described by AChE (EC 3.1.1.7) from electric eel (Type V-S, 970 U/mg) was obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (Deisenhofen, Germany). Paraoxon (paraoxon-ethyl) and Tween-20 were purchased from Riedel de Haën (Seelze, Germany). Pesticide standards were purchased from Promochem (Wesel, Germany) or Riedel de Haën. Insecticide stock solutions were prepared in ethanol. All other reagents were of analytical grade as supplied by Sigma–Aldrich. Hydromatrix® no. 0019–8004 for SFE was obtained from Varian (Darmstadt, Germany). Acetonitrile, methanol, cyclohexane, isooctane, ethyl acetate and acetone were all of residue analysis grade. Infant food samples were obtained from local stores in Germany, Spain, Poland and the USA. Five different German brands, one Polish brand (in four different flavors), two Spanish brands and two American brands were tested. The following strategy (in brief) was used for cloning and expression of human AChE (huAChE) (Vorlová, S., Schmitt, J. and Schmid, R.D., in preparation): A synthetic gene of the huAChE was completely synthesized following the method of mutually priming long overlapping oligonucleotides. The nucleotide sequence was optimized for the expression in the yeast Disposable biosensors with immobilized electric eel AChE (eeAChE) and huAChE were produced following the screen-printing method suggested by To determine the AChE-activity reactivation rate, 1 mM pyridine-2-aldoxime methochloride (2-PAM) in PBS was used as reactivating agent. The biosensor was incubated for 30 min in a stirred reactivation solution at room temperature. The final AChE activity was then measured in a buffer solution. Food samples (10 g) were mixed with 10 ml 1 M PBS (pH 7.5) to ensure a sufficient amount of water at a neutral pH value. The AChE-biosensor was incubated in the food sample for 30 min. Before measuring the activity of the enzyme in the buffer solution, the electrodes were placed in PBS containing 1 vol.% Tween-20 for 15 min and then washed with pure PBS before measuring the initial AChE activity and after incubation in the food sample before measuring the residual AChE activity. A representative sample portion of 7.5 g was weighed into a 100 ml beaker. Hydromatrix® (6 g) (Varian, no. 0019–8004) was added and the mixture stirred intensively to achieve good homogeneity. An aliquot of 4.5 g (2.5 g sample) was transferred into the extraction thimble. To prevent particles from being extruded during extraction or depressurization, which could result in tube plugging, a fine grade glass wool paper was placed at either end of the extraction thimble. The loaded thimbles were placed into a freezer immediately after filling and kept there until further processing because previous storage experiments had shown that some analytes (e.g. ethiofencarb, methiocarb, benfuracarb, furathiocarb, carbosulfan, dichlorvos) degraded significantly in the extraction cells when kept at room temperature ( A second 4.5 g aliquot of the sample–Hydromatrix® mixture was stored in a glass vial for further use in case the extraction had to be repeated. Extraction of the samples by SC–CO A modified version of a multiresidue method was used to extract organophosphates and carbamates, which was developed at the CVUA Stuttgart for the analysis of pesticide residues in citrus fruits ( The instrumental conditions used during LC-MS in ESI (pos.) mode for the identification and quantification of the carbamates are listed in Organophosphates were analyzed using GC-MS in single ion monitoring (SIM) mode in order to achieve good determination limits (HP 5890 Series II, auto sampler 7673, injector Gerstel CIS, solvent mode, detector HP 5970 MSD, equipped with uncoated pre-column 3 m×0.25 mm, press fit connection to the analytical column HP5MS, 30 m×0.25 mm, 0.25 μm, carrier gas helium constant flow). To develop a simple assay system, it was attempted to measure untreated food with the AChE electrode directly. Aliquots of orange juice, peach and apple infant food were used for this purpose and a high AChE inhibition was observed in all cases ( The proper performance of the test was verified by analyzing several food samples to which different amounts of paraoxon-ethyl in the concentration range between 5 and 20 μg/kg were added. The inhibition of eeAChE, caused by the incubation in the spiked food, was compared with the inhibition that was observed when equivalent paraoxon concentrations were present in the buffer-solution. Recovery rates were calculated out of the difference of these two inhibition values. The determination limit in food was less than 5 μg/kg paraoxon with eeAChE. The signal-to-noise ratio at a concentration of 5 μg/kg paraoxon (1.8×10 With respect to pesticides the developed test has several advantages over standard analytical methods and previously described biosensor tests. Using this test, samples can be analyzed within approximately 90 min, which means that at least 4–5 h can be saved with the test compared with the commonly used multiresidue methods ( The main advantage of the biosensor tests over conventional methods is that principally all AChE-inhibiting compounds can be detected. However, it is only possible to measure a sum parameter of AChE inhibition; qualitative or quantitative information about the single compounds cannot be obtained. In combination with traditional multiresidue methods, the biosensor test can nevertheless be applied as a pre-screening test to discriminate between samples that do or do not contain AChE inhibitors. Should AChE inhibitors be targeted, the biosensor test would help to increase the number of tested samples. To minimize false positive results, it is advisable to set an inhibition threshold for each commodity (action level). To validate the biosensor method, 26 fruit and vegetable samples were tested which were previously analyzed with traditional multiresidue methods. Two types of AChEs were used for these measurements: electric eel and recombinant human AChE. Ratios of AChE inhibition of these two enzymes were compared with ratios of bimolecular rate constants of AChE inhibition ( The next five samples ( The correct functioning of the biosensor test could be confirmed in many different types of fruits and vegetables, from the very fibrous pea or asparagus to several kinds of citrus fruits. The use of a multi-electrode system employing two different AChEs, which usually have different inhibition constants towards the tested organophosphates and carbamates, gives additional certainty about the observation that the inhibition is caused by neurotoxins and not by some kinds of matrix effects. The use of huAChE can also help to estimate the potential health risk of the analyzed food to man. Processed infant food samples from Germany, Spain, Poland and the USA were analyzed with the AChE-biosensor test and with the multiresidue method involving LC-MS and GC-MS analysis. In total, 23 different types of infant food were tested: 13 different flavors of four German brands, four flavors of two Spanish brands, four flavors of one Polish brand and two flavors of two American brands. The biosensor measurements were again performed with a two-electrode system employing eeAChE and huAChE. Since the concentrations of possible contaminants in infant food are typically very low, an additional proof of evidence for the functionality of the biosensor was added to the analytical procedure. The determination of the reactivation rate of the inhibited enzyme after reaction with a nucleophilic oxime which reconstitutes the active AChE turned out to be an appropriate way to discriminate between infant food contaminated with neurotoxins and infant food free of cholinesterase-inhibitors. But reactivation of inhibited AChE is only possible before ‘aging’ (loss of an alkyl residue) of the phosphoryl moiety attached to the active site serine of AChE. This aging process depends on the kind of organophosphate which reacts with AChE, e.g. methoxy groups age more rapidly than ethoxy groups ( Of 23 tested infant food samples, 13 caused AChE inhibition, which could be at least partially reactivated (see Three violations of the maximum residue limit (MRL) of 10 μg/kg valid in the EU for infant food were observed. One batch of the German banana–tangerine–pear infant food contained 20 μg/kg pirimicarb and 50 μg/kg ethiofencarb. The analysis of this sample with huAChE resulted in 10% inhibition, which could be reactivated to an extent of 68%. In samples of an older batch of the same brand no pesticides were detected by either of the two methods. A German fruit salad infant food contained 10 μg/kg carbaryl. Propiconazol (70 μg/kg) and 20 μg/kg esfenvalerat were found in an American peach infant food sample. These two compounds are no cholinesterase inhibitors, but it is not unlikely that also pesticides, in addition to those detected, might be present in the sample. Concerning the detection frequency of pesticides in infant food ( The applicability of the new biosensor test for monitoring infant food could be shown in the present study. Good correlation was observed between the results obtained with the biosensor test and those with the GC-MS and LC-MS. The biosensor test has the advantage over standard analytical methods that the risk of false negative results of the particularly dangerous group of organophosphates and carbamates is minimized substantially. In contrast to the Charm Pesticide Test it requires less working steps and does not require the use of organic solvents. A biosensor test for the direct detection of organophosphates and carbamates in food was developed which requires no extraction or pre-concentration steps. Matrix effects could be avoided by the introduction of an electrode pre-treatment method. The test showed excellent recovery rates with acceptable levels of reproducibility even at trace concentrations. Validation was successfully performed by comparing the test results of real food samples with the conventional multiresidue methods applied at the CVUA Stuttgart. The applicability was proven by analyzing infant food samples. To increase the analyte spectrum of the biosensor test, a combination of different and more sensitive AChE variants could be applied in a multisensor array. It would also be desirable to add a method for the detection of phosphorothionates in food to the test protocol. Currently work is under way to achieve these requirements. The authors would like to thank the European Union for financial support under project ACHEB (QLK30-2000-00650).