Two-dimensional discrete and continuum modelling of excavator bucket filling is presented. The discrete element method (DEM) is used for the discrete modelling and the material-point method (MPM) for continuum modelling. MPM is a so-called particle method or meshless finite element method. Standard finite element methods have difficulty in modelling the entire bucket filling process due to large displacements and distortions of the mesh. The use of a meshless method overcomes this problem. DEM and MPM simulations (plane strain) of bucket filling are compared to two-dimensional experimental results. Cohesionless corn grains were used as material and the simulated force acting on the bucket and flow patterns were compared with experimental results. The corn macro (continuum) and micro (DEM) properties were obtained from shear and oedometer tests. As part of the MPM simulations, both the classic (nonpolar) and the Cosserat (polar) continuums were used. Results show that the nonpolar continuum is the most accurate in predicting the bucket force while the polar and DEM methods predict lower forces. The DEM model does not accurately predict the material flow during filling, while the polar and nonpolar methods are more accurate. Different flow zones develop during filling and it is shown that DEM, the polar and the nonpolar methods can accurately predict the position and orientation of these different flow zones.Earthmoving equipment is not only used for mining, it also plays an important role in the agricultural and earthmoving industries. The equipment is highly diverse in shape and function, but most of the soil cutting machines can be categorised into one of three principal classes: blades, rippers and buckets or shovels. The basic shape of earthmoving tools has not changed a great deal since antiquity, although most are operated today by mechanical power sources and their construction benefits from modern metallurgical engineering. A dragline excavator is a crane-like structure with a huge bucket of up to 100 The problem of soil–tool interaction has been solved using limit analysis by a number of researchers (e.g. The process of excavator bucket filling was investigated experimentally by the group of Maciejewski No publication on the modelling of bucket filling using a continuum method, such as the finite element method (FEM), could be found. Bucket filling involves large displacements and deformations which are difficult to model with classic finite element methods due to the distortion of the mesh. For this research, bucket filling is modelled using the so-called meshless finite element method (material-point method, MPM) which overcomes the problem of mesh distortions. FEM also has difficulty in detecting and resolving contact between deformable bodies. Special contact elements and algorithms are needed. A special MPM contact algorithm makes the modelling of Coulomb friction contact between deformable bodies possible at low computational cost. A totally different approach, the discrete element method (DEM), is also used to model bucket filling. The forces acting on the bucket and the material flow patterns, as predicted by these two methods, are compared to experimental results and observations. The discrete element methods are based on the simulation of the motion of granular material as separate particles. DEM was first applied to soils by Cundall and Strack Although meshless methods originated about twenty years ago, little research effort has been devoted to them until recently. Particle methods can be characterised as methods where the solution variables are attributed to Lagrangian point masses (particles) instead of computational cells Sulsky et al. In granular materials the discreteness of the system is often important and rotational degrees of freedom are active, which might require enhanced theoretical approaches like polar continua In polar continuum theories, the material points are considered to possess orientations. A material point has three degrees-of-freedom for rigid rotations, in addition to the three classic translational degrees-of-freedom. Eringen In this paper, the results from MPM simulations are compared to the DEM and experimental results. The MPM method used, is based on both the classic continuum and the Cosserat continuum formulations. Two-dimensional experiments were performed by moving a bucket profile between two glass panels 200 Rowlands A Drucker–Prager constitutive model In the DEM model, initial conditions were generated by allowing material to fall from a fixed height along the total length of the test rig   During the initial stages of filling, there is an upheave of material right above the tooth. Up to a displacement of 200 Rowlands The generalised theory is illustrated in During the experiments two shear bands could be observed. The one extended from the tip of the tooth up to the free surface. This is known as the cutting shear band. The second line is the one between the initial laminar layer and the dead load, called the dead load shear band. The dead load shear band stretches from the tooth up to the free surface with an angle close to the material internal friction angle. This is indicated by the dotted line in To investigate the ability of DEM to predict the shear zone theory, the particle displacement ratio, PDR, is defined. The bucket was moved through the material and “paused” after each 100 The prevention of excessive wear on buckets plays a very important role in bucket design. Special replaceable wear packages are designed and added to buckets which increases the bucket weight. In order to minimise and predict bucket wear, the contact forces or pressures at the bucket-material interface should be known. From a DEM model all the particle-bucket contacts are known. The contact position, normal and tangential forces and the particle velocity are available at each contact and can be used to predict bucket wear. Thirty to forty years ago Finnie  DEM and MPM simulations were compared to experiments of bucket filling using cohesionless corn grains. The MPM models made use of polar and nonpolar Drucker–Prager constitutive models. All three methods predicted the trend in drag force during filling accurately. Quantitatively, nonpolar MPM is the most accurate while the polar MPM and DEM models predict drag forces lower than the measured. The DEM model did not accurately predict the material flow during filling. It fails to model the upheave of material directly above the tooth. The polar and nonpolar MPM methods predict the free surface more accurately than DEM. The DEM model depends on the parameters used and more accurate parameter values might result in the DEM model being more accurate in predicting the material flow. The DEM package used does not include rolling resistance. Several authors All three methods accurately predicted the different flow regions that develop as material enters the bucket. The characteristic V-shape of the active flow zone was predicted by all the methods, although the orientation and positions of the different zones differed slightly. It is shown that the normal and shear stresses on the bucket surface can be determined. This was, however not compared to measurements. During further work, the contact stresses could be used to predict wear rates and wear patterns. Finally it is concluded that DEM and MPM can successfully model excavator bucket filling. This process is difficult to model with conventional FEM due to large displacements and severe distortion of the mesh. When a relatively small number of particles is used in a DEM simulation, computing times are comparable to that of MPM. However, when the number of particles used are relatively high (100,000+), the time to complete a DEM simulation would increase. In this case, it would be advantageous to use MPM. In this paper, a cohesionless material is used. When cohesion is added,it becomes more difficult to determine the DEM particle properties. Cohesion can, however, easily be added to the MPM models as this is already included in the constitutive models used, but set to zero in the cases analysed here. In the first part of this section, index notation is used to denote vectors and matrices. The subscripts First, the initial configuration of the body is divided into a number of subregions. This is done as depicted in For clarity, the equations of motion are derived for a single element only. The whole system would be analysed by assembling the matrices and vectors as in standard FEM routines. The mass of each material point is fixed which ensures mass conservation. The weak from of the linear momentum equation is given by The element mesh used is similar to that of FEM. Four noded quadrilateral elements are used. Under the assumption of two-dimensional conditions, the acceleration field Let the time step size be Δ Assume that the position and velocity vector, stress tensor, strain tensor and history dependent variables of each material point are known at time With the shape functions of each particle known, the internal- and external-force vectors can be calculated using Eqs. History dependent variables such as strain-hardening parameters may also be updated at this stage. During the Lagrangian phase the nodes are assumed to move at the computed nodal velocity At this point in the computational cycle, the material points are completely updated and carry the complete solution, i.e., all the state variables needed to start a new calculation step are carried by the material points. During the convective phase, the material points are held fixed and the element mesh can be redefined. The mesh can be chosen in any convenient manner, for example adaptive meshes can be used to resolve sharp gradients and interfaces. The simplest and most convenient choice is, however, to keep the existing mesh. Any motion of the mesh relative to the material points model convection. Since the material points do not move during the convective phase, material point properties have the same value at the end of the convective phase as they had at the end of the Lagrangian phase. This completes the computational cycle. A new cycle is begun using the information carried by the material points to initialise nodal values on the element mesh. In the previous sections, a simple explicit time integrator is used of which the time step should satisfy the stability condition, i.e. the critical time step should be the smallest ratio of the element size to the wave speed through the material. For small displacements, the spatial discretisation in MPM is equivalent to that of FEM using Gauss points at the same locations as those of the material points in each element. Therefore, the convergence behaviour of the integrator used is similar to that employed to integrate the corresponding equations in FEM. However, according to Chen et al. The MPM formulation presented here automatically enforces no-slip contact between two different bodies. The reason for this is that a single-valued velocity field is used for updating the particle positions. Bardenhagen et al. The bucket was modelled as a continuum following a rigid body material model. The material points defining the bucket geometry were given a constant velocity and allowed to move through the mesh like all other material points. Using the contact algorithm by Bardenhagen et al., coulomb friction was allowed at nodes common to the bucket and the granular material. The theory behind the contact model is not presented here and the reader is referred to Bardenhagen et al.