In this paper, the variational iteration method (VIM) and the Adomian decomposition method (ADM) are implemented to give approximate solutions for fractional differential–algebraic equations (FDAEs). Both methods in applied mathematics can be used as alternative methods for obtaining analytic and approximate solutions for different types of fractional differential equations. This paper presents a numerical comparison between these two methods and the homotopy analysis method (HAM) for solving FDAEs. Numerical results reveal that the VIM and the ADM are quite accurate and applicable.Fractional differential equations have been successfully modelled for many physical and engineering phenomena such as seismic analysis, rheology, fluid flow, viscous damping, viscoelastic materials, and polymer physics. Most fractional differential equations do not have exact analytic solutions; therefore approximation and numerical techniques must be used. The Adomian decomposition method (ADM) Many physical problems are governed by a system of differential–algebraic equations (DAEs), and the solution of these equations has been a subject of many investigators. Recently, many important mathematical models have been expressed in terms of differential–algebraic equations of fractional order. The homotopy analysis method (HAM) was first introduced by Liao In this paper, the variational iteration method and the Adomian decomposition method are applied to solve FDAEs of the form There are several definitions of a fractional derivative of order A real function  A function  The Riemann–Liouville fractional integral operator of order For  The fractional derivative of  The Adomian decomposition method requires that Eq. The general form of the formula for Adomian polynomials is The VIM plays an important role in recent research in different fields of science and engineering. This method was proposed by the Chinese mathematician He To demonstrate the effectiveness of the two methods, we consider the following fractional differential–algebraic equations. All the results were calculated by using the symbolic calculus software Maple. We consider the following fractional differential–algebraic equations.    Consider the following fractional differential–algebraic equations:  According to the Adomian decomposition method to solve Eq.  We start with initial approximation  Consider the following fractional differential–algebraic equations:   We start with the initial approximation  Consider the following fractional differential–algebraic equations:    In this paper, the Adomian decomposition method (ADM) and the variational iteration method (VIM) have been extended to solve fractional differential–algebraic equations (FDAEs). The results of these two methods are in good agreement with those obtained by using the homotopy analysis method (HAM)