Revision for the treatment of a B3 periprosthetic femoral fracture often requires proximal femoral allograft arthroplasty in physiologically young or tumor prostheses in elderly patients. Extramedullary strut allograft augmentation can only be used when the host femur is structurally adequate for the insertion of the revision stem (periprosthetic femoral fractures type B2) and appears to be an attractive biological concept as early incorporation to the host bone results in a sound biomechanical construct. We report here the simultaneous use of whole femur intramedullary strut substitution along with an extramedullary strut graft placement, with impaction allografting revision to a long cemented femoral prosthesis, to augment the deficient metadiaphyseal bone stock (Paprosky type IV) for the treatment of a complex type B3 periprosthetic femoral fracture.Total hip arthroplasty revision when there is extensive proximal metaphyseal damage, less than 4 cm available diaphysis for insertion of a press fit distal loading prosthesis and an intramedullary diameter of more than 18 mm prohibiting prosthetic rotational stability, is challenging B3 periprosthetic femoral fractures occur when the femoral stem is unstable, and the quality of the surrounding bone stock is poor because of osteopenia, osteolysis, and/or fracture comminution. Revision with proximal femoral allograft arthroplasty in physiologically young or tumor prostheses in elderly patients is recommended When femoral reconstruction is elected, and if the proximal femur is intact, impaction grafting can be used to augment the host bone from within We present a case where we used a whole length of femur intramedullary strut, along with impaction allografting revision to a long cemented femoral prosthesis, to augment the deficient metadiaphyseal bone stock for the treatment of a complex periprosthetic femoral fracture. A 67-year-old male patient initially underwent a right cemented Charnley total hip arthroplasty in 1984, which eventually became loose and was revised to an uncemented Bateman prosthesis 7 years later. The prosthesis was again found to be loose 2 years later with evidence of femoral osteolysis and was revised to an uncemented hydroxyapatite ceramic (HAC) Furlong prosthesis with bone grafting for the deficient femoral canal ( It was then elected to revise the prosthesis and impaction graft the femur with double strut graft augmentation. A posterior approach was employed using part of the previous incisions. The hip joint was aspirated before opening the capsule, and this revealed no organisms and fewer than 10 white cells per high-powered field, therefore excluding infection. The capsular flap was then raised to protect the sciatic nerve. The acetabular component was found to be well fixed and the liner well preserved. We then decided not to revise the acetabular component. The femoral diaphysis above the fracture was split using an extended trochanteric osteotomy, and the prosthesis was removed. Extensive debridement followed, and the distal plug, with residual cement from the previous procedures, was removed using OSCAR (S.R.A. Developments Ltd, S. Devon, UK). Reaming of the femoral canal followed, up to 14-mm size reamer down to the distal femoral condyles. A whole fresh frozen donor femur was sectioned at the level of the lesser trochanter and just above the condyles. These cancellous areas were then passed through the large Noviomagus bone mill (A-one Medical BV, Nijmegen, The Netherlands) giving the equivalent of about 6 femoral heads. The diaphysis was then sectioned longitudinally to make 2 long strut grafts. The original intention was to wire these 2 strut grafts onto the outside of the femur, but this would have meant performing an incision to the knee and devascularizing the whole femoral shaft. It was then decided that a better form of fixation would be to hammer one of the struts into the distal metaphysis to provide stability and support for the femur in the mid and distal shaft. With the second strut graft fitted posteromedialy in the proximal femur to reinforce the calcar area, the femoral shaft was impaction-grafted to the level of the proximal defect snugly fitting the distal intramedullary strut against the posteromedial wall of the mid and distal femoral shaft. The proximal femur was then reconstructed around the impacted 205-mm phantom stem using calcar mesh, 2 circlage wires, and 2 cables. Stability was achieved, and the proximal femur was impacted to the level of the calcar. After trial reduction cement insertion with pressurization was performed. A polished Exeter 205 mm, No 2 was then inserted with wingless centralizer ( B3 fractures present a complex reconstructive problem. They require revision of the loose stem The use of strut grafts was originally introduced by Chandler et al Enhancing bone stock in a B3 fracture is challenging. When impaction grafting is used, a long cemented stem should bypass the most distal fracture line In our case, we have encountered a B3 periprosthetic fracture with unstable stem and very deficient bone stock with dilatation of the diaphysis and the metaphysis (Paprosky type IV) The biological and biomechanical advantages of the intramedullary strut grafting gave us a more solid femoral tube with a smaller diameter, adequate for reconstruction with impaction grafting revision to a long stem. The long revision stem added to the construct stability, whereas the longer intramedullary strut graft reached the femoral condyles bypassing the distal femoral dilatation stress riser that a long cemented stem with impaction grafting could not easily do ( Furthermore, the use of 2 biological plates increased the stability of the construct and optimized the potential of allograft incorporation without requiring extensive stripping of the soft tissues. Impaction grafting on the other hand filled the gap between the intramedullary strut and host bone endosteum and tightly packed the strut against the posteromedial femoral cortex. Both morselized and cortical allografts minimized the risk of cement interposition in the fracture line during cement pressurization and gave to the construct a solid cement mantle for the insertion of a long stem. The stem remained well fixed until the patient's death. An uncemented revision stem would not be adequate for the treatment of this case. Proximal fixation was impossible because more that one third of the circumference was missing, whereas distal press fit fixation could not be achieved because femoral dilatation was extending far beyond the diaphysis of the bone. Distally fixed uncemented stem with screws could be an option, but then again, poor screw purchase in the condylar femoral metaphysis and limitation in the available screw holes to be used would prohibit a stable revision stem fixation. Based on our case study, we suggest that intramedullary strut substitution combined with impaction allografting is technically feasible and may be an alternative fixation technique for the treatment of B3 periprosthetic femoral fractures in relatively young patients versus the proximal femoral allograft arthroplasty that is currently recommended in the literature with some precaution