Population balance equations (PBE) provide a suitable a framework for dealing with drop breakage and coalescence. In addition, modeling of the solid particle sedimentation process based on Kynch’s theory has been successfully used and validated in mineral processing and wastewater treatment. In this work, we present a model that merges the coalescence process with hindered polydisperse sedimentation. The PBE model is projected onto a partial differential equation (PDE) system by discretizing the droplet volume. Because there is loss of mass in the system when the daughter droplets are greater than the larger species considered for the numerical solution, two terms that produce the conservation of the mass or total volume of the dispersed phase are incorporated into the PDE system. The resulting PDE system is split into two systems: homogeneous PDEs and ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The homogeneous PDEs and the ODEs are discretized using a first-order central differencing scheme and the second-order, two-stage Runge-Kutta method, respectively. The model predicts the vertical variation of the composition of the dispersed phase layer that forms at the top or bottom of the gravity settler. The proposed model was calibrated and validated through an experiment with an oil and water system. In particular, simulations illustrate the effects of: the continuity of the dispersion (oil-in-water and water-in-oil) and the standard deviation of the initial droplet volumes on phase separation quality, as well as the influence of the coalescence frequency on the average droplet volume.The importance of immiscible liquid-liquid system separation is well known in many industrial fields such as metallurgy, wastewater treatment and the pharmaceutical, food and crude oil industries. Liquid-liquid dispersion separation is carried out in gravity settlers and centrifuges and is a complex process in which drop sedimentation and coalescence are involved. Due to the high complexity and cost of physical experimentation in a pilot plant or laboratory, mathematical modeling and simulation is very attractive for analyzing and designing gravity settlers and centrifuges. Moreover, for design and automatic control purposes, it is necessary to know the time to reach steady state in a gravity settler; therefore, merely solving the easier steady-state equations does not yield sufficient valuable information. In recent decades, there has been particular interest in the industry in the use of population balance models for different systems, including particle, droplet and bubble aggregation and breaking phenomena, especially for the control of particle size, thanks to the availability of advanced equipment for on-line particle size measurement ( The population balance concept is suitable for modeling the multiphase flow systems occurring in unit operations of liquid-liquid separation carried out in batch and continuous equipment. The dynamic behavior of the droplets (dispersed phase) in such operations makes it necessary to consider a sophisticated mathematical model that describes the variation in the concentration of the different droplet sizes as a function of position and time as a result of sedimentation and coalescence phenomena. The first researchers to incorporate population balance equations (PBE) into the modeling of chemical processes involving dispersed phase operations were Regarding PBE models of gravitational settling with liquid-liquid mixture coalescence, With respect to numerical methods for the solution of the PBE, a general treatment is presented by Regarding to the solution of the PDE for the sedimentation process for polydisperse suspensions, many authors have faced the problem ( In an unsteady-state batch settler ( The objective of this work is to model and simulate the phenomenon of batch separation of liquid-liquid dispersions in a gravity settler. The specific objectives are to predict the transient composition of the dispersed phase within the unit to study the behavior of different droplet volumes, the effects of the standard deviation of the initial droplet volumes and the continuity of the dispersion (oil-in-water and water-in-oil) on phase separation quality and the effect of the coalescence frequency constant on the average droplet volume. The mathematical model proposed here is based on population balance equations for coalescence and a PDE for sedimentation, which is applicable for dynamic operation; the numerical method is first-order accurate in space and second-order accurate in time. In addition, the numerical scheme is programmed in FORTRAN, and can be synthesized in an executable file that can run on the Windows operating system. The model is calibrated and validated through comparison with experimental measurements on the zone of dense-packed bed, because the model corrects the mass loss of the dispersed phase (consequence of simulating the process with a finite amount of drop sizes) adjusting the mass of the largest species from the end where it is deposited, which is where the dense-packed bed zone begins to grow. The paper is organized as follows: The spatially one-dimensional population balance equation for a batch gravitational liquid-liquid separator (settler) (see The term on the right-hand side of The coalescence frequency, In this work, the parameter The formula for the sedimentation zone (  We can observe that in the sedimentation zone two droplets of the same size cannot collide, and that there is no coalescence if no droplet exists ( As an approximation of the value of the critical height Here we follow the ideas of Let the ith subdomain be defined as The number concentration of droplets in the ith subdomain, The population of the With the definitions of  Then we can integrate equation The velocity of droplet species of volume In function of the slip velocity of species The source term for droplet coalescence can be written by introducing the For the sedimentation zone, the equation for the slip velocity in the vertical direction, Eq. For the dense-packed zone it is necessary to find an appropriate formula for the slip velocity or the flux function. Here, it is assumed that the formula for the sedimentation zone is also valid for the dense-packed zone. Because the fixed-pivot technique is not applicable when the daughter drops are greater than the largest species considered for the numerical solution, it is necessary to incorporate into the system of balance equations An average velocity of corrective source of mass of species Since the volumetric fraction of this source is 1, the number concentration [drops / volume] is the inverse of the volume The corrective flux density of the other species is zero: In addition, the presence of the flux density The corrective flux is added to the balance equations Using the Heaviside function, we may absorb the last term of the right-hand side of This system is solved together with the zero-flux boundary conditions: We discretize the spatial domain into cells In the numerical scheme, we approximate To solve our problem, we use the well-known Fractional-Step Method ( The proposed numerical scheme for the first step, i.e., to solve the homogeneous conservation laws: is the Lax-Friedrichs Method ( The numerical flux vector The second step means solving the ordinary differential equations: The proposed numerical scheme for this step is the well-known second-order, two-stage Runge-Kutta method ( The total volume of the dispersed phase is defined as If The volume of species In addition, because the system is closed, we define the conservative volume of species It is proposed that the average velocity of corrective source of mass of species In order to maintain the stability of the numerical method, we limit the value of In all the examples shown here, it is true that Then, the numerical corrective flux density of species The following equipment was required to perform the liquid-liquid gravity separation tests: a 3 × 100 × 350-mm Commercial-quality vegetable oil and demineralized water were used for the experiments. The appropriate O/W mixture volume for the tests is was defined as 60 ml. For the experimental design, three important parameters were considered for the investigation, in three levels: stirring speed (2, 3 and 4 Hz), stirring time (10, 20 and 30 s) and percentage of oil (10, 15 and 20%). Through the design of Box-Behnken ( To capture images of the gravity separation process, a Canon EOS Rebel T5 camera with a zoom lens, connected to a laptop computer, was used. At the moment of image capture the sample was illuminated from behind at an angle of approximately 45° by means of a halogen light source, which was diffused through a sheet of white paper to produce a reasonably homogeneous background of adequate intensity. The images were taken at the following times after cessation of agitation: first photo: 12 s and second photo: 32 s. The images captured during the experiment were analyzed using an own code in the Image Processing Toolbox of Matlab. The code allows the minimum diameter of drops to measure to be selected; for example, the smallest droplets that adhere to the surface of the larger droplets can be disregarded. It is worth mentioning that these analyses were performed for the respective times of each experiment (12 s and 32 s) and their respective duplicates. From this study of images, the variables of interest for the study of liquid-liquid separation were selected: average droplet volume and standard deviation of droplet volume. The selected settings for the model fitting were 3 Hz, 10 s and 20%. In  In all the examples the initial droplet volume distribution, at a specific The droplet volume is discretized by Here We emphasize that the species identified with the letter Furthermore, we assume that the rate of coalescence in the sedimentation zone is negligible compared to that in the dense-packed zone, i.e., we take To validate the model, we compared the results of our model with those of our experiment on gravitational phase separation of an oil-in-water dispersion in a rectangular vessel. The experiment was focused on the movement and coalescence of oil droplets in the dense-packed zone, assuming the coalescence in the sedimentation zone to be negligible. The same hypothesis was also made by To fit the model to data, first, we probed with different values of For the simulations, the initial and total number of droplet species are A quadratic polynomial was adjusted to the set of (     Here the effect of dispersion continuity on phase separation quality is shown through the study of separation of O/W and W/O dispersions. The set-up and the physical parameters are the same as in the model fitting. The initial composition of the dispersion is constant throughout the gravity settler for each species. The initial and discretization parameters for both cases are given in   In this example, it is verified that sedimentation and coalescence are strongly interdependent. In this example, we show the influence of increasing the coalescence frequency coefficient on the behavior of the numerical solution of our mathematical model through the study of five cases:    In this example, we use a simulation to show the influence of the standard deviation of the initial organic phase droplet volumes on phase separation quality. We study three cases: The set-up is the same as in the model fitting. The common physical and discretization parameters are given in    A mathematical model of batch sedimentation and drop coalescence was presented and solved numerically. The model is a population balance model (PBE) with the independent variables time In a future work, the incorporation of the settling velocity in the dense-packed zone will be incorporated and a less diffusive numerical scheme for the sedimentation (second-order) will be implemented. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. AG acknowledges support by Powered@NLHPC: This research was partially supported by the supercomputing infrastructure of the FB acknowledges support by We recorded an approximate error defined with respect to a reference solution in order to evaluate the performance of the scheme. We introduced an approximate error, denoted as    