In this paper, test loop experiments and machine learning techniques were combined to investigate pressure drops of fresh cemented paste backfill (CPB) mixes. The influence of tailings characteristics on CPB pressure drops was studied and Extensive test loop experiments were performed. The complex mapping from tailings characteristics, cement-tailings ratio, inlet velocity and solids content to pressure drop was successfully learned by decision tree regression (DTR) models. In addition, the influence of training set size and maximum tree depth on DTR performance was investigated. The relative importance of predictor variables was discussed and the visualisation for a representative DTR model was provided. Finally, the current research applied two ensemble techniques, namely random forest and gradient boosting regression tree, to increase the predictive performance of the DTR models. The study found that all ensemble techniques outperformed DTR in the pressure drop prediction of CPB.Average importance score Cemented paste backfill Cement-tailings ratio Coefficient of uniformity and curvature Decision tree regression DTR models with maximum tree depth of 1 Gradient boosting regression tree Grain size distribution Specific gravity Iterative random sampling Inlet velocity Kennard-Stone sampling Maximum depth of the DTR The number of features to be used when looking for the best split. Minimum number of samples at the leaf node Minimum number of samples for node splitting Machine learning Mean-square-error Particle swarm optimisation Correlation coefficient Random forest Solids content Standard deviation Training set size X-ray diffraction Input and output values for the Normalised Minimum and maximum values It is widely recognized that population growth and urbanization will bring enormous demands for minerals from the mining industry [ Conventional disposal into tailings ponds cannot be widely used in the modern era due to its drawbacks such as the occupation of land resources and the catastrophic tailings ponds failure. As an alternative, the cemented paste backfill (CPB) technology has been proposed for tailings disposal and mine backfill purposes. In most modern mines, some parts of the generated tailings are used for surface paste disposal while the remaining tailings are used for underground mine backfill. As a result, paste technology allows mine operators to sustainably manage their problematic tailings [ Fresh CPB mixes are often prepared in a surface mix plant and transported to underground voids through a pipe system. Pumping is needed in cases where gravity-flow is not sufficient to prevent pipe blockage. Pressure drop is a significant engineering design parameter to characterise the pipe flow of fresh CPB mixes. However, since the CPB pipe flow is in fact a complex phenomenon, pressure drop results for one type of mine tailings are extremely hard to be used by another mine site. Numerical investigation suffers from parameter selection, simplification and accuracy while experimental pressure drop investigation using test loop systems are too costly and time-consuming [ Recent advances in machine learning (ML) techniques may bridge the gap through teaming human researchers with high capability in analysing historical data. By combining ML techniques with lab experiments, knowledge discovery could be accelerated in an iterative experiment-ML modelling-experiment loop. Moreover, the robustness of ML techniques in modelling complex and high-dimensional problems has been continuously verified. In the case of CPB, a new design framework has been proposed that incorporates ML, which is known as ML aided design for CPB (MLAD_CPB) or Intelligence Mining for Backfill (IMB) [ In this work, test loop experiments and machine learning techniques were combined to investigate pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes prepared with tailings from five mine sites. Extensive test loop experiments were performed for pressure drops investigation. In consideration of both accuracy and interpretation, decision tree regression (DTR) was selected as the primary technique while two ensemble techniques, namely random forest (RF) and GBRT, were used to increase the predictive performance. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time test loop experiments and ML techniques were combined to analyse pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes with different mine tailings. This work expands the way for ML techniques in the pressure drop modelling and manifests a fundamental change in handling complex problems like pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes. To investigate pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes under the influence of tailings characteristics, five types of tailings (T1-T5) from different mine sites were used. The distribution of mine sites is illustrated in Physical characteristics of mine tailings were represented by specific gravity (G The binder used for the current study was ordinary Portland cement (OPC) adhering to No. 425 Chinese Common Portland Cement Standard (No. GB175–2007). Tap water was used to mix the mine tailings and binder, as well well provide Fresh CPB mixes with the desired transportability.  The current study focused on pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes during horizontal straight flow. Thus, pressures at point 1 and point 2 were measured and the pressure drop between these two points was calculated. Following the procedure in [ The objective of this study is investigating pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes under the coupled influence of tailings characteristics, CTR, IV and SC. As discussed before, the physical and chemical characteristics of tailings will be represented by parameters in Decision tree regression (DTR) was used as the primary ML technique for the pressure drop modelling. To further contribute to the literature of fresh CPB mixes, two ensemble techniques, namely RF and GBRT, were also employed to improve the predictive performance. DTR is a decision tree-based method designed for regression problems [ The learning process of DTR starts from a root node where all training instances are stored. Then, a top-down decision tree structure is built through instances splitting based on a series of rules related to the predictor variable. The objective of such splitting is dividing training instances into several sub-groups and the variability among instances in each sub-group is minimised. DTR continues to grow only if a particular stopping criterion is reached. Nodes that undergo no splitting are represented as leaf nodes. In this paper, mean-square-error (MSE) was employed to measure the quality of a split, recursive splitting was used for instances splitting, and the stopping criterion was the maximum tree depth or the minimum impurity reduction (for early stopping). After the full-growth, the DTR model is often pruned to combat over-fitting caused by random error or noise. To be more specific, the weakest branches that contribute little or no to the generalisation capability of the DTR model are pruned. The instance prediction starts from the root node, along the way to the leaf node according to the splitting rules, and the predicted value for that instance is the average value of all instances in the leaf node. The main idea behind the ensemble technique is combining a set of individually trained regressors (i.e., DTR models) to increase the prediction accuracy. It is believed that different individual regressors will learn various aspects from the training instances and the combination of individual regressors might enable the ensemble technique to search the solution in a wide space [ An RF is a meta regressor that trains a collection of DTR models on different sub-samples of the training set [ This study is focused on pressure drops during the horizontal straight flow (point 1 to point 2 in To reduce the influence of data variation on the predictive performance of ML techniques, all predictor and target variables were normalised to (0, 1) range according to the following formula: After the normalisation of the dataset, the whole dataset is partitioned into the training set and the testing set. As the name suggests, the training set is employed to train ML models and tune their hyper-parameters while the testing set is employed to verify the generalisation capability of trained ML models. Different data sampling methods have been proposed for the dataset partitioning, such as iterative random sampling (IRS) and Kennard-Stone sampling (KSS). A more detailed introduction to IRS and KSS has been provided in our previous paper [ Moreover, the percentage of training set will also have an important influence on the performance of ML techniques. A convergence test of the training set size (TSS) is recommended for each dataset to be used in ML techniques. In this paper, the influence training set size (from 30% to 90%) on the DTR performance was investigated and the optimum training set size can be determined accordingly. To reduce the randomness in IRS, the dataset partitioning for each training set size was repeated 20 times. The authors note here that the prediction results will be representative and reproducible even at training set size = 90% since the IRS was repeated for 20 times. Before the application of ML techniques, certain parameters require to be pre-determined. These parameters are referred as hyper-parameters for ML techniques. Various selection of hyper-parameters will influence the predictive performance of ML techniques on a particular dataset. Therefore, hyper-parameters tuning is almost an essential procedure to build ML models with improved performance. In the literature, hyper-parameters tuning is often performed using either trial-and-error or metaheuristic optimization algorithms. Particle swarm optimization (PSO), which is a population-based metaheuristic method, was employed for hyper-parameters tuning of DTR on the pressure drop dataset. The authors note here hyper-parameters of RF and GBRT were not tunned by PSO as they are not the main focus of the current study. Default hyper-parameters suggested in [ The objective of PSO is finding an optimal solution, even not a glocal one, for a multidimensional problem through the communication and cooperation of a swarm of particles. The whole procedure of PSO would be: (1) generating a swarm of particles randomly, each representing a solution to the optimisation problem; (2) determining the performance of each particle based on the selected fitness function; (3) updating the particle position considering the current position and velocity; (4) continuing steps 2–3 until a stopping criterion is reached. The velocity and updated position can be calculated as follows:  5-fold cross-validation (CV) was employed as the validation method in the current study considering bias and computational efficiency. In 5-fold CV, the training set is further divided into five subsets with four being used to train the model and the remaining one being used to validate the training performance. Interested readers can refer to Ref [ To build and assess ML models, the following measures were used: Correlation coefficient ( Mean-square-error (MSE): MSE measures the squared distances between the experimental and predicted pressure drops. MSE is defined as: The whole methodology for the prediction of pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes is illustrated in  The influence of CTR, IV and SC on pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes is further illustrated in The influence of SC on pressure drops is mainly due to the change of water content in fresh CPB mixes. With the increase of SC, the lubricating water is decreased, resulting in an increase in pressure drops. IV affects the slip velocity among particles-to-particles and particles-to-pipes. An increasing IV will increase the interactions and collisions, thus increasing pressure drops. The variations of CTR affect the cement content in fresh CPB mixes. Cement hydration will be negatively influenced with a decreasing CTR, thus the hydrates that bind tailings particles will be decreased. The above results found in the current study agree well with findings in the literature [ As discussed before, a convergence test was performed for the selection of the training set size (TSS). As shown, the DTR performance on the training set was progressively increased during the increasing of the TSS. For instance, In terms of the DTR performance on the testing set,  The Max_depth had an evident influence on DTR performance. As shown, a clear improvement in DTR performance was obtained when the Max_depth was increased from 1 to 7. For example, The maximum The influence of Max_depth on the performance of DTR on the testing set is shown in The importance score of predictor variables was also investigated and the Max_depth was selected to be 7 due to above-mentioned discussions. Variable importance is calculated as the total reduction of MSE arisen from by a particular predictor variable. Predictor variables representing physical characteristics of tailings achieved an AIS of 0.18. Similarly, predictor variables representing chemical characteristics of tailings achieved an AIS of 0.27. The AIS of predictor variables related to mine tailings characteristics summed to be 0.45, which was much higher than that of SC, IV, and CTR. The ranking of SC > IV > CTR in terms of importance score in this study agrees well with conclusions in [  The performance of RF and GBRT on the testing set was also investigated and compared with the performance of DTR models ( In the future, more influencing variables can be investigated once sufficient funding and raw materials were available. These influence variables include, but are not limited to, different types of binders, sulphur content, and clay minerals. Also, a larger dataset is always preferable to improve the prediction performance and generalisation capability of the trained ML models. Pipe transport systems should be investigated with details. For example, the pipeline network effect, pipeline blockages, abrasive mineral effect, and pumping systems can be investigated. Finally, the pipe transport of fresh CPB mixes can be investigated in atomic scale using the first-principle calculations [ The objective of this study is investigating pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes using a combination of test loop experiments and machine learning techniques. Tailings from five mine sites were used and DTR was employed as the primary ML technique for pressure drops prediction. Tailings characteristics, both physical and chemical, were considered as predictor variables, leading to a total of 13 predictor variables together with CTR, IV and SC. Extensive test loop experiments were performed for dataset preparation and a novel methodology was proposed for pressure drops modelling. The predictive performance of two ensemble techniques, namely RF and GBRT, was also investigated and compared to that of DTR modelling. Based on the promising results obtained, the following conclusions can be drawn: Pressure drops of fresh CPB mixes prepared with different types of mine tailings showed large variances with each other, indicating tailings characteristics had important influences on pressure drops. Moreover, pressure drops correlated positively with CTR, IV and SC. Training set size (TSS) influenced the performance of DTR modelling. In the current study, the optimum TSS was determined to be 80% after the convergence test, with which the DTR modelling achieved an PSO was efficient in hyper-parameters tunning of DTR models when various Max_depth values were employed. Max_depth = 7 was sufficient to build robust DTR models for pressure drops prediction based on the current dataset. DTR models with Max_depth = 7 could achieve an In terms of the relative importance of individual predictor variables, SC ranked the first with an AIS of 0.29, followed by IV (AIS = 0.21) and the amount of Fe RF and GBRT outperformed DTR even without careful hyper-parameters tunning. RF achieved an  This study was financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at