Three dimensional TiO2 scaffolds are receiving renewed attention for bone tissue engineering (TE) due to their biocompatibility and attractive mechanical properties. However the bioactivity of these scaffolds is comparatively lower than that of bioactive glass or hydroxyapatite (HA) scaffolds. One strategy to improve bioactivity is to functionalize the surface of the scaffolds using biomolecules. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was chosen in this study due to its important role in the bone mineralization process. The current study investigated the ALP functionalization of 3D titanium dioxide scaffolds using self-polymerization of dopamine. Robust titanium scaffolds (compressive strength∼2.7 ± 0.3 MPa) were produced via foam replica method. Enzyme grafting was performed by dip-coating in polydopamine/ALP solution. The presence of ALP was indirectly confirmed by contact angle measurements and enzymatic activity study. The influence of the enzyme on the bioactivity, e.g. hydroxyapatite formation on the scaffold surface, was measured in simulated body fluid (SBF). After 28 days in SBF, 5 mg ALP coated titania scaffolds exhibited increased hydroxyapatite formation. It was thus confirmed that ALP enhances the bioactivity of titania scaffolds, converting an inert bioceramic in an attractive bioactive system for bone TE.The repair and reconstruction of damaged bone tissue caused by traumata, bone diseases or loss or bone tumour removal represent major clinical challenges There are various methods of surface functionalization, namely physical, chemical and biological. This work focuses on the immobilization of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) on TiO In this work, ALP was chosen as a biomolecule because of its huge influence on the calcification of bone TiO The polymer sponge burnout and sintering steps were carried out following a previously reported procedure Dense TiO The first step in the functionalization process is the cleaning of the surface to remove contamination and to expose hydroxyl groups. The scaffolds and pellets were ultrasonically cleaned for 10 min in acetone and isopropanol, respectively, in order to remove contamination In order to covalently graft ALP to titania scaffolds and pellets, three different amounts of ALP (alkaline phosphatase from bovine intestinal mucosa, P7640 from Sigma-Aldrich) with dopamine (Dopamine hydrochloride, H8502 from Sigma Aldrich) were used and an uncoated titania scaffold was considered as reference. For the coating of scaffolds, the 1-step coating process reported by Nijhuis et al. The scaffolds and pellets were put individually in a well plate containing 2 ml of the prepared solution and soaked for 16 h. After soaking, samples were washed 3 times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and one time in DI water to stop the grafting reaction. Afterwards, the samples were dried and stored at room temperature In order to study the bioactivity of the ALP/dopamine coated titania scaffolds, a standard For scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations, samples were fixed on stubs using double sided carbon stickers and silver paint was used as an adhesive to improve the conductivity. Prior to SEM evaluations, the samples were coated with Au using an EMITECH-K550 sputtering device. The morphology of the scaffolds was observed by SEM (AURIGA-4750, Zeiss, Germany). For pore morphology, magnifications around 100× and 200× were sufficient whereas for detecting hydroxyapatite a magnification up to 30KX had to be used. The average pore size was analyzed with the ImageJ software. Elemental analysis was performed by EDS (X-MaxN Oxford instruments, UK). Compressive mechanical testing of TiO For measuring the wettability of the samples, contact angle tests were performed on the produced pellets using the sessile drop method employing a contact angle-measuring instrument (DSA30-E, Krüss, Germany). After the adjustment of the base line, 3 μl distilled water was dropped on the surface of the pellets and the contact angle was measured. The measurement was taken five times for each pellet and then the average contact angle was calculated. In order to investigate the crystalline structure of the scaffolds, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Siemens Kristalloflex D500, Siemens AG, München, Germany) was carried out with a current of 30 mA, voltage of 30 KV, step size of 0.02° and step time of 3s, in the measurement range of 25–75° (2θ). To verify the biochemical activity of ALP immobilized onto the scaffolds, the transformation of para-Nitrophenylphospate (pNPP) to 4-nitrophenol was measured  The mass and dimensions of the sintered foams were measured to calculate the density of the foam, ρ The used titanium dioxide microparticles were in the anatase modification while the as-received nanoparticles exhibited a mixture of rutile and anatase phase (the weight ratio of anatase and rutile being approximately 80/20 as stated by the supplier). Since the sintering temperature was 1400 °C, which is clearly higher than the conversion temperature of anatase, the anatase phase was fully transformed into rutile phase The average compressive strength of TiO To prove the effect of the polydopamine layer used to functionalize the scaffold surfaces, the wettability of the samples was measured by the sessile drop technique. The results for both the coated and uncoated titania pellets are reported in To confirm the grafting quality and quantity of the alkaline phosphatase, an enzymatic activity study was performed and results are shown in The conversion into activity units (1U = 1 μg/ml) per volume indicated that the enzyme quantity was around four times higher on the 5 mg coated samples than on the samples with 2 mg. In comparison to 1 mg, the 2 mg coated scaffolds showed nearly the same proportion as the enzyme concentration in the grafting solutions. Overall, it was shown that the dopamine-based ALP anchoring was successfull while the enzyme retained its activity. Furthermore, it was confirmed that the amount of ALP in the coating solutions corresponded to the quantity of grafted enzyme. However, a further measurement, not shown here, led to the conclusion that the enzyme activity decreased with increasing storage time at room temperature. Hence, storage conditions should be considered since they influence the enzyme activity and therefore also the bioactivity of the functionalized surface. After 7 and 14 days of immersion in SBF, there were no significant changes observed on the surface morphology of scaffolds. The surface was smoother but the presence of HA like structures was not detected. Further, there were no visible differences between the coated and the uncoated samples. In comparison to 7 and 14 days, the morphology of coated scaffolds showed visibly clear changes after immersion in SBF for 21 days. From  Bone is a highly complex and vascularized tissue structure exhibiting hierarchical levels of organization with a variety of structural and mechanical functions. Several requirements are critical for scaffolds in bone TE, such as an appropriate pore structure and porosity for cell migration, blood vessel formation and tissue ingrowth, a competent mechanical stability comparable to that of natural bone in order to be suitable for load-bearing applications and good bioactivity to deposit HA on the surface for bone bonding. In the current work, the scaffold pore size was calculated to be in the range of 300–400 μm which, according to Murphy et al. Techniques proposed to improve the bioactivity of bioinert surfaces include coating by bioactive glasses In this study, TiO The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Tobias Fey (University of Erlangen-Nuremberg) for helping with XRD measurements and Mr. Marvin Valley (Institute of Biomaterials, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg) for experimental support.