Particle size distribution, uniformity of the distribution and specific surface area (SSA) have a great influence on service properties of cement, particularly on strength. In this paper the effects of these physical parameters on strength development were studied using PC 42.5 R.
                  In order to understand the significance of different particle size ranges in a distribution, samples having size distributions such as −10 µm, −20 µm, −30 µm, −45 µm, −32+3 µm and −20+5 µm were prepared from PC 42.5 R by using a laboratory scale 3rd generation separator. Additionally −32+3 µm and −20+5 µm fractions were added to the original PC 42.5 R in varying amounts to study SSA and uniformity effects. Same strength values were obtained for samples with a narrower size distribution but smaller SSA. Fineness is very important for strength development, particularly in the early stages of hydration.Particle size distribution, uniformity factor and specific surface area (SSA) are important physical parameters affecting cement service properties. These parameters define the proportion of fine and coarse particles in the cement. This proportion controls water demand, setting and hydration reactions Many attempts have been made to correlate the particle size distribution and/or SSA of cement with its compressive strength. Some empirical regression models have been described which predict cement strength from particle size distribution and SSA The uniformity of the particle size distribution curve is a controversial subject. Uniformity factor, ‘n’, is a parameter which differentiates the inclination of the lines characterizing size distribution in granulometric grid. In other words, According to Frigione and Marra's study SSA with service properties should only be considered in conjunction with particle size distribution. Moreover, strength development should be expressed in terms of particle size distribution instead of a single fineness value. Kuhlmann et al. The purpose of this study was to compare the effects of certain size fractions and surface area values upon the compressive strength of cement samples. A commercial PC 42.5 R As discussed above − The − Since different particle size distributions were formed from PC 42.5 R, chemical analyses of these samples were carried out to check if any variation had occurred. Chemical characterizations were performed by XRF analysis. As the particle size distribution and uniformity factor changed, it was expected that the SSA values would also change. BET (N Compressive strength values were determined as described in TS EN 196-1 Chemical compositions of the samples prepared at different fineness from PC 42.5 R are given in Chemical compositions of PC 42.5 R, − Also, as can be seen from Surface area measurements are shown in Blaine measurements of samples containing − The compressive strength test results are shown in As can be seen in Similar results are shown in Addition of the − The major results are summarized in Based on the findings the following conclusions can be deduced: Fineness has a great effect on 2 days strength. In late ages, strength is affected more by the amount of coarse particles rather than fines. When the amount of − Addition of the − The fine and coarse tails of the distribution have different effects on strength. If both ends are minimized and the distribution is made more uniform, high strength values can be obtained. Considering water demand and setting characteristics, some operational parameters in the separation process can be rearranged to obtain higher strength products. As a suggestion; separate marketing of filter product may be more economic rather than mixing it with separator product, when the obtained results of this study about the effects of fines are considered. The author gratefully acknowledges the Bastas Cement Plant staff for their cooperation and for providing the samples. Muammer Oner, David Sutherland and M. Burak Top are also thanked for their valuable contributions.