This paper shows how a unified model with a single set of equations and material constants can be used for describing inelastic flow of rocksalt submitted to a variety of loading conditions associated with plasticity, creep and relaxation. After introducing the complete model in its full expanded version, the authors demonstrate that these different observed material responses are specific manifestations of a unique (unified) inelastic behavior, each corresponding to an imposed load path. The unified model relies on the use of internal state variables (ISV) attached to specific phenomena, including isotropic and kinematic hardening. Each ISV appears in the kinetic (flow) law and evolves according to a growth rule as a function of the inelastic strain tensor until it reaches saturation. The flow law, which relates the deviatoric stress to the inelastic strain rate, takes into account the evolution of these ISV as well as the external (observable) variables. Together, they represent a complete description of inelastic flow. These concepts are illustrated by results obtained on rocksalt samples submitted to different loading conditions, including constant strain rate (CSR) tests, creep (constant stress) tests, and relaxation (constant strain) tests.elastic constants (Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio) stiffness and bulk elastic modulus Cauchy stress and its deviatoric component major, intermediate and minor principal stress deviatoric stress total, elastic and inelastic strain tensors total, elastic and inelastic strain rates tensors mean stress and von Mises equivalent of Cauchy stress von Mises stress saturation value internal stress and saturation value von Mises equivalent of inelastic strain von Mises equivalent of inelastic strain rate Krönecker delta hydrostatic loading pressure hardening modulus time temperature material parameters for Norton’s creep law material parameters for the strain-hardening model scale factor for the temperature function activation energy for the temperature function universal gas constant total, short range, and long range kinematic backstress kinematic back stress tensor ( von Mises equivalents for kinematic backstresses and saturation values ( isotropic ISV (yield strength material constants internal state variable(s) constant strain rate constant rate of stress conventional triaxial compression reduced triaxial extension Avery Island Artificial Rocksalt The mechanical behavior of rocksalt has been investigated extensively over the last four or five decades. This is not surprising considering that halite (the main mineral of rocksalt) deposits have been mined for thousands of years. At different times, salt has been used for many purposes, from food processing, pharmacology, and monetary currency to water treatment and road deicing agents Numerous research activities have also been favored by strategic projects, such as programs on radioactive waste disposals The behavior of rocksalt is quite similar to that of many other crystalline materials. It typifies a large isomechanical group of ionic crystals with rocksalt structure known as alkali halides (AH), which also includes LiF, KCl, AgCl Rocksalt mechanical behavior is dominated by inelastic deformation processes, as its elastic limit is usually very low, even at room temperature, at least in a virgin state. When loaded under uniaxial or triaxial compression, it exhibits a more ductile response than most other rocks. This response can even become fully plastic if the applied deviatoric stress remains far enough from the failure surface, whose location in stress space varies according to temperature, strain rate and mean stress. In that regard, it has been observed, both in the laboratory and in the field, that a sufficiently high mean stress combined to a deviatoric stress that is much lower than the peak strength promotes ductility by virtually eliminating microfracturing Laboratory testing of rocksalt is usually performed under triaxial compression. The main controlled loading variable can be the strain rate as in constant strain rate (CSR) tests or relaxation tests (in which case the axial strain rate is nil), or the deviatoric stress rate as in constant rate of stress (CRS) tests or creep tests (for which the rate of stress is nil). Observations during such tests have indicated that rocksalt has a very low yield strength (<1 MPa) and a marked tendency for hardening. The latter is due, on the microscopic level, to the increasing number of dislocations and to the interactions developing between them as well as with various microstructural obstacles during straining During a CSR test, the stress–strain curve is non-linear and the hardening modulus The material response to external loading is being influenced by time or strain rate, and is said to have a viscous nature. For instance, in a CSR test, the flow stress increases in an abrupt manner when the strain rate is suddenly augmented; partial unloading may, however, lead to an elastic response due to material hardening which increases its yield strength. On the other hand, a quick modification of the stress state in a creep test induces a sharp bend in the strain-time curve. These and other specific features have been reviewed by various authors over the years At the microstructural level, hardening and recovery processes take place simultaneously, in a way that depends on the thermomechanical history (before reaching steady state). Recovery is considered to be dynamic when directly driven by the strain energy, and static when driven by time or thermal activation. Recovery phenomena counteract hardening and lead the microstructure to progressively return to a virgin state (equivalent to annealed or unhardened by a heat treatment). This phenomenon tends to lower the flow strength in a CSR test and to increase the strain rate during a creep test (when compared to a no recovery situation). These characteristics are the source of memory effects, that are fading since their influence tends to dissipate over time. Memory effects vanish when a dynamic equilibrium is established between hardening and recovery processes, i.e. when a steady state is reached. The authors present in the following an approach to formulate constitutive equations using ISVs. A unified viscoplastic model, named SUVIC (which stands for In rock mechanics, simple constitutive equations, such as linear elasticity or elastoplasticity with elementary hardening/softening rules, are commonly used to represent material behavior. These models, although simplifying the complex nature of rock media, can provide satisfactory results for specific applications. However, when dealing with soft rocks like rocksalt and potash, it becomes imperative to resort to more elaborate models to represent, among other features, hereditary effects, time (or rate) dependency of inelastic behavior, and directional and non-directional hardening/softening phenomena. Most constitutive models developed so far do not allow a complete representation of the inelastic behavior of soft rocks with low porosity, and may therefore provide inadequate modeling results for engineering calculations. In the case of rocksalt, such calculations can be quite challenging, whether they are related to the design and monitoring of underground excavations for mining The most often used models to assess the time dependent behavior of rocksalt are based on a power law equation of the following type: This equation has been extensively used to model the behavior of different structures in rocksalt deposits, such as galleries, caverns and pillars, often with mixed success A widely used approach to describe both the transient and steady state flow of polycrystalline materials, including rocksalt, is based on a partitioned formulation defining the creep (inelastic) strain rate as: The partitioned approach further requires that other terms be added to describe short term straining, usually through an elasto-plastic component with a flow rule and a plastic potential. Unfortunately, with such approach, the model equations and corresponding parameters can only be valid under the conditions used for their determination (but which may not correspond to the actual in situ conditions). To alleviate this limitation and hopefully generalize the partitioned model applicability, various strategies have been elaborated. For instance, it has been proposed that a creep law (describing the inelastic strain increase with time under a given stress) be combined to a so-called relaxation law (characterizing a decreasing axial stress with time at a given strain), two limiting cases that, in principle, encompass a wide range of loading conditions An alternative approach, initially developed for metallic materials, is to rely on a unified formulation and to introduce evolutionary state variables in the model in order to represent a broader range of material responses, such as transient creep followed by steady state flow The ISV model presented below is an updated version of SUVIC, a model developed for rocksalt behavior in the context of rate-dependent plasticity Within the unified theory framework, material hardening and the resulting mechanical state are entirely described at a given time by the current value of the external (observable) state variables ( The constitutive equations consider that only elastic and viscoplastic straining occurs. The model presented here, referred to as SUVIC As previously stated, with the ISV modeling approach, one of the material structural state characteristics often used is the so-called internal stress  The existence of a macroscopic (mean) internal stress acting within a representative volume element of crystalline materials has been rationalized using the heterogeneous nature of dislocations distribution, which produces ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ regions with different local stresses and different dislocations mobility The formulation used to define the internal stress in the SUVIC model evolved progressively over the years to capture more accurately the main features of rocksalt behavior. The model presented herein has three distinct ISVs with updated evolution laws. Two variables, For small perturbations under isothermal loading, the total strain rate tensor is the sum of elastic and inelastic strain tensors: The inelastic component of the strain rate tensor is given by a single kinetic law obtained from a multiaxial generalization of Phenomenologically, each ISV is assumed to evolve through a competitive process of the following type, given for a generic ISV As already pointed out, steady state flow is considered to be independent of previous mechanical events, or memory effects. Therefore, it can be formulated using only external variables. It has also been stated before that, when the steady state flow is controlled by dislocations climb, glide and/or cross slip mechanisms, the relationship between In the preceding equations, the following von Mises equivalencies are used: Analyses performed on the relative magnitude saturation value of the internal stress at steady state, compared to the applied stress, have shown that the following relationship is appropriate  In this section, the procedure to obtain the material constants is first presented succinctly; it has also been discussed in more details in Julien For tests on the artificial salt (see Ref. The tests on AI salt, presented in Senseny et al. Identifying a representative set of material constants for ISV models can be a difficult task The elastic constants ( The determination procedure for the inelastic parameters starts with the normalized active stress exponent Using The internal stress has been expressed as a function of the applied stress at steady state [ The main static recovery parameters are deduced from physical considerations. Microstructural observations on dislocations density have shown that constants The remaining parameters are related mostly to short term effects; these are constants Such refinements have been achieved here using an identification scheme that searches for a set of parameters while minimizing the discrepancies between the experimental results and the simulation output. For this, the computer code SIDOLO was used The material constants given in The capabilities of SUVIC   Finally, For AI rocksalt, the parameter values ( Tests with long durations and lower strain rates are of interest in mining and civil engineering applications. Creep tests with rapid changes in the strain rate due to quick increases or decreases in the stress state ( Since the same set of parameters is used to reproduce these various experimental results (plasticity, creep and relaxation), one can only conclude that the SUVIC In this presentation on AI salt, however, the results only reflect the descriptive capabilities of SUVIC It is interesting to recall also that another ISV model was applied to these test results by Senseny et al. ISV models have been increasingly used in engineering over the last two decades, especially for calculations on pure metals, alloys, ceramics and composites. The rock mechanics community has not adopted such ISV approaches at the same pace, even though some existing models used for practical applications can be shown to be inappropriate when considering all relevant aspects of material behavior. It must be recognized, however, that using ISV models, such as SUVIC In their effort to refine their model and promote its use (and that of other ISV models), the authors have recently implemented SUVIC Finally, it is interesting to mention that ISV modeling can be applied not only for the ductile regime of inelastic behavior, but also in the cases of a brittle and semi-brittle responses In this paper, the authors have investigated the development and applications of elaborate constitutive equations for the ductile (fully plastic) behavior of rocksalt. A modeling framework, based on the unified theory of inelastic flow using internal state variables (ISV), is presented. The SUVIC The authors would like to thank N. S. Brodsky from Sandia National Laboratories (USA) and K. L. De Vries from RE/SPEC Inc. (USA) for providing information about the experimental data given in Ref.