The kinetic studies of ammonia synthesis over a barium-promoted cobalt catalyst supported on magnesium–lanthanum mixed oxide were performed. The commercial iron catalyst was used for comparison purposes. Measurements were carried out under conditions close to the industrial ones, i.e. at the temperature of 400, 440, 480 °C, pressure of 9.0 MPa and various NH3 concentrations in the inlet gas. The cobalt catalyst displayed higher catalytic activity in the entire tested range of temperature and ammonia concentrations in comparison to the iron catalyst. The catalytic behaviour in ammonia synthesis process was analysed with a power-law rate equation and the reaction orders with respect to H2 and NH3 were determined. There was no difference in the values of the reaction order with respect to H2 for both the catalysts indicating that NH3 synthesis reaction rate is not inhibited by hydrogen. In contrast, the reaction order with respect to NH3 varied on the catalyst. The cobalt-based catalyst had a less negative value of the reaction order with respect to NH3 revealing a lower inhibition by product itself (NH3) compared to the iron catalyst. Due to its high activity the cobalt-based catalyst may be considered as a valuable alternative to the iron catalyst for ammonia synthesis process.A broad range of ammonia applications made its production process the primary segment of the bulk chemical manufacturing. Ammonia is used as a raw material for the production of nitric acid, soda, urea and as an additive in the production of plastics, textiles and pesticides. In addition, ammonia is considered as an efficient energy carrier due to its high energy density (12.8 GJ m On an industrial scale ammonia is produced from hydrogen and nitrogen gases over the promoted iron catalyst using the well-established Haber–Bosch process The valuable alternative to the commercialized catalysts for NH In this research we evaluated the catalytic behaviour of a barium-promoted cobalt catalyst supported on magnesium–lanthanum mixed oxide. Barium was added to enhance the catalyst's activity in NH Mg–La mixed oxide support (Mg/La molar ratio=7) was prepared by co-precipitation with pH increasing to the value of 11. An aqueous solution of magnesium nitrate hexahydrate (pure p.a., Chempur) and lanthanum nitrate hexahydrate (pure p.a., Alfa Aesar) was mixed by a magnetic stirrer at 30 Specific surface area of the studied catalysts was determined using nitrogen physisorption method (ASAP2020, Micromeritics). The results of the measurements were approximated by the BET adsorption isotherm model. Laboratory powder X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded at room temperature on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer in the Bragg-Brentano geometry with Cu-Kα radiation. The samples were scanned in 2θ range of 10–70° in a continuous scan using 0.03° steps. Studies of pulse chemisorption of carbon monoxide were conducted using a flow set-up with a quartz U-tube reactor (AutoChem II 2920, Micromeritics). Prior to the measurement the iron and cobalt catalyst precursors (mass of 0.3 g) were reduced for 18 h in the hydrogen flow at 550 Temperature-programmed surface reaction (TPSR) of preadsorbed nitrogen with hydrogen was carried out using the same equipment described above. Prior to the measurement, the iron and cobalt catalyst precursors (mass of 0.5 g) were reduced for 18 h in the hydrogen flow at 550 The activity measurements were carried out in a flow installation consisting of a section of preparation and purification of the synthesis gas, a preliminary reactor (packed with the iron catalyst) and a main reactor (packed with the studied catalyst samples). The detailed description of the experimental setup has been presented elsewhere [ The feed gas for NH Before activity measurements, the investigated catalysts were activated according to the conditions listed in Two types of the activity measurements were performed, The activity measurements were carried out within a certain range of the experimental conditions listened in In addition, the long-term durability tests were performed (overheating at 600 Reaction kinetics were analysed by applying a power-law rate equation [ Combining In a chemical equilibrium, the reaction rate of ammonia synthesis ( Combining an equilibrium constant ( Assuming that the rate-determining step of ammonia synthesis is N Therefore, the reaction orders with respect to H The apparent activation energies (  As it can be seen from CO pulse chemisorption experiments revealed that the average cobalt metallic particle has 27 nm in size in comparison to 94 nm of the metallic iron ( XRD analysis of the reduced barium-promoted cobalt catalyst ( Fig. S3 depicts the results of the TPSR experiments performed over the cobalt and iron catalysts. The NH Additionally, an quantitative analysis was made to determine amount of NH The dependence of ammonia synthesis reaction rate ( To investigate in detail the differences in the reaction rates on the studied cobalt (the Ba+Co/Mg–La) and iron (the Fe-cat.) catalysts, the ratio of corresponding reaction rates ( The temperature dependence of ammonia synthesis reaction rate at various NH  Due to the strong influence of ammonia partial pressure ( Although the iron catalyst is characterized by lower the apparent activation energies, the cobalt catalyst exhibits higher activity compared to the iron catalyst at various measurement conditions ( As shown in For both the catalysts the values of the reaction orders with respect to H  As it can be seen from The comparison of the catalytic activity of the cobalt, iron and ruthenium catalysts in ammonia synthesis process is summarized in As it can be seen from For the industrial applications, a high catalytic activity should be accompanied by a long-term stability and an efficient recycling method of the spent catalyst. Thus, the comparison of the recycling methods of both the investigated catalysts (the iron and cobalt catalysts) was made. For the spent fused iron catalyst the recycling is based on the oxidation of the metallic iron into the iron(II,III) oxide and subsequent remelting. The iron catalyst precursor thus obtained has the catalytic activity comparable to that of the catalyst made from natural magnetite According to the conduced studies it is apparent that the cobalt catalyst combines the advantages of the well-known iron and ruthenium catalysts and thus has a potential to be a new industrial catalyst for ammonia synthesis process. Superiorities of the cobalt-based catalyst over the commercialized catalysts are: No inhibition of NH Moderate tendency to the inhibition of NH In the presented study it was demonstrated that the barium-promoted cobalt catalyst supported on magnesium–lanthanum mixed oxide (the Ba+Co/Mg–La) is a highly effective catalytic system for NH The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Hubert Ronduda thanks the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education for the financial support within the project “Najlepsi z najlepszych! 4.0″. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi: 