This paper provides the results of the tests on bioenergy plants—topinambours and sunflowers, their cultivation and usage for fuels. Previous investigations show that stalks of topinambours, grown in fertile soil and fertilised, can reach up to 4m height and give up to 15t dry matter (D.M.) ha−1 of the green mass, sunflowers—3m and 11tD.M.ha−1, respectively.
                  Effective way to minimise the moisture of energy plants is to keep them harvested in the storage. The stems of the topinambours cut in autumn reaches 20% moisture content in 11 days, the sunflowers—in a month.
                  Physical–mechanical characteristics of chopped stems—angles of fall and natural crumble, is important for construction of stores of chopped mass. These angles of large-stalked plants, chopped by forage combines E-281C and Krone-Big varied marginally: angle of fall—from 74° to 82°, angle of natural crumble—from 45° to 47°.
                  There were investigations on main physical–mechanical characteristics of chopping quality of bioenergy plants. Chopping quality of topinambours and sunflowers, chopped by the stationary fodder chopper SPP-1 was sufficient high, and we recommend this chopper to chop the bioenergy plants. Experimental data of chopping quality of combines E-281C and Krone-Big show, that the amount of dust, which was large enough (8.6–12.5%) was affected by stalks were chopped with leafs during trials. According to the fineness requirements for fuel-chaff, stalks were chopped in good quality, despite large amount of dust.Grasses, such as reed fescue grass ( Topinambour is popular in many countries, their roots can be used as food or for pharmaceuticals, and the stems can be utilised for the energy Growing energy plants and their use as a fuel is new in Lithuania. Investigations in this field were recently started at the Lithuanian Institute of Agricultural Engineering and Lithuanian Agricultural Institute The first tests of growing energy crops and determining their moisture content were conducted at the Lithuanian Institute of Agricultural Engineering in 1998–1999. Four plots of non-traditional long stem plants (topinambour, sunflower, hemp and maize) were established. The soil was a medium-rich light clay loam. The physical–mechanical characteristics of these plants at different stages in the growth cycle are given in Topinambour grows tallest. The stems of the topinambour have the highest density 219 Highest yields in October were achieved with topinambour (14.8 At the end of October the moisture content of the stems of all the plants was high, in excess of 49% and needed to be dried to 20% for combustion. Stem samples taken in spring (21 April) had moisture contents less than 20%. However, weather conditions play important role when harvesting in spring. This initial study indicated the potential of topinambour and sunflower as energy crops and so further investigations were undertaken to determine yield on different soils and the physical–mechanical characteristics of the stems. Growing of topinambour and sunflower and change in moisture content was investigated at the Lithuanian Institute of Agricultural Engineering. Two methods of stalk harvesting were studied: stalk cutting and tying in bundles and stalk cutting and chopping in the field by mobile combines In 2002, topinambour and sunflower were grown in less fertile soil (first plot—fertile, soil texture—cohesive sand, rich in nutrients; second plot—moderately fertile, soil texture—sandy loam, moderately rich in nutrients) where planting (sowing), growth, management, harvesting technology and machinery were investigated ( Before sowing the soil was ploughed and cultivated by a combined tractor unit: plough and general tillage cultivator, similar to that for potatoes. Sunflower seeds were sown, topinambour tubers were planted, and the interrows cultivated as for cereals or potatoes. The quality of planting topinambour tubers using a potato elevator planter was not very high, as the planter's spoons were not very efficient at taking the awkward-shaped tubers from the hopper. Stems were cut manually with a motor sickle and the cut stems tied in bundles of various sizes and transported by tractor trailer to a barn for storage. Six plots were harvested; 3 each of topinambour and sunflower. They were stored vertically in barns until the heating season. A stationary drum type fodder chopper The machine chopped stalks of topinambour and sunflower tied in bundles of 20–30 stalks. The physical–mechanical characteristics—moisture, density, the angle of fall and natural crumble ( Comminution of stalks was done with combines Stalks of topimanbour and sunflower, cut in autumn, 2002 tied in bundles, and stored in an unheated barn under natural conditions dried up to 18–20% moisture, were chopped in spring using a A similar trial, using the forage combine Physical–mechanical properties of the plants stems-moisture, mass dimensions and stem density were determined The dynamics of moisture content change of the harvested unchopped and chopped stems was determined by weighing them every 5th day over a 60-day period. The parameters of the ambient air (the temperature and the relative humidity) were also determined during the investigation. The drying dynamics of cut stems while keeping them in heating and unheating storage was also estimated. The following physical–mechanical characteristics of topinambour tubers were obtained: average moisture content of lifted tubers average weight per tuber weight of tubers per plant tuber yield The physical–mechanical characteristics of the stalks results of topinambour and sunflower in 2002 and on different soil types are shown in Average stalk weight of topinambour was twice that of sunflower (99.9 and 40.8 The calculated yield per hectare for the two soil types was 7.3 and 5.7 For combustion the stalks (20% moisture content) are chopped and burnt in a special hearth type furnace. Stalks can be chopped by stationary or mobile drum and disk-type forage choppers. Comminuted stalks must meet the following requirements: average length of chopped pieces must not exceed 15 The main physical–mechanical characteristics of the comminuted energy crops cut with the stationary forage chopper Physical–mechanical characteristics of stalks comminuted by the combines The density of chaff from topinambour and sunflower stalks varied from 43 to 57 The largest fraction (from 44% to 62%) is left on the oblong 8 The change in the moisture content with storage after harvest is shown in The ambient air temperature Topinambours reached 20% moisture content in 11 days whereas sunflowers took 28 days. The regression equations of the moisture change of the energy plants were chosen and calculated. The dynamics of the change of the moisture content of the topinambours and sunflowers is described by the following equation:  The chopped stems of topinambour and sunflower dry slowly in storage—it took 25–30 days to reach 20% and became mouldy. The dynamics of natural drying of the bundles of stalks are shown in  Experimental results show, that in 2002 the yield of the two crops grown on different soil types was 7.3 and 5.7 Experimental data of chopping quality of combines The density of chaff from topinambour and sunflower stalks varied from 43 to 57 The test results of the dynamics of natural drying of the bundles of stalks show that in the unheated storage the bundles of topinambour stalks reached moisture content below 20% after 21 days of storage, whilst bundles of sunflower stalks took 8 days. Stalks dried in this way can be used as fuel.