Target jet milling and conventional ball milling were used to produce powders from gray cast iron scraps. Powders of similar size distribution produced by the two methods were pressed at different compacting pressures. Green compacts were made at the compacting pressures of 500, 600, 700 and 800MPa. Jet milled powder showed good compaction behavior while ball milled powder showed very poor compressibility. Also, balanced compacts composed of 50% Hoganas SC100.26 iron powder and each of the cast iron powders produced in this work were made at 500 and 800MPa and their green properties were determined. Results showed that, green properties of the jet milled powder were acceptable and superior compared to ball milled powder. The jet milling process proved to be a much more efficient process compared to ball milling in terms of time and production capacity.Recently, many researchers have focused their attention on the reclamation and recycling of scrap which, is due to the rapid increases in the cost of engineering materials and energy costs Among all chips from machining, ferrous chips are the most important considering the volume and quantity produced. In particular, cast iron scrap has attracted more attention as it best meets powder metallurgy requirements Producing sintered components using gray cast iron chips to make the starting powder, has been another way to utilize scraps. Rise in powder production costs, mainly due to the increases in energy costs, has forced researchers to find cheaper powder resources Ball milling has been the main method used to convert gray cast iron chips into powders, suitable for making sintered components. Annealing the powders produced via milling, has always been an integral part of the process to relieve strain hardening and reduce surface oxides in order to improve compressibility of the powders On an industrial scale the productivity of ball mill comminution is clearly too low and experiments were being conducted with the aim of developing a method of accelerated comminution of cast iron chips Metallurgical, geometrical and mechanical properties, as well as the residual strain of the cast iron powders produced by this method are investigated and compared with those of powders produced by conventional ball milling. The cast iron scrap investigated in this study was pearlitic lamellar gray cast iron ( In order to pulverize the scraps via jet milling, compressed air with the pressure of 6–7 In order to evaluate the compressibility of the powders, cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 25 The green strength of the compacts was determined using three-point bending test. The bending tests were carried out on rectangular specimens using a Santam STM-20 testing machine at room temperature. The green strength was calculated from the following equation Scanning electron microscopy was used to examine the morphology of the powders and the fracture surface of the green compacts. The phase constitutions and residual strain of the powders were determined using a Phillips X-ray diffractometer (XRD). The gray cast iron powders obtained by the two methods were characterized according to the time of pulverization, morphology, flow rate and apparent density. According to the capacity of the planetary ball mill used, four hours of ball milling was needed to pulverize 40  Flow rate and apparent density of both powders are reported in The green properties of compacts made from JM powder are shown in The presence of graphite fines ( Presence of surface oxygen is a widely reported reason for poor compressibility of metal powders Considering the poor compressibility of BM powders produced in this work and in order to compare them with JM powders, 50   Jet milling proved to be a much more efficient process to make powder from gray cast iron scrap compared to ball milling. Jet milled powder in contrast to the ball milled powder, showed good compaction behavior in the as received condition and did not require any additional treatment before compaction such as; annealing. Green strength of the jet milled compacts increased by 58% by increasing the compacting pressure from 500 to 800 Balanced compacts made of ball milled powder had still inferior green properties compared to those made of jet milled powder. The green densities were determined to be 5.87 and 6.50 Jet milling of gray cast iron scrap can be considered as a viable and economical technique with minimum environmental pollution (compared to foundry recycling of the scraps) to make powders suitable for compaction which can potentially be used to make iron based bearings and sintered cast iron and steel components. Also, its use as loose powder in the coating process of mirrors is under investigation by the present authors with very promising initial results.