In this paper, the effects of mechanical activation and roasting on treating titania slag process were systematically investigated. Several operating parameters as independent variables, namely activation time, temperature and roasting time, and synthetic rutile content as dependent variable, were optimized using response surface methodology (RSM) with a central composite design (CCD). A second-degree equation for independent and dependent variables was computed and used to create the response surface and contours. It showed that linear effect of activation time, temperature and roasting time, interaction effect between activation time and temperature, square effect of activation time showed influence on synthetic rutile content. According to results from analysis of variance (ANOVA), the value of the determination coefficient (R
                     2
                     =0.9767) indicates that the model was a good fit that 97.67% of the variation could be explained well by the model. The value of the adjusted determination coefficient (adj.R
                     2
                     =0.9558) was also very high to advocate for a high significance of the model. The predicted synthetic rutile content after process optimization was found to agree satisfactory with the experimental values. The optimum experiment parameters were found as follows: activation time of 170.42min, temperature of 1149.28°C, and roasting time of 20.79min. The specific polymorphic phase transition of titania slag before and after combination mechanical activation and roasting process were obtained and characterized by X-ray Diffraction (XRD), respectively.Rutile is the major raw material for the production of TiO Mechanical activation belongs to innovative processes to improve technological methods by creating of new surfaces and structural defects of solid state Design of experiments (DOE) is the most efficient approach for organizing experimental work. DOE selects a diverse and representative set of experiments in which all factors are independent of each other despite being varied simultaneously. The result is a causal predictive model showing the importance of all factors and their interactions The aim of this work was to solve the problem mentioned above, and to optimize the combined mechanical activation-roasting parameters with a consideration of response by applying RSM. A quadratic model was derived to describe the effects of activation time, temperature, and roasting time on synthetic rutile content. The polymorphic phase transition of synthetic rutile under the optimum condition was also analyzed. In the present study, titania slag was obtained from Kunming City, Yunnan Province, China. The chemical composition of titania slag is listed in XRD instrument (D/Max 2200, Rigaku, Japan) was used to measure the crystal structure of the titania slag and the treated samples. XRD pattern was acquired using an X-ray diffractometer with CuKα radiation and a Ni filter. The voltage and anode current operated were 35 A conical ball mill (XNQ-67, Wuhan, China) was employed for the mechanical activation of the titania slag. The milling cells were 1000 A batch-type resistance furnace (YFX12/16Q-YC, Shanghai, China) was conducted for roasting process. The temperature of the raw materials during roasting process was monitored using a thermocouple inserted into the ores. After roasting was completed, the roasted ore was naturally cooled in the furnace to room temperature. Based on our previous work, three operating factors, namely the activation time ( For statistical calculations, the chosen independent variables used in this experiment were coded according to Eq. A second-order polynomial regression model was used to express the dependent variables as a function of the independent variables which is given by Eq. The results of the experimental design were analyzed using ‘Design Expert’ (version 7.1.5, STAT-EASE Inc., Minneapolis, USA) for regression and graphical analyses to fit the equations developed and also for the evaluation of the statistical significance of the second-order polynomial equations. The results of the second order response surface model fitting in the form of ANOVA for activation time, temperature, and roasting time is given in The ANOVA of the quadratic model for synthetic rutile content is listed in According to the least squares method, the models are selected based on the highest order polynomials while the additional significant terms are also put into account and the models were not aliased. For the synthetic rutile content, the quadratic model is selected, as suggested by the software. Eq.    The response surface curve for the interaction of activation time and roasting time at zero level of temperature is illustrated in  The validation of the model is carried out under predicted conditions. Synthetic rutile is prepared under the experimental condition given in In the present study, preparing synthetic rutile under optimum experiment conditions is characterized by XRD, and the results are shown in In this study, response surface methodology is successfully applied for combined mechanical activation-roasting of titania slag. The high regression coefficients of the second-order polynomial showed that the model is well fitted to the experimental data. According to the second-order polynomial equation, the optimum conditions for experiment parameters were obtained with activation time of 170.42 Financial supports from the