Coal desulfurization prior to usage is a preprocessing in order to achieve clean fuel and reduce environmental impacts such as acid rain. Desulfurization of Tabas Mezino coal was conducted with two consecutive steps of froth flotation at ambient temperature followed by leaching at various conditions. Reducing the ash content of Mezino coal by 35.7 wt.% and its total sulfur content by 36.9% using froth flotation process was successful. HCl and HNO3 were used, separately, to leach the floated coal, and the effectiveness of each acid on Mezino coal desulfurization was investigated. Nitric acid was found to be much more effective than HCl and the effects of reaction time, acid concentration and temperatures as well as stirring speed were studied as major parameters in the nitric leaching process. Taguchi orthogonal experiment with the above mentioned parameter elements; one at three levels was used to optimize the experiment parameters by the analysis of variances. Applying of the Taguchi technique significantly reduced the time and cost required for the experimental investigation. The findings indicated that acid concentration, with a high contribution, had the most dominant effect on desulfurization performance, followed by temperature, stirring speed and time. Accordingly, the optimum condition was obtained as, temperature: 90 °C., acid concentration: 30%., and stirring rate: 1000 rpm. The total sulfur and ash removal after flotation and leaching at optimum condition reached to 75.4 and 53.2% respectively that is a remarkable result compared to the previous works.In recent years, with the rising prices of crude oil and natural gas and shortage of oil and gas resources, worldwide energy industries have been focusing on accelerating the development of coal chemical industry. The coal chemical industry can make a significant contribution in the sustainable development of some countries’ energy resources in the next twenty years, and will thereby reduce environmental pollution caused by coal burning. It will also reduce dependency on oil and gas as energy sources. Coal usually contains significant quantities (normally more than 10%) of different impurities such as sulfur, silicates, carbonates etc. Demineralization and desulfurization of coal may be achieved by both physical and chemical methods. Some demineralization can be achieved by simple physical processes based on the differences in the physical properties of the mineral and carbonaceous parts of the coal The sulfur present in coal appears in pyritic, organic and sulfate forms Organic sulfur is fixed in the chemical structure of coal and often much more difficult to remove than inorganic sulfur. Organic sulfur is partially removed by breaking its chemical bonds using chemical methods Leaching is one of the most common methods employed for coal desulfurization. Coal is mixed with acid or alkali and its sulfur is extracted while being heated or stirred. The type of reagent depends upon the type of sulfur in coal Various chemical processes are presently being developed employing agents such as hydrochloric acid The Meyers process uses P-cresol as a chemical solvent to reduce organic sulfur Bolet et al. studied the chemical demineralization of Turkish coal using different acids alone and 0.5N aqueous NaOH in combination with one or two of the acids The effect of mineral acids at different concentrations on desulfurization and demineralization of Indian coal has been investigated by Mukherjee et al. at ambient temperature and at 95 °C The existence of sulfur in Mezino coal limits its industrial usage in large scale. The purpose of the present work was to reduce the sulfur and ash content of coal in which a combination of flotation and leaching processes was employed to reduce the expenses. The leaching process was carried out in two series of experiments, one with hydrochloric acid and the other with nitric acid. The effects of the major parameters such as reaction time, acid concentration and temperature as well as stirring rate were also investigated. The optimum desulfurization conditions were determined by applying Taguchi method The coal sample to be studied was prepared from Mezino coal mine in Tabas, Iran. The Mezino coal sample is a high sulfur subbituminous coal. After delivery to the laboratory, the sample was left to dry at room temperature. The dried sample was then crushed, grounded and then floated by conventional froth floatation technique. The proximate and ultimate analysis on the coal samples were performed according to ASTM standard procedures The total sulfur was analyzed following Eschka method (ASTM D-3177) and also by an elemental analyzer. The elemental analyzer was a Leco-SC432 heat analysis instrument. Leco instrument is a heat analysis device in which the coal sample was burned in its furnace. The coal sulfur was combined with oxygen and converted to SO ASTM D-2492 standard was used to measure the pyritic sulfur of the coal sample. The dilute HCl was used to leach the coal in order to remove non-pyritic iron. The remaining pyrite was again leached with dilute HNO ASTM D-2492 standard was also used to measure sulfate sulfur content of the coal sample. Coal was leached with dilute HCl to extract sulfate sulfur and non-pyritic iron. The sulfate sulfur was precipitated as barium sulfate and the weight of sulfur in sample was finally calculated using gravimetery. By subtracting the sum of pyritic sulfur and sulfate sulfur from the total sulfur content, the organic sulfur content was calculated. The results are presented in To perform the flotation process, flotation machine with 1–l capacity cell was used. A 20% pulp was made at ambient pH and the slurry was mixed well for 1 min. Then gas oil and methyl isobutyl carbonyl (MIBC) as frother were added to the pulp at the dosage rates of 500 g/ton and 100 g/ton, respectively. The slurry containing a known amount of surfactant was conditioned for a further 10 min, after this period of time, bubbled induced by the agitator, passed through the pulp and forming froth on the upper pulp surface. The froth concentrates overflowed from the cell were collected and dried. Leaching experiments were carried out at ambient pressure in a 250-ml spherical glass reactor bulb placed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. A reflux condenser was used to prevent excessive evaporation at higher temperatures. Heating and stirring was provided by a magnetic stirring hot plate. The coal concentrate obtained from the flotation process was leached with HCl and HNO Taguchi's parameter design provides a simple and systematic approach for optimization of design for quality, performance and cost. The selection of control factors is the most important stage in the experimental design. It is possible to identify the non-significant variables at the early opportunity by including as many factors as possible. Taguchi creates a standard orthogonal array to address this requirement. Orthogonal experiment enables to investigate the relative importance of various factors and identify the best levels for different factors on a response and the results can be analyzed by using a common mathematical procedure. This method can significantly reduce experimental time and research cost by using orthogonal arrays. The number of trials chosen for an experimental design is based on the resolution desired and the number of the chosen experimental parameter levels is based on the range of operating conditions of the leaching process, resulting in three levels for each of the four controlled factors. Therefore, to investigate four controllable three level factors, L9 array including nine tests was selected for both sets of the leaching experiments with HCl and HNO In each of the nine test runs, a 100-ml acid solution at the desired concentration and 10 grams of the floated coal was added to the reactor. All the test runs were carried out with their respective combination of temperature, time and stirring rate. After leaching, the reactor contents were cooled, filtered and washed repeatedly with distilled water. Finally, the remained coal was dried at ambient temperature and weighed. The sulfur and ash contents were analyzed using a Leco apparatus and/or standard methods The results are presented in Where: weight of the original dried sample, weight of the original dried sample after leaching, sulfur percentage in the original sample, sulfur percentage in the coal obtained from leaching, ash percentage in the original sample, ash percentage in the coal obtained from leaching, To calculate the total reduction of sulfur (or ash), the following formula was used total reduction percentage, reduction percentage in flotation, reduction percentage in leaching, In this study two consecutive steps of flotation and acid leaching were performed. In the first step, the flotation process was carried out at ambient temperature to dissolve some of the ash and inorganic sulfur of coal. The residual ash and sulfur were further removed in the leaching process. After flotation, the coal concentrate was dried, then analyzed. The results showed a 35.7 and 37.0 percentages of reduction in ash and sulfur contents, respectively. Then, HCl and HNO Accordingly, a flotation process, as a sulfur and ash pre-reduction step, can be considered to ease the leaching process due to the removal of some mineral matter such as kaolinite and silicates. Moreover, the above-mentioned process as a reaction free step is not able to deactivate the coal prior to the leaching step, as a result, during the leaching step, acid solution can penetrate into the coal particles and attack the internal mineral grains much more easily. The results of sulfur and ash reduction of the floated coal by leaching with two mineral acids (HNO As it is clear from In this study, analysis of means (ANOM) was adopted. The calculated values are also given in Analysis of variance (ANOVA) in accordance with the Taguchi method represents the relationship between the operating parameters and the observed values The main purpose of ANOVA is to further investigate which factor significantly influences the reduction of sulfur. The number of levels Here, Optimum conditions for the present case study are listed in As Sulfur removal rate increases with increasing temperature. However, the increase of sulfur reduction rate at the temperature range of 60 to 90 °C is lower than at the temperature range of 30 to 60 °C. Karaca et al. (2003) attribute the reason for the reduction of the desulfurization rate at higher temperatures (higher than 60 °C) to the fact that at these temperatures, nitric acid is rapidly destroyed and converted to NO In the HNO In the present work, three acid concentration levels were chosen from 10 to 30%. The acid concentration was found to be the most effective parameter on desulfurization process of the Mezino coal. In the leaching by nitric acid beyond a certain level of concentration (between 10 and 20% of acid concentration), a noticeable increase in the sulfur removal was observed and the total sulfur content undergone a rapid decrease especially in HNO The reaction between HNO To investigate the effect of stirring speed on the desulfurization rate, the experiments were performed at three levels of stirring speed from zero (with no mixing) to 1000 rpm. It was found from the results that the sulfur removal increased with the increase of stirring rate. However, when the rate of stirring was increased to the range of 500 to 1000 rpm, the rate of sulfur removal was found to be increased a little. Since the acid leaching of coal is a chemical process and as long as the coal particles are fully suspended in the acid, the rate of stirring will have little influence on the sulfur removal rate. Karaca et al. (2003) studied the effect of stirring speed and concluded that the pyritic sulfur removal rate is independent of the stirring speed at lower temperatures but it is slightly effective at higher temperature The results of ash reduction are given in Ash reduction of the coal samples by HCl is comparable to that of the HNO The remaining sulfur in the coal was not significantly removed at higher levels of the operating conditions. Any increase in these parameters had approximately no effect on the sulfur reduction percentage and, therefore sulfur content, approximately, remained constant because the sulfur remained in the coal was finely disseminated in the coal matrix and not accessible to the acid The results of the total amounts of sulfur and ash reduction by both froth flotation and nitric leaching process are presented in Lastly, an experimental confirmation was conducted using the predicted optimum levels. The purpose was to verify that the optimum conditions suggested by the matrix experiment give the improvement. Result shows the 75.4% reduction of the total sulfur by nitric leaching according to the optimum conditions, which was the highest in comparison to all the other experiments. It shows that the observed result and the suggested optimum conditions are indeed compatible. Many different techniques for demineralization and desulfurization of coal are available in the literature. However, all these treatments are tedious and costly; therefore search for less time consuming and cost effective technique is continued. In present study by using combination of flotation and leaching processes and applying Taguchi method in the design of experiments, the time and cost required for experimental studies were significantly reduced and unprecedented and welcome results compared to the previous researches were achieved The desulfurization of Tabas Mezino coal can effectively be achieved by using two consecutive steps of froth flotation at room temperature and leaching with nitric acid at 90 °C and acid concentration of 30%. Sulfur removal was the lowest in HCl leaching of the coal samples at all conditions. The removal of ash or mineral matter with HCl treatment can be explained by the increase of mass transportation and decomposition of many oxides and carbonates present in the coal. Nitric acid was effective on desulfurization of Tabas Mezino coal and the test results of nitric leaching revealed the following as optimum operating conditions: acid concentration of 30%, stirring speed of 1000 rpm, treating time of 90 min and temperature of 90 °C. The findings indicated that acid concentration, with a high contribution, had the most dominant effect on the desulfurization performance, followed by the temperature, stirring speed, and treating time. By applying this technique, which was scarcely ever applied in this field, the time required for experimental studies was significantly reduced. This method is highly useful when investigating the effects of multiple factors on the performance as well as to study the influence of individual factors to determine which factor is quantitatively more influent comparing to the others. These findings suggest that the Taguchi method offers much promise for obtaining a wide range of improvement in the work piece quality. During the desulfurization process, the total sulfur content was reduced by 75.36% under the optimum conditions and welcome result comparing to the previous works was reached. The confirmation experiment, employing optimum parameters, indicated the stability of the orthogonal method in the coal desulfurization.