Leaching of chalcopyrite occurs at modest temperature (less than 100 °C) and atmospheric pressure when nanosize silica is added to the system. Important parameters in the system are chalcopyrite particle size, oxidant type and concentration, nanosilica concentration, pulp density and temperature. Electron micrographs and EDX spectra are presented showing the chalcopyrite surface covered with sulfur after leaching in the absence of nanosilica whereas the chalcopyrite surface is covered with nanosilica (with little sulfur) after leaching in the presence of nanosize silica.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Commonly-used oxidants for the leaching of chalcopyrite are ferric chloride and ferric sulfate in an acidic medium. The ferric chloride leaching reaction can be written as ( In sulfuric acid solutions containing ferric sulfate, the reaction is ( In ammoniacal solution the reaction is seen to produce thiosulfate and elemental sulfur ( The sulfur layer that forms on the surface of the chalcopyrite in the case of ferric sulfate and ammonia leaching is passivating and highly protective. Use of high oxidation potential offers a possibility of dissolving chalcopyrite. Chalcopyrite can be made the anode in an aqueous electrolyte in conjunction with a counter electrode. The anodic dissolution reaction can be written as ( To increase recovery, investigators have tried a number of methods to obviate the formation of the layer of elemental sulfur/polysulfide. One of the most successful techniques was developed by  ( The development of a technique to leach chalcopyrite under modest temperature and pressure has been a goal of the copper industry for decades. It is the objective of this investigation to establish conditions under which chalcopyrite can be leached effectively at moderate temperature and pressure. Chalcopyrite ordered from Wards Earth Science and a chalcopyrite flotation concentrate were used in the study. Copper content of the mineral was 30.2% and that of the chalcopyrite concentrate was 28.0%. With the exception of nanosize silica which was a commercial product, reagent-grade chemicals were used in the study. The ferric chloride was anhydrous; the ferric sulfate was hydrated (average iron content, 22%). The hydrogen peroxide was added as a solution (30 wt%). De-ionized water was used. Chalcopyrite samples were prepared by dry grinding with a mortar and pestle and sized by screening (−37 μ). Leaching experiments were conducted with 1.25 and 5.0 g/L chalcopyrite samples in acidic medium in the presence of specific additions of leaching reagents for various lengths of time in a constant temperature bath. After leaching, solid/liquid separation was effected with an ultracentrifuge, and the solution was analyzed for copper content by atomic absorption spectroscopy. In the early part of this work, the electrochemistry of chalcopyrite leaching was investigated. Three electrodes of chalcopyrite were prepared, and the impedance of each electrode was measured in an open circuit potential. With two of the chalcopyrite samples, the impedance was noted to increase with time, while the third showed no change in impedance. In examining the third sample of chalcopyrite with an optical microscope, the sample was observed to contain veinlets of microcrystalline silica. In adding silicic acid and fluosilicic acid to the other two anodes, significant dissolution was noted. Nanosize silica was also added, and similar results were obtained. The first series of experiments involved leaching of chalcopyrite in acidic medium with no added oxidant. Experimental conditions were: 5 g/L chalcopyrite concentrate (−37 μ), 200 ml 0.5 N H The effect of nanosize silica addition to these systems with ferric chloride as oxidant is given in Experiments were also conducted for longer leaching times. As shown in Ferric sulfate was also used as an oxidant in this system. These results are shown in In experiments in which hydrogen peroxide was used as oxidant, about 25% dissolution of chalcopyrite mineral (−37 μ) was obtained with 3.0 g/L H As shown in The surface of chalcopyrite was examined prior to leaching, after leaching with hydrogen peroxide in acidic medium in the absence of nanosize silica and also after leaching with hydrogen peroxide in the presence of nanosilica. An electron micrograph of chalcopyrite prior to leaching is shown in When nanosize silica is added to the leaching system, crystals of SiO Conditions have been established under which chalcopyrite can be leached at moderate temperature and atmospheric pressure; the addition of nanosize silica is key to this technology. The role of the silica is not clear at this time, but work is continuing to establish the mechanisms involved. Considerable research has been conducted on chalcopyite dissolution over the years. Previous work ( With ferric sulfate as oxidant, a coherent layer of sulfur forms on the chalcopyrite surface. The kinetics in this case are controlled by product layer diffusion. Work is presently being undertaken to establish a kinetic model of this leaching system in the presence of nanosize silica. Chalcopyrite particle size, oxidant type and concentration, nanosilica concentration, pulp density and system agitation will be studied. The effect of recycling silica will also be examined. In view of the importance of this discovery, it is felt that publication of these initial results is desirable. The authors wish to thank Vishal Mahajan and Kangnian Zhong for conducting the experimental work for this paper. The financial support provided by the Center for Advanced Separations Technologies is gratefully acknowledged.