Fe-Cu composites with different compositions and morphologies were synthesized by a hydrothermal method combined with precursor thermal transformation. γ-Fe2O3/CuO and α-Fe2O3/CuO were obtained by calcining the Fe and Cu tartrates under air atmosphere at 350°C and 500°C, respectively, while Fe3O4/C/Cu was obtained by calcining the tartrate precursor under N2 atmosphere at 500°C. The Fe3O4/C/Cu composite possessed mesoporous structure and large surface area up to 133m2
                     g−1. The Fenton catalytic performance of Fe3O4/C/Cu composite was closely related to the Fe/Cu molar ratio, and only proper amounts of Fe and Cu exhibited a synergistic enhancement in Fenton catalytic activity. Cu inclusion reduced Fe3+ to Fe2+, which accelerated the Fe3+/Fe2+ cycles and favored H2O2 decomposition to produce more hydroxyl radicals for methylene blue (MB) oxidation. Due to the photo-reduction of Fe3+ and Cu2+, the Fenton catalytic performance was greatly improved when amending with visible light irradiation in the Fe3O4/C/Cu-H2O2 system, and MB (100mgL−1) was nearly removed within 60min. The Fe3O4/C/Cu composite showed good recyclability and could be conveniently separated by an applied magnetic field. Compared with conventional methods for mesoporous composite construction, the thermolysis method using mixed metal tartrates as precursors has the advantages of easy preparation and low cost. This strategy provides a facile, cheap and green method for the synthesis of mesoporous composites as excellent Fenton-like catalysts, without any additional reductants or organic surfactants.Water pollution has become more and more serious with the rapid development of industry Iron oxides are commonly used Fenton-like catalysts due to their low cost and relatively high activity Another method to improve the catalytic activity of Fe In this work, we prepared different Fe-Cu composites by a facile hydrothermal-decomposition method, and studied their Fenton-like catalytic activities. Mixtures of iron tartrate and copper tartrate were prepared as precursors by a low temperature hydrothermal synthesis, and then Fe-Cu composites including γ-Fe All reagents are of analytical grade and were used without further purification. In a typical synthesis process of the tartrate precursor, 0.01 Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab(9) diffractometer at a scanning rate of 8° The Fenton-like catalytic activities of the as-prepared composites were evaluated by the degradation of MB as a model reaction. 25 The XRD patterns of the as-prepared precursors are shown in The morphologies of the precursors and the calcined products are shown in In order to further demonstrate the presence of carbon, the Raman spectrum and TG curve of the Fe XPS spectra of Fe  The catalytic activities of six composites calcined under different conditions were evaluated for the Fenton reaction using MB as a model pollutant. As can be seen from The degradation efficiencies of MB for the Fe The catalytic activity of Fe The effects of initial pH, H The mechanism of degradation of MB in the Fe Cu@C, with peroxidase-like activity, also can catalyze decomposition of H Surface bound Cu ( Consequently, the active species Fe which favors the steady supply of Fe When visible light illumination is introduced to the reaction system, the degradation efficiency is greatly enhanced. In addition to the Fenton reaction occurred in the reaction system, photo-reduction also played an important role in MB degradation reaction. Fe The stablility and reusability of the catalyst is vitally important for practical applications. Under the same condition of the photo-Fenton reaction, five successive MB degradation experiments were carried out to evaluate the reusability of the magnetic Fe We reported a hydrothermal-decomposition method to synthesize Fe-Cu composites with different compositions and morphologies, among which the magnetic, mesoporous Fe This work was supported by the