This paper compares the use of jaw and impact secondary crushing for producing coarse recycled aggregates from concrete wastes, obtained from road pavement and demolished building materials. The crushing mechanism interferes directly with recycled aggregate properties at different levels: particle size distribution, aggregate shape, generation of micro-fractures, as well as regarding the detachment of porous hardened cement paste from particle surface in order to recover pure, non-porous natural aggregates. However, crusher selection in the recycling industry is mostly carried out by acquisition and maintenance costs, industry and manufacturer traditional habits, low cost associated with second hand equipment. It also does not consider essential parameters such as the final properties of the desired end-product. Representative samples from two recycling plants were collected after primary impact crusher and secondary crushing were performed in a controlled laboratory condition through jaw and impact crushers. The aggregates attained were characterized, demonstrating similar density, porosity, particle size distribution and content of attached cement paste. Minor observed differences do not justify the common belief in the industry that impact crushers provide an improvement in the quality of recycled aggregates due to the higher detachment of cement paste from aggregates.Construction and demolition waste (CDW) is mainly composed of cement-based materials such as concrete and mortar, but often includes other materials. This waste is abundant since concrete is the second most consumed material in all of society after water according to the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (Report: The Cement Sustainability Initiative, 2009) Although concrete has the most homogeneous physical properties and the lowest porous inorganic phase in CDW, recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) are more porous, also having lower density and strength when compared to natural aggregates, which limit its use as a construction material. While aggregate material used for road bases is widely available, the demand for concrete is currently rising, ultimately emphasizing the importance of substituting natural aggregates for RCA in concrete. The removal of hardened cement paste attached to recycled aggregates is paramount to enhance the use of RCA in high-strength concrete Mineral dressing operations can split different material phases in a composite material, including concrete. In this process, it is important to identify phase-specific features to select the most appropriate segregation principles. Thus far, the literature has mostly focused on density separation methods using jigging or air separation, ultimately removing organic materials from CDW. Previous studies evaluating mineral phase segregation indicate different methods for effectively decreasing cement paste content and red ceramic particles in recycled aggregates In order to remove adhered cement paste from recycled aggregates using mineral dressing operations, two steps are required: liberation and separation. Liberation occurs when dissimilar phases, such as hardened cement paste and natural aggregates, are detached from each other. This segregation is not feasible if a certain degree of particle release has not been previously achieved This paper focuses on comparing crushing systems aiming to reduce the content of cement paste and porosity. A different approach was proposed in the literature for using recycled aggregates with low removal rate of the cement paste at low costs processing technologies for applications at lower mechanical demands  The effect of crushing on the detachment of hardened cement paste from natural aggregates is associated with a reduction in aggregate water absorption and an increase in its envelop density From mineral processing knowledge, the finer the comminution, the higher the phase liberation and the purer the aggregates. Specifically, fragile porous hardened cement paste tends to break down into finer particles, accumulating in fractions finer than 0.15 RCA with higher liberation ratios tends to contain less attached cement paste, therefore reducing its porosity. A higher amount of adhered cement paste on aggregates means that nearly no detachment across the phases grain boundaries has occurred. The result is RCA with higher porosity and water absorption. It must be highlighted that the properties of recycled aggregate depend on various factors. A comprehensive study demonstrated that there is an overlapping among the effects of the size of natural aggregates, the compressive strength of parent concrete and the number of crushing stages on the properties of recycled aggregates. The authors stated that “these effects occur simultaneously and interact with one another in varying degrees, rendering it difficult to quantify and to account for them independently” Crusher choice primarily relies on material size, the desired end product, operating costs, and environmental considerations Macroscopic models for jaw crusher concrete waste have been previously investigated Improvement in the segregation of cement paste tends to enhance the recycled aggregate quality and use under different stress conditions, such as compression, impact and shearing. This process leads to a higher proportion of aggregates with cement content when compared with conventional impact machines Regardless of the crusher type, the progressive crushing stages are essential in reducing the amount of attached cement paste on RCA. This process generates a higher volume of fine aggregates (<4.8 The efficiency of cement paste detachment from aggregates varies in relation to the initial concrete characteristics Abrasion crushers generate high quality RCA with an energy consumption which is lower Even though electric discharge comminution has been reported as an alternative method Finally, a recent body of literature has focused on the mechanical properties of the interfacial tinny transition zone (ITZ) in RCA In face of this previous literature, a higher liberation ratio of recycled aggregates may improve its recyclability. With an increased release of aggregate fractions, closed material cycles may be simpler to implement, with properties of newly generated concrete resulting in more efficient recycled aggregates. Given that crushing is fundamental for phase liberation, this paper compares the use of jaw and impact secondary crushing for producing coarse recycled aggregates from concrete wastes, obtained from road pavement and demolished building materials. The investigation involved two case studies: Case study A: analyses of properties of RCA made from demolished pavement of structural concrete for application as new concrete for pavements. Case study B: analyses of properties of RCA made from demolished building concrete components for application as new concrete for buildings. The concrete waste included other low strength concrete types. All the concrete samples were composed of natural aggregates (crushed granite/gneiss), homogeneous, without organic materials. Both were primarily crushed at the construction site with top-sizes in between 50 and 75 Different testing procedures were carried out for each concrete application. Whereas, for road construction materials, the mechanical and abrasion resistance matters, for reuse in concrete, water absorption is more important for concrete technological aspects. Concrete pavement demolished slabs were obtained from the Mario Covas Ring Road in Sao Paulo, Brazil. The slabs were broken into blocks using a hydraulic drill and hauled to a crushing plant, where they were primarily processed by a jaw crusher. A representative sample of around 1 Demolished building concrete samples were collected and primarily crushed at an impact crusher on site. A pre-crushed concrete sample was obtained with approximately 2″ (50 To minimize the variability in recycled concrete aggregates, 500 A representative aliquot from each sample (about 100 In laboratory, samples were screened in 25.4 and 4.8 The particles were crushed in close circuit until most of the material passed the 25.4 Since pre-crushed concretes presented similar top-sizes, they were assumed not to interfere with the mechanism of cement paste liberation. The strength of concrete wastes usually differs in site recycling operations. To orient the study conclusions, the primary crushing mechanism of low strength concrete wastes was tested using an impact crusher to check if cement paste liberation can provide effectively RCAs with superior quality, when compared with that obtained from a primary jaw crusher. Different configurations of material feed were tested before establishing the crushing conditions and we decided to use the conditions to provide the top-size required for the study. In this sense, variations in opening conditions of jaw crusher were not feasible to be tested, or even the velocity of the lab impact crusher. The material feed was always fully performed, abiding by the most recommended condition for cement paste liberation and usually adopted in real industrial processing conditions. The most purposeful option in the study was considered to make it the most like industrial processing. The major influence for cement paste liberation is certainly related with the top-size of concrete waste and its strength. Both variables were controlled in this experiment to generalize the conclusions in the present study. Industrial specifications for particle size distribution of crushed aggregates does not consider other variables except materials resistance, feed size and crusher characteristics. The characterization tests performed in the two case studies were not the same because the studies were performed separately with different purposes; however, this does not interfere with the conclusions that are mostly based on particle size distribution, cement paste content and water porosity (an indirect measurement of porosity). Other results only enriched the analysis about the effects of secondary crushing on RCAs characteristics. For case study A, the products obtained from both crushers were characterized aimed at the following properties: particle size distribution, chemical composition, particle shape and water absorption (oven dry density and porosity were also calculated). In order to obtain representative samples, each product was homogenized and sampled in a horizontal pile or using an open-bin riffle splitter. Particle size distribution was assessed by wet sieving through screens with nominal apertures from 25.4 down to 0.15 The chemical composition was determined by quantitative XRF analysis (Axios spectrometer, PANalytical) in fused beads, according to procedures applied in most worldwide mining industries; loss on ignition (LOI) was assayed at 1050 The chemical composition was used to indicate the content of each phase present in the recycled aggregates. Silica is mainly related to the content of quartz, while the sum of Na The content of cement paste in recycled aggregates is usually assessed by HCl leaching, and the soluble phases correspond to the cement paste content. These results can be correlated to the total content of CaO Particle shape was measured in aggregates passing the 25.4 The water absorption, envelop density, Coarse recycled aggregates obtained from demolished building concrete using jaw and impact crushers (in the secondary crushing) were characterized according to the following properties: particle size distribution, estimation of cement paste content by HCl leaching Particle size distribution was assessed by wet sieving in sieve sizes from 25.4 to 0.15 Water absorption was measured according to international standards regarding coarse products (from 4.8 to 25.4 Density separation was performed in sequential heavy liquid separation for coarse (4.8–25.4 The particle size distribution curves are presented in The jaw crusher produced 85% coarse aggregates (fraction >4.8 The grades of the main oxides attained by XRF and LOI at 1050 The chemical composition of both products is very similar. The content of silica is lower in the fine fractions, while the content of CaO The average content of CaO The results from particle shape measurements are presented in The water absorption, porosity and apparent density of coarse fraction (4.8–25.4 The results of 24 Both methodologies considered the most appropriate acids to determine cement paste content according to the literature review Acid insoluble residue can usually overestimate the cement paste content, even for a weaker acid as HCl, because some constituents of clays or limestone are dissolute in the acid solution. This sulfuric acid attack may be stronger, and it should be taken into consideration. Those compounds may be discounted to improve the overall accuracy. The particle size distribution curves of the products obtained using jaw and impact crushers are presented in The jaw crusher produced 60% of coarse aggregates in weight, whereas the impact crusher produced 49% coarse aggregates. The proportion of particles finer than 0.15 The results of binder content (by HCl leaching), water absorption and apparent porosity tests are presented in The coarse aggregates obtained by different crushing mechanisms (jaw and impact crushers) show very similar characteristics in terms of binder content assessed by acid leaching (27.5 and 26.6 The water absorption of the recycled cementitious aggregates was systematically higher than that of the recycled concrete aggregates previously reported (and supported by another study Results in the literature Finally, the water absorption of the cement pastes, estimated by data extrapolation from the literature The weight distributions of coarse and fine fractions in different densities are shown in The differences observed between coarse and fine fractions are remarkable and emphasize the higher phase liberation for fine fractions and, consequently, greater separation efficiency. A similar statement was previously described in the literature and proved that the production of fine recycled aggregates, despite unusual, it is favored by liberation by comminution and further obtaining low porosity recycled aggregates Moreover, comparing coarse and fine fractions, it is clear that the two stages of crushing with maximum particle size of 25.4 Water absorption and porosity are mostly related to the proportion of porous phases, i.e., the remaining hardened cement paste. Impact crushers disrupt particles due to the existing structural weak planes, interfaces, micro-fractures and grain contours. These fractures result in a decreased imperfection percentage within the aggregates. However, jaw crushers also tend to fracture these particles by shearing them across the main tension plane at 45 degrees from the main compression direction. This latter effect can lead to an increase in the number of failure points compared to the particle initial state. Therefore, the current literature reaches a consensus regarding impact crushers being able to generate less porous recycled aggregates. However, to present an appropriate comparison, particle size and liberation particle size should be similar, which necessarily occurs at the 25-mm level. This comparative study was conducted comparing jaw and impact crushers and demonstrated that end products for both processes are similar in relation to adhered cement paste, density, porosity and particle size distribution. The differences observed do not necessarily justify the widely held belief in the literature that impact crushers are associated with superior release ratios of RCA. This conclusion is based on two different case studies with crushed concrete samples with different strengths and application (road pavement and building), processed by secondary jaw and impact crusher. This similarity in results may be connected to the release of aggregates and cement paste not occurring at the particle size range about 25 As a secondary finding, the distribution of coarse and fine products by density separation demonstrated that a two-stage crushing with maximum particle size at 25.4 The study was limited to comparing the two most used crushing systems by jaw and impact crusher; it did not intent to correlate the properties of the initial concrete and the attained recycled aggregate. The recycling industry usually selects crushers based on acquisition costs and capacity but very rarely considers essential parameters, such as the desired properties of the end-product. As demonstrated in the literature, the properties of RCA depend on various factors, including crushing mechanics and the number of crushing stages. This work demonstrated that the crushing mechanism does not interfere with aggregates properties if the product top-size is larger than the liberation particle size. In this case, the particle size of crushing is more relevant than the equipment mechanical characteristics. For practical purposes, the industry will be driven to find a balance between the recycling costs and the desired aggregates quality and choose to spend more in processing for obtaining higher quality recycled aggregates, as the Japanese heating and rubbing plants Future research should investigate the phase liberation curve by density/porosity to set the most appropriate particle size for comminution. It should also evaluate the influence of aggregates produced by different crushers regarding concrete strength. Costs, maintenance, crusher availability measured as effective working hours, energy consumption and CO The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge