The degradation of aqueous phenol (100mgl−1) solutions using ozone, iron III and ultraviolet radiation has been carried out in two different devices: a laboratory installation and a pilot plant. From the results, it has been observed that mineralization of phenol solution is faster with the use of O3/UV/Fe3+ than with simple ozonation. Additionally, some experiments have shown that the substitution of the iron salts by copper salts may be an interesting option to degrade the phenol at non-acidic conditions.Ozone has demonstrated its effectiveness for the mineralization of recalcitrant organic compounds The reaction between ozone and organic matter can proceed in two different ways depending on the ozonation conditions: through direct reactions of molecular ozone and the pollutants, or indirectly through radical reactions (mainly through reactions with OH radicals) that can result from the decomposition of ozone Previous studies have shown that ozone in combination with homogeneous or heterogeneous catalyst is effective to remove contaminants from water In the treatment with ozone, UV radiation and iron salts, there are simultaneous chemical and photochemical reactions involved. The irradiated Fe(III) species in aqueous solution undergo a photoredox process which gives rise to Fe(II) and hydroxyl radicals via photo-Fenton reaction In the dark, Fe(II) catalyzes O In the presence of visible light, Fe(III) ions can be reduced to Fe(II) by photo-Fenton reaction (1), hence, closing a loop mechanism where Fe species act as catalysts, while generating additional OH In addition, the mineralization process can be accelerated by photolysis of Fe The initial oxidation of organic pollutants generates oxygenated intermediates (i.e. intermediates with hydroxyl and/or carboxylic functional groups) which can react with Fe(III) to form complexes. Carboxylic complexes are also photoactive and produce CO In the present paper, we have undertaken the study of the mineralization of phenol with ozone, iron or copper salts, and simulated solar light in an attempt to characterize the process. Experiments have been carried out in a laboratory installation and in a pilot plant, both working in a batch mode. These two scales have been used to see the effect of scale-up and to have an approach to the behavior of these pollutants in a real plant. Experiments were carried out in two different devices: a laboratory installation and a pilot plant. The laboratory installation ( The main components of the pilot plant ( All chemicals used were at least of reagent grade and were used as received. All solutions were prepared with ultrapure water supplied by a Milli-Q Millipore system. Pollutant’s concentration was determined by reverse-phase chromatography. A Waters HPLC apparatus (photodiode array detector 996, autosampler 717, controller 600) with a Millenium software was used. The column was a Spherisorb ODS2, 5 In the experiments carried out with Fe(III) as catalyst, the initial pH of the solutions was 3. During the experiments, the pH evolved to even lower values and the absence of Tyndall effect indicated that Fe(III) species were soluble. Phenol experiments in the lab installation were carried out at room temperature (20–25 TOC reduction of 100 The presence of iron and light in the process does not have the same effect in the phenol degradation as in the TOC removal. In order to see the effect of ozonation and catalytic ozonation with more concentrated pollutant solutions, experiments with 250 The lab experiments carried out with phenol were also carried out in the pilot plant to see if there is any change in the effects observed in the lab installation. The phenol concentrations were again 100 and 250 Phenol degradation, depicted in The effect of phenol concentration has been studied in the pilot plant with the most effective process: O The scale-up in chemical processes is not easy because their design at an industrial scale is impossible to achieve using only theoretical methods. The main difference between the current two installations is the power and the spectrum of the radiation source used. In the laboratory device, a solar simulator with a Xe lamp was used, whereas in the pilot plant black blue fluorescent tubes were used. The results of these two scales can be compared quantitatively using the ozone dose in each experiment. This dose (g The different scales have to be compared using the same experimental conditions in order to guarantee that the differences observed are only because of the scale-up. As can be seen in both figures, the necessary ozone dose to achieve a certain TOC removal is always lower in the pilot plant experiments than in the lab ones, and the introduction of light into the system also reduces the ozone dose needed. The difference between scales is probably due to the fact that ozone in pilot plant is fed by a venturi injector, which improves the contact between ozone and wastewater, resulting in a better use of the gas. As it happened when different catalytic ozonation processes were compared, the introduction of light into the systems improves TOC removal and consequently reduces the necessary ozone dose to achieve a certain TOC removal. In the experiment with 100  The reduction of TOC by ozonation processes in the presence of UVA light seems to have a linear behavior with reaction time from 30% of initial TOC until approximately 80%. This let us to calculate another parameter, TOC degradation rate, expressed as the quantity of carbon removed per hour of treatment. Apart from iron, it has been observed that other types of metal ions can be used to catalyze ozonation processes improving catalytic ozonation (O The experiments were conducted in the laboratory installation with 100 As can be observed, TOC removal achieved with Fe(III) is higher than with Cu(I), regardless of the different pH tested. In the first 15 The introduction of UVA light and/or iron ions to the ozonation system improves mineralization of the pollutants studied. Catalytic ozonation is more effective than simple ozonation for all the cases studied, the most effective process being that of O Phenol degradation is faster with simple ozonation than with the catalytic ozonation probably because of the competition between reaction intermediates and iron species on one hand and phenol on the other hand for ozone present in the medium. The use of the O The necessary ozone dose (g The authors wish to express their gratitude for the economic support given by Carburos Metálicos S.A. (Spain).