This paper presents a discrete dynamic fracture model, hybrid lattice particle modeling (HLPM), and its applications in the wave propagation induced fracture problems of solids. The HLPM is established based on a combination of the first author’s prior particle modeling (PM) technique with the conventional lattice modeling (LM) theory. The HLPM has the robustness of simulating the dynamic fragmentation of solids under high strain rate loadings at macro-scales with a varying Poisson’s ratio. In this paper, first, the wave propagation in 1D and 2D homogenous materials with HLPM is modeled and the obtained results are validated by a comparison with the analytical solutions; then, two HLPM simulations of the wave propagation induced fracture, spall cracks, due to hyper-velocity impact and blasting, are completed. In the impact case, spall crack formation due to hyper-velocity impact is captured, and the HLPM results are in good agreement with the analogous molecular dynamics (MD) simulations by Krivtsov (1999) [27,28]. Moreover, a functionally designed infrastructure material coated with a high strength layer, but with different coating strengths at the interface, is also investigated to find out the protective effect of material from spallation. The modeling results demonstrate that prevention of a material from spallation under extreme loadings is difficult; it needs the coating material with a super strength. In the blasting study, the fracturing efficiency associated with different spatial explosive setup is investigated. This will benefit the explosive fracturing applications.Dynamic fracture and fragmentation under high strain rate loads (impact, blasting, crush, collapse, high speed puncture/penetration, comminution, etc.) has broad civilian/military applications, among which the explosive related applications, seismological studies, shock synthesis and ballistic impacts are currently the most challenging areas to the numerical models. In the above-listed areas, the wave propagation dominates the formation and evolution of the dynamic fracture pattern, and the fragments, e.g., spall cracks, are often induced by the internal wave interactions. Thus, a good model is required not only to be able to correctly predict wave but also the consequent induced fracture. Static or quasi-static models have existed for several decades and successfully been used for micromechanics and macro-mechanics structure analysis. However, they fail to become a tool for dynamic fracture of solids. The reason arises from the fundamental differences between static (or quasi-static) and dynamic deformation. In a quasi-static deformation, at any time, a situation of static equilibrium holds, which implies that any element in the material body has a summation of forces acting on it close to zero. In contrast, in a dynamic deformation, when a high strain rate loading is applied to the boundary of the body, the stress propagates, that is, the stress has to travel through the body. This is called wave propagation, usually measured by Hopkinson bar test Current continuum mechanics based models (CMBM for short), e.g., a finite element method (FEM), can indeed accurately solve the wave propagation of solids even in case of large deformation. However, they limit to fracture/fragmentation. In principle, the FEM regards material as one continuum media, and constitutive equations are space-averagely applied within each element; hence, once the continuity of material is broken due to the presence of fracture or fragmentation, re-meshing is required for the next cycle of computation. When a material body is subject to extreme loadings, unexpected fragments are often produced. Herein, this offers FEM an extreme challenge in technique to deal with the dynamic re-meshing, and causes the computation highly expensive. Although FEM has constantly been developed to meet such requirements and several re-meshing techniques (i.e., Lagrange, Euler and Arbitrary Lagrange Euler) All the current DEBMs can be classified into two categories: mesh free (or meshless) and lattice particle models. For example, SPH, PFC and their inherited subclass of methods are mesh free models since the computations do not rely on a meshing system. In contrast, the confinement-shear lattice model (CSLM for short) In the domain of meshless models, PFC and SPH are the two most notable techniques. Many new developed meshless models and the according hybrid CMBM–DEBM techniques originate from these two models. However, viewing from the current technological status of meshfree models, they are, in general, far less complete in technique. This imperfection partially arises from a fact of that the dynamic fracture mechanics model study is still at a quite fundamental stage, and partially from the technique limits inherently from each individual model which can be summarized as follows: In PFC and its inherited subclass of developed methods, each particle’s size is physically accounted for, e.g., circular discs or spheres used for 2D or 3D, respectively. In summary, three disadvantages of PFC are obvious: (i) particle packing causes porosity of material. It is obviously not suitable for compact materials; (ii) material’s Poisson’s ratio cannot be related to the pattern of the packed particles; and (iii) expensive computation is spent in keeping track of the instantaneous contact positions and the evolving geometry of all elements. In SPH, a kernel density function, or weight function, is employed to define for each particle a reaction domain, and continuum constitutive equations are then applied to the particles within the domain. In the recent years, several new techniques have been established to modify the kernel function to improve the computation accuracy. These new techniques are element-free Galerkin method (EFGM) Compared with the meshless techniques, dynamic lattice techniques are currently far less paid an attention and less developed, however, they are promising to be a more robust tool due to their unique advantages. Cusatis’s confinement-shear lattice model (CSLM) Hybrid lattice particle modeling (HLPM) The HLPM can readily simulate dynamic behaviors/fragmentation of materials at macro-scales with a varying Poisson’s ratio. For instance, assigning the same The advantages of HLPM over the other existing DEBMs can be summarized as follows: Easy for the determination of input parameters. Five conservative/equivalent rules (mass, potential energy, Young’s modulus, tensile/compression strength and Poisson’s ratio) are required to determine the material’s properties for the input datasheet. Easy for implementation and high computation efficiency. Since the physical size of each particle is ignored other than its equivalent mass, the algorithm of coding a HLPM computation is fairly easy; meanwhile, since no computation is spent in keeping track of the instantaneous contact positions and the evolving geometry of all elements, the HLPM computing cost is greatly reduced. Easy for tracing the post-fracture interactions. In HLPM, a pre-defined neighborhood in a lattice structure represents the integrated and non-fractured body of material. Any fractured member will change this originally defined neighborhood, and be defined with a different interaction rule from the non-fractured. Consequently, interactions among fragments can be readily and accurately predicted. A multi-scale model. In the case of lattice spacing decreasing to a few angstroms, we will recover a molecular dynamics (MD) model at zero Kelvin with, say, a Leonard-Jones potential. This implies that HLPM is an upscaled MD and can be flexibly applied to various length scale problems, if a proper equivalent macroscopic potential is provided. Since its establishment, a successful HLPM simulation has been firstly achieved in predicting the fracture pattern of an epoxy plate with randomly distributed holes in tension, shown in A 3D HLPM has been built up, and a preliminarily quantitative comparison has recently been completed with the punch-shear experiment of a vinyl ester platelet under a low-velocity impact, 3.55 The above-mentioned discrepancies may come from two major factors. First, the 3D HLPM simulation shown here still employs the same contact method as in Nevertheless, we can conclude that the 3D HLPM can well predict the punch-shear process of a vinyl ester platelet, especially the damage initiation stage. After gaining the confidence of HLPM from the above-mentioned fracture study cases, in this paper, we step forward to investigating the modeling capability of the HLPM on the wave propagation induced fracture problems. As the wave propagation in the lattice and the particle model (spring connections) is somewhat different from that of the continuum media, it is not clear if the physical phenomenon of wave propagation can be correctly predicted. Thus, to have confidence in HLPM model for simulating wave dominated problems, it needs to be tested and validated. In what follows, we first briefly introduce the HLPM algorithm. It is then applied to one- and two-dimensional wave propagation problems. The obtained HLPM results are verified with the analytical solutions. Next, the HLPM is applied to the simulation of wave propagation induced fracture, spall cracks, due to hyper-velocity impact and blasting. In the impact case, a functionally designed infrastructure material coated with a high strength layer, but with different coating strengths at the interface, is also investigated to find out the protective effect of material from spallation. The ultimate application for HLPM is aimed at exploring shock synthesis. The hybrid lattice particle model (HLPM)—also called lattice particle simulation, discrete modeling, or quasi-molecular modeling—is a dynamic simulation model that typically uses a relatively small number of particles of macroscopic sizes, representing solid and/or fluid mass. The particles’ location and velocity evolves according to the laws of Newtonian mechanics. The axial force interaction between particles is modeled after Wang et al. The theoretical derivation of non-thermal-based HLPM can be briefly reviewed as follows. In HLPM, the non-linear axial interaction force between neighboring (quasi-) particles, Here Ashby and Jones Note that Eq. Just as in MD, the non-linear dynamical equation of motion for each particle The derivation of four parameters in Eq. First, for the atomic structure (MD model), we have: Young’s modulus (GPa) is obtained from Eq. Total number of atoms in In Eqs. Next, for the quasi-particle structure (PM model), we have interaction force (dynes) as in Eq. Interaction potential energy ( We now postulate the equivalence of MD and PM models. From the mass conservation, we calculate the mass of each quasi-particle From the energy conservation, we have: From Eqs. Similarly, tensile strength can be obtained under We have established the equations for The larger the values of ( In the case of In the case of A uniform augmentation of volume For elastic-brittle materials, a general format of linear dynamical equation is often employed for axial springs In Eq. An analogous angular spring interaction scheme to Eq. The 2D angular stiffness The leapfrog method, with second-order accuracy, is employed in the HLPM simulations. The leapfrog formulas relating position, velocity and acceleration for particles The safe time step is after the derivation result by Hockney and Eastwood It is noted that the discretized scheme and deterministic time increment of HLPM as shown by Eqs. To readily describe the breakage effect on material, we define a concept of fracture density It is clearly seen that a big Note that different failure criterion for inelastic and elastic materials shown in Eqs. Angular failure criterion follows the analogous scheme to Eq. In this section, we report a preliminary HLPM study of wave propagation in a 1D and 2D elastic-brittle bar, subjected to dynamic and kinematic loads, respectively. The computational domain for 1D and 2D are The classical wave theory gives that the wave propagation speeds in the above-mentioned 1D and 2D material bars are, respectively A dynamic boundary condition with 97.8  A kinematic boundary condition with 60.0  Within an elastic extent, wave speed should be identical and independent of the loading change. Therefore, next, we will employ different loading rates to the above-mentioned cases to test the reliability of HPLM. We completely adopt the same geometry as what we have used for the above-mentioned 1D and 2D studies except that different dynamic and kinematic loading values are applied, respectively. Since the vertical effects are trivial, only the horizontal results are shown in the following. For the dynamic loading test, 48.9 For the kinematic loading test, 50.0 From Spall crack formation is the direct consequence arising from the wave (tension and compression wave) interactions in solids. The area will be highly stretched wherever the strong enough tension and compression wave meet, and a spall crack will consequently occur. In the following, spall crack formations due to high speed impact and blasting load are preliminarily simulated, respectively. The dimension of the target is set as 5.2  Next, the above-mentioned target coated with a high strength layer at the bottom of the target, but with different coating strength at the coating interface, is investigated to find out the protective effect of material from spallation. We choose the coating layer with the same density as that of the above-mentioned flyer and target, but with more stronger material strength properties, i.e., the Young’s modulus is  Preliminary HLPM simulations of spall crack formation with different spatial blasting sources are presented in the following.   The spall crack formation in pattern and extent arises from the complicated tension–compression wave interactions in materials. Wherever the tension wave reacts with the strong enough compression wave, the material herein is highly stretched, and, thus, fracture or fragmentation is formed. Via the simulations, the fracturing efficiency associated with the spatial explosive source setup is exhibited. The underway research will benefit the explosive fracturing applications. In this paper, a hybrid lattice particle modeling (HLPM) method is first employed for a study of wave propagation in 1D and 2D material bar, and the results are verified with the analytical solutions. Next, the HLPM is applied to the simulation of wave propagation induced fracture, spall cracks, due to hyper-velocity impact and blasting. In the hyper-velocity impact case, a functionally designed infrastructure material coated with a high strength layer, but with different coating strengths at the interface, is also investigated to find out the protective effect of material from spallation. Via this study, the following benefits are obtained. From the serial analyses of the preliminary simulation results obtained by using HLPM, we obtain several important conclusions: No need for re-meshing. Re-meshing is known as an overwhelming challenge for FEM, whereas HLPM does not suffer from it at all. In HLPM, fracture is created when a bond (spring) is broken by translational force. This provides HLPM a unique power to be able to quite easily overcome a “discontinuity of material” problem. No stress intensity required. In HLPM, a bond (spring) is broken and fracture is thus resulted wherever the critical failure strain reaches. HLPM can correctly capture wave propagation of solids. From the HLPM applications of wave propagation induced fracture problems, spall cracks, due to hyper-velocity impact and blasting, we conclude that HLPM can successfully capture spall crack formation. In the hyper-velocity impact case, a functionally designed infrastructure material coated with a high strength layer, but with different coating strengths at the interface, is also investigated to find out the protective effect of material from spallation. The modeling results demonstrate that prevention of material from spallation under extreme loadings is difficult; it needs the coating material with a super strength. In the blasting study, the fracturing efficiency associated with the explosive setup is investigated. This will benefit the explosive fracturing applications. In summary, the outcomes of this paper can provide important lessons for fracture control which has remarkable significance to engineering applications. Of course, more modeling validations and improvement work are required. The ultimate application for HLPM is aimed at exploring shock synthesis. This work was partially supported by the funding received under a subcontract from the Department of Homeland Security-sponsored Southeast Region Research Initiative (SERRI) at the Department of Energy’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA. Authors wish to acknowledge the partial support for this research by