Acrylamide (AA) is a probable human carcinogen generated in carbohydrate-rich foodstuffs upon heating. Glycidamide (GA), formed via epoxidation, presumably mediated by cytochrome P450 2E1, is considered to be the active metabolite that plays a central role in the genotoxicity of AA. The aim of this work was to evaluate the cytogenetic damage induced by AA and GA in cultured human lymphocytes by use of the sister chromatid exchange (SCE) assay. Furthermore, this report addresses the role of individual genetic polymorphisms in key genes involved in detoxification and DNA-repair pathways (BER, NER, HRR and NHEJ) on the induction of SCE by GA. While AA induced the number of SCE/metaphase only slightly, especially for the highest concentration tested (2000μM), GA markedly induced SCEs in a concentration-dependent manner up to concentrations of 750μM, leading to an increase in SCEs of up to about 10-fold compared with controls. By combining DNA damage in GA-treated lymphocytes and data on polymorphisms, associations between the induction of SCEs with GSTP1 (Ile105Val) and GSTA2 (Glu210Ala) genotypes are suggested.Acrylamide (AA) is a well-known industrial chemical classified as a probable human carcinogen by IARC since 1994 In 2002 it was shown that AA can be formed during heating The metabolism of AA occurs The alpha/beta-unsaturated double bond of AA is responsible for much of its reactivity, being involved in Michael-type reactions. In fact, the beta-carbon of AA can react with nucleophiles Long-term studies in rodent models have shown that AA is carcinogenic at different organ-sites In this context, the primary aim of the present report is to assess the usefulness of sister chromatid exchange (SCE) as a cytogenetic toxicological biomarker in human lymphocytes exposed Acrylamide (AA; CAS registry number 79-06-1, ≥99.5% pure) was purchased from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland) and glycidamide (CAS Registry Number 5694-00-8, >98.5% pure, containing ∼1% AA) was obtained from Toronto Research Chemicals (North York, Ontario, Canada). Fetal calf serum, Ham's F-10 medium, penicillin–streptomycin solution, Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 13 healthy donors (8 female and 5 male, mean age 28.1 All donors were informed about the aim and experimental details of the study and an informed consent was obtained from all participating subjects prior to the start of the study. Each participant completed one standardized questionnaire about health history, lifestyle, alcohol consumption, medication usage, family history of cancer, exposure to indoor/outdoor pollutants, and dietary habits. All individuals were non-smokers. Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the institutional Ethical Board of the Faculty of Medical Sciences. The lymphocyte cultures were set up by adding 0.5 Firstly, different concentrations of AA and GA up to 2000 For both studies, after 46 The mitotic index (MI) was used as a measure of the cell proliferation. This index can be defined as MI Genomic DNA was obtained from 250 Genotyping of The genotyping of The genotyping of  Genotype determinations were carried out twice (all samples for multiplex and PCR-RFLP and 20% of samples for Real-Time PCR) in independent experiments and all the inconclusive samples were reanalyzed. For the concentration–response curves of AA and GA, regression analyses were performed using the Graphpad Prism v.5 software. The non-parametric Mann–Whitney (for two-group comparisons) and Kruskal–Wallis (for more than-two-groups comparisons) tests were used to evaluate the association of different genotypes with the frequency of GA-induced SCE after subtracting the background values. The level of significance considered was The cytogenetic response in terms of SCE was first evaluated in stimulated lymphocytes from whole blood cultures of two healthy individuals. Different concentrations of AA and GA (up to 2000 With regards to the induction of SCE, regression analyses performed on the concentration–response curves indicated slopes that were significantly different from zero for AA (slope 0.0022, donor 1; 0.0019 donor 2; Based on the concentration–response curve for GA ( The inter-individual variability described above in terms of GA-induced SCE could be related with different polymorphisms in detoxification and DNA-repair genes ( The genotypic distribution of the polymorphisms involved with detoxification pathways and its association with the levels of GA-induced SCE are presented in For DNA repair, the distribution of genotypic frequencies related with repair pathways (BER, NER, HRR and NHEJ) and its association with SCE levels are presented in The development of predictive biomarkers for cancer-risk assessment is a challenging issue in food toxicology. The SCE test is well-known for its sensitivity to detect chemical genotoxicants PHA-stimulated lymphocytes from whole blood cultures were used throughout this report. This “whole blood” approach has been followed by other authors In this study, a slight induction of SCE by AA was found, which was especially associated with the very high and cytotoxic concentration of 2000 In view of this clear genotoxicity of GA, in contrast to AA, the further step of this study was to evaluate the inter-individual response to a GA concentration of 250 The induction of SCE by the metabolite GA revealed inter-individual variability ( The GSTP1 enzyme is the major GST enzyme in blood and metabolizes several diol-epoxides of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) With regards to GSTT1 and GSTM1 enzymes are involved in the metabolism of epoxides and are mainly expressed in liver and blood The same is valid for the genetic polymorphisms of DNA-repair polymorphisms that modulate DNA-repair capacity may influence the individual susceptibility to DNA-damaging agents and, therefore, modify cancer risk. In fact, polymorphic variants in DNA-repair genes have been associated with susceptibility to several types of DNA lesions and cancer risk In summary, our results show that AA only slightly induced SCE at a very high concentration. Conversely, GA is clearly genotoxic to cultured human lymphocytes, highlighting the importance of this metabolite. It was also demonstrated that SCE frequency constitutes a sensitive and reliable endpoint to evaluate DNA damage, being a valuable cytogenetic biomarker that could be used, along with other cytogenetic biomarkers ( Although these results are based on a small number of blood donors, this exploratory study points to a possible role for The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. The authors thank Bruno C. Sousa from Centre for Malaria & Tropical Diseases Institute of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine from Lisbon for statistical support. This work was supported by