Olivine is used as an additive in Luossavaara–Kiirunavaara AB (LKAB) blast furnace pellets. The LKAB iron ore is magnetite which oxidizes to hematite during the sintering process. Olivine retards the oxidation of magnetite pellets if the threshold temperature of magnesioferrite formation is exceeded.
                  In this study, we have developed a thermogravimetric measuring method to study the relationship between the olivine reactivity in green pellets and the olivine fineness. A less reactive olivine makes the pelletizing process more tolerant of excessively high temperatures in the green pellets during oxidation.
                  The reactivity of olivine decreases when the amount of fine tail in olivine is decreased. The top size is limited by balling. Grinding tests in pilot scale show that if the olivine additive is ground in closed circuit with a ball mill keeping good control over the top size, the olivine fineness can be appreciably decreased without disturbing balling. The olivine reactivity can be decreased by 40% compared to the reference olivine in the production plant. Also, savings can be made on both the grinding energy and grinding media consumption. The results in both pilot scale and full production scale show that better oxidation in the grate due to a coarser olivine additive improves the low temperature reduction strength (LTD, ISO 13930) in pellets.
                  The measuring method developed for the olivine reactivity enabled evaluation of different particle-sizing methods for olivine characterisation. The screening size fraction %−45 μm showed a good correlation to olivine reactivity in green pellets within a very large measuring range. The correlation of laser diffraction analysis to the olivine reactivity showed, however, that the laser diffraction measuring method is affected too much by variations in the large particles.Luossavaara–Kiirunavaara AB (LKAB) in Sweden produces around 15 million tonnes of pellets yearly, of which about 60% is blast furnace pellets containing olivine as an additive. The olivine addition yields a high melting point and narrow meltdown temperature range in the pellets A schematic flow sheet of the LKAB pelletizing plant in Svappavaara is shown in In an industrial pelletizing process, the pellet temperature is raised very rapidly, and conditions in the system are far from thermodynamically balanced. In order to achieve a high degree of oxidation in pellets during heat treatment in the grate, the oxidation needs to advance as far as possible before the magnesioferrite formation starts. The magnesioferrite formation rate is not only influenced by the pellet temperature, but also by the available surface area of the olivine particles. This, in turn, depends on the amount of olivine in the pellets and on the fineness of the olivine particles. The total amount of olivine is adjusted to gain desired pellet properties in the blast furnace and is therefore fixed. The olivine fineness can, however, be optimised so as to reach the lowest possible reactivity during the pelletizing process. In our earlier pilot-scale studies The aim of the present study was to determine how much the olivine reactivity can be retarded by decreasing the amount of small particles in olivine. The limiting factor for olivine fineness is that the coarser olivine should not weaken the green pellets. Therefore, the absolute top size was restricted to 200 μm. Also, the amount of +100 μm particles should not increase significantly after the olivine is mixed with the magnetite concentrate. Alternative grinding circuit layouts to produce olivine with narrow particle size distribution were studied in pilot scale. A thermogravimetric measuring method was developed to determine the reactivity of olivine in the green pellets. The olivine products were then characterised according to particle size and reactivity. We also studied how different particle-sizing methods correlate with the olivine reactivity in the green pellet. This information is necessary for achieving good control over the olivine grinding circuit in the production scale. Finally, the olivine fineness at LKAB's Svappavaara plant was decreased to study the resulting effect in full production scale. Olivine is a generic term for a group of minerals consisting of solid solutions of forsterite (2MgO·SiO As a reference, olivine samples taken from the LKAB Svappavaara production plant were used. These olivine samples also contained minor amounts of limestone. The magnetite concentrate used in this study is from LKAB's Svappavaara concentrating plant and typically contains 71.0% Fe. The particle size of Svappavaara magnetite pellet concentrate (SPC) is typically 76%−45 μm and 98%−125 μm (by screening). Several different grinding circuit layouts were run at the LKAB pilot plant. The test runs were divided into two main groups according to the type of grinding mill used: rod mill grinding (RM) and ball mill grinding (BG). Within each main group, several test runs with different layouts and somewhat different settings were run. These runs are numbered consecutively (RM1, RM2, etc.). Two of the ball mill ground products were further deslimed (DS). Also, the slime products (SLIME) were characterised for their fineness. Narrow particle-size distribution for olivine was one of the targets of this study; therefore, rod mill grinding was studied as one alternative. The question was whether the rod mill grinding done in one stage could meet the given restrictions for the top size. The rod mill was run both in open circuit followed by scalping (RM1) and in closed circuit with screen (RM2 and RM3). One test (RM4) was run with the rod mill in closed circuit with a Floatex density separator. The rod mill used was of trunnion overflow type, diameter 1.0 m and length 1.5 m. A trommel screen with 3-mm screen opening was used at the mill discharge. The rod mill was charged with graded standard rods −55 mm to 10 kW. The maximal energy output was 8 kW h/t. The solids content was 65 wt.%. The ball mill was run in closed circuit, either with a screw classifier (BM1) or with a Floatex density separator (BM2 and BM3). Small pilot-scale cyclones (diameters 50 and 75 mm) were also tested, but they did not manage to maintain the coarse separation cut size required. Some more complicated layouts with a screw classifier combined with a density separator were run as well (BM4 to BM8). Two of the ball mill ground products were further deslimed using cyclones in order to obtain samples of extremely narrow particle size distribution (DS1 and DS2). The ball mill used was of the grate discharge type. The mill diameter and length were 1.5 and 1.7 m, respectively. A trommel screen with 3-mm screen opening was used at the mill discharge. The ball mill was charged with 10–40-mm steel balls to 26 kW. The raw material feed rate varied between 1.1 and 1.7 t/h. The solids content was 65 wt.%. The magnetite oxidation to hematite is described by The oxidation of magnetite to hematite can be measured with good accuracy by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) because the total weight gain is as large as 3.455 wt.% for clean magnetite. A typical thermogram for Svappavaara magnetite pellet concentrate (SPC) is shown in Oxidation of magnetite to hematite is a reversible reaction. If the hematite phase is clean, the hematite starts to dissociate back to magnetite at 1457 °C (in air). If the pellet contains components that form a solid solution with the hematite phase, the dissociation starts several hundred degrees earlier. The difference in the dissociation temperature for SPC with and without olivine can be seen in Samples were prepared by mixing the studied olivine sample with about 15 g Svappavaara magnetite concentrate (SPC). A mixing ration of 3.5 wt.% of olivine was used in the mixture. Ethanol was used as a disperging agent. These SPC/olivine mixtures were measured in the TGA. The dissociation rates at 1250 and 1300 °C were read from the derivative curve (DTG). The dissociation rate is a negative figure because it describes the reaction rate to the left. Absolute values were used in the evaluation of results. A Setaram 92-16 TG/DTA instrument was used. The thermograms were run by using small, open platinum crucibles with a volume of 130 μl. The sample weight was 115±5 mg and the heating rate was 5 °C/min. The gas atmosphere was 10% O Three different particle-sizing methods were used: screening, laser diffraction and KTH surface. For screening, Endecott screens were used. The −45 μm fraction was wet-screened. The laser diffraction analysis was done using Malvern Mastersizer S. The measuring principle of the laser diffraction measuring method is explained in the international standard, The third analysis method used for particle sizing is KTH surface. In the KTH-surface method, the particle surface area is calculated from gas permeability through a packed bed of particles The particle sizing and reactivity data are summarised in The curve RM2 in Similar problems with top size were encountered when running a screw classifier in closed circuit with a ball mill (see curve marked BM1 in Olivine with 65%−45 μm (by screening) from the Svappavaara production plant is shown as a reference in The pilot-scale grinding tests show that by closed-circuit grinding in a ball mill while maintaining good control over the top size, the olivine control value could probably be drawn down near to 40%−45 μm without problems in balling. The correlation between the dissociation rate at 1250 °C and the screen analysis %−45 μm is shown in The dissociation rate at 1250 and 1300 °C as a function of the next larger screening size fraction, %−63 μm, is shown in The correlation between the dissociation rate at 1250 °C and the Malvern D10 values was not linear as shown in The correlation between the dissociation rate at 1250 °C and the KTH-surface values are shown in The reactivity (the measured dissociation rate) of Svappavaara olivine with 65%−45 μm was used as a reference and given a relative reactivity 1.0. The reactivity of the other olivine samples was related to this value. Typical relative reactivity values for the coarser olivine from Svappavaara, the olivine ground with a ball mill and with a rod mill in pilot scale and for the deslimed olivine product, are shown in The results in The desliming resulted in low-reactivity olivine, but desliming is not of current interest. Also, the reactivity in the rod mill ground olivine was very low, but the large amount of big particles in these products would probably cause balling problems. The thermogravimetric measurements show that the dissociation of hematite in the presence of olivine starts at around 1200 °C due to the magnesioferrite formation. Measurable differences in the dissociation rate can be seen at 1250 °C, which was also chosen as a reference temperature in this study. The 1250 °C temperature reading on the thermograms describes the real temperature inside the pellet during oxidation and is not necessarily the same as the gas temperature measured over the pellet bed (1000–1120 °C). On the contrary, due to the highly exothermal nature of the magnetite oxidation reaction (Δ This is supported by optical microscope studies on plant pellets reported by In this study, we have indirectly measured the reactivity of olivine to form a solid solution with the hematite phase in a green pellet by measuring the rate of contemporary formation of magnetite, i.e., the dissociation rate of hematite. The olivine reactivity values given here describe how fast the olivine reacts when the threshold temperature for solid solution formation is exceeded for one reason or another. A less reactive olivine makes the pelletizing process more tolerant of excessively high temperatures in the green pellets during oxidation. This is indicated by higher reduction strength values as shown by our earlier pot furnace studies. In this study, we could also verify the positive influence of coarser olivine on the pellet reduction strength in full production scale. Decreasing the olivine control value from 72% to 65%−45 μm by screening raised the pellet low temperature reduction strength (ISO 13930) measured in samples taken at the pelletizing plant from 92±2(1 The pilot-scale grinding tests shows that if the olivine additive is ground in closed circuit with a ball mill while maintaining good control over the top size, an appreciably coarser olivine product could be used without disturbing balling. The coarser ground would further decrease the olivine reactivity during oxidation on the grate. The closed-circuit grinding would slightly complicate the process layout; on the other hand, savings can be made on both the grinding energy and grinding media consumption. The developed thermogravimetric measuring method for olivine reactivity made it possible to evaluate different particle-sizing methods for olivine characterisation. The screening size fraction %−45 μm showed a good correlation to olivine reactivity within a very large measuring range. The use of a laser diffraction measuring method, such as Malvern, would have been preferred because it would enable fast and easy analysis. The correlation of Malvern values to the olivine reactivity showed, however, that Malvern is affected too much by variations in the large particles. The Malvern measurement could probably be refined if the larger particles were screened off before Malvern measurement. This will be studied further. The thermogravimetric measuring method presented in this study can also be used to evaluate the reactivity of other olivine deposits in comparison to the Åheim olivine. It can also be used to evaluate the reactivity of other minerals, especially magnesium-bearing minerals, like dolomite. The results obtained in this study are valuable for both process design and control. Funding from the Agricola Research Centre (ARC) at the Luleå University of Technology, Sweden, is gratefully acknowledged.