This study was carried out, at both laboratory- and pilot-scale, to investigate whether the presence of phosphorus affects the nitrification process during aerobic digestion of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste. Results from the laboratory-scale aerobic digestions indicated that nitrification did not occur throughout the entire bioprocessing period (21 days) in aerobic bioreactors containing phosphorus. The mineralization process in laboratory-scale aerobic bioreactors which did not contain phosphorus, on the other hand, followed the typical non-inhibited nitrogen mineralization (i.e., release of ammonium, NH4
                     + followed by oxidation into nitrate, NO3
                     −). Results from pilot-scale aerobic digestions confirmed that the presence of phosphorus did impact the nitrification of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste. However, analytical data and modeled parameters revealed that the presence of phosphorus significantly (P = 0.0406) delayed the onset of nitrification (lag period of 9.2 days for aerobic bioreactors without the presence of phosphorus compared to 29.3 days for aerobic bioreactors containing phosphorus, corresponding to a delay period of 3 weeks) but did not influence (P > 0.05) the nitrification kinetic parameters (i.e., maximum nitrate concentration (99.5–101.1 mg/L) and maximum rate of nitrate production (11.3–19.6 mg/L/day)).Organic solid waste represents nearly 50% of the total solid waste produced globally [ In anaerobic digestion, microbial consortia break down organic biomass into biogas comprising 50–80% methane and 30–50% carbon dioxide [ In a recent study, which aimed at optimizing the bioprocessing conditions for the mineralization of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste [ The solid waste was obtained from a high-intensity pilot-scale recirculating aquaculture/aquaponic system (80 m The effect of phosphorus on the nitrification process during the aerobic bioprocessing of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste was investigated in both laboratory- and pilot-scale settings. The laboratory-scale experiments were carried out in 1 L bioreactors, which consisted of glass vessels fitted with oxygen diffusers and magnetic stirrers to maximize aerobic and mixing conditions, respectively ( The pilot-scale experiments were carried out to validate the laboratory findings. The pilot-scale bioreactors consisted of 500 L fermentation tanks fitted with heat exchangers, agitators, oxygen supply systems as well as pH, temperature, dissolved oxygen, electrical conductivity and foam level sensors ( For both laboratory- and pilot-scale, the bioprocessing was carried out at 35 °C using tilapia solid waste with a final dry solid content of 1% (w/v) as suggested by Khiari et al. [ The moisture content of the dewatered aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste was determined after drying at 105 °C for 24 h using a forced air convection Isotemp oven (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) according to Hoskins et al. [ The pH in the laboratory-scale bioreactor was determined using a calibrated YSI Professional Plus handheld multi-parameter water quality meter (Yellow Springs Instrument, Yellow Springs, OH, USA) while dissolved oxygen (DO) was measured using a portable DO meter (Handy Polaris 2, OxyGuard International A/S, Birkevød, Denmark). For pilot-scale bioreactors, the pH and DO were automatically and continuously recorded using ZEUS™ industrial grade pH sensors (Advanced Sensor Technologies Inc., Orange, CA, USA) and aquaculture oxygen sensors (OxyGuard International A/S), respectively. The collected digestate samples were thawed over-night at room temperature then centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 5 min at room temperature using an Eppendorf benchtop centrifuge 5702 (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) to separate the sludge from the soluble fractions. The supernatant was collected and appropriately diluted for each chemical analysis (ammonium NH Digestate samples from pilot-scale bioreactors were used to determine the evolution of chemical oxygen demand (COD) during the entire bioprocessing period. The collected digestates were kept undisturbed for 1 h to settle down the sludge then samples from the supernatant were added to pre-mixed high range COD digestion vials (20–1500 mg/L COD) following the manufacturer's instructions (Hach, London, ON, Canada) and heated to 150 °C for 2 h using a heating block (Model: HB-1, Wealtec Corp., Sparks, NV, USA). After cooling the vials down to room temperature, COD was measured using a spectrophotometer (Model: Smart Spectro, LaMotte, Chestertown, MD, USA) at 620 nm. Kinetics of nitrate production during the pilot-scale aerobic digestion of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste can be described by the modified Gompertz model. Experimental values for nitrate concentration over the entire bioprocessing period were fitted to the modified Gompertz equation using the Solver tool (Microsoft Excel software). The mathematical model was based on the double exponential equation, previously described by Khiari et al. [ In this study, four replicates were used for the laboratory-scale experiments and three replicates were used in the pilot-scale experiments. Each analytical assay was performed in triplicate. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used and Tukey's honest significant difference (P < 0.05) multiple range test was conducted to determine differences between treatments. All statistical analyses were performed using Statistical Analysis Software (SAS University Edition, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Letter groupings were obtained using the SAS PDMIX800 macro [ Ammonification (estimated by the formation of ammonium) and nitrification (determined by the formation of nitrite and/or nitrate) were monitored to assess the mineralization of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste. The kinetics of nitrogen mineralization process (including both ammonification and nitrification) during the laboratory-scale aerobic digestion of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste are presented in Nitrite, which is the intermediate compound during the oxidation of ammonium into nitrate, was not detected for all bioprocessing conditions (control, MES-buffered and PO Since the suppression of nitrification was only observed for phosphate-buffered bioreactor as revealed by the laboratory-scale experiment, therefore, the lack of the nitrification reported in the previous study [ Pilot-scale aerobic digestions were carried out to verify and validate the result obtained in the laboratory-scale experiments. Phosphoric acid (as a source for phosphorus) was used for a set of 3 pilot-scale bioreactors and compared to a set of 3 control aerobic bioreactors with no phosphorus addition. A preliminary pilot-scale aerobic digestion with pH adjusted using phosphoric acid and potassium hydroxide showed no nitrification within 21 days compared to a pilot-scale aerobic digestion with pH adjusted using sulfuric acid and potassium hydroxide. However, after running the aerobic digestions for a longer period (6 weeks), both bioreactors contained nitrate and no residual ammonium was detected. Therefore, the pilot-scale experiments were carried out for 60 days instead of the initially planned 21-day period.  The use of phosphoric acid, on the other hand, significantly affected the mineralization process of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste and resulted in different mineralization patterns compared to using sulfuric acid ( Results from the pilot-scale experiments confirmed those from the laboratory-scale experiments, which indicated that phosphorus does affect the nitrification process of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste. However, pilot-scale experiments revealed that the use of phosphoric acid delayed the onset of nitrification but did not suppress it. This result also explained the reason nitrification was not detected in phosphate-buffered bioreactors (observed in laboratory-scale experiments from the present study and those previously reported by Khiari et al. [ For all pilot-scale aerobic bioreactors, the measured DO varied between 4.9–19.0 mg/L (  Nitrate evolution during the entire bioprocessing period (60 days), for pilot-scale bioreactors, was fitted to the modified Gompertz model. The model estimations showed an excellent fit to the experimental data in relation to NO Nitrate production rates (r The present study provided strong evidence that the presence of phosphorus delays the onset of nitrification during the aerobic digestion of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste. Phosphorus containing compounds (such as phosphate buffer and phosphoric acid) should be avoided during the aerobic processing of aquaculture/aquaponic solid waste into nitrate-rich liquid fertilizer. Further research is still required to fully understand this phenomenon (  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The