Alkyl amines are widely used as cationic collectors in froth flotation. They are generally referred to as weak electrolyte collectors and frequently form solid insoluble precipitates. Much work has been done to measure the interfacial tension and contact angle regarding alkyl amine collectors. However, the role of these colloidal precipitates in adsorption phenomena and the kinetics involved in the adsorption have not been systematically studied and decoupled from those of soluble species in flotation. Using dodecyl amine (DDA) as the model surfactant, four sets of intimately linked measurements were made on the dynamic surface tension of amine true solutions and solutions containing precipitates to demonstrate the difference in the surface activity kinetics of colloidal precipitates and soluble species. The effects of the interfacial kinetics on the bubble size in a two-phase system and on the contact angle in a three-phase system were also studied to understand the migration of precipitates between different interfaces. The experimental data showed that kinetic effects existed whenever precipitates were involved, but were absent from true amine solutions. A three-stage mechanism (migration–adsorption–aggregation) was proposed and tested to explain the kinetic behavior associated with precipitates. The size of air bubbles generated in the true solutions was not affected by the surface age of bubbles, while bubble size was affected by the surface age in the presence of precipitates. The observed kinetics of contact angle evolution suggested that the migration of DDA species between air–water–interfaces occurred.Alkyl amines along with their various derivatives are broadly applied as cationic collectors in the reverse flotation of quartz from different types of minerals, such as phosphate ( When flotation is performed at an alkaline pH, insoluble colloidal precipitates form when the solubility limit of the free amine is exceeded. The presence of precipitates may play a key role in flotation through interaction with particles and bubbles, affecting their surface charges and surface hydrophobicity ( The existing research on the interactions of chemicals with bubbles suggests that the interactions of alkyl amine precipitates with bubbles should not be ignored and that the action of precipitates is very different from that of soluble species during flotation. A significant amount of work has been conducted to study the surface tension of alkyl amine solutions and contact angle formed at different amine concentrations and different pH values ( Dodecyl amine hydrochloride (CH       Three types of solutions were investigated in this study: (1) distilled water with sodium chloride as the background electrolyte at a concentration of 0.01 The kinetics of the surface activity of the precipitates and soluble species of DDA was studied by measuring the surface tension as a function of time. The surface tension of all the test solutions was measured using the drop shape method with the FTA1000 Drop Shape Analyzer ( Bubbling experiments were conducted to study the adsorption of precipitates on bubbles and to test the potential role of gas bubbles in enhancing the formation and coagulation of colloidal precipitates. Nitrogen was bubbled into 30 A single air bubble was generated through a needle with an inner diameter of 0.483 The three-phase contact angle was measured using the sessile drop method with the FTA1000 Drop Shape Analyzer ( The surface activity kinetics of the soluble species and precipitates of DDA was studied by measuring the dynamic surface tension of DDA true solutions and solutions containing precipitates. Four sets of related measurements were made. The first step was to compare the surface tension of DDA solutions at a fixed total amine concentration with and without precipitates. The above result, however, could not confirm that precipitates were more surface active than the soluble species. Considering that the surface tension of the DDA true solution was only slightly lower than that of distilled water, one could argue that the constant surface tension could possibly be caused by the low concentration used and the resulting low adsorption density of soluble species absorbing at the air–water interface, making it impossible to detect any changes in the surface tension under the experimental conditions. To clarify this, the second step was to measure the surface tension of DDA true solutions at higher concentrations. To understand the effect of the ratio of the molecular species to the cationic form on kinetics, the third step was to measure the surface tension of DDA true solutions at a fixed total concentration with different ratios of the molecular to cationic form. The concentration chosen, 1.8 The result in To further evaluate the kinetics of the surface activity of precipitates in comparison to the soluble species, the fourth step was to measure the surface tension of solutions containing different concentrations of precipitates with the same molecular to cationic ratios. The increasing concentration of precipitates was confirmed by the increasing value of turbidity, as shown in According to the Gibbs adsorption equation ( To test the effect of the surface age of a liquid droplet on the surface tension of DDA true solutions, experiments were conducted in two ways: (1) taking snapshots right after liquid droplets were generated (waiting time Conversely, there was a time effect on the surface tension of the solutions containing DDA precipitates ( To test the effect of the surface age of a liquid droplet on the surface tension of DDA solutions containing precipitates, experiments were conducted in the same two ways as in the aforementioned tests with DDA true solutions. The subsequent increase in the surface tension of DDA solutions containing precipitates might be associated with the aggregation of the precipitates at the air–water interface. The aggregation of colloidal particles at the air–water interface has been reported in the literature, e.g., the coagulation of ultrafine colloidal FeOOH particles on bubble surfaces (  Based on the above analysis, a three-stage mechanism was proposed in this study to explain the kinetic behavior of amine precipitates: migration–adsorption–aggregation ( When bubbles are created through a single capillary, the resulting bubble size depends on the inner diameter of the capillary and on the surface tension of the solution ( To test the effect of surface tension kinetics on bubble size, air bubbles were generated at different dispensing rates in the same test solutions as in To understand the behavior of DDA precipitates and soluble species at the air–water–solid interfaces, the contact angle was measured by creating a liquid droplet of a test solution and contacting the liquid droplet with the surfaces of a quartz slide. Interestingly, a kinetic effect was observed on the contact angle for the DDA true solution at a higher concentration of 4 A kinetic effect was observed on the contact angle for solutions containing precipitates, even though the total amine concentration was only 2 Based on surface tension measurements, colloidal amine precipitates were found to exhibit unusual dynamic behavior at the gas–liquid interface. In early stages of interface development, colloidal amine precipitates accumulated at the gas–liquid interface. This initial period of high interfacial activity of the precipitates was followed by an apparent decrease in the adsorption density of the precipitates, and the surface tension increased to steady-state values approaching the surface tension of pure water. It was proposed that this behavior was a result of a three-stage process. The initial decrease in surface tension was associated with the migration of precipitates in stage 1 and the increasing adsorption of precipitates at the gas–liquid interface in stage 2. In stage 3, as the adsorption density reached a critical level, lateral interactions between the adsorbed colloidal precipitates led to coagulation of the colloidal species to form large aggregates. The increasing effective size of the aggregates brought about the formation of a dissipated adsorbed layer covering a smaller surface area of the interface. This increase in aggregate sizes and the simultaneous decrease in the surface coverage resulted in an increase in the surface tension. In support of the proposed mechanism, it was demonstrated that gas bubbles passing through a homogeneous colloidal dispersion of amine enhanced the formation of large amine coagula and decreased the turbidity of the system. In contrast to colloidal precipitate dispersions, true solutions of amine did not exhibit any kinetic effects on the surface tension of amine solutions, and the adsorption of amine at the gas−liquid interface was almost instantaneous. The contact angle data showed that colloidal precipitates were capable of rendering the quartz surface hydrophobic after an initial induction period at pH values below the iso-electric point of the precipitates. True amine solutions also increased the hydrophobicity of quartz, although in contrast to colloidal amine systems, the evolution of the contact angle in true amine solutions was initiated immediately after contacting a true solution with the quartz surface. This result suggested that the adsorption of amine molecules at the solid–liquid interface was very fast. On the other hand, the induction period observed for colloidal amine systems was explained by the slow migration of colloidal amine precipitates from the gas–liquid interface to the solid surfaces. At the same time, the higher steady-state contact angle on quartz for colloidal amine systems, compared to the steady-state contact angle reached in true amine solutions, indicated that the adsorbed colloidal amine particles were more effective than amine molecules in facilitating the recession of the water film from the quartz surface. Similar phenomena on hydrophobic colloidal particles making liquids recede from solid surfaces were observed in the existing work ( Overall, it appears that colloidal amine precipitates play a significant role in total amine adsorption in flotation and that the occurrence of kinetic effects in various interfacial phenomena is very characteristic of such colloidal amine systems. These experimental results have practical implications for choosing the optimum conditioning time and the way amine collectors are applied in flotation. Since these collectors may be brought to solid surfaces by attaching to air bubbles, the way in which these amines are applied in the conditioning stage is very important, i.e., whether it should be introduced as emulsified form or as aerosol in the stream of air. Funding for this project was provided by The Canadian Centre for Clean Coal/Carbon and Mineral Processing Technologies (C5MPT).