The adsorption properties of chelating ion exchange resins containing mixed sulfonic/phosphonic (SP), aminophosphonic (AP) or iminodiacetic (IDA) acid functional groups were investigated towards the rare earth elements (REE). The aim of this work was to determine the potential for such resins to assist in the isolation of a mixed rare earth product under conditions relevant to the hydrometallurgical processing of rare earth containing minerals. The selectivity of the resins towards La, Sm and Ho, versus the common impurity metals; Al, Fe and Th, was determined in sulfuric acid media. The chelating resins all displayed a similar selectivity with Fe and Th adsorbed in preference to the REE and Al (i.e. Th≃Fe≫REE≃Al). The IDA resin displayed a far superior performance compared to both phosphonic resins (SP and AP) as well as a strong acid cation exchange resin for the adsorption of REE in the presence of very high Na or Ca concentrations. Equilibrium and kinetic adsorption isotherms for La were measured and successfully modelled with all resins, and the elution characteristics of selected resins investigated in both batch and column operation. A number of areas were identified where these resins could be exploited to provide an advantage in the hydrometallurgical processing of REE.The rare earth elements (REE) find application in many fields associated with modernity such as green energy, high performance magnets, lighting and consumer electronics, medical equipment as well as in more traditional industries including glass, ceramics and catalysis ( Solid phase extraction with ion exchange resins is a particularly versatile separation technology that can be efficiently applied for the processing of low concentration feed solutions ( A number of alternative resin types have been developed that offer diverse adsorption properties compared to conventional SA resins. Of particular interest are the “chelating resins” that contain phosphonic acid or iminodiacetic acid functional groups, as opposed to the sulfonic acid groups. Such resins exhibit a high affinity for the adsorption of heavy metal ions and proven performance in established hydrometallurgy applications ( This work investigates a range of resins to determine the potential for application in the context of rare earth hydrometallurgical processing. We present comparative sorption and elution data for ion exchange and chelating resins containing the functional groups: sulfonic (SA); mixed sulfonic/phosphonic (SP); aminophosphonic (AP) and iminodiacetic (IDA) acid. The resins used for this study were supplied by Purolite and are commercial products. The exception was the strong acid resin which was a developmental product also supplied by Purolite. The resin properties are summarised in The pH screening studies were performed by batch contact of the resin with a solution containing a mixture of all metal ions (ca. 50 The adsorption isotherms were determined by batch contact of known resin volumes with LaCl Batch elution studies were performed on 2 For the acid dependent sorption, sorption rate studies and column elution curves the elemental concentrations were determined by ICP-MS (Perkin-Elmer Elan 9000) or by ICP-OES (Perkin-Elmer Optima 5300DV). For the sorption isotherms and batch elution studies neutron activation analysis (NAA) of the isolated resins was used to determine element concentrations. The resins were dried at 50 The sorption of the REE; La, Sm and Ho, as well as metal ions; Al, Fe(III) and Th, routinely found in process liquors, was investigated over a range of sulfuric acid concentrations using the SA, SP, AP and IDA ion exchange resins. The percent sorption versus acid concentration for the various resins is shown in For the SA resin it is possible to extract the separation factors from the data displayed in Another key difference to note between the performance of the SA and chelating resins is the influence of acid concentration on the adsorption of REE. Both SA and SP resins have a similar affinity for the REE and are able to efficiently extract these metals from acid solutions up to approx. 0.5 The equilibrium adsorption isotherms for La were determined as a model for REE behaviour. The adsorption experiments were performed in HCl to minimise coordination effects of the anion ( The adsorption kinetics for La were also measured in HCl media, at pH Elution of La from the SA, SP and IDA resins was investigated with HCl solutions of various concentrations (0.1–4 The 4 A large difference between the resins was observed when elution of La was attempted using 4 The batch desorption studies described above highlight the relative ease of recovering adsorbed REE values from an IDA resin using dilute HCl solutions. To investigate this in more detail the elution of La from the IDA resin using HCl was performed in a column operation, and the results compared to the elution of La from a column of SA resin. An important difference between the SA and IDA resin is the elution peak shape. The SA resin shows a sharp elution front and a long trailing tail, whereas the IDA resin shows a broad elution front and a very sharp tail (for both eluent solutions). For the SA resin this tailing effect greatly reduces the efficiency of the column. This is illustrated by the % elution curves in Some key metrics have been summarised in To investigate the use of ion exchange in the production of REE from low grade mineral concentrates, we considered a sulfuric acid bake/water leach route as the simplest first step to producing suitable feed liquor. For this reason the impact of acidity on the adsorption of rare earth and impurity ions was conducted in sulfate media ( For the chelating resins ( The results shown in The results described in The chelating resins display a significant difference in the adsorption of REE versus acid concentration. Both phosphonic chelating resins will adsorb REE from strongly acidic solutions ([H The IDA resin offers two key advantages over conventional SA resins and the phosphonic chelating resins. Firstly, adsorbed REE are easily eluted from the IDA resin using acid, resulting in lower acid consumption and a higher REE tenor in the eluate ( Another important consideration when choosing an ion exchange resin is to determine the impact of the resin capacity and adsorption kinetics on a process. The chelating resins display lower capacity and slower adsorption kinetics for La compared to the SA resin ( The fundamental adsorption properties of SP, AP and IDA chelating resins were characterised and compared to a conventional SA resin. The following key observations were recorded: All chelating resins displayed a similar selectivity series with Fe and Th adsorbed in preference to the REE and Al (i.e. Th A varied response to REE adsorption towards acid concentration was observed, with the SA, SP and AP resins displaying a tolerance for REE adsorption from high acid concentrations (< The sensitivity of the IDA resin to acid concentration resulted in superior elution performance with HCl eluent compared to both phosphonic and SA resins; The IDA resin also displayed superior selectivity for the adsorption of REE in the presence of high Na and Ca concentrations; Equilibrium and kinetic adsorption isotherms were measured and successfully modelled for all resins. The chelating resins displaying lower capacity and slower kinetics for La adsorption compared to the SA resin. These results have highlighted opportunities for the application of chelating resins in the hydrometallurgical processing of REE, namely: The application of chelating resins for removing trace Th impurity from REE liquors, especially with regard to sulfate solutions where no separation of Th and the REE is possible using conventional SA resins; The application of IDA resins in the recovery of dilute REE values from waste process streams, where cost advantages may be obtained in the facile regeneration of the resin with acid and its high selectivity for REE adsorption over alkaline metal impurities such as Na and Ca.