Gold and antimony are associated in a number of gold ores with resulting complications in the gold extraction process. The principal mineralogical forms, in which gold occurs in these ores are metallic gold, free-milling, or associated with silicate gangue, as metallic gold associated with stibnite [Sb2S3] will be seen from the processes used to treat such materials that the majority of the gold appears to be in the metallic form rather than interstitially in sulfide lattices, associated with arsenopyrite both as metallic gold and interstitially in the sulfide lattice, and as aurostibite [AuSb2].Gold and antimony are associated in a number of gold ores with resulting complications in the gold extraction process. The principal mineralogical forms in which gold occurs in these ores are: metallic gold, free-milling or associated with silicate gangue; as metallic gold associated with stibnite [Sb associated with arsenopyrite both as metallic gold and interstitially in the sulfide lattice; and as aurostibite [AuSb Stibnite [Sb Any change in cyanide consumption following an increase in the stibnite in the ore is related to the formation of thiocyanate as antimony does not form a cyanide complex. The rate of oxidation of stibnite is strongly dependent on pH with appreciable dissolution at pH 10 reducing to low levels at pH 12. Sulfur containing anions such as thioantimonates (SbS In many cases where minor stibnite is present, pre-aeration, addition of lead nitrate (to precipitate sulfide ions) and pH control around 10 can negate any adverse influences due to the stibnite.  Ores and concentrates containing stibnite have also been treated by roasting. This is generally required if significant amounts of the gold are present in a truly refractory form such as associated with arsenopyrite or as aurostibite. A two-stage roasting process, similar to that used for arsenic sulfide ores, can also volatilize antimony oxides and prevent adverse reactions such as the production of metallic antimony, which can coat the surface of gold particles ( Aurostibite is a completely refractory mineral, which has conventionally been successfully treated by roasting such as at Giant Yellowknife ( A recent investigation by the author (Unpublished, 2003) into the recovery of gold from a flotation concentrate containing significant aurostibite indicated that recovery from this mineral could only be achieved by pressure oxidation or to a lesser extent by bio-oxidation. Intermediate approaches such as low-pH pressure cyanidation, thiourea leaching, elevated temperature cyanidation and low-temperature calcination had no impact on recovery of the gold associated with aurostibite. Although tolerance limits of 80–300 For ores containing small amounts of antimony with the gold present in a non-occluded form, pre-aeration combined with lead nitrate additions and alkalinity control around pH 10 will normally give satisfactory gold dissolution. Reference to The most prominent examples of antimonial gold ores are the Hillgrove mine operated by New England Antimony Mines in New South Wales, Australia and the Consolidated Murchison Mine originally operated by Johannesburg Consolidated Investments and now owned by Metorex, at Gravelotte in Limpopo Province, South Africa. At both of these operations, free gold is separated by gravity concentration and separate arsenopyrite and stibnite concentrates are produced by flotation. At both operations a significant amount of gold reports to the arsenopyrite and a pressure oxidation circuit was installed to treat this stream at Hillgrove in 1999 ( The philosophy is adopted at both mines of recovering gold from the stibnite concentrate without oxidation and with subsequent sale of the gold-depleted stibnite. This is a consequence of the lack of gold credits available from antimony smelters on concentrate purchased by them. At Hillgrove, 10–20% of the gold in the plant feed reports to the stibnite concentrate, 35–50% to the arsenopyrite concentrate and 10% is recovered by gravity ( At Hillgrove, gold is recovered from the antimony concentrate by thiourea leaching ( Gold recovery from the stibnite concentrate is in the range 50–80%, dependent on the level of exposure in the concentrate treated. The operation at the Consolidated Murchison Mine has been comprehensively described by Davis and Paterson (1986). At the time of their paper, approximately 35% of the gold in the plant feed was recovered by gravity separation and a further 35–40% reported to the stibnite concentrate, resulting in a concentrate gold grade of around 30 Gold is recovered from the stibnite concentrate by a low alkalinity, high-pressure cyanidation process operated in a 1.5-km-long pipe reactor. The reactor was originally designed to treat 1,000 Concentrates at 55% solids are pre-screened at 2 Slurry is pumped from P2 back to P1 using a high-pressure piston pump via the pipe reactor. The reactor comprises 16 straight lengths, each 85 Oxygen is added 10 Each batch of material is treated twice through the pipe reactor, the second pass improving gold dissolution by a further 5–9%, giving a total of just less than 80%. The cyanide level is adjusted back to 1% if it has fallen below this level, between the two passes through the pipe reactor. The reactor has a residence time of around 15 For gold ores where minor, economically insignificant stibnite occurs it is difficult to be prescriptive concerning the optimum flowsheet because stibnite is seldom the sole problem mineral, with arsenopyrite and similar minerals nearly always being present. If low levels of stibnite constitute the only cyanidation problem then pre-aeration, lead nitrate and controlled alkalinity around pH 10 will normally be adequate to ensure satisfactory recovery in conjunction with a typical CIL circuit applicable to free-milling gold ores. If the ore behaves as in For removal of gold from stibnite concentrates which will be subsequently sold to a smelter, both thiourea leaching and low alkalinity, high-pressure cyanidation may be applicable. For similar recoveries, economics will probably tend to favour thiourea where the scale of operation is small and cost of capital is high. It is noticeable that The investigation of using autoclaves rather than pipe reactors may then be justified in the investigation of the applicability of the low alkalinity, high-pressure cyanidation process. Stibnite and aurostibite may be components of a refractory sulfide concentrate, in which case any gold associated with the stibnite would be able to be recovered using one of the processes outlined for stibnite concentrates but gold intimately associated with pyrite or arsenopyrite would be unaffected. Gold associated with aurostibite can be recovered in processes conventionally used for refractory sulfide concentrates such as pressure oxidation, roasting or bacterial oxidation. Of these, roasting is frequently difficult to accommodate on environmental grounds and bacterial oxidation may be adversely impacted depending on the tolerance of the culture used to the prevalent antimony levels in solution. It can therefore be concluded that pressure oxidation will frequently have the least process risk but bacterial oxidation cannot be ruled out without recourse to testwork.