This work uses vapour–liquid equilibrium (VLE) to explain the observed two-alpha product distribution in Fischer–Tropsch (FT) reactors. We discuss three possible scenarios or cases of Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) product distribution and VLE. The three cases assume the following: (1) the reaction sets up a single alpha ASF distribution in the total (vapour+liquid) products, (2) the vapour phase follows a single alpha distribution and (3) a single alpha distribution is set up in the liquid phase. We then look at the consequences of these assumptions in conjunction with a simple Raoult's law VLE model on the exit product distributions. We find that only Case 3 gives rise to a two-alpha model in accordance with experimental results that is frequently observed in FT reactors. This model further predicts a relationship between the two values of alpha that are consistent with the measured experimental results.In April 1926, Fischer and Tropsch announced that higher homologues of methane are formed when mixtures of hydrogen and carbon monoxide are passed at atmospheric pressure over catalysts of iron or cobalt mixed with various supporting materials, at temperatures from 250 to 300 FT is a surface polymerisation reaction ( According to The logarithm of the above equation gives Hence, a plot of the logarithm of the molar concentration of hydrocarbon of chain length Most studies assume that the ASF distribution is a model of the product selectivity ( Previous attempts to explain the deviations from ASF distribution in FTS have led to a two-active-site model ( Although according to  While  However, The VLE method propounded by Actual measurements of the vapour and the liquid phase composition have been done ( Diffusional restrictions, which prevent the attainment of vapour–liquid equilibrium, can give rise to liquid phase effects on FTS selectivity by introducing chemical potential gradients between the gas and liquid phases ( For FT synthesis products, it is true that the heavier the hydrocarbon, the more difficult its diffusion in catalyst pores because diffusivity decreases significantly with increasing carbon number ( To develop a model to explain two-alpha positive-deviation product distribution we conceptualised a reactor into which CO and H We assumed three different scenarios ( the the a single In all cases, except where specified otherwise, we specified that the conversion was 85%, and that an alpha of 0.85, temperature of 200 In the exposition below, we consider each of the three scenarios separately, and look at the predicted liquid, vapour and total distributions that each of these assumptions yields. The expected trends form the main focus of the figures presented in these cases.  The overall mass balance on hydrocarbon product after the FT reaction gives The component balance on hydrocarbons of chain length The vapour fraction is defined as Hence the component balance can be written as Since the vapour fraction f ranges from 0 to 1, this means that We assume that the vapour and liquid are in VLE, or Furthermore, we would expect that as the liquid phase is a mixture of homologous hydrocarbons, the liquid phase would tend to behave ideally. Also, because the partial pressures of individual product components in the gas phase are very small, one would expect that in many cases The total product distribution follows a single The theory examined in this Case is that the reaction sets up a  We assumed that the total (vapour and liquid) hydrocarbon products could be described by a single Thus, Therefore If the total mole fraction of components in the product other than hydrocarbons is Hence Thus The single Therefore From the component balance Substituting Eqs. Hence Therefore This reduces to Assuming that the VLE can be described by Raoult's law gives According to  Therefore Eq. This reduces to Since according to our postulated Hence the plot of log If we consider the vapour phase, Therefore substituting Eq. Thus for lighter components, the gas phase mole fraction follows that of the total hydrocarbons, while the liquid phase slope rises beyond log(1), as shown in  Eq. The liquid phase mole fraction replicates the total mole fraction. From Eq. Since the overall product distribution was specified, we used a simple flash calculation to work out the mole fractions of the vapour and liquid phases. The expected product distribution results for It is important to note that the values of the mole fractions on the y-axis are for demonstration/explanation only. The actual values of the mole fractions would depend on the overall mass balance, which would take into account the unreacted and inert gases, CO We see that the total hydrocarbon distribution follows a single Hence, if the total product distribution and VLE were set up quickly, and the liquid was given time to accumulate and then start flowing out of the reactor, one might expect that initially one would observe the gas phase distribution. This, although it would display the 2- The liquid distribution for higher carbon numbers (C8 and above) resembles the total production distribution and hence has a slope log( We also looked at the effect of changing At low values of As However, the vapour phase modelling always shows a negative deviation from the ASF distribution. Thus the initial observed product distribution would track the vapour distribution more closely, and, as time went on and the liquid flow began to reach steady state, the observed product distribution would gradually approach a single A single In this case we test the theory that the reaction Therefore we assume that Applying the same derivation used in Therefore, if there is VLE, according to Eq. This gives Thus This implies that the liquid phase mole fraction slope is constant and is greater than log(1) for our assumed values of The component balance can be written as Therefore Substituting Eqs.   Therefore In other words, the total mole fraction product distribution for lighter hydrocarbons follows the gas phase distribution.   Then Hence It follows that the total mole fraction product distribution for heavier hydrocarbons corresponds with that of the liquid distribution, and it has a slope that is steeper than the vapour phase and higher than log(1). Since the total mole fraction ( For simplicity we assumed that H Thus the vapour fraction ( Changing the conversion/vapour fraction would affect the intercept of the vapour phase and the total product distribution, but not the shapes. Relaxing the assumption that the liquid phase consists of hydrocarbons only would not change the shape of the curves, which is the main point under discussion. Since the focus is on the shape of the curves. The values of the mole fractions shown on the figures have not been normalised and therefore depend on factors such as conversion. We notice that the vapour and total distribution coincide for the lower carbon numbers (C1–5), while the total and the liquid distribution correspond for higher carbon numbers. The total product observed shows a positive deviation from the classical single- It should be noted that other researchers ( Most of the researchers who considered VLE in the FT reactor ( A single We now propose that the reaction sets up a single-alpha ASF distribution in the liquid phase fairly quickly, and that it is accompanied by the forming of a vapour phase that is in equilibrium with the liquid. The vapour phase distribution is described by VLE. As the vapour removes components from the liquid, the reaction occurs in the liquid phase so as to maintain the liquid distribution. The total product distribution can be calculated from the sum of the vapour and the liquid phase products, as described in Eq. Assuming that the distribution in the liquid phase is set up very quickly and is described by a single As before, this implies that Assuming further that the vapour phase distribution is set up so as to be in equilibrium with the liquid, then from Eq. Hence Therefore This means that the vapour phase product distribution also has a constant slope, log( The component balance is still given by Therefore the total product distribution is described by   Thus, as before, the total product distribution for lighter hydrocarbons follows the vapour phase distribution where the slope is given by log( This clearly shows the observed deviation from the single alpha ASF distribution. Hence, postulating a single alpha in the liquid phase does succeed in explaining the two-alpha product distribution. It is noticeable that the total distribution follows the vapour phase distribution up to a carbon number of around 10, and thereafter conforms to the liquid phase distribution. Even for a fixed alpha, this break depends on the temperature through the value of An interesting prediction we can make based on this Case is that if we consider the sum of hydrocarbons in the liquid phase, The sum of hydrocarbons in the liquid phase is given by A single alpha in the liquid phase gives Thus Using Raoult's law gives Two possible explanations are: that the liquid phase cannot consist purely of hydrocarbons, and/or that the assumption of an ideal VLE/Raoult's law is incorrect. The model predicts that, for 0≤ The focal point of discussion is the shapes of the curves. The actual values of mole fractions would be different depending on the catalyst and the conditions used. The relationship between the slopes predicted by The results in all three Cases carry some common implications. The total and vapour distributions correspond for the light hydrocarbons, while it is the total and liquid compositions that correspond in the instance of the heavier hydrocarbons. We can deduce from these Cases that a single-alpha ASF distribution can be observed only for a vapour phase FT reactor (in other words low-alpha or high-temperature FT). Once the dew point of the reactor is reached and liquid is formed inside it, the two-alpha negative deviation can be observed only in the non-steady state condition, while liquid is still building up in the reactor. However, once VLE has been reached under steady state conditions, the expected product distribution would be as shown in In terms of testing whether However there are other tests that could be done, such as testing the composition of the liquid, particularly in the case of the lighter hydrocarbons. There may also be novel ways of running the reactor to try to determine if we do indeed have VLE in the reactor. None of these are addressed in this paper. The model results should describe the reactor at all relevant FT conditions. Therefore the experiment could be conducted at any relevant FT condition. We conducted an experiment in a fixed bed micro-reactor at 270 A heating jacket was connected to a temperature controller and was mounted around the reactor's outer casing to supply heat, and we placed a thermocouple near the centre of the reactor to record the temperature in the chamber. The reactor feed was a pre-mixed synthesis gas (10% N The operating pressure in the reactor was maintained at 8 The gas was directed to the GCs for only the short period required to flush out the residual gas in the sampling loops, to allow for further sampling. For the remainder of the time the solenoid valves vented the outlet gas to the atmosphere to keep the sampling line clean. A new gas sample was analysed every two hours. The gas analysis was carried out online using two GCs, one with a flame ionisation detector (FID) and the other with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD). The GC equipped with FID had a Poropak-Q column that was used to separate hydrocarbons from C1 to C9. The GC fitted with the TCD was employed in the analysis of the inorganic gases H Wax, oil and water were allowed to accumulate in the hot and cold traps, respectively, and were collected at the end of the mass balance period. We carried out the oil and wax fractions analysis with an off-line GC with an FID on a BP-5 capillary column. For the analysis of these condensed phases we obtained a mass composition directly from the GC peak area percentages, as the mass response factors were around one. The product distribution obtained at the end of the mass balance period is shown in The experimental results presented in The Liquid-Phase ASF Product Distribution Model ( Pure vapour-phase FT can be carried out only at low alpha ( If the total product distribution followed a single alpha ( If the reaction sets up a single alpha distribution in the vapour-phase ( Once the reaction begins, the catalyst and the reaction sites would become filled with liquid. This might lead us to assume that the single-alpha ( In all models for the light hydrocarbons, the total and vapour distributions correspond, while for heavier hydrocarbons, the total and liquid compositions correspond. Experimental results were compared to the predictions of An interesting prediction from this model is that the liquid phase cannot be only hydrocarbon as  mole fraction of hydrocarbon with chain length chain-growth probability factor reactor feed molar flow rate vapour flow rate liquid flow rate total flow rate (sum of the vapour and the liquid flow rates). mole fraction of component mole fraction of component total mole fraction of component vapour fraction ( vapour-pressure of component  ratio of vapour pressure of component total mole fraction of components other than hydrocarbons operating pressure