The objective of this study is to determine how grinding conditions affect the breakage rate with respect to the sample mass, major elements, and minerals present in siliceous goethitic (SG) nickel laterite. This information is helpful in determining the optimal grinding conditions for selective comminution and nickel upgrade. The kinetics of batch wet grinding of nickel laterites with feed sizes of 2.38–1.68, 1.68–1.18, 1.18–0.85, 0.85–0.6, 0.6–0.42, 0.42–0.3, 0.3–0.21, and 0.21–0.15mm were determined using a Netzsch LME4 stirred mill under the following conditions: 1000rpm, 50% charge volume, 150.0g of solid. The grinding behaviour of the majority of the feed samples was non-first-order due to the fast breakage rate of soft minerals and the low breakage rate of hard minerals in the feed. Therefore, an enrichment of the soft mineral was obtained in the underscreen product by selective grinding. The effect of selective grinding on Ni upgrade was evaluated by looking at grinding time, feed size, and product size. Optimum grinding time with respect to Ni upgrade was 0.25min for SG nickel laterite samples. Generally, grinding larger particles and/or collecting finer product size yielded better Ni upgrade results. The effect of selective grinding was evaluated by the changes of the major soft and hard minerals for the selected samples. Selective grinding was also examined with respect to the major element weight ratio (e.g. Si/Ni for SG nickel laterite). With respect to Ni upgrade, the best result was achieved from the 1.18–0.85mm feed on the −400 mesh product after grinding for 0.25min. The Ni grade increased from 0.73% to 1.30% (upgrade 76.8%), with 14.4% Ni recovery; the Mg grade increased from 1.30% to 3.96% (upgrade 205.6%); the Si grade decreased from 28.7% to 16.2%.The demand for nickel led to the need to exploit ore bodies that were low in grade and complex in mineralogy (  Selective grinding requires that the energy of grinding body is less than the energy required to break the large, hard component. Therefore, either a soft, fine product or a hard, coarse valuable mineral fraction was achieved ( The selective size reduction of minerals with different hardnesses was found in a stirred mill. Under the same stress, the breakage rate of soft material was faster than that of the hard materials. The stress intensity of stirred milling was varied through the impeller speed so as to target the grinding of either hard or soft minerals. A lower impeller speed and therefore lower stress intensity was found useful for the comminution of relatively soft components while minimizing the grinding of harder minerals ( The particle size distribution of a grinding product depends strongly on the size reduction mechanism. Based on the energy intensity, three size reduction mechanisms were explored: abrasion, compression, and impact. Abrasion gives a narrow size distribution, while impact produces a broad distribution, and compression, an intermediate distribution ( Stirred milling kinetics was investigated on siliceous goethitic (SG), goethitic, and saprolitic nickel laterite samples. Similar discussions were made on each kind of nickel laterite. The best selective comminution result was achieved on the SG nickel laterite among the three kinds of samples. Therefore, this study focused on SG nickel laterite. The study seeks to determine how grinding conditions affect breakage rate with respect to sample mass, major elements, and minerals present in SG nickel laterite. The information is useful for evaluating optimal conditions for selective size reduction of minerals of varying hardnesses. The effects of grinding time, feed size, and product size on nickel upgrade were also investigated. Siliceous goethitic (SG) nickel laterite sample (−15 The chemical composition of the SG nickel laterite samples is shown in A Netzsch LME4 horizontal stirred mill was the key instrument used in the kinetic study. The test procedures included sampling, batch grinding, wet screening, drying, weighing, and assay. Batch grinding tests were carried out under the following conditions: 1000 When the breakage rate is a constant value in relation to grinding time the breakage behaviour is called first-order (Eq. The rate of breakage depends on the size of the feed particles. The formula for the variation of the breakage rate, The breakage rate is not constant due to the accumulation of harder minerals in the unbroken fragments in a mixed mineral system, a cushioning action of fines around coarse material, or decreasing efficiency of the grinding equipment. The non-first-order behaviour was found in grinding tests and/or discussed in past studies ( Based on the mineralogy characteristics of nickel laterites and the availability of the assay results, three methods were utilized in evaluating the effect of selective grinding. As suggested from the upgrade of alumina from low grade bauxite, the effect of selective grinding can be evaluated by the upgrade of the soft mineral in the fine grinding product (underscreen or −38 The weight ratio changes of soft and hard minerals supplies a direct way to evaluate selective size reduction. If the QXRD data is unavailable, the weight ratio of the major elements that represent the minerals can be used as alternatives. Therefore, the weight ratio of Mg and Si can be used as a standard in the discussion of SG samples. However, to upgrade nickel is the ultimate goal, the weight ratio of Ni and Si is more interesting. More nickel distributes in the softer minerals. Therefore, the shortcoming of the method is dependent on the Si deportment in soft minerals. Since the nickel content is far less than the silica grade, the weight ratio of Si/Ni instead of Ni/Si was discussed. For the 1.68–1.18 The report on weight ratio of the major minerals or elements is suitable for evaluating selective grinding for a binary mineral system. Due to the Ni deportment in various minerals in a nickel laterite sample, a more complex system, nickel was enriched in a soft mineral product. The purpose of selective size reduction is to change the Ni distribution. Therefore, the extent of nickel upgrade and the corresponding recovery is central to a discussion of selective grinding. Totally, thirty-six batch grinding tests were carried out on SG samples. As shown in Breakage rates can be used to indicate selective comminution after grinding a sample for a fixed period of time. Then, the comminution effects can be discussed by the three evaluation methods proposed in this paper. It is necessary to calculate the average breakage rates. To calculate the average rates of breakage, the first-order behaviour was assumed at 0–0.25  The breakage behaviour of the sample mass is the same as that of the element and mineral for a pure mineral feed. For a nickel laterite sample (heterogeneous system) the breakage behaviour of sample mass is different from that of element, which provides detailed information on the selective size reduction of minerals. Therefore, the overscreen grinding products were sent out for chemical analysis. Figures can be drawn on the weight fraction remaining top size versus grinding time for various elements. The breakage rate with respect to element was calculated, accordingly. The breakage behaviour with respect to elements for SG samples is shown in The breakage behaviour of mineral is different from that of element for a nickel laterite sample due to its complexity in mineralogy. Overscreen products were selected for QXRD analysis. Figures can be drawn on the weight fraction remaining top size versus grinding time for minerals. The breakage rate with respect to mineral was calculated. The effect of grinding time, feed size, and product size on selective grinding was evaluated. The influence of time on the effect of selective grinding is shown in The influence of particle size on the effect of selective grinding is evaluated and shown in   Evaluating selective grinding of nickel laterites based on nickel upgrade is practical for beneficiation. But, such an evaluation is difficult to conduct when the nickel deportment is not clear. Assuming nickel distributes more in the soft minerals and less in the hard ones, the evaluation method represented by nickel upgrade indicates the effect of selective grinding. Si is primarily derived from silica, the hardest main mineral in the SG samples. So, the Si/Ni ratio was used to re-evaluate the effect of selective grinding. As shown in The stirred milling kinetics of siliceous goethitic (SG) nickel laterite was investigated using a Netzsch LME4 stirred mill under the following conditions: 1000 Generally, the breakage rates with respect to sample mass and element follow the non-first-order behaviour. This is due to the presence of hard and soft minerals, since the soft minerals broke faster, the hard minerals gradually dominated the grinding process as the soft minerals became depleted. In order to obtain a nickel-rich fine mineral product, a short grinding time with low Ni recovery conditions was needed for a high Ni upgrade. Under the optimum grinding time, the weight ratio of soft and hard minerals reached a maximum value, yielding the best results for selective comminution. Collecting a finer grinding product (−38 Under the experimental conditions, the breakage rate with respect to sample mass, major element, and mineral was found through testing. The optimum grinding time for selective grinding and Ni upgrade for SG nickel laterite was 0.25 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization of Australia (CSIRO).