We propose a combination of chitosan (CHT) with bioactive glass nanoparticles (BG-NPs) in order to produce CHT/BG-NPs scaffolds that combine the shape memory properties of chitosan and the biomineralization ability of BG-NPs for applications in bone regeneration. The addition of BG-NPs prepared by a sol–gel route to the CHT polymeric matrix improved the bioactivity of the nanocomposite scaffold, as seen by the precipitation of bone-like apatite layer upon immersion in simulated body fluid (SBF). Shape memory tests were carried out while the samples were immersed in varying compositions of water/ethanol mixtures. Dehydration with ethanol enables to fix a temporary shape of a deformed scaffold that recovers the initial geometry upon water uptake. The scaffolds present good shape memory properties characterized by a recovery ratio of 87.5% for CHT and 89.9% for CHT/BG-NPs and a fixity ratio of 97.2% for CHT and 98.2% for CHT/BG-NPs (for 30% compressive deformation). The applicability of such structures was demonstrated by a good geometrical accommodation of a previously compressed scaffold in a bone defect. The results indicate that the developed CHT/BG-NPs nanocomposite scaffolds have potential for being applied in bone tissue engineering.Shape memory polymers (SMPs) represent a technologically important class of stimuli-responsive materials that offer mechanical and geometrical action triggered by an external stimulus. SMP can be deformed and subsequently fixed into a temporary shape, which remains stable unless it is exposed to an appropriate external stimulus that triggers the polymer to recover its original shape ( Although SMP have found a niche application as an actuation material in biomedical applications, they have not fully reached their technological potential. A significant drawback of unreinforced SMP materials is their low stiffness and strength compared to alloys or ceramics ( Among the naturally occurring polymers that can be used as such as smart polymers, polysaccharides constitute a very common and important family of biomolecules ( The presence of fillers in the polymeric phases can improve the mechanical performance of the resulting organic-inorganic composite ( This work presents the development of bioactive composites using bioactive glass nanoparticles (BG-NPs), prepared Chitosan (CHT) of medium molecular weight ( To prepare the BG-NPs a protocol based on previous work was followed ( The scaffolds were obtained by freeze–drying. Chitosan was dissolved in an aqueous acetic acid solution 2% (v/v) to a concentration of 3% (w/v) for preparation of the control scaffold of pure chitosan, labeled CHT. To achieve the same mass as the control for feasible comparisons, the composite scaffold, labeled CHT/BG-NPs, were obtained by dissolving CHT (2.1  A NanoSEM-Fei Nova 200 (FEG/SEM) scanning electron microscope was used to study the composition and morphology of the surfaces. A Pegasus X4M instrument was used to perform EDS experiments. FTIR analyses were applied to study the composition of the scaffolds. The infrared spectrum was measured using a FTIR Spectrometer (model IRPrestige-21, Shimadzu; Germany) in the wavelength range of 4400–400 The swelling of CHT and CHT/BG-NPS scaffolds in mixtures of ethanol/water was determined by immersing previously weighted chitosan scaffolds in mixtures of these solvents at compositions varying from pure water to pure ethanol at room temperature, for 4 Instead of more conventional thermomechanical cyclic tests, the specimens prepared in this work were subjected to innovative hydromechanical cyclic essays. The compressive tests of the developed scaffolds were performed using a Universal tensile testing machine (Instron 4505 Universal Machine, USA). The tests were performed under compressive loading, by performing uniaxial compression, using a crosshead speed of 2 In a cyclic hydromechanical compressive test, the shape memory capability of a SMP is typically characterized by the shape fixity ratio ( The shape recovery of the BG-NPs scaffolds inside bone defects produced in the pig femurs bone was evaluated by μ-CT using a Scanco 20 equipment (Skyscan 1702, Belgium) with penentrative X-rays of 95 When bioactive bioceramics and glasses, such as Bioglass In this study BG-NPs synthesized by a sol–gel route were used in the preparation of the CHT/BG-NPs composites. The image in EDS spectra and SEM micrographs of CHT/BG-NPs scaffolds soaked in SBF for 0, 3 and 7 days are presented in EDS analysis of the scaffolds was performed in order to analyze changes in the surface chemical composition related to the mineralization process. The EDS results shows that the concentrations of calcium (Ca) and phosphate (P) gradually increase as the concentration of silicon (Si) decreases due to the dissolution of the BG-NPs, supporting the indication of the development of apatite, being consistent with the SEM observations ( Evolution of apatite formation was also analyzed using FTIR ( Swelling tests were used to evaluate the absorption capabilities of CHT and CHT/BG-NPs scaffolds in mixtures of a non-solvent (ethanol) and solvent (water). The combined effect of solvent and non-solvent in miscible liquid pairs is expected to be rather useful to control the swelling ratio within polymer networks. Ethanol was used as a non-solvent, aiming at provide control over the scaffolds swelling capability. The water-uptake capability is an important property of the scaffold to be used as a shape memory device induced by hydration. As shown in In order to study the CHT/BG-NPs as device with shape memory ability with hydration as a stimulus, using dehydration to fix the temporary shape and hydration to recovery the permanent shape, the mechanical properties and the shape memory capability of both CHT and CHT/BG-NPs scaffolds were performed for the scaffolds immersed in different mixtures of water/ethanol. The CHT scaffolds were used as a control to analyze how the BG-NPs affect the mechanical properties of the composite. The Young's modulus ( The higher value of The shape memory effect of CHT and CHT/BG-NPs scaffolds can be represented by hydromechanical cycles. The process across the changing between the permanent and the temporary shape can be divided in 4 steps: loading, dehydration, unloading and recovery. The cycle starts by hydrating the scaffolds followed by a compression at a constant strain rate, resulting in a continuous stress–strain curve. Afterwards the temporary shape is fixed by dehydrating the scaffold at constant compression ( The stress–strain curves were performed for CHT and CHT/BG-NPs in hydrated conditions by compression tests up to The strain–hydration curves present in the compressive cycle were obtained by hydration of the dehydrated scaffolds in mixtures of water and ethanol, varying from pure ethanol to pure water (sequence IV in  The shape fixity As an exemplification of the applicability of the shape memory effect of the scaffolds we placed a previously deformed structure in a bone defect model. A defect was produced in a fresh pig femur with a size between the permanent shape and the temporary shape of the scaffolds. The dehydrated CHT/BG-NPs scaffold in the temporary shape was placed in the empty space and These results strengthen the hypothesis that CHT/BG-NPs have potential as shape-memory bone implant materials for tissue regeneration, in which the scaffolds can be introduced with smaller volumes in bone defect, thus requiring less invasive procedures. CHT/BG-NPs composite scaffolds were fabricated and studied for possible application as shape-memory bone implantable materials for tissue regeneration. Upon immersion in SBF the composite scaffolds were able to promote the deposition of an apatite layer, evidencing an osteoconductive potential. The introduction of BG-NPs in the chitosan matrix increased the stiffness of the scaffolds. Both CHT and CHT/BG-NPs exhibit good shape memory properties. For a maximum strain of 30% the recovery of the original shape was 87.5% for CHT and 89.9% for CHT/BG-NPs; the fixation of the deformation shape was 97.2% for CHT and 98.2% for CHT/BG-NPs. CTH/BG-NPs exhibit better shape memory properties than CHT. It was shown that the BG-NPs act as reinforcing fillers. Consequently, shape memory properties were significantly increased with the addition of the nanoparticles. Shape memory capability allows a better fixation and geometrical accommodation of the scaffold in bone defects. These results suggest that by combining chitosan with BG-NPs, we ally the mineralization induced by the BG-NPs with the shape memory capability of the chitosan biopolymer, producing a nanocomposite with potential applications in bone tissue engineering. This work was supported by the Portuguese Foundation for