A highly uncertain future due to changes in climate, technology and socio-economics has led to the realisation that identification of “best-guess” future conditions might no longer be appropriate. Instead, multiple plausible futures need to be considered, which requires (i) uncertainties to be described with the aid of scenarios that represent coherent future pathways based on different sets of assumptions, (ii) system performance to be represented by metrics that measure insensitivity (i.e. robustness) to changes in future conditions, and (iii) adaptive strategies to be considered alongside their more commonly used static counterparts. However, while these factors have been considered in isolation previously, there has been a lack of discussion of the way they are connected. In order to address this shortcoming, this paper presents a multidisciplinary perspective on how the above factors fit together to facilitate the development of strategies that are best suited to dealing with a deeply uncertain future.Uncertainty has been considered extensively in the context of environmental and hydrological models for many years ( Thinking about future uncertainty in terms of While each of these elements (i.e. thinking of future uncertainty as being represented by In order to address this shortcoming, the primary objective of this paper is to provide a multidisciplinary perspective on how the concepts of an A fundamental purpose of modelling is to help understand the future, to support planning or adaptation. We focus here on quantitative models defined by a model structure and a set of parameter values. The model is applied to input data in order to obtain estimates of future system states. The models therefore have some temporal element (even if they do not generate time series), and are usually spatially situated (even if they are not spatially distributed). The quantitative model is usually linked with an underlying qualitative conceptual model ( The need to address uncertainty in modelling and the existence of different types of uncertainties is widely recognised. Uncertainties are generally differentiated according to their different levels, nature, and source ( In the end, it is the action that matters, rather than the motivation. In terms of modelling the future, we consider that the actions addressing all these differences in types of uncertainty boil down to three complementary paradigms of how modellers conceptualise the future. These paradigms are defined based on sharp changes in mindset that occur when transitioning between them. The same problem can often be approached with any of the three paradigms, regardless of the inherent type of uncertainty. At the same time, the three paradigms are also usually used in combination, addressing different parts of a problem. As described below and summarised in In the first paradigm, models are used to consolidate best available knowledge ( In the second paradigm, the future is treated as quantifiably uncertain in order to deal with system processes and conditions that are considered insufficiently well-known to be captured within models. Natural variability in inputs can be expressed as distributions ( The third paradigm explores There are different terms that can be used to encapsulate the concept of multiple plausible futures. In this paper, three of these will be discussed, including The first term encapsulating the concept of multiple plausible futures is The second term encapsulating the concept of multiple plausible futures is “ The third term considered is Arguably the most common approach to the identification of multiple plausible futures, or “states of the world” as they are referred to by  Alternatively, “what-if” scenarios, which consider the future based on what will happen if a specific event occurs, altering the likely path, are another form of predictive scenario. For example, this type of scenario could be used to predict what will happen to society if a rapid high density residential development, a slower paced low-medium density housing precinct, or a technology hub is implemented.   A well-known ‘problem-focused’ framework for the development of framed scenarios is the scenario logic approach ( In contrast to framed scenarios, Unframed scenarios are commonly developed through intake of significant information via a combination of participatory processes, expert elicitation and extensive literature review, but do not consider pre-determined drivers or outcomes of interest as the starting point, as is the case with framed scenarios. This type of exploration can be traced to the scenario analysis techniques employed by Shell (  There are also differences between the types of scenarios based on the way they are generated. As can be seen in Although predictive, explorative, and normative scenarios all consider the future, they are not equally suited to identifying multiple plausible futures. In general, forward focused approaches have a greater ability to consider alternate multiple plausible futures, as described in As   Choosing whether to frame a set of scenarios or not and then subsequently how to frame them, either on uncertain drivers or outcomes of interest, should be based on problem context. For more applied policy assessment, framing on outcomes may provide a more effective scenario development process. However, if the exploration and understanding of future uncertainty is of more significance, framing based on drivers or the use of unframed scenarios can provide a better platform for identifying multiple plausible futures. There are also instances when increased exploration is not necessarily of benefit to the scenario and overall decision support process. These situations may relate to physical constraints, and as such, applying constraints to the scenario frames or developing predictive scenarios may be more appropriate. For In summary, the degree of exploration required is dependent on the system state, and the degree it is impacted by multiple plausible futures. This affects the type of scenario deemed appropriate to scope future changes, and there may be an emphasis on scoping or decision making influencing the choice between forward and inverse looking approaches. These scenarios, once conceived, are then used to assist in model-based decision support, allowing for a conceptualisation of the variability in system state, and as such, what future conditions developed strategies, designs or plans could be exposed to. The aim of model-based decision support in the face of multiple plausible futures is to assist with the development of strategies, designs or plans (referred to as strategies hereafter) that perform adequately, irrespective of which of these futures actually occurs. This results in The first is a The second is an It should be noted that as part of the static approach, the fixed, individual strategies are designed to be robust, so that the adequacy of their performance is insensitive to which future conditions occur. In contrast, as part of the adaptive approach, The robustness of The plausible states used in the calculation of the former measure can be identified using some of the techniques for scenario development discussed in Section Whether a Adoption of a static approach featuring a single, fixed strategy that is robust under as many plausible future conditions as possible is not preferable when the level of uncertainty over the planning horizon is high. This is because static strategies that have to cater to a wider range of conditions have to be more conservative, which is likely to incur high economic, social and/or environmental costs. In addition, as it is not possible to conceive of all plausible futures at the beginning of the planning period for highly uncertainty systems, static strategies designed to be robust under a certain set of future conditions might still fail if the future unfolds in a direction that was not considered. The If the time it takes to implement a solution is long relative to the rate of change of the system, the implementation of a single, static strategy that performs well under a range of plausible futures is likely to be a better option, as adaptation might not be able to be achieved sufficiently quickly to avoid system failure. In contrast, if the time required for the system to adapt is short relative to the rate of change the adaptation is designed to respond to, an adaptive approach is likely to be an attractive option. While As with any other application of modelling, the treatment of multiple plausible futures is influenced by purpose and context and should be fit for purpose ( A second common requirement is the need to be open to qualitative input into an otherwise model-driven analysis ( The breadth and depth of a model's scope can vary significantly. For more exploratory methods ( Model requirements can vary even for a given model scope, depending on the approach used. Exploratory contexts often benefit from more qualitative information and a greater level of participation from a wide range of relevant stakeholders or domain experts. Where quantitative techniques are used to computationally explore a broad range of futures, the emphasis is on fast models that satisfy specific policy-relevant accuracy requirements ( The need to deal with an uncertain future as a result of changes in climate, technology, socio-economic conditions and politics has led to the realisation that traditional methods of dealing with uncertainty that are based on probability distributions surrounding a “best-guess” of the future are unlikely to be appropriate. This has precipitated the development of a number of concepts that consider multiple plausible futures, such as deep uncertainty, global uncertainty and VUCA, highlighting the independent evolution of thinking about this emerging and important topic in different disciplinary areas. The characterisation of uncertainty in terms of multiple plausible futures has flow-on effects in terms of: The way uncertainty is quantified: Rather than just sampling from probability distributions, different plausible future pathways are represented as scenarios that generally represent coherent storylines that are based on particular assumptions. The way system performance is measured: Rather than representing performance in terms of the probability of violating specific values related to a “best-guess” future, it is represented in terms of the robustness (insensitivity) of performance to a range of plausible futures. The way strategies or designs are developed: Rather than only considering single, static strategies or designs, the use of multiple, adaptive strategies might provide an attractive alternative, depending on the attributes of the problem under consideration. While a good understanding of the linkages between the above factors is vitally important when dealing with a highly uncertain future, so is a good understanding of the categorisation of the individual methods that can be used within each category. To this extent, this paper provides perspectives on how: Consideration of multiple plausible futures is one of a number of complementary paradigms for considering an uncertain future. Deep uncertainty is one of a number of terms used to encapsulate the concept of multiple plausible futures. Different types of scenarios have different degrees of suitability for exploring multiple plausible futures. Different criteria that determine whether static or adaptive strategies are preferred and how they can be in conflict with one another. In conclusion, we hope that the articulation of (i) different paradigms for representing an uncertain future, (ii) different terms that can be used to encapsulate multiple plausible futures, (iii) different types of scenarios and the role they play in quantifying an uncertain future, (iv) different approaches to developing robust strategies and the criteria that favour one over the other and (v) different issues to consider when developing models when dealing with multiple plausible futures presented in this paper will be useful for researchers and practitioners as they endeavour to develop robust strategies in the face of a highly uncertain future. The authors from the University of Adelaide gratefully acknowledge financial support from the