In this study, we aim to investigate the possibility of the manipulation of an aromatic ring current and magnetic moment induced by spin angular momentum (SAM) and orbital angular momentum (OAM) carrying light by changing the frequency of the light beam. In the study, the possibility of transitions and the contribution of the excited states into the induced current have been investigated by analyzing the angular band structure. The induced current density has been obtained by using time-dependent perturbation theory and calculations have been performed in Cartesian coordinate. The induced magnetic field is calculated by using the well-known Biot-Savart law. The result confirms the possibility of controlling the spin direction of a magnetic atom which can be located at the center of the ring-shaped molecule.Quantum control of an electron motion The light is able to carry OAM as well as SAM For the application of OAM or SAM carrying light, the most suitable geometry of the structure is ring shape and circular symmetry. An electron moving freely in the ring-shaped molecule can have net circulation in the case of OAM or SAM transfer by the laser beam. The electronic structure and ring currents of some molecules and particularly ring-shaped molecules have been intensively studied The main aim of this study is the theoretical investigation of the ring current and magnetic moment (induced by OAM or SAM transfering) analyzing the angular band structure of ring-shaped benzene molecules which is introduced in this study. Furthermore, we focus on the ring current that resulted from high-frequency transitions while previous studies investigated the ring currents induced by HOMO-LUMO transitions. We also introduce the ring currents induced by the transfer of OAM of the twisted light into the nanoscale ring shaped molecules. By SAM carrying light, the free electrons in the system can be caused to jump into the excited states, and angular momentum of the light can be transferred to the electron. When electrons are excited into a specific state which has a net magnetic quantum number, electrons have a net circulation leading to the net ring current. This induced ring current results in an explicit magnetic moment. The magnitude and direction of the current and magnetic field can be changed by applying the variation of the frequency of the light. Previous studies on ring-shaped molecules have focused on the HOMO-LUMO transitions and related induced current Another aim of the study is the investigation of the possibility of tuning the magnitude and direction of the current by changing the OAM of the light. The twisted light due to the non-homogeneous spatial distribution and carrying orbital angular momentum can contribute to the manipulation of the current in a molecule. We will introduce the induced current in a benzene molecule by a highly focused twisted light and we will reveal the possibility of tuning the direction of current by circular polarized light and twisted light. In this study, we will first introduce a numerical technique to reveal the electronic structure of the molecule. Than we mention the laser beam structure. After that, we will introduce the calculation technique for obtaining induced electric and magnetic field. Finally, we will discuss the results for the benzene molecule. The benzene molecule has an electronic structure which is calculated by performing Gaussian 09. For optimized structure of the benzene molecule, we have used the density functional theory (DFT) with hybrid B3PW91 functional in conjunction with the 6-31(d)G basis set to obtain electronic structure. The total wavefunction for each state is formed by combining basis sets and using numerical technique. Twisted light carrying OAM has the vector potential with a radial dependence which is The current density can be written as For Substituting the coefficient The induced magnetic field can be calculated by using the Biot-Savart law as The induced current density and induced magnetic field are dependent on the frequency of light and perturbation term As a traditional method, an induced current in a ring can be represented by a magnetic moment with a perpendicular direction to the ring plane. A measurement on a magnetic moment of a system is the best way to determine the ring current. However, information about the current density in a system can also allow us to analyze the contribution of the local regions in the system. In our calculations, the current density has been obtained for different frequencies of the circularly polarized light beam and twisted light. In the case of circularly polarized light, electric field strength  For the case of Looking As can be seen from the current density figures, in the case of circular polarization the magnitude or direction of the current can change with the variation of frequency. Twisted light is a structured beam and has an OAM. The analytical form of the twisted light has been shown in Eqs.     As seen in In this work, the angular electronic band structure of the ring shaped benzene molecule was introduced to reveal the relationship between the light induced ring currents and the high frequency dependent electronic transitions. For chemists, information on the light induced current density leads to understanding the electron motion in aromatic molecules in the case of exposing to the electromagnetic field. Furthermore, the studies on photo-induced current density in aromatic molecules are quite important for analysis and manipulation of ultrafast photoinduced reactions. Unlike earlier works, we dealt with the transitions which are out of the range of the HOMO-LUMO excitations. The effect of OAM carrying light on the ring current in a small molecule has been introduced and calculated for the first time. We investigated the possibility of tuning the magnitude and direction of the induced current and induced magnetic moment by varying the frequency of the light carrying OAM or SAM. In our calculations, two extreme points, which are the small beam waist and the high frequency of light, are very important. In the case of UV-vis range, transition can be observed between HOMO and LUMO states, but in order to see the different situations, we studied what happens out of this range. On the other hand, in the case of large molecules or clusters, the change in induced current direction can be observed in UV-vis range. Based on our knowledge, the effect of laser field in high frequency with OAM This work was supported by