This paper studies the dynamic behavior of advanced ceramics by a finite element model. It implements the direct simulation of fracture and fragmentation together with a mixed-mode cohesive law to describe the fracture process. In particular, we simulate dynamic Brazilian tests performed with a Hopkinson bar, at strain rates ranging from 65 to 89 s−1, on six different materials: three kinds of alumina with different average grain sizes and degrees of purity, a blend of alumina and zirconia, silicon carbide and boron carbide. The rate dependence of the results emerges explicitly from the calculations, thanks both to the inertia attendant to the fracture process, and to the time effect provided by the cohesive law. Indeed, the simulations give accurate values for the dynamic strength of the six ceramics under study. The simulations also predict the main features of the crack pattern.Advanced ceramics are widely used as ballistic armors due to their excellent stiffness to weight and resistance to weight ratios. Another appealing property of advanced ceramics is their capacity for dissipating energy by fracture and friction when they are comminuted by the impact of a projectile. Thus, the dynamic mechanical response of these materials is especially important to grant the required level of protection to an armor. This is why some of the scientific research in this field has focused on the determination of their dynamic properties and the development of accurate constitutive models and failure criteria at high strain rates. As with other quasi-brittle materials, advanced ceramics perform very well under compression, but their tensile strength is low, approximately one order of magnitude below the compressive strength. Hence most times failure takes place when the tensile strength is reached, rendering it an essential property in the modelization of these materials. Several different tests have been proposed to measure the tensile strength of ceramics and it has been found that it grows with the strain rate under every experimental configuration. In particular, the diametral compression test or Brazilian test performed by means of a Hopkinson bar is seen by some experimentalists as a convenient set up giving reliable measurements. Gálvez, Rodrı́guez, Sánchez-Gálvez and Navarro are a case in hand. They recently carried out a series of dynamic Brazilian tests on several advanced ceramics to show the feasibility of this experimental method to get the tensile strength at high strain rates Here we use their results to validate a model that was originally applied to concrete undergoing the same test conditions Cohesive models are suitable for simulating cracking processes in advanced ceramics, since these materials, in spite of their relative small grain size, develop long fracture process zones––of the order of millimeters, depending on the microstructure and geometry of the specimen––due to the bridging and interlocking of the grains in the wake of the crack Another interesting feature of our finite element model is the explicit treatment of fracture and fragmentation The simulations in this paper give a good prediction of the tensile strength for each material and come out with crack patterns very similar to the actual ones observed in the experiments. The model predicts the formation of a principal crack that nucleates in the center of the specimen and grows towards the bearing areas, as well as some secondary cracking parallel to the main crack and near to the loading areas. The paper is organized as follows: a brief account of the main assumptions of the model and of its finite element implementation is given next. For completeness and posterior reference, in this section we summarize the main features of the cohesive law used in the calculations. An extensive account of the theory and its finite element implementation may be found elsewhere A simple class of mixed-mode cohesive laws accounting for tension–shear coupling (see Camacho and Ortiz Cohesive theories introduce a well-defined length scale into the material description and, in consequence, are sensitive to the size of the specimen (see, e.g. Ref. In calculations, we allow for decohesion to occur along element boundaries only. Initially, all element boundaries are perfectly coherent and the elements conform in the usual sense of the displacement finite element method. When the critical cohesive traction is attained at the interface between two volume elements, we proceed to insert a cohesive element at that location. The cohesive element subsequently governs the opening of the cohesive surface. Details of the finite element implementation may be found elsewhere The simulations in this paper refer to experiments reported by Rodrı́guez et al. The Hopkinson bar consists of an incident bar and a transmitter bar, with a short specimen placed between them and a striker bar that produces an impact on the incident bar to generate a longitudinal compressive pulse that propagates toward the specimen ( The strain records of the incident, reflected and transmitted pulses are used to calculate the corresponding stress pulses and the tensile stress in the loading plane, which derives from the following equation: The experimental set-up was completed with a high speed photography system which was synchronized with the mechanical pulses so as to obtain several shots during the fracture process. The specimens are cylinders whose diameter and thickness are 8 and 4 mm respectively. The authors of the experimental program tested up to six different materials: three kinds of alumina with 94%, 98% and 99% degree of purity (which from now on are referred to as A94, A98 and A99), a combination of alumina plus zirconia (AZR), SiC and B  In order to avoid plastic deformation in the bars, the specimens were stricken through alumina cubes whose edges were on average 6 mm long. There were some tests in which the cubes together with the specimen broke, but these were not considered valid. By measuring the imprints left in these cubes by the cylinders after the tests, it was determined that the width of the loading area varied from 5% to 10% of the diameter length. Nevertheless, in the simulations we opted for a bearing width of 16% of the diameter in order to avoid spurious fragmentation near the supports. Rocco et al. In order to make the simulations in 3D computationally efficient, we take a slice of 1/3 mm, which is 1/12 of the real thickness of the specimen, and impose plane strain boundary conditions. Nevertheless, for SiC we have ℓ It should be carefully noted that, unlike other brittle or quasi-brittle materials like concrete, for the advanced ceramics we are dealing with here the characteristic length is of two orders of magnitude above the average grain size (see Selected results of the calculations and comparisons with experimental data are presented in The dynamic tensile strength and corresponding strain rate emerging from the simulations, together with the experimental results (mean value and standard deviation), are presented in The precision in the calculation of the peak transmitted load and, by extension, of the dynamic strength, Eq. It bears emphasis that these features of the dynamic behavior of advanced ceramics are The aforementioned lack of change in the micromechanisms of fracture is in apparent contradiction with experimental findings by Kobayashi As regards the reported standard deviations in The predicted sequence of crack patterns closely follows the experimental patterns observed by means of a high speed photography system Remarkably, both the experimental observation and the numerical solution exhibit a main crack on the midplane of the specimen which initiates near the center of the cylinder and subsequently propagates towards the bearing areas, eventually causing the specimen to split into two main fragments. This through-crack is clearly seen in the snapshots in In keeping with experimental observation,  It should be noted that the experimental scattering makes it difficult to compare our results with experimental transmitted load curves even for nominally identical specimens. Nevertheless, we choose an artifact to do so here, consisting of plotting an experimental curve after multiplying both records ( It is interesting to note that the time required for elastic pressure waves to travel trough the diameter of the cylinder is of the order of 0.7 μs (approximately 1 in dimensionless time units). In view of the smoothness of the rising part of the transmitted load history, it would appear that the number of reverberations which take place during the ramp-up time of the loading pulse is sufficient to establish a rather uniform state of deformation within the specimen. It follows as a corollary that the waviness of the softening part of the load history curve is due to fracture processes rather than to wave effects. Furthermore, the absence of significant wave effects justifies the use of the test data for purposes of inferring constitutive properties of the material. The comparison between load histories, experimental and numerical, displays graphically the good prediction of the dynamic tensile strength and of the strain rate, since both curves show the same maximum value and linear ramp-up slopes. The agreement is not as good when it comes to the time at which the peak takes place, which could be attributed to the imperfect simulation of the local conditions at the supports. It is also evident that the post-peak behavior is rather sharp in the simulations. Indeed, the experimental curve unloads at 15 Regarding the cohesive energy curve, its S-shaped curve responds to the way in which the fracture process of the specimen takes place. The softening part of the load curve corresponds to a great increase in the cohesive energy consumption caused by microcracking. It starts in the bearing areas and extends along planes parallel to the midplane, which leads to the formation of a columnar pattern of cracks that is characteristic in splitting tests As regards the extension of microcracking in dynamic Brazilian tests, it has been noted We used cohesive theories of fracture, in conjunction with the direct simulation of fracture and fragmentation, to describe processes of tensile damage and compressive crushing in advanced ceramics subjected to dynamic loading. Indeed, cohesive models are suitable for simulating cracking processes in advanced ceramics, since these materials develop long fracture process zones––two or three orders of magnitude longer than the average grain size––due to the bridging and interlocking of the grains in the wake of the crack, and these process zones constitute the main energy dissipation mechanism for this kind of materials. The configuration contemplated in this study is the Brazilian cylinder test performed in a Hopkinson bar, which has been proposed as a convenient and reliable experimental method to obtain the dynamic tensile strength of these materials. Our approach accounts explicitly for the development of macroscopic cracks, and uses a mixed-mode cohesive law to control the fragmentation process. The effective dynamic behavior of six different types of advanced ceramics is predicted as an outcome of the calculations. In particular, our simulations capture closely the experimentally observed rate-sensitivity of the dynamic strength of advanced ceramics, i.e., the increase in dynamic strength with strain-rate. The model also predicts key features of the fracture pattern such as the primary cracks in the load plane, as well as the secondary profuse cracking near the supports and along planes parallel to the load plane. We have assumed that the cohesive properties of the material are rate-independent and therefore determined by static properties such as the static tensile strength. However, we have noted that cohesive theories, in addition to building a characteristic length into the material description, endow the material with an intrinsic time scale as well. This intrinsic time scale accounts for the ability of the model to predict key aspects of the dynamic behavior of advanced ceramics, such as the strain-rate sensitivity of the tensile strength. Our results suggest, therefore, that most of the strain-sensitivity of advanced ceramics is attributable to the microinertia attendant to dynamic microcracking and fracture. We are indebted to Prof. Michael Ortiz for providing us with access to his numerical codes at the Graduate Aeronautical Laboratories, California Institute of Technology, as well as for his advice during the development of this work. We are also thankful to Dr. Francisco Gálvez and Prof. Jesús Rodrı́guez for providing us with some records of their tests and insights into their excellent experimental work. Rena C. Yu and Gonzalo Ruiz thank the