In an effort to facilitate the utilization of giant magnetostrictive thin films in microdevices, application-related properties of these thin films, which include induced anisotropy, residual stress and corrosion properties, are investigated. A large induced anisotropy with an energy of 6×104
                     J/m3 is formed in field-sputtered amorphous Sm–Fe–B thin films, resulting in a large magnetostriction anisotropy. Two components of residual stress, intrinsic compressive stress and tensile stress due to the difference of the thermal expansion coefficients between the substrate and thin film, are identified. The variation of residual stress with fabrication parameter and annealing temperature, and its influence on mechanical bending and magnetic properties are examined. Better corrosion properties are observed in Sm–Fe thin films than in Tb–Fe. Corrosion properties of Tb–Fe thin films, however, are much improved with the introduction of nitrogen to the thin films without deteriorating magnetostrictive properties.Giant magnetostrictive Tb–Fe and Sm–Fe thin films possess excellent intrinsic properties as driving materials in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). Some important characteristics include a large output force (20 times greater than conventional piezoceramics) and a fast response time. One most serious problem, however, was the inability to achieve giant magnetostriction at a low magnetic field, due to very large magnetocrystalline anisotropy. This problem has been much relieved, if not solved, through systematic research efforts in the last several years Magnetostriction is frequently characterized by the quantity Stress is a source of magnetoelastic anisotropy by coupling to magnetostriction. This anisotropy term is expected to be large in these thin films due to their large (giant) magnetostriction. This indicates that magnetic properties of these thin films are very sensitive to the type and magnitude of stress. In addition to magnetic properties, mechanical properties are also affected by stress. One notable example is bending. The magnitude of bending is expected to be small in an ordinary thin film with thick substrate. This is not the case, however, for microstructures such as microcantilevers where the substrate is usually very thin, being comparable to the thickness of the film itself. This bending of microstructures is usually harmful to device fabrication, the process of which normally consists of a sequence of coatings and etchings. Corrosion can be a concern during the application of giant magnetostrictive Tb–Fe and Sm–Fe thin films, since the thin films contain a corrosive rare earth (R) element as one of the constituent elements. It is, therefore, of significant practical importance to examine the corrosion properties of these thin films. Thin films of both Tb−Fe (positive magnetostriction) and Sm−Fe (negative magnetostriction)-based alloys were coated onto Si substrates by rf magnetron sputtering. A composite target, which consists of an Fe disc or Fe−B disc (4 Systematic experiments of both field-sputtering and field-annealing were carried out for amorphous Tb–Fe and Sm–Fe-based thin films in order to form induced anisotropy. No anisotropy was induced for Tb–Fe-based thin films, possibly due to their low Curie temperature (∼400 From a systematic investigation on the stress state in as-deposited thin films and its variation with annealing, two stress components are identified. One is “intrinsic” compressive stress, the formation of which is related to the sputtering process itself In Sm–Fe-based thin films, compressive stress exists in the as-deposited state, indicating that the intrinsic compressive stress component is greater than the tensile one. The opposite is true in the case of Tb–Fe-based thin films. The annealing temperature dependences of residual stress, mechanical bending, and magnetic and magnetostrictive properties indicate that the compressive stress is more easily removed by annealing than the tensile stress. The results for the annealing temperature dependence of residual stress are shown in In order to examine the corrosion properties of the present thin films, they were placed in a fixed temperature (70°C) and humidity (90%) chamber. The results of the change in M SHL thanks Research Center for Advanced Magnetic Materials (an ERC at Chungnam National University) for its financial support to this work. The authors wish to thank Drs. Y.S. Choi (Hankook Core, Korea), J.M. Jung (Samsung Electro-mechanics, Korea), and T. Shima (Tohoku University, Japan) for their help in experiments.