Air bubbles of uniform size (ca. 1 mm diameter) were generated at a submerged orifice (glass capillary) under controlled frequency (down to ca. 0.06 s−1) in aqueous solutions of frother (Dowfroth 250). The bubbles were sized with an imaging technique. One objective was to establish whether the Tate equation (static balance between buoyancy and capillary forces) could be used as a standard sizing calibration method. Another aim was to verify whether with decreasing surface tension (due to increasing frother concentration) the anticipated decrease in bubble size agreed with the equation prediction. An effect of frother was detected compatible with the role of surface tension but divided into two concentration regions, seemingly the result of a gradual change in bubble shape and wetting: >6 ppm the bubble holds a spherical shape and the capillary appeared to be completely wetted while at ≤6 ppm a degree of non-wetting and bubble distortion (neck formation just prior to detachment) were apparent, supported by qualitative observations. In addition, at >6 ppm the Tate value was only approached by decreasing the bubble frequency but not attained. Plausible causes for the failure to reach the predicted size are discussed.Addition of frother to control bubble size is almost universally practiced in flotation. The mechanism is through control of coalescence. The significance of coalescence is illustrated by noting that the size of bubble produced in the single bubbling regime ( A common starting point in the analysis of factors affecting bubble size is to consider a single orifice and the predicted bubble volume at detachment ( Assuming the bubble is a sphere (typically when bubble diameter < The equation has been studied on several occasions in the case of water only assuming: (1) perfect wetting—the bubble does not spread over the tip (i.e., the equilibrium contact angle (  There are some verification tests reported using surfactants of interest in flotation. To test the Tate model it is important to control the generation frequency and establish the critical frequency (if one exists) for Eq. A second requirement is an accurate measurement of bubble size. The simplest would seem to be a photographic (imaging) method. However, sizing bubbles from images is not trivial. Blanchard and Syzdek used the displaced-mass method while Lin et al. used the displaced-volume method which becomes cumbersome at low In this paper spherical air bubbles (ca. 1 mm) were generated using an accurate way to control bubble frequency (down to 0.06 s To produce a steady stream of uni-sized bubbles by applying a low airflow rate to a capillary tube the essential requirement is to sustain a low constant air pressure. To cause flow, the pressure should exceed both the static water (pressure) head on the capillary tip and the slight pressure loss (due to friction) as the air flows through the supply line. This can be achieved by pressurizing an airtight reservoir with a water column (e.g., To illustrate, using the set-up of A more robust method was successfully tested. The approach consisted of placing a “micro-orifice” between the capillary tube and the outlet of a commercially available high precision pressure regulator to increase the friction (pressure drop) in the air supply line, as illustrated in The inlet of the pressure regulator (A) (Fairchild model 10232) was connected to a 600-kPa pressure-regulated line and the outlet pressure was measured with the gage (B) (range: 0–276 kPa (0–40 psi) and resolution: 6.9 kPa (1 psi)). The pressure regulator was connected to the cylindrical housing chamber (C) (built in-house) in which micro-orifices (glass capillary tubes 150 mm long and 3 mm O.D.) of various internal diameters (typically between 16 and 100 μm) could be placed individually. The frequency was obtained by averaging departing periods (1 The viewing chamber (D) was set to Greyscale digital images (1000 A circular mask with radius The small The images were thresholded at half the grey scale using an image analysis software package (Northern Eclipse 6.0). A macro sequence (program) was created using the software built-in functions to determine automatically the major ( In the preceding study, measurements from the images were compared with standard bubble sizes (0.7 mm Not less than 10 images were analyzed to attain a constant standard deviation (i.e., independent of the number of sized bubbles). The standard deviation was 1 μm (i.e., the observed uncertainty was approx. 10% of the least count) Glass capillaries (150 mm long and 3 mm O.D.) were cut using a scoring/snapping technique. High pressure air was blown through to remove any debris. The orifice was inspected under both an optical microscope for cleanliness, and a variable pressure scanning electron microscope (VPSEM) for circularity and was sized (if passed). (The VPSEM allowed direct examination without altering the surface of the glass capillary by coating with a conductive material ( Surface tension was measured using the Du Nouy Ring and Wilhelmy Plate methods (Kruss K12 Tensiometer (resolution Prior to performing a bubble sizing test, three samples of the solution were taken directly from a sampling port located at the bottom of the viewing chamber. For each sample, the surface tension was determined and an average was calculated (standard deviation To confirm the reliability of the bubble generation method, frequency vs. regulator pressure curves were produced at intervals over the experimentation period. As shown in The impact of concentration and bubble frequency on bubble size is given in Overall, it is evident that bubble size decreases with frother addition (due to reducing surface tension) but the impact is relatively small (approx. a 3% variation between 0 and 50 ppm). On closer inspection, the results appear to divide into two groups: (1) frother concentration > Likewise, the impact of frequency divides in the two groups. In the first (> Overestimated values in the presence of surfactant and underestimated values in water only agree with observations reported by others. In addition, Blanchard and Syzdek noted the deviation reduced with decreasing distortion (i.e., smaller bubbles), and Also possible is that at low frother concentration (< Accepting there is a time-dependency on bubble formation described by Eq. A decrease in There are two qualitative observations which add evidence that wetting improves when frother is added: (1) occasionally bubbles would stick to the window of the (inclined) viewing chamber in water only but this was not a problem with frother solutions. The water film on the bubble stabilized by frother may play a role in the improved sliding that was observed; (2) during a period of one week bubbles were produced uninterruptedly at The consistency of the data suggests the technique could be used to study wetting. If a surfactant is introduced that adsorbs on the capillary to give a marked de-wetting effect the bubble will tend to spread to the outer edge of the tip, producing bubbles larger than predicted for complete wetting ( Using a novel combination of controlled bubble generation frequency (down to 1 bubble every 15 s was achieved) and precise bubble size measurements (standard deviation The authors would like to thank Kevin Robertson for help in operation of the VPSEM. Funding for this work is under the Collaborative Research and Development program of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, initially (1996) sponsored by Inco, Falconbridge, Teck-Cominco and Noranda and now including COREM (2001) and SGS Lakefield Research (2003), and since 2001 by the North American partners in the Amira P9 project. A scholarship to Jose R. Hernandez-Aguilar from the National Council for Science and Technology of Mexico (CONACYT) is also gratefully acknowledged.