The paper describes the effect of cold deformation on the stability of L12 structured hypostoichiometric Ni76Al24(B) alloy. During cold rolling, the order parameter decreases with the degree of deformation. After 85% cold rolling, the material transforms to DO22 structure from its initial L12 structure. The lattice parameters are measured as a
                     =3.567Å and c
                     =7.188Å having a c/a ratio of ∼2.015. After annealing, the metastable structure transforms back to its original L12 structure. The DO22 structure can be derived from the L12 structure by local rearrangement of the Ni atoms as antisites. The activation energy of the reverse transformation is similar to that for the diffusion of Ni atoms in Ni3Al.The intermetallic compound Ni In the present study, the effect of cold rolling on the ordered structure and ordering behaviour of boron-doped Ni The alloy used in this study is an off-stoichiometric one having nominal composition of Ni–24Al–0.24B (at.%). The alloy was homogenized at 1000 Later, samples were cut from the rolled strips and used for DSC. A Stanton Redcroft DSC 1500 was used. It consisted of a cell base module and the CPC 706 programmer recorder. In this experiment, platinum was used as reference material. Samples from 25%, 45% and 85% cold rolled sheets of mass about 46.8 The initial material is well-homogenized L1 The XRD line profiles for different degrees of cold work are shown in The relative intensities and the peak positions of the X-ray line profiles of the 85% cold rolled sample have been listed in Cold working leads to progressive decrease in long-range order parameter by introducing defects, which are nothing but point defects, anti-site defects, line defects (dislocations) and planar defects (stacking faults and APBs) L1 The indices and the relative intensities of reflections for the DO The XRD line profiles show that as the degree of cold rolling increases from 45% to 65%, there is a marked broadening of all the lines and there is a marked shift of the peaks towards lower 2 The SAD pattern taken from a thin foil of the 45% cold rolled ( Line broadening, a strain parameter, was measured from (111) peak width at half maxima and it shows a sudden drop after 45% cold rolling ( As shown in It has been reported by Sato and Toth In DO More information on this transformation is obtained from DSC work. In order to separate out the reactions occurring during heating in this alloy, two separate DSC runs were carried out under identical conditions. In the first run, high purity annealed platinum discs were placed in both sample and reference pans and in the second run the platinum disc in the sample pan was replaced by a piece of the cold worked Ni The plot of order parameter ( The profile of peak C was not so sharp in comparison to that of peaks A and B. This indicates a variable spectrum of transformation sites in the material after deformation. This conforms that as L1 To assess the activation energy associated with the transformation peak A is analyzed and the corrected thermograms due to peak A are shown in The activation energy can be determined by an integral technique If the temperatures at which the same volume fraction, The values of log The total heat effect of 56.77 It has been found that in Cu The stored energy observed in the present case is quite high compared to pure metals and alloys. Even the value is quite large compared to other intermetallics compounds Terry and Smallman Hypostoichiometric Ni The authors are grateful to Mr. V. Kumar and Mr. Uma Shankar for their help during experiments. One of the authors (SGC) wishes to thank Prof. S.P. Mehrotra, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur for his encouragement and kind permission to publish this paper.