The fragmentation behaviour of a thin brittle coating attached to a ductile substrate subjected to equibiaxial quasi-static in-plane tension is studied. The experimentally observed cracking patterns are related to repetitively branching coating cracks. The fragmentation process is modelled by the rate equation approach. It is established that fragmentation by branching cracks leads to a qualitatively different fragment distribution compared to binary fragmentation. The fragmentation model is applied to identify crack branching and coating/substrate stress transfer parameters.Fragmentation is an irreversible dynamic phenomenon that occurs in a number of mechanical processes involving brittle homogeneous solids, such as comminution, impact, explosion, etc. The fragment distribution upon impact or other quasi-instantaneous fragmentation events is typically given by a power function, at least at the small fragment limit In heterogeneous solids consisting of a relatively brittle and relatively ductile component (e.g. brittle fibre reinforced ductile matrix composites, coating/substrate systems) with good adhesion ensuring efficient stress transfer, fragmentation of the brittle phase by repeated cracking can take place under much more benign conditions of quasi-static mechanical loading, temperature variation, or desiccation. The fragment distribution features here are governed mainly by two factors, the ratio of the characteristic fragment length to the stress recovery distance Extrinsic factors such as load level The present study is aimed at elucidation of the effect of a non-binary fragmentation process on coating fragment distribution. Methods to produce nanocomposite materials with controlled particle size in the sub-micrometre range, based on the fragmentation of thin layers, have been described in recent years For ceramics, typical materials of hard brittle coatings, strength scatter is thought to result from the presence of microcracks of different length in a material with deterministic toughness The rate equation approach is an efficient tool for the description of continuous fragmentation process The material investigated was a 12 μm thick biaxially stretched poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) film coated by physical vapor deposition (PVD) with a 100 nm thick silicon oxide (SiO Fragmentation tests under equibiaxial plane stress conditions were performed at room temperature on circular specimens of diameter 50 mm previously cut from the coated film with a sharp punch. The experiments are described in detail elsewhere The mechanical behaviour of the SiO The measured mechanical response of the SiO Consider a coating fragmentation process due to coating surface defects sequentially activated by equibiaxial mechanical loading. Assuming that the break-up rate is governed primarily by the fragment area For the sake of simplicity and tractability, we consider a circular fragment of the coating attached to a substrate undergoing equibiaxial tensile deformation. The stress state of a coating fragment perfectly adhering to a biaxially strained substrate is derived by shear lag analysis in We are interested here in the advanced fragmentation stage characterized by fragment sizes comparable to or smaller than the stress transfer length. The stress distribution at We apply the two-parameter Weibull distribution for the evaluation of failure probability, The fragment break-up rate is derived, based on Eq. The coating fragmentation process in the SiO It remains to be verified if It follows from Eq. The theoretical relation for average fragment area as a function of applied strain also incorporates, apart from the coating strength and elasticity parameters, the stress transfer length However, the strain hardening coefficient calculated from The exponent of the power-law relation Eq. Upon the transition from binary cracking to fragmentation by branching cracks at about 3% strain, the SiO The authors are indebted to Lawson Mardon Packaging for supplying the film samples.