The Budapest Intercontinental Hotel across the River Danube from the Royal Palace and St Matthias Church on Castle Hill was the impressive venue for the For Mr O'Driscoll, the Budapest conference was the stage for his last appearance as Editor of ‘Industrial Minerals.’ After 16 years in the post, he has now moved on within the company to take up a new role heading a team compiling multiclient research studies and newsletters on specific topics, as well as catering for corporate training and workshops. Following Mr O'Driscoll's opening overview, the first morning's plenary session continued with keynote papers from Mr Gilles Michel (Chief Executive of Imerys) and Ms Xiaoling Liu (Chief Executive of Rio Tinto Minerals) echoing some of the same themes. In addition, Mr Michel drew attention to the low carbon footprints of most industrial minerals, compared against the high carbon footprints of plastics and aluminium. He also mentioned remarkably high figures for global recycling rates, counting all applications −54% for calcium carbonate, 55% for talc and 64% for feldspar. Ms Xiaoling spoke about the current “second wave of industrialisation” affecting a number of large countries, notably China, India and Brazil. She also highlighted the twin facts that world population growth is slowing down and that people generally are living longer. The median age of the world's population was about 25 years old in 1950; by the year 2100, the median age will be nearly 45. Urbanisation is also a key factor affecting the demand for products derived from minerals. By the year 2030, more than 5 bn people will be living in cities or conurbations. As well as promoting demand for consumer products and infrastructure, these trends also mean that people have greater expectations regarding personal and environmental health and safety, which in turn impose certain operating constraints and standards on miners and mineral processors. The fourth presentation addressing issues affecting a wide spectrum of industrial minerals was delivered by Mr Richard Shaw (of the British Geological Survey). Memorable soundbites included: “If it can't be grown, it has to be mined” and “Mineral deposits are rare concentrations in a small volume of crust that are very unevenly distributed throughout the planet.” Mr Shaw described the ongoing study commissioned by the Royal Society of Chemistry to assess the various risks to sustaining supplies of each of the commercially significant chemical elements. Dr Ian Wilson (a UK-based consultant) gave a very good overview of the world talc industry. Talc is important as a pigment and functional filler, with the key characteristics of softness and platiness. A layer of talc in a deposit is essentially a brucite sheet sandwiched between two silica sheets. The layers are held together by weak Dr Wilson also chaired one of the first conference sessions on the Wednesday morning, during which there were four presentations related to TiO Other papers presented at the Budapest conference that may be of interest to companies involved in various sectors of the pigment industry included: Mr Ottar Nakken (of Nordic Mining) discussing projects to mine anorthosite, quartz and rutile in Norway; Mr Ahmed Rasheed (of Rasheed Performance Minerals) discussing Egyptian bentonite and baryte; Ms Eileen Hao and Mr Robert Baylis (of Roskill's) discussing zircon and other raw materials for the Chinese ceramics industry; Mr Joseph Keating (of Vitro Minerals) discussing the potential for recycled glass as a functional filler; Dr Jacek Kolacz (of Comex) discussing advanced sorting technologies as a means of economically removing impurities at an early mineral processing stage; Dr Dietmar Alber (of Hosokawa Alpine) discussing the micronisation of ground calcium carbonate; and Dr Oliver Pikhard (of Rhewum) discussing the ultrafine screening of zirconia. There was also a special session on rare earths on the Thursday morning, chaired by Ms Judith Chegwidden (of Roskill's) and featuring presentations by: Mr Edwin Bentzen (of Lyntek) and Mr Vasili Nicoletopoulos (of Natural Resources GP).