Perlite is a common name for amorphous volcanic silicate/alumina rock which can be expanded when rapidly heated at 900–1200°C. Utilization occasions of perlite have made the product adjustable to abundant applications in construction, petrochemical industries, industrial, chemical and horticultural. In construction, expanded perlite (EP) can be used as a part of cement or aggregate in traditional cementitious materials or as a source material for geopolymers. EP in construction deals good thermal and sound insulation, good fire resistance and low density. Subsequently perlite seems to be a very important material. In this paper, the author reviews the effect of EP which used as a part of building material on fresh properties and hardened properties of traditional cementitious materials, geopolymers as well as other binders. Furthermore, different additives which used to improve some properties of EP matrices have been reviewed.Reduced workability Increased workability Increased workability Increased workability Increased setting time Increased setting time Increased water absorption and sorptivity Increased permeability Increased water absorption Increased apparent porosity and capillary coefficient 5% and 15% decreased apparent porosity, whilst no effect of 25% at 28 and 90-day Decreased chloride permeability Increased apparent porosity and water absorption Decreased chloride permeability and chloride migration coefficient Increased apparent porosity and sorptivity Increased porosity Increased water absorption Increased porosity Increased capillary water absorption Increased water absorption and sorptivity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased heat conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity and thermal diffusifity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Increased thermal resistance and specific heat Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased thermal conductivity Increased compressive strength Decreased density Decreased thermal conductivity Increased compressive strength Decreased water absorption and porosity Increased compressive strength Decreased water absorption and porosity Increased mechanical strength Increased compressive and flexural strength Increased tensile strength Increased splitting strength Increased modulus of elasticity Decreased compressive strength Increased indirect tensile strength Increased fracture resistance Increased thermal resistivity Increased flexural strength Increased flexural strength before and after firing Increased strength Increased sound absorption Decreased thermal conductivity Increased moisture resistance Increased compressive strength Increased compressive strength Decreased thermal conductivity Decreased density Increased compressive and flexural strength Decreased dry density Perlite is not a trade name, but a common term for naturally occurring siliceous volcanic rock. The distinguishing feature which arrangements perlite apart from other volcanic glasses is that when rapidly heated to its softening temperature which ranging between 900 Perlite ore consists mainly of SiO Already the literature has scattered abundant studies related to employing EP as a part of building material. Although, there is a good review article regarding to using perlite as building material Tükmen and Kantarci Darweesh From the above cited studies, it can be well-known that the inclusion of EP in the mixture increased its workability as reported by several studies ( Lanzón and García-Ruiz Binici and Kalyayı Sadik et al. Tükmen and Kantarci From the above cited studies in Section Abidi et al. Sadik et al. Kramar and Bindiganavile Gandage et al. Dawood Bozkut From the above cited studies in Section Some studies Tükmen and Kantarci From the above cited studies in this section, it can be noted that this item still needs more studies. Thus, the effect of EP on the different types of shrinkages of mortar and concrete can be considered as main topics for future studies. However, according to the available studies it can be concluded that the inclusion of EP in the matrix as a part of aggregate reduced autogenous shrinkage and drying shrinkage. Lanzón and García-Ruiz Khonsari et al. From the above cited studies in this section, it can be well-known that the inclusion of ground EP as a part of cement decreased the porosity resulting of its pozzolanic reaction. This reaction can convert Ca(OH) Lanzón and García-Ruiz From the above cited studies in this section, it can be well-known that there is a shortage in the number of studies related to the effect of EP aggregate on the chemical resistance of mortar/concrete. Really, the chemical resistance of mortar/concrete with including EP aggregate still needs more investigations. Thus, this point can be used as major topics for future studies. However, according to the available studies, mortars containing EP aggregate can resist sodium sulfate attack, but cannot resist hydrochloric acid. On the same line, the effect of ground EP on ASR expansion of mortar/concrete still needs more investigations. However, according to the available study it can be well-known that the ground EP (in the powder form) mitigated the expansion of ASR due to its pozzolanic effect. Abidi et al. Oktay et al. From the above cited studies in this section, it can be well-known that the inclusion of EP in the matrix reduced its thermal conductivity. This means that the inclusion of EP in the matrix increased its thermal insulation. The thermal conductivity decreased with increasing EP content or in other wards the thermal insulation increased with increasing EP content. The low thermal conductivity of the EP is one factor from the factors affecting the thermal conductivity of the composite. Another factor affecting thermal conductivity of the composite is porosity. As reported before, the inclusion of EP in the matrix increased its total porosity. This led to a reduction in the thermal conductivity of the composite. It is well-known that the thermal conductivity decreased with increasing the rate of porosity, of which the air presents in the pores is an excellent insulator which increases the thermal insulation behavior of the composite. In addition, the countless air cells in EP aggregate make it excellent insulation. It is worth mentioning that EP plaster offers up to 4–6 times more resistance to heat transmission than traditional sand plaster Zhao et al. Li et al. From the above cited studies in this section, it can be concluded that EP increased sound insulation. On the surface of EP there are a lot of unlinked open pores. They form cavity resonance sound absorption structure. So it has strong good sound absorption performance Vance et al. Çelik From the above cited studies in this section, it can be concluded that EP powder can be used as a source material for geopolymer mixtures. EP powder can be activated with NaOH or sodium silicate. Using thermal curing at 100 Using EP powder with other binders such as carboxymethylcellulose or polymeric matrix containing novolac resin can produce products exhibited low density, low thermal conductivity, low strength and high sound insulation. Using EP powder with these binders still needs more studies. Demirboğa and Gül Celik et al. Gül et al. Kramar and Bindiganavile Lu et al. In general view, using EP as a part of building material in the matrix displays some benefits, where some properties are enhanced and some defects, where some properties are declined. The benefits of utilizing EP in the matrix are increasing workability, reducing unit weight, reducing autogenous shrinkage, decreasing drying shrinkage, increasing sodium sulfate attack resistance, mitigating ASR expansion, decreasing thermal conductivity, improving fire resistance and increasing sound insulation. As mentioned before that ground EP can be used as a part of cement or as a source material for geopolymers, this means that the production of PC will be eliminated. Thus, the CO From the previous discussions, it can be reason out that EP can be used for many applications which need lightweight, thermal insulation, fire resistance and sound insulation. In any event, EP can be used in lightweight tile concrete, mortar, decorative bricks, floor fills, garden sculpture, gas-fireplace, sound firewalls, insulating plaster, insulating boards, masonry wall insulation, subfloor insulation, pool base, tank bases, fuel tanks, tank insulation, underground pipe, statuary, foundries insulation, gas-fireplace logs, chimney lining, cryogenic insulation and etc. ( The current review paper aims to review the previous works that achieved on the fresh properties and hardened properties of traditional cementitious materials and other binders containing EP as a part of building material. The remarks of this overview could be briefed as: It is possible to use EP as a part of aggregate or a part of cement in traditional cementitious materials. EP can be utilized as aggregate in lightweight concrete and plaster because of its fire resistance, thermal insulation and acoustic insulation. EP plaster can be used for better acoustics and reduction of noise in wireless studios, auditoriums, theatres, hospitals etc. The inclusion of EP in the matrix as aggregate decreased mechanical strength, increased water absorption, increased porosity, increased sorptivity, decreasing hydrochloric acid resistance, but decreasing autogenous and drying shrinkage. 5–30% SF can be utilized to increase compressive strength, decrease thermal conductivity and density of EP matrix, whilst 5–20% colemanite can be used to increase compressive strength and reduce water absorption and porosity. Suitable contents of different types of fibers can be used to enhance mechanical strength of EP matrix. 5–10% paraffin can be used to reduce thermal conductivity of EP matrix, whilst sodium silicate as coating material for perlite particles can increase their moisture resistance. 1.58% H EP can be used as a part of cement as pozzolanic material, of which mechanical strength could be improved and ASR expansion could be mitigated. It is possible to use EP powder as a source material for geopolymers. Using sodium silicate as activator is effective than that of NaOH in resisting fire, whilst using NaOH as activator is effective than that of sodium silicate in resisting Na Based on this review, it is promising to use EP as a part of building material. However, the effects of EP on some properties such as drying shrinkage, chemical resistance, carbonation resistance and abrasion resistance of the traditional cementitious materials still need more studies. These can be used as major topics for future investigations. In addition, it is very important to investigate the effects of EP which can be used as a source material or as an aggregate substitution in alkali activation and geopolymer systems in terms of fresh properties and hardened properties, in similar lines of what have been investigated for traditional cementitious materials.