In this study, static strain ageing behavior of commercially available and solution heat treated duplex stainless steel was investigated and the effect of static strain ageing on the mechanical properties was also determined in detail. Some of as-received duplex stainless steel test specimens were pre-strained in tension by 5% and then aged at 100°C, 200°C, 300°C, 400°C, 500°C and 600°C for 30min in furnace. Some of duplex stainless steel test specimens were solution heat treated at 1050°C for 30min, water quenched and then pre-strained for 5% in tension shortly after the solution heat treatment.
                  In order to identify the effect of static strain ageing on the mechanical properties, the tensile strength, the change in the strength due to ageing (ΔY), elongation fracture and hardness were determined. The test results showed that the mechanical properties were affected by static strain ageing mechanism which was applied at different temperatures for same time interval.Duplex stainless steels simply contain ferrite and austenite phases in their structure Duplex stainless steels are the products of Fe–Cr–Ni–Mo–N systems. These steels are produced after being exposed to the heat treatment at a temperature range of 1050–1150 Interstitial atoms such as carbon and nitrogen exist freely within the solid solution. These atoms make precipitates and restrict the movement of dislocations in a free way during the ageing heat treatment Ageing is one of the methods of increasing the strength of those materials which cannot be hardened by heat treatment. Ageing can be classified into two types: cooling ageing and deformation ageing. Deformation ageing can further be divided into two types as static and dynamic ageing. Static ageing is defined as the ageing that occurs followed by the plastic deformation. It increases the yield stress and decrease the elongation. These effects are thought to be caused by dislocations and interstitial carbon or nitrogen atoms and also due to carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides which lock the dislocations or hinder the dislocation movement Annealing is usually employed to tailor the microstructure so as to enhance the mechanical properties of metallic materials The literature reviews The steel used in this investigation was AISI 2205 of a commercial grade, received in the form of sheet with a thickness of 1.2 The specimens for tensile test were prepared in accordance with the relevant TS EN ISO 6892-1 standard In practice, the annealing temperature is chosen as low as possible but sufficiently high take into solution any precipitate phases. Because of this, the super saturated solid solution at room temperature, the AISI2205 grade steel test specimens were soaked in a furnace for 30 To make comparison, a batch of 5% pre-strained with solution heat treated tensile test specimens was processed with a batch of 5% pre-strained without solution heat treated tensile test specimens. The amount of pre-strain for each specimen was measured by using an extensometer. After solution heat treatment and pre-straining processes, the specimens were artificially age hardened at 100 The samples were subjected to standard metallographic processes for characterization works and were electrolytically etched in 10% oxalic acid at 5 To study the effect of heat treatment on the ultimate tensile strength, Δ The variation in tensile strength, hardness and Δ It can be seen that as the ageing temperature increases for 30  According to Gardi In the present experimental work, the microstructural evaluation was carried out with using NanoSEM and EDS analysis. The precipitates responsible for strengthening by aging are shown in As can be seen in The dimension of carbide precipitates presented in the sample that was aged at the temperature of 500 Although, in this study the determined ageing time (30 A definite decrease in tensile strength, yield strength and hardness of samples aged at 600 The lower tensile strength of specimens aged at 600 However, the elongation to fracture (%) in AISI2205 grade steel falls gradually with increase in temperature ( The increase in tensile strength, hardness and Δ  It is worth noting from As can be seen in The fracture surface of as-received and solution heat treated test samples are shown in  The 5% AP and 5% SHTP test specimens showed different ageing behaviors at different ageing temperatures. The tensile fracture surfaces of 5% AP and 5% SHTP test specimens when aged at 100 The 5% SHTP test specimens showed ductile fractures and microscopically a surface covered by dimples of several sizes in which globular shape texture was observed after the solution heat treatment at 1050 The conclusions derived from this study can be given as follows: The tensile strength, hardness and Δ 5% SHTP test specimens showed slightly lower strength properties than 5% AP test specimens at all ageing temperatures. This is due to solution heat treatment, caused by grain growth mechanism in solid solution or by changing ferrite austenite ratio. The % elongation fracture in AISI2205 grade steel decreases gradually with increase in ageing temperature due to loss in ductility. Fractographic analysis showed that 5% SHTP and 5% AP test specimens underwent brittle and ductile fractures when aged at 500 In short, a significant increase in mechanical properties was observed after 30