In this study, the abstraction of nickel, copper and zinc ions from aqueous solutions has been investigated in a laboratory batch scale mode. A combined two-stage process is proposed as an alternative of the heavy metals removal from aqueous solutions. The first stage is the sorption of heavy metals onto non-living microorganisms followed by dispersed-air flotation of the loaded biomass. Three types of strains were used: Penicillium chrysogenum, Saccharomyces carlsbergensis and Streptomyces rimosus. The main parameters studied were solution pH, biomass concentration, surfactant concentration and flocculant concentration. The biomass reuse after elution was also examined. Remediation is a possible application of flotation being cost-effective and with readily available equipment and know-how. The application of this process looks promising.Flotation that originated in minerals processing has nowadays found extensive use in water and wastewater technology due to its advantages. These essentially two different flotation applications are more or less based on different techniques, dispersed-air and dissolved-air flotation, regarding particularly the bubbles generation and flow conditions, as have been recorded by  Fungi can accumulate metal and radionuclide species by physico-chemical and biological mechanisms including extracellular binding by metabolites and biopolymers, binding to specific polypeptides and metabolism-dependent accumulation; however, to date the most promising approach to metal removal by fungi is biosorption The purpose of this work was to examine the effectiveness of three potential low cost sorbent materials, which may be applied in the preliminary stage of the process, as the various biosorbents, i.e. non-living biomass produced in thousand of tons as a solid waste (or by-product) from industrial fermentations. This work was a part of a project, which had the objective to develop a highly innovative metal removal and recovery process. The biosorbents investigated in the laboratory were the following: The contact and mixing time for biosorption was kept constant at 900 s, with initial volume of treated solution (in deionised water) being 0.5 dm The aqueous mixture of metals applied contained: Zn: 50, Cu: 10, Ni: 2, Ca: 100, Mg: 100 and Na: 100 mg dm The dispersed-air flotation column had a retention time of 600 s and superficial air velocity of 0.27 cm s The need for a surfactant (here, dodecylamine in ethanol solution) as collector for the separation of metal-loaded biomass was first studied, shown in A good correlation for In the present, a two cycles operation was attempted with alternative addition of surfactant. Metals and biomass removal are presented as The metal removals due to biosorption are characteristically shown in  The metals removal behaviour of the various tested biosorbents versus the solution pH was quite similar, mainly for zinc and nickel, as illustratively shown in An explanation for the selectivity of the process for copper can be found in an earlier work (with copper alone and using appropriate Gooch filtration) where the size distribution during copper precipitation was examined as a function of pH Non-living actinomycetes biomass showed greater binding capacities for cadmium than the respective living bacterium Further batchwise results regarding the influence of surfactant concentration on (dispersed-air) flotation of The choice for a cationic surfactant was based on zeta-potential measurements. The influence of polyelectrolyte presence on biosorptive flotation of loaded fungi was subsequently examined, using DA as optimised. The behaviour of fungi flotation regarding this parameter was different than that of grape stalks biomass (unpublished data); the latter was another good metals biosorbent investigated extensively; being a by-product from the winery industry. The results of biomass recovery by flotation were found to be substantially increased (from 64% up to 82–84%, using 5–10 mg dm Keeping constant the previous conditions, the influence of co-existing iron ions (studied concentration range 0–50 mg dm In conclusion, biosorptive flotation seems a viable and effective separation process for the aqueous system (mixture of metal ions) under investigation, no matter the sort of biosorbent applied. This work was funded by a EU Environment and Climate program (Contract No. ENV94-CT95-0068). Thanks are also due to Ms. E.G. Rousou, chemist for experimental collaboration.