The effect of microwave heating on magnetic processing of pyrite was investigated. Different size fractions of pyrite were treated (heated) in a microwave oven at 2.45 GHz frequency and different power levels. The microwave treated pyrite samples of −420 μm fraction were subjected to magnetic separation at magnetic field intensities of 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5 T. It was found that pyrite was converted to such ferromagnetic minerals as pyrothite and γ-hematite, and magnetic separation recovery was improved after microwave treatment.Microwave energy is nonionizing electromagnetic radiation with frequencies that range from 300 MHz to 300 GHz or wavelength that range from 1 to 300 mm. Microwaves can be transmitted, absorbed or reflected. Insulators are transparent to the microwaves and, thus, do not store any of energy in the form of heat. Metals with high conductivities, reflect the microwaves which provide no significant heating effects. Materials such as semiconductors, with medium conductivities, typically from 1 to 10 S m In recent years there has been a growing interest of microwave heating in mineral treatment and a number of potential application of microwave processing have been investigated. These include microwave assisted ore grinding, microwave assisted carbothermic reduction of metal oxides, microwave assisted drying and anhydration, microwave assisted mineral leaching, microwave assisted roasting and smelting of sulfide concentrate, microwave assisted pretreatment of refractory gold concentrate, microwave assisted spent carbon regeneration and microwave assisted waste management One of the most important possible applications of microwave heating is coal desulfurization. The inorganic sulfur occurs in raw coal mainly in pyritic and sulfate form. The separation of fine pyrite from coal is difficult by conventional magnetic separation methods. The performance of magnetic separation in removing mineral pyrite from coal can be improved by increasing the magnetic susceptibility of pyrite. Several studies have shown that magnetic susceptibility of pyrite can be enhanced by heating The purpose of this study is to determine the microwave heating characteristics of and the effect of microwave treatment on the magnetic processing of pyrite. The pyrite sample used in this research was from Murgul–Çakmakkaya copper deposit of Black Sea Copper Works of Turkey. Different size fractions of test samples were prepared from pyrite crystals by comminution and sieving. These fractions were −1680+1200, −1200+850, −850+420 and −420 μm. Samples were cleaned by shaking table and re-cleaned by hand under a microscope. A variable power (maximum output 850 W) and 2.45 GHz kitchen type microwave oven was used for microwave heating. Ten grams of representative samples of different size fractions were used in the tests. Samples were placed in the oven in a microwave transparent porcelain crucible covered with a lid. The crucible was always located in the same central position in order to minimize the effect of the field pattern variations in the oven. The sample was treated with microwave radiation at desired power levels for given durations. The temperature of the test sample in the oven was measured continuously using a stainless steel-sheathed, K type, thermocouple which was inserted into the sample through the roof of the oven and the lid of crucible cover. Infrared thermometer which has been used by some researchers Samples of the finest fraction, namely −420 μm, were subjected to microwave irradiation at 850 W power level until the temperature reached 325, 475, 625, 725 and 825 Microwave heating characteristics of different size fractions of pyrite sample in air were determined at power levels of 850, 680 and 510 W. The results are given in As seen from the figures, heating rate and maximum attainable temperature of pyrite samples increased with increasing power and decreasing particle size. Of all, the maximum attainable temperature and heating rate were observed for −420 μm size fraction at 850 W. For this fraction, the temperature rose to 860 In order to exclude the effect of oxygen and study the effect of microwave treatment alone on the heating characteristics and the end products of pyrite, the same size fractions as for air were subjected to microwave treatment in nitrogen atmosphere. As seen from the The nature of the products that form after the microwave treatment of pyrite was studied by XRD. The results are given in In order to investigate the effect of changes in the magnetic properties of the microwave treated pyrite on the magnetic separation, a series of magnetic separation tests were conducted. For these tests only the −420 μm size fraction was used. The sample was brought to the given temperatures in the microwave oven at 850 W applied power by changing the treatment time, and cooled in the oven immediately. The tests were carried out for pyrite samples treated both in air and nitrogen at the magnetic field intensities of 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5 T. The results are tabulated in The results of this study show that microwave treatment has a considerable effect on the mineralogy, heating characteristics and magnetic processing of pyrite mineral. Heating rate and maximum attained temperature of pyrite samples increased with increasing power and decreasing particle size. The maximum attained temperature of 860