The technology of anaerobic digestion of organic solid wastes is, in many aspects, mature. Topics such as fundamentals (kinetics, modelling, etc.), process aspects (performance, two- and single-phase systems, wet and dry technologies), digestion enhancement (several pre-treatments), co-digestion with other substrates and its relation to composting technology are examined in this review. Special attention is paid to the advantages of anaerobic digestion in limiting the emission of greenhouse gases. An overview of industrial achievements and future developments is given.A few months ago, in June 1999, the second International Symposium on Anaerobic Digestion of Solid Waste (II-ISAD-SW) was held in Barcelona. Seven years after the first Symposium, the meeting attracted more than 350 people from 47 countries, which points to the relevance of this biotechnology topic. In consequence, a substantial amount of the research and developments presented at this symposium will be used as a source of data for this review. It has to be stated that this review is focused on the latest publications on the topic of solid organic wastes, but some of the issues discussed may have been under investigation for some years in a number of centres. ‘Solid’ organic waste is not a very precise term. Normally it is understood as organic-biodegradable-waste with a moisture content below 85–90%. There are many agricultural and industrial wastes meeting this criterion, but the most relevant is the organic fraction of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW), with a daily production in Europe of about 400,000 tons. Due to the large environmental impact of landfills, many of them are due to close in Europe because of the evolution of legislation. In fact, a European directive is being prepared to restrict this practice. Concomitantly, separate collection of fractions of MSW has increased significantly. Biological treatments are the clearest alternative for the putrescent fraction collected separately. These technologies can maximise recycling and recovery of waste components. Among biological treatments, anaerobic digestion is frequently the most cost-effective, due to the high energy recovery linked to the process and its limited environmental impact. Biogas production throughout Europe, could reach over 15 million m Another important waste is municipal sewage sludge. In fact, more than 36,000 anaerobic digesters are today in operation in Europe, treating around 40–50% of the sludges generated The diversity of papers in the literature dealing with anaerobic digestion of solid wastes reflects the large number of topics within this area. From fundamental aspects, including kinetics and modelling, co-digestion with other organic wastes, pre-treatments to enhance the performance of the digesters, up to the practical full-scale application of this technology, a wide range of topics are relevant and will be discussed in this review. Varied studies of the fundamentals of solid waste digestion have been undertaken. One area is the modelling of the process. The availability of a robust anaerobic digestion model, allowing the best operating parameters for optimal control to be defined, would be invaluable. Because of this, many studies have been devoted to this aim. However, there are many difficulties in the modelling of the anaerobic digestion of the organic fraction of municipal solid waste (OFMSW). There are many steps and types of micro-organisms involved and the substrate is a complex one. Most of the models reported in the literature discuss the kinetics of soluble substances and so only consider the fermentative, acetogenic and methanogenic steps In fact, due to its relevance within overall biodegradation kinetics, hydrolysis has been widely studied. For instance,  Other fundamental studies look at different aspects of the anaerobic digestion of solid waste. For instance, Other important papers are devoted to analytical questions. Thus, some contributions to a better understanding of the biological mechanisms responsible for an inefficient anaerobic process were made by A good example of how fundamental analysis leads to quite practical conclusions is reported in a detailed microbiological study of the well-known leach-bed process Many papers have been published dealing with the performance of different reactor configurations digesting organic solid wastes. Most of them focus on aspects of the anaerobic biodegradation of the putrescent fraction of MSW. Despite the increasing number of full-scale plants, research activity continues, especially at universities. For instance, Economically, the use of an anaerobic digester in small-scale sewage treatment plants is not always feasible. It is not the aim of this review to cover these aspects in depth, as they have been discussed widely in the literature. Only a few papers directly related to OFMSW and dewatered SS will be mentioned here. More details can be found in a comprehensive literature search conducted by  Finally, it is worth mentioning that in simulating the behaviour of the anaerobic co-digestion process, of OFMSW and primary sewage sludge, including ammonia inhibition, the mathematical model developed by There are many references in the literature to successful operations in both mesophilic and thermophilic conditions. Thermophilic temperature was found optimal for digesting mechanically selected OFMSW by  As discussed above, significant effort has been dedicated in recent years to find ways of improving the performance of digesters treating different wastes, especially solid wastes, because of the obvious link between successful pre-treatments and improved yields. These treatments can be biological, mechanical or physico-chemical. The economic aspects of digestion enhancement are very important to industry, a point not usually covered in the studies reported. Among biological methods of improvement, The classic addition of complexes of enzymes has been carried out recently by Size reduction of particles and the resulting increase in the specific surface available to the medium improves the biological process. Two effects have been reported: first, if the substrate has a high fibre content and low degradability, their comminution leads to improved gas production; and second, size reduction can lead to more rapid digestion  In another study, As stated, anaerobic digestion of solid wastes is rate-limited by the hydrolysis step, and so physico-chemical treatments are often used to promote solubilisation of organic matter. However, the substrate solubilisation step limited the anaerobic digestion of an industrial microbial biomass An interesting option for improving yields of anaerobic digestion of solid wastes is co-digestion. That is, the use of a co-substrate, that in most cases improves the biogas yields due to positive synergisms established in the digestion medium and the supply of missing nutrients by the co-substrates. In addition, economic advantages derived from the fact of sharing equipment are quite significant. Sometimes the use of a co-substrate can also help to establish the required moisture contents of the digester feed. Other advantages are the easier handling of mixed wastes, the use of common access facilities and the known effect of economy of scale. However, some drawbacks also exist, mainly due to slurry transport costs and the problems arising from the harmonisation of different policies of the waste-generators. The advantages of co-digestion have been sung for some time. For instance, Also in North America, another comparative study of two digestion systems (wet and dry) was based on the co-digestion of tuna sludge and OFMSW. This study is currently scaled to pilot-plant after the good yields obtained In quite an interesting study of co-digestion, As a solution to the problem of ammonia inhibition during the anaerobic digestion of chicken manure (see for instance,  Working with unsorted MSW, Other examples of co-digestion presented at the II-ISAD-SW are summarised in Anaerobic digestion effluents are not generally suitable for putting directly onto the land. They are too wet, contain a notable amount of volatile fatty acids which are somewhat phytotoxic and, if digestion has not occurred within the thermophilic range of temperatures, are not hygienised. Thus, it is generally accepted that post-treatment after anaerobic digestion is needed to obtain a high-quality, finished product In terms of global warming, which is often used as a reference value for ecological balance, anaerobic digestion scores much better than other options, as can be seen in In industrial terms, anaerobic digestion of solid waste can be seen as a mature technology Yields from the biomethanization process are very much dependent on the particular situation of each plant. Of course the main factor affecting this yield is the kind of substrate used. In the case of the OFMSW it is interesting to see how different values are obtained during a long period, using the same process but different sorting procedures In the last few years a remarkable interest in digesting “grey wastes” or “residual refuse”, i.e. what remains after source separation, has arisen. Options for this fraction are landfilling or incineration. However, anaerobic digestion offers a number of advantages such as: (a) greater flexibility, (b) the possibility of additional material recovery (up to 25%) and (c) a more efficient and ecological energy recovery: the low-calorific organic fraction is digested, the high-calorific fraction is treated thermally and the non-energy fractions can be recovered and reused A very high growth potential is envisaged for the anaerobic digestion of OFMSW. Today around 50% of MSW is landfilled, with a content of around 30% of organic fraction (without considering paper and cardboard). Following in potential is the digestion of sewage sludges. Another factor that in the near future will contribute to the consolidation of anaerobic digestion as a mainstream technology for the OFMSW is the fact that the digested residue can be considered quite stable organic matter with a very slow turnover of several decades given adequate soil conditions. In this way the natural imbalance in CO Aspects such as the degradation of chlorinated compounds need to be examined in greater depth, as anaerobic treatment offers high potential in this area