The contact forces and coordination number distributions for granular materials under breakage during one-dimensional compression are investigated using the discrete element method (DEM). The fractal distribution of contact forces within the granular packing is the main factor that induces the progressive development of the particle fractal size distribution. A simple method is developed in the current study to reveal the fractal distribution of contact forces in comminuted granular materials. It can also be used to evaluate the structural feature of granular materials. Another interesting finding is that the coordination number distribution for each particle displays a unique distribution within the fractal size distribution of granular assemblages at the ultimate state. Furthermore, the numerical results also demonstrate that the Weibull modulus, inter-particle frictional coefficient and permitted tensile stress of the initial largest particle can affect the evolution of the contact force distribution and coordination number distribution.Granular materials are applied in many fields, such as pharmaceuticals, agriculture, mining industry, construction, and so on. They are an unusual medium that cannot be directly categorized as solid, liquid or gas In recent years, some advanced high-resolution 3D X-ray diffraction and micro-tomography techniques have been considered to characterize particulate assemblies As an alternative method, the discrete element method (DEM), which was originally developed by Cundall and Strack This paper is organized as follows. First, we introduce the numerical DEM model for this confined comminution analysis. Then, the evolution of the contact forces and coordination number during the crushing process are described by comparing different conditions. Additionally, detailed discussions on the force intensity, force probability and particle fractal size distributions are presented in this section. Finally, a conclusion about the main findings from this study is provided. In the current study, the linear contact model in PFC 2D A previous model that was presented by Ben-Nun and Einav Because grain crush is strongly associated with the tensile strength, the modified Brazilian criterion The particles that split during the crushing process are modeled in the present study in an identical manner to that in Ben and Einav In our crushing numerical tests, we first introduce the appearance of the self-organization of the particle arrangement and force chain networks in the fractal crushable conglomeration ( The PSD and probability density of normalized normal contact forces for the simulation results are shown in Here, the authors develop a simple fractal model to evaluate the normal, shear and total contact forces. This model is calculated as follows using the cumulated contact number (  The coordination number for each grain is another important quantity to predict the system stability. Repeating the former benchmark numerical sample, we continue to study the size ratio between the initial maximum particle and the smallest permitted crushing particle.    In this paper, we investigated the contact forces and coordination number distribution in a crushable granular assemblage. Extensive numerical tests were performed to validate the developed fractal model and analyze the sensitivity of the parameters. When the distribution of normalized contact normal force shows a pronounced log-normal relation at the ultimate state, a power-law fractal pattern of contact forces emerges. The fractal contact force distribution can also be considered to explain the development of PSD, which also has a power law relation. Additionally, the fractal dimension of the broken particles is much higher than the statistical index of global packing. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the size ratio, Weibull modulus, inter-particle frictional coefficient and permitted tensile stress can affect the development of contact forces to attain an asymptotical power law. In this paper, the suggested size ratio is 30 for a balance between computation efficiency and accuracy. Notably, a small Weibull modulus and inter-particle frictional coefficient or large permitted tensile stress are unsuitable to generate a fractal pattern of contact forces. The shear contact forces are much more sensitive to these variables from the present study. The current manuscript also shows that the coordination number distribution has an opposite trend from the normalized normal contact force during the comminution procedure. For the fractal PSD granular assemblage, the coordination number distribution is unified, which is independent of the above parameters. The fractal dimensions of the broken particles are directly affected by the inter-particle frictional coefficient and permitted tensile stress. The authors would like to thank the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at