An environmental friendly surface modification of precipitated silica with zero emission of free alcohol during the mixing process was carried out by the use of a xanthate reaction. After modification, the result was a zinc salt of dixanthated silica (ZMS). The success of ZMS preparation is evidenced by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic results, in which a new absorption peak of the CS stretching vibration of dixanthate is observed, and by energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) results in which the two new elements (sulphur and zinc) can be detected. Compared to the unmodified silica (UMS), the ZMS possesses smaller agglomerate size and gives superior dispersion when incorporated into a natural rubber matrix. The enhancement of filler dispersion increases with increasing degree of xanthation. Moreover, the systems reinforced with ZMS demonstrate significant increase in cure efficiency, and thus enhancement in mechanical properties of the rubber vulcanisates.To broaden the applications of elastomeric materials, one of the simple and economical methods is to incorporate rigid filler particles, such as carbon black, silica, calcium carbonate and clay, into the deformable rubber matrix A xanthate reaction is a well-known reaction based on the reaction of hydroxyl groups with carbon disulfide (CS Therefore, the present work aims to modify the surfaces of PSi by the use of a xanthate reaction in order to reduce the hydrophilic characteristics of PSi via the reduction in the amount of silanol groups on PSi surfaces. The influence of degree of xanthation on viscoelastic behaviour, cure characteristics and mechanical properties of the silica-filled NR vulcanisates is also investigated. All mixing ingredients were obtained from suppliers or manufacturers in Thailand, and used as-received. Natural rubber (NR; STR5L) was supplied by Union Rubber Product Corporation Co., Ltd. Precipitated silica (Tokusil 233; BET 125 m  The compound formulation used in the present work is given in The extent of filler-filler interaction was determined using a Rubber Process Analyser (RPA2000, Alpha Technologies, USA) under oscillatory shear deformation with swept strain amplitudes from 0.98% to 200%. Angular frequency and test temperature were kept constant at 1 Hz and 100 °C, respectively. The discrepancy in storage modulus (G′) at low and high strains (ΔG′), widely known as the “Payne effect”, was used as an indication of the magnitude of filler-filler interaction FTIR spectra of the UMS and 4% ZMS are shown in Referring to the EDS results, the predominant elements found on the UMS surfaces are silicon and oxygen, as illustrated in   The effect of degree of xanthation on tensile properties of PSi-filled NR vulcanisates is shown in Xanthate reaction, a chemical reaction between silanol groups and CS The authors would like to thank the