Objective
                  To analyze characteristics of type II odontoid fracture (TII-OF), including clinical and radiographic factors, that influence surgical planning in 8 Latin American centers.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective chart review was performed of 88 patients with TII-OF between 2004 and 2015 from 8 Latin American centers. Parameters studied included 1) demographic data and causes of TII-OF, 2) clinical and neurologic presentation, 3) characteristics of fracture (degree of odontoid displacement, displacement of odontoid relative to C2 body, anatomy of fracture line, distance between fragments, presence of comminution, contact area between odontoid and C2 body), 4) type of treatment, and 5) clinical and radiographic outcome. Bone fusion was assessed using computed tomography.
               
                  Results
                  Mean patient age was 45.33 years ± 23.54; 78.4% of patients were male. Surgery was the primary treatment in 65 patients (73.8%), with an anterior approach in 64.6%. Surgery was usually preferred in patients with posterior or horizontal oblique fracture lines, local pain, and a smaller bone contact surface between the odontoid and the body of C2. A posterior approach was chosen when distance between the fractured bone fragments was >2 mm or after failed conservative or anterior odontoid screw treatment in a symptomatic patient.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The treatment of choice for TII-OF in 8 Latin American trauma centers was surgery through an anterior approach using screw fixation. Posterior segmental C1-C2 fixation was indicated when distance between bone fragments was >2 mm and in symptomatic patients with nonunion.Odontoid fractures account for 9%–15% of cervical spine fractures. TII-OF is the most common odontoid fracture (65%–74%) and is the most prevalent cervical fracture in patients >70 years old. TII-OF is the most common spine fracture in patients >80 years old, results in a high percentage of nonunions, and is associated with a low prevalence of associated neurologic deficits (2%–27%). The controversy seems to be even greater in geriatric patients. A retrospective chart review of patients with TII-OF was performed in 8 Latin American centers for the years 2004–2015. Inclusion criteria were acute and isolated TII-OF and charts that offered complete demographic data as well as clinical, neurologic, and preoperative and postoperative radiographic data. Patients who did not have well-documented preoperative and postoperative plain radiographs and computed tomography (CT) images available were excluded from the study. Patients with pathologic fractures and multiple fractures of the cervical spine were also excluded. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the University of Caxias do Sul. Study parameters were 1) patient demographics and causes of TII-OF, 2) clinical and neurologic presentation, 3) characteristics of the fracture, 4) type of treatment, and 5) clinical and radiographic outcome. The variables analyzed were sex, age group, type of accident, and time elapsed from fracture to diagnosis and treatment. Comorbidities assessed were smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, hypertension, and drug addiction. The clinical variables studied were pain, muscle strength, sensibility, and deep reflexes. Pain was assessed as present or absent. Muscle strength, sensibility, and deep reflexes were graded as normal, reduced, or absent. Radiographic parameters studied in the pretreatment images were the degree of odontoid displacement related to the body of C2, the direction of odontoid displacement, the anatomy of the fracture line, the distance between the bone fragments, the degree of atlantoaxial instability, the presence of comminuted fractures, and the contact surface between the odontoid process and the body of C2: The degree of odontoid displacement related to the body of C2 was analyzed using 6-mm cut sagittal and coronal reconstruction CT images ( Anterior displacement, posterior displacement, or no displacement of the fractured part of the odontoid in relation to the body was established using sagittal reconstruction CT imaging ( Anatomy of the fracture line was classified as anterior-oblique, posterior-oblique, and horizontal based on sagittal reconstruction CT images ( The distance between bone fragments was measured using 2-mm cut sagittal and coronal reconstruction CT images ( The degree of atlantoaxial instability was defined as the comparative dislocation of right and left C1-2 joints based on plain x-ray films and reconstruction CT images of the cervical spine. Comminuted fractures were defined as fractures with >2 bone fragments on plain x-ray and reconstruction CT images of the cervical spine. The contact surface between the odontoid process and the body of C2 was measured using sagittal reconstruction of CT images of the cervical spine ( Bone fusion was defined by evidence of bony trabeculae crossing the fracture site and absence of sclerotic borders adjacent to the fracture site using sagittally reconstructed CT images. Nonunion was defined as a definite fracture gap with abnormal motion of the fractured dens on dynamic radiographs and CT scan. Management was based on the surgeon's expertise, anesthesia risk, and patient's choice. The type of conservative or surgical treatment was recorded as well as the clinical and radiographic data that seemed to have inspired the choice. Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS for Windows version 16 (SPSS, Inc, Chicago, Illinois, USA). The categorical variables were presented as proportion. The continuous variables were submitted to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to verify normal distribution and were presented as mean ± SD or median ± minimum and maximum, depending on distribution. The comparative analysis between the groups was conducted using the Fisher exact test for categorical variables and Student In the 8 participating Latin American centers for the years 2004–2015, 113 patients with TII-OF were identified. There were 25 patients excluded because of lack of relevant information. The remaining 88 patients were included in the current study. The mean age of the study population was 45.3 years ± 23.54. There was a preponderance of male patients (78.4%; 69 of 88). Motor vehicle accidents accounted for 67% (59 of 88) of the fractures, followed by falls (29.5%; 26 of 88) and sports injuries (3.4%; 3 of 88). The average time elapsed between the accident and definitive treatment was 7 days (range, 1–180 days) ( The incidence of preoperative comorbidities in the conservative treatment and surgical treatment groups is summarized in Pain at the fracture site was the most common symptom at presentation (86.4%; 76/88) ( On radiographic analysis, degree of odontoid displacement >6 mm was observed in 26% of the group ( Characteristics of patients according to treatment are reported in Significant clinical and radiographic factors were present in the surgery group, including the presence of a posterior-oblique fracture line, a smaller surface contact area between the odontoid and the body of C2, and greater preoperative morbidity ( The average patient follow-up time was 23.41 months ± 25.06. At final follow-up evaluation, 72 patients (81.8%) were pain-free and had a normal neurologic examination; 13 patients (14.8%) complained of local tenderness; and 3 patients (3.4%) complained of hyperesthesia of the C2 dermatome, probably caused by the surgical intervention (segmental fixation of C1-2) ( Bone fusion was observed in 76 patients (86.4%). Of the patients treated conservatively, 6 later underwent surgery (26.2%), and 4 (4.5%) of the patients who were originally treated surgically through an anterior approach underwent reoperation using a posterior approach ( Complications were observed in 6 patients (6.8%) <60 years old and in 3 patients (3.4%) >60 years old ( The treatment of odontoid fractures is influenced by many factors, such as type of fracture, association with other lesions, patient age, and comorbidities. The distribution of odontoid fractures according to age shows 2 peaks: 1 in younger patients (17–30 years old), associated with high-energy traumas, and 1 in geriatric patients (>70 years old), associated with low-energy traumas, such as falls. Surgeons seem to recognize morbidity as an important factor during the decision-making process and have concluded that morbidity is not an absolute contraindication to surgery. Morbidity that is relevant to surgery is also relevant to nonoperative treatment. In our series, surgery was the primary treatment of choice when there was refractory pain, bone displacement >6 mm, or a smaller contact surface between the odontoid and the body of C2 as well as after failure of nonoperative treatment. Cho and Sung The critical management decision in patients with TII-OF is to establish the best treatment that will allow better results with lower morbidity. Conservative treatment of TII-OF may be accomplished using a cervical brace or a halo vest. Although the latter is highly effective to achieve bone fusion, the incidence of complications and increased morbidity are equally high, and thus a halo vest is not recommended for elderly patients. The literature has not established which surgical approach, anterior or posterior, is better in TII-OF. A nondisplaced odontoid fracture was observed in 47% of patients, and most of them underwent surgical intervention. Management was based on the surgeon's expertise, anesthesia risk, and patient's choice. After the results were compiled, a meeting was held among the investigators and the conclusions were as follows: 1) the patients' choice was against wearing the Philadelphia neck brace or halo vest over a long-term period; 2) the patients were worried about undergoing a bigger posterior fixation surgery if fusion was not achieved after the conservative treatment, instead of having an anterior screw placement; 3) most of the surgeons thought that the anterior approach in general had good results with a lower incidence of complications. The posterior approach techniques have evolved from poorly stabilizing wires and rods that required autologous bone grafts and external fixation to more rigid instrumentations with screws placed into the lateral masses of C1 and C2 pars, pedicle, or laminar screws. Surgical treatment in patients with TII-OF achieves fusion rates similar to nonoperative treatment, regardless of the degree of bone displacement. Predisposing factors for the development of nonunion in elderly patients are reduced trabecular bone, degree of displacement between the odontoid and the vertebral body, and distance between fractured bone fragments. The limitations of this study are its retrospective design, which made it necessary to exclude 25 patients owing to the loss of data. Assessment of the severity of osteoporosis in older patients was not standardized. The relatively small sample size stratified into age groups did not allow appropriate statistical analysis of the controversial group of elderly patients. A strength of this study is the correlation between the radiographic classification between the different odontoid fracture types with surgical planning and outcome. The surgical decision for treatment of TII-OF must be tailored to the individual characteristics of each patient, the possible acceptable complications for each case, the surgeon's experience, the patient's preference, and the technical resources available. The treatment of choice for TII-OF in this multicenter study was surgical using the anterior odontoid screw technique. A posterior approach and segmental C1-2 fixation were usually indicated when the distance between the dislocated fracture fragments was >2 mm and when conservative or primary surgical treatment with the anterior screw technique failed.