The biocompatibility properties of Ti scaffolds can be improved significantly by hydroxyapatite (HA) composite coating. We successfully coated the surface of the Ti substrates by in-situ formation of HA nanocrystals on TiO2 sublayer under calcium acetate and trisodium phosphate electrolytes through the plasma electrolytic oxidation (PEO) process. The effects of the process parameters and passivation on the characteristics of the coated substrates were studied using X–ray diffraction, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, Field emission scanning electron microscopy, and Energy–dispersive X–ray spectroscopy. The systematically controlled experimental studies indicated that using the higher calcium/phosphorous ratio in the electrolyte enhances the micro arcs power and consequently, thickens the synthesized HA layer. The HA nanocrystals were tailored on the walls and edges of the discharge channels due to the locally concentrated heating zones, which consequently resulted in noticeable amounts of Ca and P dopants in porous TiO2.A unique combination of properties, particularly high specific yield strength (78*10 Recently, a new method, Plasma Electrolytic Oxidation (PEO), was developed to provide HA coating with desirable properties on Ti-base implants. The method is derived from the conventional anodizing process and can be applied on valve metal (Ti, Al, Mg) substrates Further investigations indicated that the type, crystallinity, thickness and morphology of the synthesized phases depend on the substrate In this study, the low voltage one-step PEO process was applied in order to the synthesis of HA. High Ca/P ratio containing electrolytes were used for the synthesis of HA on Ti substrates. To promote the formation of crystalline HA coatings, a supersaturated primary TiO In this study, Ti (grade 2) sheets were used as the substrates. The Ti samples 10 × 10 × 1 mm in size were cut from the sheet, mechanically polished, cleaned in acetone, and finally surface activated via chemical etching. The electrolytes of the PEO process were prepared using calculated amounts of calcium acetate and trisodium phosphate (Zohal Shimi, Iran) as a source of Ca and P elements. Four testing electrolytes including different Ca/P ratios were finally prepared. PEO samples were then labeled based on the coding system presented in The PEO bath was set-up using a stainless steel 316 cylinder as the cathode, Ti sample as the anode and a 30 kW DC power supply. To provide the possibility of electrolyte circulation, two gates were embedded in the cathode cylinder, and the whole system was equipped with a water-cooled circulation system. The designed set-up of the used PEO cell including technical details is schematically shown in PEO process was applied on the samples at 290 V for 7 min. The coated samples were then rinsed with distilled water and dried in warm air flow. In addition to the coated samples, the synthesized ceramic layers were then detached from the substrate via chemical removal of the substrate to provide independent investigation of the coating. The phase analysis of the coatings was carried out using an X-ray diffraction spectrometer (XRD; PANalytical X′pert HighScore) with a Cu K The current-time and voltage-time characteristics of the sample 4 during the PEO process are representatively shown in Electrical parameter variations of samples 1–4 vs. Ca/P ratio are presented in X-ray diffraction patterns of the coated samples are shown in At the beginning of the PEO process, amorphous TiO Another possible anodic reaction is the oxidation of acetate anions, which according to the Kolbe mechanism Meanwhile, ionization of electrolyte components including calcium acetate, trisodium phosphate and water can lead to the formation of Ca The precipitation of HA through the PEO process occurs in high rates. Hence, the primary synthesized HA can be detected as amorphous phases in XRD patterns. Anyway, amorphous HA may be crystallized locally, as a result of temperature concentration. Such a phenomenon will be clarified in the microstructural investigation section. The XRD results can be confirmed using FTIR analyses. FTIR spectrum results of all samples (not shown here) verify the presence of the hydroxyl (OH FESEM micrographs, as well as related EDS analyses of the surface of samples are presented in As it can clearly be seen, the morphology of the surface coating depends on the used electrolyte through the PEO process. Although the increased Ca/P ratio can lead to lower porosity fraction in the synthesized PEO layer, bigger pores are observed. The pore density and average pore size of the samples are calculated using ImageJ quantitative image analyzing software and presented in According to the results, using electrolytes containing higher Ca/P ratio can also increase the number of relatively large pores (>2 µm); however, they may decrease the number of fine pores (<0.5 µm) of synthesized ceramics. Actually, higher ΔV is applied to Sample 4, inducing stronger sparks, and therefore bigger pores are formed. In addition, as the overall applied voltage is constant in all samples, the number of sparks in the 4 sample is lower than the others, which can lead to the lower number of pores.  EDS/Xray maps presented in  In the next step, increasing the voltage results in a thicker oxide layer, similar to what occurs through the anodizing process. The thickening step may be accompanied with gas evolution (Step I in Higher magnification FESEM micrographs of samples 1 and 4 are shown in It should also be noted that the presence of locally heated zones can promote the crystallization of HA. Based on the mentioned discussions, such regions are more likely in sample 4. Hence, the formation of crystalline HA at the outer edge and internal walls of the discharge channels in sample 4 is highly expected. Such a hypothesis, which is supported by the FESEM findings (marked area in Anyway, the number and strength of the arcs are competing parameters. Therefore, the overall amount of crystalline HA which is affected by these two parameters may be varied in different samples. The chemical parameter, Ca and P ions concentration, is another effective factor on the amount of crystalline HA. Although stronger arcs are formed in sample 4 and accompanied with higher Ca-P concentration, the amount of crystalline HA in sample 3 may be higher, due to the dominant impact of the number of arcs. The higher ratio of crystalline HA in sample 3 can be paraphrased from the XRD pattern presented in It is worth noting that the strength and number of arcs in every sample can be confirmed, based on the size and fraction of pores (discharge channels) in FESEM images (see The cross-section micrograph of the ceramic coating formed on sample 4 and its related EDS line scan are representatively shown in Based on the EDS line-scan presented in The variations of the mean thickness of mentioned dense and porous regions with Ca/P ratio compared to scale bars are measured using Image J software and presented in It can be concluded that the higher thickness of the coating, as well as the higher amount of HA, can be achieved when high Ca/P ratio contained electrolytes are used in the PEO process. The findings and related discussions also endorse the higher crystallization ratio of HA if higher ΔV is applied through the PEO process of titanium. Bioceramic coatings were in-situ synthesized on the Ti substrate using an innovative plasma electrolytic oxidation (PEO) method. The over-stoichiometric Ca/P ratio electrolytes containing proper amounts of calcium acetate and trisodium phosphate were used and super saturated TiO The effects of PEO process parameters on the microstructural and morphological characteristics of in-situ synthesized layers were investigated. Results indicated that the total thickness of synthesized ceramic layers including the thickness of dense and porous sublayers would be enhanced if the higher Ca/P ratio electrolytes were used. It can be concluded that the higher Ca/P ratio electrolytes would induce increased ΔV in the system and consequently, stronger arcs will form. Results in heat-concentrated zones inside the discharge channels of supersaturated ceramics provide sufficient activation energy for HA formation. This phenomenon is accompanied by higher chemical potential derived from the higher Ca/P ratio electrolytes, and finally leads to the precipitation of nano-crystalline HA.