Various parameters have been utilized to evaluate the osseointegration of the orthopedic implants. Mechanical response of the bone to the local loading conditions is one category of the factors for a successful osseointegration of the orthopedic implants after implantation. Load transferring between the bone tissue and the implant would be influenced by the difference of mechanical modulus between the bone and the implant. After primary resorption of the bone tissue at the bone-implant interface (old bone), new bone tissue is deposited to the surface of the implant. Nevertheless of implant surface conditions which will be reviewed and discussed in the following chapters, mechanical stimulation of osteogenic cells at the initial stage of the bone-implant integration is crucial. Furthermore, the influence of mechanical loading conditions in the long-term integration of the implant to the bone is vital for successful clinical outcomes. The other category of factors is associated with the biological aspect of the osseointegration. On the other hand, measurement of the total protein, expression of the osteoblast and the osteoclast-related marker genes, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activities have been found effective in biological evaluation of osseointegration. In order to evaluate such an activity of such biological factors in various stages of the osseointegration, pull-out test was extensively utilized to examine the strength of integrated lamellar bone to the implant. The formation of new lamellar bone tissue at the contact surface of the bone and the implant could enhance the integrity of the implant to the bone. Furthermore, the contact surface of the new bone over the old bone with the implant could be studied to quantify the osseointegration at the bone-implant interface. This chapter would review these concepts in details to exhibit a general understanding of effective parameters on osseointegration and the relevant evaluation methods that are utilized in the development of orthopedic implant with greater bioactivity at the bone-implant interface.Bone remodeling is carried out based on the effective mechanical and biological factors that are permanently under alteration. The process of bone remodeling is extremely affected when the bone is injured and need to be healed. In some cases, it is necessitated to insert or implant the artificial components made of various types of biomaterials in contact with the bone for the treatment of bone fractures or for the replacement of degenerated bone tissue. Therefore, it is crucial to achieve a good integration of implant with adjacent or surrounding intact bone tissue. The attachment of bone cells to the implant surface followed by their stimulation to be mineralized and formed as the bone tissue at the interface of bone-implant would be important in primary and long-term integration of the implant to the bone. Mechanical response of bone cells to the loading conditions at the interface of the bone-implant would be significantly effective in integration of the implant to the bone. First, mechanical modulus mismatch between the bone and the implant forms a specific pattern of load transferring. If the modulus of the implant is higher than that of the bone tissue, major portion of the localized stress is transferred to the implant from which the physiological transferred strain for stimulation of bone cells is reduced. On the other hand, other parameters such as geometry of implant, surface condition of the implant, and corrosion resistance of implant in human body fluid are effective in osseointegration of the implant in contact with the bone. However, understanding of mechanical effects on the integration of bone tissue to the implant has been focused in recent decade to enhance the primary and long-term implantation of orthopedic implants in the treatment of bone injuries. Osseointegration of orthopedic implants has been evaluated from various aspects. As reported in the literature Evaluation of osseointegration ability of the implant is carried out by in vitro or in vivo assessment of the biological and mechanical factors that would influence or affect the quality of the implant osseointegration. Integration of the implant to the bone has been mechanically evaluated by pull-out or torque tests. These types of tests are conducted by the implantation of the implant to the animal bone and the range of the implant removal force or torque is measured to evaluate the bonding strength of the bone-implant after a couple of weeks or months postimplantation. Osseointegration has been also biologically evaluated by measuring the range of osteoblast- and osteoclast-related marker genes and total proteins of the integrated bone to the implant at various time points after implantation. Likewise, the activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) has been highlighted as evaluation factors for biological assessment of osseointegration. In this chapter, the effective mechanical and biological factors or concepts on the enhancement or deterioration of the osseointegration are reviewed. First, the responses of the bone tissue to the mechanical factors are reviewed and then the effects of the bone mechanoresponsive on osseointegration are discussed. The deterioration of the bone formation rate due to reduction of the activity of the hormonal factors is then reviewed. Afterward, the mechanical and biological evaluation methods on the basis of in vivo implantation experiments are expressed. In the final sections of this chapter, the concept of the new/old bone contact surface with the implant and response of the cortical and trabecular bone at the peri-implant and distant bone areas are elaborated. Mechanoresponsive of the cortical and trabecular bones has been assessed in the literature and investigated by radiographic scanning of the bone in human bodies to study the alteration of the bone mass and architecture in various conditions. Likewise, direct investigation has been carried out for insight study of bone alteration based on aging and mechanical loading conditions in animal bodies Through scanning electron microscope (SEM), the morphology of trabecular bone is different in various part of the body bones. It was shown that In order to discuss the relation of mechanical stimulation with mineralization and formation of the new bone tissue, the evaluation of healing process could be organized. Hoerth et al. Immobilization of the bones would result in unloading of the bone tissue from which the required mechanical stimulation for induction of osteogenic cells would not be created to facilitate differentiation and formation of the lamellar bone. Thus, the volume or density of the bone tissue is gradually reduced. In addition to the bone mechanical response, alteration of hormonal, genetic, and nutritional factors would cause changes in mass and architecture of the bone. Mechanoresponsiveness of the bone tissue to the mechanical factor/loading has been clearly observed in athletes who received high-impact and high-velocity loading conditions (e.g., tennis players whose playing arm has a higher bone mass and diameter than the nonplaying arm). Although mechanoresponsive ability of the bone tissue could encourage exercises and mechanical loading for increasing the bone density, however, bone remodeling or osteogenesis is remarkably affected by aging. It means that other than mechanical factors that would enhance the bone remodeling and the bone formation, hormonal changes would also influence the quality of bone remodeling. In women, the ability of bone formation is reduced after the menopause. Bassey et al. Mechanoresponsiveness of the trabecular bone is reduced in adulthood compared to young age. In young age, in response to the mechanical loading, significant increase of the bone volume fraction and the thickening of trabeculae was observed in an experimental study by Willie et al. The main method to increase the osseointegration of bioinert materials is the deposition of a bioactive layer on the surface of the material. Calcium-phosphate-based bioceramics was extensively used to be coated on the surface of the implant. It was reported that hydroxyapatite (HA) coating enhances the secondary integration of the implant by which stability and shear strength at the bone-implant interface is increased. It would also promote mineralization of the new osteocyte cells to be formed as bone extracellular matrix In order to enhance the effectiveness of the coating layer for long-term implantation, grafting of biphosphonate-based materials [e.g., pamidronate (PAM), ibandronate (IBA), and zoledronate] to the HA-coating layer was investigated Manjo et al. Bone remodeling could be contemplated as a biological process at which osteoblast cells are constructing the bone cellular matrix. In this process, once the osteoblastic genes are expressed, the collagenous fibers (fibrils) are synthesized in the surrounding of osteoblast cells. Then, these collagen fibrils are mineralized by organic constituents such as calcium phosphate. The steps of bone remodeling are organized through existed proteins in the tissue fluid at the processed zone. Therefore, the reduction of the protein level at the tissue fluid of the bone-implant interface could show the progressing of the bone remodeling Similar to osteoblastic marker genes, osteoclast-related markers “TRAP” and “CalcR” have been detected higher in the integrated bone tissue to the implant in 8 weeks postimplantation compared to 4 weeks When the implant is inserted to the bone, the parent or old bone, which has been crushed by the implant, could not be integrated with the implant. In fact, the old bone is replaced by the new bone tissue. The increase of ratio of the new bone contact surface over the old bone contact surface with the implant at the interface of the bone-implant would indicate the progress of osseointegration In one type, the osteogenesis cells may be adhered, trapped, or absorbed to the implant surface and thus the new bone tissue deposition is initiated and progressed from the implant surface through the bone tissue. In other type, the formation of the bone might be initiated from the distant osteogenesis cells and then the woven bone is gradually deposited through the implant surface and remodeled to the lamellar bone. The latter type would be more theorized for the effective enhancement of the osseointegration After insertion of the implant through the bone, the response of the cortical and trabecular bone to be integrated with the implant would be different. In fact, bone remodeling process is significantly affected at the bone tissue near to the implant (peri-implant). On one hand, the distribution and extent of the mechanical loading is highly altered by the implantation of a new device through the bone, from which the mechanical stimulation signals for the bone formation might not be naturally generated. On the other hand, flow of blood and the presence of biological factors at the implanted zone is greatly affected, by which the bone formation might be significantly reduced. In order to evaluate the effect of implantation of a medical implant through the bone tissue, the bone remodeling (bone resorption and formation) at the bone tissue near to the implant (peri-implant) and distant to the implant was studied by Li et al. Due to bioactive nature and mechanical structuring of the bone tissue, there would be various biological and mechanical factors which would influence the bone remodeling process at the interface of the bone and the implant and thus implant osseointegration in the long-term implantation. In this chapter, these factors were reviewed generally and constructive discussions were provided for a better understanding or challenging of the expressed concepts. Initially, the mechanical response of the bone was elaborated as the mechanoresponsive behaviors of the bone against of physiological loading conditions. As reviewed, the mechanoresponsive behavior of the bone is greatly affected by the implantation of an artificial device or implant through the bone. As highlighted in  Express how the stability of the implants might be affected. What is the role of the trabecular bone in the enhancement of the implant stability? Provide examples in your answer. What characteristics of the trabecular bone might be altered for bearing of the physiological loading? What is the range of mechanical modulus of the trabecular bone? Explain why the mechanical modulus is different in various parts of the body. What is the relation between the mechanical stimulation and mineralization and formation of the new bone tissue? Express your answer with consideration of the healing process at the fracture gaps between bone fragments. Discuss how the gap between the bone and the implant could affect the implant osseointegration. What is the effect of the body immobilization on the bone formation? Consider What are the mechanoresponsive aspects of osseointegration? Provide a brief elaboration for each aspect. What is the effect of hormonal factors in mechanoresponsiveness of the bone? How the density of lining osteoblast cells would be reduced with aging? Express this effect in premenopausal and postmenopausal women. What are the bone mechanoresponses to the physiological loading conditions? Express this response in young age and its deterioration with aging. What is the effect of biphosphonate-based materials on osseointegration? What types of biphosphonate are currently utilized and which type has greater effect on the implant osseointegration? Discuss why the optimal range of biphosphonate is beneficial to be delivered or released at the bone-implant interface. What types of mechanical testing method might be utilized for the evaluation of implant osseointegration? What types of biological factors might be detected for the evaluation of osseointegration progression at the bone-implant interface? How this detection would be carried out? Provide a brief explanation on how each type of biological factor would examine the progression or quality of the osseointegration. What are the meaning of the new and the old bone tissue in contact surface with the implant? How the ratio of the new/old bone contact surfaces with the implant could be used for evaluation of the osseointegration? What are the effective factors on the rate of new bone formation at the bone-implant interface? Express the remodeling of the new bone tissue at the bone-implant interface and how it could be progressed. Which type of the new bone remodeling has been theorized and how the implant osseointegration could be enhanced by consideration of such theories? Discuss the effect of implantation of an artificial implant on the bone remodeling behavior of the cortical and trabecular bone at near and distant areas of the implant. Provide feasible reasons for your answers.  What types of in-vivo evaluation methods could be utilized for examination of the long-term osseointegration after a couple of months or even years of implantation? What other mechanical and biological factors might be effective in the osseointegration of the orthopedic implants? What other feasible reasons could be discussed for response of the cortical and trabecular responses to the implanted artificial device at the peri-implant and distant bone tissues.