For the minimization of excess sludge in activated sludge process, the photo-Fenton reaction was applied as a novel technique and its effectiveness was experimentally examined. A batch study was conducted to elucidate parameters governing the activated sludge integration by the photo-Fenton process such as the concentrations of sludge, Fe ion and hydrogen peroxide. It was found that the chemical oxidation sludge disintegration by photo-Fenton reaction could be divided into two phases. At the beginning of the photo-Fenton process the dissolved chemical oxygen demand (COD) increased. This is due to the discharge of organic compounds occurred by oxidative decomposition of the cell wall of a microbe in the sludge. The COD reached the maximum and then decreased. In this phase, mineralization of dissolved organic substances by the photo-Fenton reaction might be dominant. The occurrence of mineralization was suppressed as the initial MLSS increased. The Fe dosage enhanced the sludge disintegration by the photo-Fenton reaction as well as the H2O2 dosage. The soluble total organic carbon (TOC) of the solution increased monotonously. The results suggest that Fe ions might be entrapped into the activated sludge. It may be concluded that photo-Fenton reaction is one of feasible processes for disintegration of excess activated sludge.In recent years, increased attention has been given to minimization of waste sludge in wastewater treatment process. This is based on that the cost of disposal of sludge has weighed on management of effluent treatment plants and shortage of a disposal place. Treatment and disposal of excess sludge amount to approximately half the entire operating cost for domestic wastewater treatment plants. Research of excess sludge treatment has been extensively carried out and some novel sludge reduction techniques have been proposed The photo-Fenton reaction, which is one of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), may offer a promising technology for minimization of excess sludge This reaction is followed by reaction In this study, the utilization of the photo-Fenton reaction for sludge disintegration is experimentally examined. In order to investigate change of the solid ingredient of activated sludge, the dissolved COD (chemical oxygen demand), soluble TOC (total organic carbon), H The experimental apparatus used in this study is the glass cylindrical reactor of a laboratory scale (working volume: 2 The UV light irradiation sources were three 15 The activated sludge used in the experiment was taken from a final settling tank of an effluent treatment plants (Kawagoe City, Saitama, Japan). The pH has a significant role determining the efficiency of Fenton and photo-Fenton oxidation. Except as otherwise specified the initial pH of the solution was adjusted to 3 which is the optimal value for the (photo) Fenton reaction using sulfuric acid [e.g., Samples from the liquid phase were withdrawn at predetermined time intervals using a syringe. In order to remove fine solids, the sample was filtered with a 5 Tap water was used in preparing the reaction mixture. Fenton reactions were initiated by addition of known amount of H The concentration of hydrogen peroxide in the sample solutions was measured by the method, which is an application of the glucose oxidase (GOD) method used to measure glucose concentration in serum, plasma or urine The concentrations of Fe dissolved in the solution were measured by the 1,10-phenanthroline method (AQUAB Model AQ-103, Shibata Sci. Technol. Ltd., Japan) Most of the experiments were performed in duplicate or triplicate to assure accurate data and the average variability was within 15%. Many of suspend solid ingredients in activated sludge are the organic matters of the living thing origin. Since most activated sludge microorganisms would be killed and oxidized to organic substances, the effects of sludge reduction were determined in term of changes in dissolved COD As illustrated in In the experiment the data of which are shown in It was found as shown in The rather fast decrease in H As illustrated in  The influence of activated sludge loading on photodegradation was examined with the initial sludge concentration (MLSS) of 2000, 3000 and 4000 In Initial concentration of H It should be noted that the [H The pH of the solution controls the production rate of The measurements of soluble TOC in the solution during the course of photo-Fenton oxidation were conducted at various doses of Fe and H The feasibility of photo-Fenton reaction for excess activated sludge disintegration was studied in a batch photoreactor. It was experimentally found that the chemical oxidation by photo-Fenton reaction could be divided into two phases. At the beginning of the photo-Fenton process the dissolved COD increased. This is due to the discharge of organic substances occurred by oxidative decomposition of the cell wall of a microbe in the sludge. The COD reached the maximum and then decreased. In this phase, mineralization of dissolved organic substances by the photo-Fenton reaction might be dominant. The effects of parameters like the initial concentrations of activated sludge and Fenton regents were assessed. The occurrence of mineralization was suppressed as the initial MLSS increased at the range of concentration used in our experiment. The Fe dosage enhanced the sludge disintegration by the photo-Fenton reaction as well as the H The measurements of Fe ion dissolved in the solution suggest that Fe ions are entrapped into the activated sludge. It may be conjectured that Fe is physically or chemically adsorbed to biomass particulates. The Fenton reaction has not only oxidation function but also coagulation by the formation of ferric-hydroxo complexes. We have not examined the change in the sludge dewaterability in this study. This is one of our future research subjects as well as the state of Fe entrapped into biomass particulates. To elucidate the kinetics of sludge disintegration by the photo-Fenton reaction further studies should be conducted.