Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been widely used as pigment in paints, paper and cosmetic products, as well as high-tech applications such as solar cells, semiconductors, biomedical devices and air purification. TiO2 pigment is primarily produced by a high temperature chloride process, which forms CO2 as a reaction byproduct. A novel hydrometallurgical process for making TiO2 pigment without direct CO2 emission is investigated. The novel process involves alkaline roasting of titania slag, with subsequent washing, leaching, solvent extraction, hydrolysis, and calcination stages, resulting in high-purity anatase or rutile pigments. Experimental validation for each of the processing steps is demonstrated. Pigment whiteness is critically sensitive to trace amounts of discoloring impurities such as iron. The use of solvent extraction proved to be highly effective in reducing the concentration of discoloring impurities in the final pigment to commercially acceptable levels.Titanium dioxide (TiO The two main commercial processes for producing titanium dioxide pigment are sulfate process ( Titania slag or raw ilmenite is used as the feed material for the sulfate process, which was developed nearly 100 The chloride process was first developed in the late 1950s by DuPont. The chloride process involves reacting rutile (natural or synthetic) or titania with petroleum coke and chlorine gas at high temperatures, forming a titanium tetrachloride (TiCl The resulting product of these reactions is a highly purified TiO Several hydrometallurgical processes for producing pigment grade TiO A direct leaching method of ilmenite using chloride media has been developed by The Altair process ( In summary, the existing commercial processes for making TiO Therefore, it is imperative that any novel process of pigment manufacture be able to realize certain advantages over current methods, but also be able to meet commercial pigment purity standards. A new method has been developed recently that relies on a combination of alkaline roasting of Ti-slag, leaching in HCl acid, and one-stage solvent extraction ( The new pigment manufacturing method is composed of multiple unit processes that are well established in other metallurgical operations ( Other investigators have used alkaline roasting to digest titanium feed stocks. These methods indicate that alkaline digestion of titanium slag can yield high decomposition rates at medium temperatures and atmospheric pressure. Such conditions will conceivably lead to lower energy consumption for the entire pigment manufacturing process. It is hypothesized that that the synergistic combination of alkaline roasting, acid leaching and solvent extraction will result in a virtually iron-free titanium solution that can be further processed to commercially pure TiO Laboratory scale experiments were conducted to characterize the feed material, intermediate reaction products, and final pigment, as well as validate the chemistry of each unit process. The slag used in this investigation was provided by Rio Tinto QIT and goes by the trade name of Sorelslag®. The slag is a solid-solution of various titanate compounds with a pseudobrookite structure ( The sodium hydroxide, acids, and other reagents used were analytical grade and supplied by Cole-Parmer. The solvent extraction reagents were supplied by Cognis Corp. Titanium slag roasting was conducted using nickel crucibles inside a muffle furnace. Several grams of slag were mixed with NaOH pellets in a nickel crucible and heated at 500 Leaching was conducted in glass round bottom flasks in a temperature controlled oil bath with precise temperature (+/− The leach solution used in the solvent extraction experiments was prepared by leaching the washed after-roast product with various concentrations of hydrochloric acid. The liquid to solids ratio for each leaching test was 10:1. The organic solvent was comprised of 20 Dissolved metal concentrations of washing and leach solutions were determined using an ICP Agilent 7500ce quadrupole mass-spectrometer. X-ray diffraction of slag, intermediate and final products was performed with a Philips 1140 diffractometer (Cu Kα) and the patterns were analyzed using X'Pert High Score Plus software. Intermediate and final products were examined with SEM microscopy using a Topcon SM100 microscope with an EDAX EDS detector. Roasting is one of several commonly used chemical metallurgy processes for upgrading metals from raw materials or intermediate products such as slag. Alkaline roasting of vanadium slags has been an established upgrading process for several years ( By forming Na A sample of roasted slag was examined using X-ray diffraction, as shown in ICP analysis of the first wash solution indicated that a substantial amount of the aluminum and silicon compounds were leached into the alkali solution, as shown in Leaching of the roasted and washed products was performed to dissolve Ti into solution. Na TiO Iron and other impurities follow similar dissolution reactions. The extent of leaching has strong dependence on the concentration of HCl solution. A series of leach tests were performed using HCl solutions varying from 0.75 It is apparent that Ti recovery significantly improves with an increase in HCl concentration, whereas the recovery of Na remains relatively unchanged. After each leaching experiment, the leach solution and undissolved solids were separated by vacuum filtration. At lower concentrations, the solution was quite turbid and difficult to filter. Once the HCl concentration exceeded 1.5, the filtered solution became clearer and had less fine suspended particles, although precipitation occurred in the filtered solution after a few days. It is apparent that lower concentrations of acid are sufficient to dissolve Ti but not to keep it in solution, resulting in low temperature hydrolysis. The product of low temperature hydrolysis is a hydrated titanium oxide compound known as orthotitanic acid, Ti(OH) The residue of each leaching experiment was rinsed, filtered, dried, and weighed. The composition and structure of the residue were also examined by ICP-MS, SEM/EDAX and XRD. The concentration of Ti in the residue did not vary much from sample to sample, although the amount of residue decreased with increasing acidity. The structure of the residue for each sample did not vary and showed only weak anatase and SiO Leaching experiments using higher concentrations of acid and higher pulp densities were also conducted. The leaching was performed with 5 It is apparent that the dissolution reaction occurs very rapidly and that a substantial portion of metals have been dissolved after only a few minutes. The concentration of Ti in solution was 77.8 TiO Amine extractants have been used for decades in various solution concentration and purification applications. Alamine 336 is a common amine extractant that has been used to recover a wide variety of dissolved metals including cadmium, cobalt, iron, hafnium, tungsten, uranium and vanadium ( The extent to which a metal anionic complex, M As mentioned previously, each leach solution was prepared by leaching washed after-roast product with various concentrations of hydrochloric acid. The compositions of the leach solution prepared with 5 It is apparent that nearly 100% of the Fe in the leach solution was removed after a single contact with the amine extractant. The reaction occurred very rapidly with equilibrium between the phases occurring in less than a minute of contact time. The level of Fe was less than the detectable limit of the ICP analyzer (0.01 The levels of impurities in the pigment produced by this method nearly meet or are below those of two commercial pigments. These results demonstrate that the basic hypothesis of this work is valid. Sufficiently pure TiO The extraction efficiency of a particular extractant for a metal is given by the extraction coefficient, E Leach solutions prepared by using various concentrations of HCl acid were contacted with amine extractant under the same conditions mentioned previously. One solution was prepared by using 4.8 The highest extraction coefficient for Fe was 970 at 5 Dissolved metals can react with water molecules to form insoluble hydrates in a process known as hydrolysis. Titanium tends to undergo either low temperature or high temperature hydrolysis reactions. The product of low temperatures hydrolysis (25–80 Solutions with low acidity favor this reaction. At higher temperatures (80–110 It has been well established that precipitating Ti in the less hydrated form leads to higher quality pigment, thus thermal hydrolysis initiated by dilution and boiling of titanium rich solution has been the established industrial procedure for many decades ( The rate and extent of hydrolysis is highly dependent on the initial Ti concentration, acidity, and temperature, as well as the addition of nuclei “seeds” for precipitation. In this experiment, the precipitate nuclei were formed homogenously, whereas it is common practice in industrial sulfate process operations to add a small percentage of nuclei seeds to control particle growth and increase recovery ( Calcination involves the heating of the hydrated compound to drive off chemically bound water and promote the crystalline transformation to TiO The morphology of pigment calcined at 650 A new process for producing commercial quality TiO The Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy of the