In this paper, we present an explicit solution to the partial eigenvalue assignment problem of high order control system using orthogonality relations between eigenvectors of the matrix polynomial. Our solution can be implemented with only a partial knowledge of the spectrum and the corresponding left eigenvectors of the matrix polynomial. We show that the number of eigenvalues and eigenvectors that need to remain unchanged will not affected by feedback. A numerical example is given to illustrate the applicability and the practical usefulness of the proposed method.We consider the polynomial eigenvalue problem The matrix polynomial The system modeled by The choice of the control Many practical situations where such problem arises and need to be solved are, for example vibration analysis of structural mechanical and acoustic systems, electrical circuit simulation, fluids mechanics, finite element model updating in aerospace and automobile industries. The partial eigenvalue assignment problem for large linear control and large space structure are extensively considered, for example see This paper is organized as follows: In Section Let us start with the following preliminary definitions, see  A scalar  The nonzero vectors  The matrix polynomial (lambda matrix)  In this paper we restrict ourselves to nonsingular matrix polynomial    The following theorems establish the orthogonality relations between the eigenvectors for the matrix polynomial using its connection with the standard eigenvalues problem.    Suppose the pair Suppose the pair Hence Next, suppose that Eq. Similarly, if Eq. Substituting Eqs.     By This proves relation Similarly, from Eq. Given This is the partial pole assignment problem in which we use the vectors Write the polynomial eigenvalue problem Let us partition the Next, we introduce the following theorem for solving Partial Eigenvalue Assignment Problem of high order control systems.    In words, this theorem assures us that any choice of  Our goal is to prove that Thus In order to use In the following section, we obtain the explicit expression for In the following theorem, we introduce the explicit expression for   Then the modified matrix polynomial  We need only to show Then from In From the expression No The The vector The above discussion leads us to formulate the following algorithm for our solution of the partial eigenvalue assignment problem.       We generate the randomly matrices Now, we assign the first From which we compute the feedback vectors In this paper, we derived an explicit solution to the partial eigenvalue problem by using one of orthogonality relations between eigenvectors for matrix polynomial The first author would like to sincerely thank Professor Dr. Salah El-Gendi, Faculty of Science, Assiut University for the helpful discussions, interest and comments.