Block and panel caving methods are increasingly used for mining of large and strong orebodies at large depths below the ground surface (>1 km). This paper focuses on the production phase of caving when the extraction level is fully developed and subjected to the weight of overlying caved material. A limit equilibrium solution for estimation of cave loads is critically reviewed and combined with existing empirical tools in order to forecast extraction level performance under cave loading. The analysis results, presented in nomogram form, suggest that the risk of severe squeezing of extraction level tunnels does not increase with cave depths below 500–1000 m due to the beneficial effects of arching. Under normal extraction ratios (ER = ∼50%), severe squeezing experienced from cave loads in deep mines appears to be unlikely in all but the weakest rock masses (σ
                     cm < 5 MPa, where σ
                     cm is the rock mass global strength), even with poor draw control or low drawpoint availability. The likelihood of severe squeezing is greater when large draw areas (HR = 50–75 m, where HR is the hydraulic radius) are combined with low drawpoint availability or poor draw control and locally higher extraction ratios (ER = ∼75%), even in better quality rock (σ
                     cm = 5–10 MPa). The analysis results are back-analyzed with the extraction level performance before and after a doubling production of rate and draw area at the deep ore zone (DOZ) mine in Indonesia. The extraction level conditions predicted by the nomograms correlate well with the experience at the DOZ, in which extraction level damage increases significantly over the production rampup, accompanied by a significant drop in drawpoint availability.Block and panel caving methods are increasingly used for mining of large and strong orebodies at large depths below the ground surface (e.g. >1 km). The high in situ and induced stresses associated with deeper cave mines have led to changes in design and sequencing of the underlying extraction level development. One of the significant changes is the timing of extraction level development relative to undercutting. By delaying development of the drawpoint drifts and drawbells until after the undercut has passed over, mines have been able to avoid subjecting a fully developed extraction level to elevated abutment stresses. This is an important design concept, since abutment stresses are often high enough to cause significant fracturing or even rockbursting around the production drifts, drawpoint drifts, and associated intersections. As caves become deeper, this problem is likely to be worse. Once the undercut has passed and the extraction level is fully developed and put into production, it will still be subjected to the weight of overlying caved material. Although these stresses are likely to be much lower than the abutment stress, the extraction level is more vulnerable at this stage due to the higher extraction ratio and the damage caused by the abutment stress. Understanding of how much of the overburden weight is likely to be transferred to the extraction level and how this is influenced by depth remains limited and unfortunately it is not typically monitored during production. An existing limit equilibrium solution for estimating cave loads is reviewed here in light of more recent physical and numerical modeling studies and applied to the study of average cave loads. The potential vulnerability of deep extraction levels to severe squeezing (closure) during the production phase is then analyzed by combining the results of Monte Carlo simulation of cave loads with existing empirical tools for forecasting of extraction level performance.  In applying the limit equilibrium solution, The results of discrete element model (DEM) simulations and continuum simulations of drawdown in a body of frictional material carried out by Use of Eq. The friction angle of caved rock is also expected to vary substantially within a cave due to variability in the bulk porosity, stress, and uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the rock fragments. The empirical rockfill shear strength criterion developed by   The increase in horizontal stresses at the cave wall with depth relative to RBS will cause a reduction in the overall friction angle with depth. The presence of shearing and dilation at the cave perimeter will result in a local porosity that is higher than the average cave porosity and corresponding reductions in equivalent roughness and friction angle. There will be a range in RBS at the cave perimeter due to the cave intersecting multiple lithologies over its large height. The cave porosity impacts the bulk density and friction angle of the caved rock. Hydraulic radius is equal to the area under active draw divided by the perimeter. In the case of a block cave, in which all drawpoints on the footprint are drawn on a regular basis, the hydraulic radius will be equal to that of the cave footprint. In the case of a panel cave, the draw area will be smaller than the footprint area and will be a function of the production rate from the panel. In large footprint caves with multiple panels, there may be multiple areas under active draw. These should be treated separately when calculating hydraulic radius for cave load estimation, as illustrated in The hydraulic radius can be related approximately to the production rate. A production rate of 20,000 t/d per panel would typically incorporate draw from around 200 drawpoints (i.e. 100 drawbells), which would draw an area of 45,000 m A Monte Carlo approach was used in Excel (with @Risk) to explore the likely range of average cave base stresses in deep cave mines via the limit equilibrium solution presented in Eq. A summary of inputs to the simulation is provided in The results of a simulation employing 50,000 iterations are outlined in The vertical stresses on the extraction level are likely to vary significantly from the average stresses estimated above due to the redistributing effects of draw and the fact that material above the major apex tends to remain stagnant (at least for some distance above the extraction level) relative to material directly above the drawbells ( Assuming that there is reasonable flow interaction over the minor apex and that flow immediately above the top of the drawbell is restricted to the area of the drawbell itself, the ratio of IMZ area to stagnant area can be estimated from the drawbell length, Based on the results of DEM and continuum simulations, Because of the significant amount of arching that can occur within a flow zone, the IMZ stresses tend to be very low relative to the stagnant zone stresses. For example, the IMZ stresses expected in a 12 m long drawbell would be 130 kPa for a caved rock friction angle of 40° and a density of 1800 kg/m For a 30 m extraction drive spacing and 14 m drawbell length, this ratio in Eq. The stresses in the stagnant zone over the major apex will be further concentrated as they transmit down to the extraction level where the production drifts, drawpoint drifts, and orepasses have been excavated. In this case, the average stress on the extraction level, The extraction ratio of a fully developed extraction level is in the order of 50%, which would further concentrate the major apex loads by a factor of around 2. Near orepasses or middle access drifts, however, the extraction ratio is typically closer to 75% and the major apex loads could be concentrated by a factor of 4. This means that the vertical stresses at the extraction level could range from 4 times the average cave load under strict draw control and normal extraction ratio to 12 times the average cave load under poor draw control close to areas of high extraction ratio. Although it is common to measure deformation of extraction level excavations during production (e.g. with convergence pins, extensometers or laser-based surveys), measurement of absolute vertical stresses is rare and therefore further research will be required to validate these estimates. The response of the extraction level can be estimated from the results of a benchmarking study carried out by The rock mass global strength, The disturbance factor, Global strength The results of the cave load analysis were combined with the empirical closure limits of Low rock mass strength ( Large hydraulic radius draw areas ( High extraction ratio ( Severe squeezing conditions as a result of cave loads are considered more likely under conditions of poor draw control and/or low drawpoint availability. At normal extraction ratios ( As noted in the analysis of average cave loads, the overall risk of severe squeezing due to cave loads levels off after approximately 500–1000 m depth due to arching effects. The analysis results outlined here were compared to the experiences with extraction level performance during production from a single large panel at the deep ore zone (DOZ) mine in Indonesia. The DOZ extraction level lies at a depth of approximately 1000 m below mountainous terrain. According to With roughly 250 drawpoints contributing to an early production rate of 40,000 t/d at the DOZ, the area under draw would have been approximately 65,000 m Back analysis results suggest that the increase in active draw area resulting from a doubling of production rate from 2005 to 2010 may have been a primary contributor to increased damage on the extraction level at the DOZ. The resulting drawpoint shutdowns and coincidence of wet muck then likely exacerbated the problem due to an increasing loss of draw control and more irregular cave loading, as suggested by The extraction levels of deep caving mines must survive both the undercutting process, which sheds significant abutment stresses onto pre-developed excavations and the production phase, where a significant weight of caved material must be borne by the extraction level, primarily through the major apexes. Application of the limit equilibrium solution to cave loads suggests, however, that the average cave loads are unlikely to increase below depths of 500–1000 m, due to the beneficial effects of arching, and that the magnitude of the average cave load is most strongly dependent on the hydraulic radius of the area under draw (which is directly related to the production rate and number of active drawpoints in the panel). Average cave loads are expected to range from 2 MPa to 6 MPa for draw hydraulic radii in the range of 25–75 m. Drawing on tributary area theory and the results of recent physical modeling of cave loads, it was postulated that the average cave loads will either double or triple as they concentrate at the top of the major apex, depending on whether drawpoint availability is high or low (corresponding to strict and poor draw control). These stresses are then expected to concentrate further on the extraction level in the presence of production drifts, draw drifts, and cut-outs. Under normal layouts, with an extraction percentage of around 50%, stresses are expected to double again (i.e. 4–6 times the average cave load, depending on the drawpoint availability). In areas of higher extraction, however, stresses could quadruple (i.e. 8–12 times the average cave load). The results of the cave load analysis were combined with empirical closure limits to produce a set of nomograms for prediction of extraction level stress and closure based on the local extraction ratio, hydraulic radius of the draw area, depth and draw control/drawpoint availability (strict/high versus poor/low). The nomograms suggest that under conditions of good draw control and high drawpoint availability, severe squeezing conditions due to cave loads are unlikely even in weak rock masses at large depths (i.e. >1000 m). Severe squeezing conditions are shown to be much more likely under conditions of poor draw control and/or low drawpoint availability, especially under large draw hydraulic radii ( The extraction level conditions predicted by the nomograms correlate well with the experience at the DOZ mine, where a simultaneous increase in draw area and a drop in drawpoint availability over time result in significant damage and closure on the extraction level. The nomograms suggest that this is accompanied by an increase in extraction level stresses from 20 MPa to 45–50 MPa, which put weak rock masses at risk of severe closure and strong rock masses at risk of moderate closure. The nomograms would benefit from more in-depth analysis of rock mass strength at the DOZ and comparison to other case studies of extraction level closure under cave loading. In situ measurements of cave loads should also be used to test the nomograms and provide deeper insight into the role of draw control on extraction level stresses and performance. The author confirms that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no financial support for this work, from any source, that could have influenced its outcome. The author would like to thank Professor E.T. Brown for his encouragement and support in the preparation of this paper, his contributions to the field of cave mine engineering and his generosity with knowledge and ideas over the years. The anonymous reviewers are also acknowledged for their constructive feedback, which helped to improve the paper.