The scattering of Lamb waves has been adopted for effective detection of different types of mechanical damage in both metal and composite structures. The scattering field from a defect is normally obtained through various types of sensors, which can quantify this field in only one direction. This paper presents experimental investigations adopting 3D laser vibrometry and the root mean square (RMS) of the velocity fields in isotropic plate-like structures. Experimental case studies with defects are considered. The results clearly illustrate the benefits of the method and utilisation of the full 3D characterisations of Lamb wave propagation and scattering. Lamb wave based testing in particular has been confirmed to be a capable tool among various structural health monitoring (SHM) techniques. Lamb waves have been proven to be reliable tools to identify most types of mechanical damage amongst a range of non-destructive methods. Lamb wave-based damage detection methods have been adopted for numerous research studies recently for both composite [ In terms of sensing the Lamb wave propagation, piezo and optical sensors are widely utilised for measurements of Lamb waves due to their high sensitivity and low response time [  Considering all the aforementioned limitations and challenges, this paper presents a Lamb wave based characterisation and damage imaging method, adopting advanced 3D laser vibrometry. The advanced, high sensitivity and resolution technology combines a high sensitivity resolution and processing time. The test sample represents large aluminium plates 3 The experimental equipment included a signal amplifier, 3D laser vibrometer and a built–in signal generator as illustrated in The velocity components were measured at different grid points of 100 A plate with a crack was considered in this method. The two fundamental modes of Lamb wave ( The Root Mean Square (RMS) value of a set of values is the square root of the arithmetic mean (average) of the squares of the original values. In the case of a set of To investigate more about Lamb wave characterisation, particularly in damage location, the signal ratio was defined. The signal ratio here means the ratio between the Considering In the current paper, imaging and localization of various mechanical types of damage for isotropic plate-like structures were investigated. The investigation considered whether the application of 3D laser vibrometry can seriously advance the identification and localization of different types of mechanical damage, based on the scattering of Lamb waves. The main outcomes of this work are: The merits of adopting the 3D scattering field characterisation in comparison with traditional (1D) measurements, based on laser vibrometry or an array of PZT sensors and A presentation of a damage imaging method, based on utilising RMS velocity fields, particularly at the damage location. Future work will be focused on composite materials and the characterisation of more common structural damage. This work was supported by the Australian Research Council under Grant Number DE130100261.