Cerium is the most prevalent and lowest cost rare earth element (REE) in hard rock bastnaesite type ores. Cerium separation is facilitated by oxidation of cerium from trivalent to tetravalent state, where its solubility is greatly reduced. In the initial study, the thermodynamics and kinetics of cerium oxidation were investigated in acidic chloride solutions. The leach solutions in REE processes contain a large mixture of rare earths in trivalent form. Part two of this study investigates the ability of this process to separate cerium from mixed REE leach solutions of more industrially important REE. The cerium oxidation process developed in Part I of this study was implemented on mixed REE solutions under similar conditions. Cerium was oxidized using sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide, potassium permanganate, and Caro's Acid. Reactions were tested at pH 3.0 and 25 °C. The greatest cerium removal, 98.4%, was achieved using permanganate as an oxidant in multi REE solutions leaving a product with a cerium to total REE (Ce/TREE) ratio of 0.62. Varying levels of cerium removal were achieved with lower selectivity using the other oxidants. To investigate the adsorption of other REE to cerium, adsorption isotherms of neodymium and terbium were created using ceric hydroxide and fitted to the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms.The removal of cerium from concentrates of mixed rare earth elements (REE) is the first step in REE separation flowsheets, allowing higher value REE to be separated via solvent extraction (SX) economically ( Cerium is removed from REE concentrates based on the difference in solubility between tetravalent cerium compounds and trivalent REE compounds ( Removing cerium at the beginning of the hydrometallurgical circuit greatly reduces water and reagent consumption in subsequent processes, as it is commonly ~50% of the total REE by weight in a given deposit ( Part I of this study ( Oxidation selectivity tests were conducted using solutions with multiple rare earth elements. The mix of REE was chosen to be higher in concentration of LREE than HREE, as most bastnaesite ores have that distribution. These were produced by dissolving cerium sulphate octahydrate (99.9%), lanthanum sulphate octahydrate (99.9%), neodymium sulphate octahydrate (99.9%), praseodymium sulphate octahydrate (99.9%), and terbium sulphate octahydrate (99.9%), all sourced from Alfa Aesar, in 0.1 M HCl. Concentrations for the multi element tests are shown in Oxidants used in the tests were sodium hypochlorite (13%), hydrogen peroxide (H The method used for performing oxidation experiments and the chemical analysis methods used were the same as was used in Part I of this study ( With the aim of obtaining greater insight on the adsorption of trivalent REE on the surface of ceric hydroxide particles, REE adsorption isotherm experiments were conducted using washed cerium precipitates generated using the oxidation procedure previously described. REE concentrations in the adsorption tests were undertaken at 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2500, and 5000 mg/L in DI water adjusted to pH 3.0 with 1 mol/L HCl. Tests were conducted using 60 mL of REE solution in a glass beaker, at 25 °C. The solution was agitated using a magnetic stir bar for 1 h after the addition of 0.1 g of ceric hydroxide precipitate particles. The solution was then separated from the solids in a centrifuge and filtered using Whatman no. 2, 8 μm, filter papers. The liquid samples were analyzed to find the equilibrium concentrations of REE. The fraction of each REE adsorbed per unit weight of ceric hydroxide (mg/g), To understand the viability of cerium separation from other REE, thermodynamic modeling preceded the test works. Speciation diagrams for the individual REE in solution are presented in A Pourbaix diagram of the Ce-H In this section, the results of the oxidation tests on cerium in the presence of other REE are presented. After establishing the ability of the 4 oxidants to oxidize and precipitate cerium from solution in Part 1 of this study ( As a result of the test works, the amount of REE reporting to the solid fraction after the wash process, and the cerium to total REE distribution in solid residue [Ce/TREE]     Interestingly, when sodium and/or sulfate sources were added, i.e. sodium hypochlorite and Caro's acid, all of the REE recovery was in same proportion both in the sodium hypochlorite and Caro's acid systems, and thus [Ce/TREE] To confirm the formation of REE double sulfate salts, the precipitate formed by Caro's acid was analyzed with XRD and SEM-EDS. The precipitates formed in the sodium hypochlorite tests had no crystal structure and were deemed to be amorphous, so it will not be presented in this paper. Precipitates from Caro's acid tests were in the form of sodium REE double sulfates, as shown in The selectivity for HREE is greater than that for LREE in part due to the atomic radii differences between the two subgroups; the LREE have extremely similar radii and charges to those of cerium, allowing for complexation and precipitation via Van der Waals and polar forces with ceric hydroxide ( In the oxidation selectivity tests the REE would continue to co-precipitate even after all of the cerium oxidant had been added and the pH was stable, indicating the oxidation reaction had ceased. This indicates that the REE ions were adsorbing on to the ceric hydroxide solids both during the cerium oxidation process and for the remainder of the observation period. To test this and see if ceric hydroxide particles were capable of adsorbing trivalent REE, adsorption isotherms were created for neodymium and terbium. This was to represent the response of LREE and HREE, respectively. Ceric hydroxide produced in the cerium only oxidation tests using Caro's acid were selected for these tests due to the relative abundance compared to those produced by hydrogen peroxide or sodium hypochlorite, as well as the lack of manganese dioxide that precipitates alongside ceric hydroxide when using permanganate. These cerium solids were washed in two stages to ensure only ceric hydroxide was present and all trivalent cerium had been removed. Batch adsorption tests were performed using solutions of only neodymium or terbium and 0.1 g of ceric hydroxide. The characteristics of this adsorption was investigated by fitting the data to both the Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption models. The equation for the Langmuir model is given in Eq. The Freundlich model assumes that adsorption is multi-layered and that the adsorbent in question has a heterogeneous surface ( The data points obtained from analysis of the final solutions in the adsorption tests were fitted to both of these models and can be seen in The Langmuir and Freundlich constants were calculated using the slope and intercept of the linearized plots are given in Oxidation tests performed on cerium in the presence of other REE indicated that potassium permanganate was the most selective oxidant for cerium tested in this study. Cerium precipitation of 98.4% was achieved using potassium permanganate with washed residues having a [Ce/TREE] The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support for this study through  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at