Purpose
                  Tension band wiring is considered the standard treatment for patella fractures. However, it is limited for fractures with marginal involvement, comminution, and osteoporotic bone. Our experience indicates that these limitations can be overcome with the hook plate. We evaluated the radiographic and clinical outcomes in patients with patella fracture treated with hook plating.
               
                  Methods
                  We enrolled 30 patients who underwent hook plating for patella fracture at two institutions between 2013 and 2017. Fracture classification and surgical options were reviewed. Postoperative fracture gap and time to union as radiographic measurements, and complications, range of motion, and functional outcome with the Lysholm score as clinical outcomes, were evaluated retrospectively.
               
                  Results
                  Nine fractures were AO/OTA 34A1, three B1, one B2, two C1, nine C2, and six C3. All were closed fractures. There were 3 cases of revision, 4 with lateral or medial marginal fracture, 9 with isolated inferior pole fracture, and 14 with comminuted fracture. The average postoperative fracture gap was 0.4 (range, 0–2.0) mm, and bone union was achieved without additional intervention. The average time to union was 11.6 (range, 7–24) weeks. There were no complications, and no extension lag except in one case (10°). The average flexion was 138.5° (range, 110–145°). For functional outcomes, the average Lysholm score was 89.5 (range, 74–95), with 13 excellent, 14 good, 3 fair, and no poor cases.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study suggests that hook plating can result in good bone union and restored knee function in marginal or comminuted fractures of the patella.The goals of treatment for displaced patella fractures are anatomical reduction of the articular surface and restoration of the extensor mechanism of the knee. Tension band wiring (TBW) has long been the standard method for such fractures [ This was a retrospective observational cohort study, and the present study was approved by the institutional review board. The medical records and radiographs of patients who presented with patella fracture from May 2013 to December 2017 in two institutions were reviewed. The inclusion criteria were as follows: patella fracture, surgical treatment with hook plating, and patient age ≥18 years. The exclusion criteria were patients with less than 12 months of follow-up and periprosthetic fracture. Out of the initial 313 patella fractures that were screened during the period, 30 patients (17 male and 13 female) were included in this study with an average age of 52.2 (range, 18–86) years. The average follow up was 14.0 (range, 12–30) months. Our indications for hook plating for patellar fracture were revision after failed TBW, comminuted fracture, osteoporotic fracture in elderly, marginal fracture involving the medial or lateral border, and inferior pole. The plate used was LCP Hook Plate 3.5® (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) which was contoured to fit the patella ( Demographic data, including mechanism of injury, body mass index (BMI), comorbidities assessed with the Charlson comorbidity index (CCI), smoking, and diabetes, were reviewed. AO/OTA fracture classification, open fracture and its classification, inferior pole involvement, comminution, and impaction were reviewed with plain radiographs and knee computed tomography. The interval from injury to surgery, surgical option including combined TBW, or screw fixation was recorded. Radiographic measurements included fracture gap after surgery and time to union. All the radiographic observations in the current study were conducted by an orthopaedic surgeon who is one of the authors. Clinical outcomes were also evaluated, considering complications, including infection and nonunion, secondary procedures, and functional outcomes. Range of motion of the injured knee and functional outcome with the Lysholm score were evaluated at postoperative 12 months. Of the 30 patients, 12 sustained high-energy injury, while 18 had low-energy injury. Their mean BMI and CCI were 22.9 (range, 18.4–28.2) kg/m The result of the current study demonstrated that hook plating for patella fracture had good results without any complication or secondary intervention. Although TBW is popularly used for displaced patella fracture, it has fundamental pre-requisites: a fracture pattern or bone that is able to withstand compression, an intact cortical buttress opposite the tension band, and a fixation that withstands tensile forces [ However, we used hook plating because of several advantages. Fixed angle plates alone cannot generate compressive forces across fracture fragments. Therefore, fragment reduction and compression of major fragments was achieved with clamp application in hook plating. This was followed by additional compression with the eccentric position of a cortical screw at the most proximal combi-hole of the hook plate, with the anterior screws locking into the plate, allowing the contouring of the plate in situ. Thereafter, angular stability was acquired with locking screws ( Another important issue is ‘hook’ plating. Marginal fractures with small and comminuted fragments, which are common in inferior pole fracture in the elderly, are difficult to appropriately address with TBW or screw. In particular, inferior pole fracture is frequently associated with comminution and requires technical expertise for surgical treatment [ Although our patients demonstrated no complications, we performed additional surgery for the removal of implants in 16 patients. Since the plate and screw heads are close to the skin, but have a smooth margin and low-profile with minimal soft tissue irritation, this removal might not have been caused by discomfort or irritation from the implant, but rather by the patients’ desire not to retain metals in their body, which is particularly common in Asians. Similar tendencies have been recorded in other study of Asians. Suh et al. [ This study presented a new technique for treating patella fractures for which TBW is not suitable. However, there are some limitations to this study such as its retrospective nature, small sample, and the fact that the surgeries were performed by two surgeons in two institutions. Although the two surgeons were experts, a potential for bias exists because the surgeries were performed at different centers. However, we performed a standard surgical procedure based on basic fracture principles; therefore, the potential for bias should be minimized. This study showed that hook plating for displaced patella fractures had good clinical outcomes. Therefore, hook plating could serve as a treatment option for marginal or comminuted fractures of the patella. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Ji Wan Kim declares that this study was supported by the