A new classification method, coal grain analysis, which uses optical imaging techniques for the microscopic characterisation of the individual grains present in coal samples is discussed. This differs from other coal petrography imaging methods in that a mask is used to remove the pixels of mounting resin to obtain compositional information of the maceral (vitrinite, inertinite and liptinite) and mineral abundances on each individual grain within each image. Experiments were conducted to establish the density of individual constituents in order to enable the density of each grain to be determined and the results reported on a mass basis. The grains were sorted into eight grain classes of liberated (single component) and composite grains. By analysing all streams (feed, concentrate and tailings) of the flotation circuit at a coal washing plant, the flotation response of the individual grain classes was tracked. This has implications for flotation process diagnostics and optimisation.Coal petrography is a standard method for characterising the organic (maceral) and inorganic (mineral) constituents of coal. Analyses are conducted on polished grain-mounts using an oil immersion lens fitted to a reflected-light microscope. The petrographic constituents or macerals in the sample are characterised primarily on the basis of their reflectance, texture and association with other constituents, including mineral matter. All macerals increase in reflectance with increasing rank (vitrinite reflectance gives a measure of rank). The three maceral groups are vitrinite, inertinite and liptinite and are present in varying proportions in all coals, along with minerals. Two types of data are derived from petrographic analysis: rank (defined by vitrinite reflectance) and composition (maceral proportions). Mostly, coal petrography is a manual characterisation test although imaging techniques have been developed that provide maceral composition and vitrinite reflectance information. These techniques generally rely on using thresholding to discriminate between the background resin and the coal particles so that reflectance measurements are only recorded on the coal material. This means that most of the dark minerals contained within coal particles, or present as liberated minerals, and liptinites are generally excluded along with the resin. The summary information obtained from a number of images is used to produce the reflectance distribution of the samples from which the maceral composition and vitrinite reflectance information is extracted. An alternative imaging method called coal grain analysis has been developed for performing routine coal petrography assessment. This differs from other coal petrography imaging methods in that a mask is used to remove the pixels of mounting resin and consequently compositional information is obtained on each individual grain within each image. It is important to note that the word ‘grain’ is used in the same sense as ‘particle’ in this discussion. The application of this method to the analysis of samples obtained from a coal flotation circuit is discussed in this paper. Microscopic analyses were conducted on polished grain-mounts using an oil immersion lens fitted to a reflected-light microscope. Microscope images were captured using the MACE The images were first processed with the reflectogram program to determine the coal rank (mean vitrinite reflectance) and composition (maceral abundance) for the bulk sample ( This system was developed to automatically characterise product coals that generally contain minor amounts of mineral grains. In order to provide accurate grain information on flotation feed and flotation tailings samples which contain significant amounts of liberated dark and translucent minerals it was necessary to perform manual image editing. Example mineral grains that are difficult to analyse for all optical systems that use manual petrographic methods or imaging are shown in The manual image editing step also allows improved discrimination of liptinite from dark minerals for lower rank coals so they can be added in. To accurately determine the density of each grain it is necessary to know not only the abundance of each constituent in each grain but also each constituent’s density. Minerals are currently grouped as being either dark (low reflecting) or bright (high reflecting). Dark minerals are mainly comprised of clays, carbonates and quartz and bright minerals consist of pyrite, iron oxides and calcite. Maceral density is rank dependent and hence it was necessary to determine maceral densities at a number of different ranks. Float sink testing was done for coals of three different ranks (mean vitrinite reflectances of 0.6%, 1.35%, and 1.8%) and the maceral composition of each of the density fractions for each coal was determined by coal grain analysis. This data enabled (using the Solver function in Microsoft Excel) the relationships between the densities of each of the maceral constituents (vitrinite, inertinite, liptinite) and coal rank to be determined ( Once maceral and mineral densities had been determined the density of each grain was estimated from the abundances of the constituents in the grains ( A relationship between the mineral abundances and ash% for the audit samples and washability testing ( The number of vitrinite, inertinite, liptinite and mineral entities is measured for each grain. For now this information is used to determine the area abundance of each constituent in each grain, but it is possible to discriminate between texturally different grains with the same bulk grain composition. The grains were classified into eight classes consisting of four liberated (single component) and four non-liberated (composite) grains. Single component grains were comprised of >95%, by volume, of a single phase and other grains were classified as composites. If required the additional textural parameters that are recorded during the analysis can be used for grain classification. The incorporation of these additional parameters will increase the number of grain classes. For the applications to which the grain information has been applied to, this has not yet proved necessary. Microlithotype nomenclature was used for the single component grains with grains comprised of >95% vitrinite, inertinite, liptinite and minerals classified respectively as vitrite, inertite, liptite and minerite. The composite grains were subdivided based on their maceral/mineral associations as being either vitrinite-rich (VitRich), inertinite-rich (InertRich), liptinite-rich (LipRich) or mineral-rich composites (MinRich) ( Initially it was envisaged that it would be possible to conduct a single analysis of the unsized samples of feed, concentrate and tailings and from the size information available for the individual grains in each image determine size distribution, size by density information, and the density distribution of the different grain types. An investigation was undertaken using samples of −0.125 Hence it was necessary to analyse size fractions rather than unsized samples. This approach also reduced stereological issues associated with attempting to determine grain size from a 2D section of the grain. Depending on the size fraction between 60 and 248 images were processed so that information was generally obtained on between 2000 and 5000 grains in that size fraction. The finer fractions contained many grains and required fewer images to provide sufficient grains to generate the data. When multiple size fractions of a sample are analysed information is obtained on approximately 2000–5000 grains (or particles) for each size fraction. Depending on the type of samples being analysed, one or two samples a day can currently be analysed and processed with either of our imaging systems. The collection of calibrated images and the production of the whole coal reflectogram information shown in Particle separation by froth flotation occurs because of the differences in the surface chemical characteristics of the components of the feed coal. Coal is a heterogeneous material composed of a variety of organic and inorganic constituents whose surface properties and therefore flotation response vary widely. As grains are not necessarily composed of a single maceral or mineral the overall response of a particle in an encounter with an air bubble may be further complicated by maceral and mineral associations within grains. An audit was conducted on the flotation circuit of a Bowen Basin coking coal mine in central Queensland, Australia. This mine produces approximately 10 Coal grain analysis information was obtained on each of the six size fractions of the flotation feed, tails and concentrate. Due to its rank this coal sample studied did not contain liptinites. The result obtained for the 0.25 This information was used to generate the summary grain information for this analysis that is presented in The density and mass information that is obtained for each grain enables the sample’s overall washability and the washability of each grain class to be determined ( The analysis of size fractions of the three streams enabled the component recovery data to be presented as a function of particle size ( Grain-by-grain processing provides compositional information on coals that cannot be obtained by any other means with the same degree of precision. Coal grain analysis has provided grain data that has enabled the flotation partitioning of the coal grains to product or tailings to be studied in greater detail than ever before possible. Size, composition and density information on individual grains of flotation feed, product and tailings was used to map their partitioning in the coal flotation system. The behaviour of each of the macerals, minerals and their associations as composite grains can be used to pinpoint the root cause of problems and identify potential solutions. This study showed that pure grains of coarse inertite and composite particles containing inertinite had lower flotation response than pure grains of vitrite and vitrinite-rich grains. In the flotation circuit processing material with a nominal top size of 0.5 The financial support provided by the Australian Coal Association Research Program (ACARP) and CSIRO and permission to publish the information is gratefully acknowledged.