The Enviroplas process was developed at Mintek to treat certain metallurgical wastes, such as lead blast furnace slag, electric arc furnace dust, and neutral leach residues from the zinc industry. The process relies on a DC arc furnace and an ISP lead splash condenser for the direct recovery of the contained zinc as prime western grade metal, with the simultaneous production of a disposable slag.
                  This paper outlines certain fundamental issues of the process, including feed preparation and specifications, operating temperatures, coke (coal) requirements, flux addition, and recycling of the fumes and the condenser dross. In addition, the chemical reactions involved and the associated kinetics are presented and discussed, as well as the major factors that influence the condensation process. Selected test results are also included to highlight the significance of the most important factors that affect the process.Over the past ten years, Mintek has been involved in an extensive R&D program in order to develop a viable and cost-effective method for the treatment of certain metallurgical wastes as a means of minimising, if not eliminating, the negative environmental impact of such materials. The success of the program has been demonstrated through the development of the Enviroplas process to a stage where it is ready for commercial implementation. The Enviroplas process involves the smelting of electric arc furnace (EAF) dust, lead blast furnace (LBF) slag or neutral leach residues (NLR) in a DC arc furnace and the subsequent recovery of the volatilised zinc in an ISP lead splash condenser (LSC) as Prime Western grade metal. To date, more than 2000 tons of LBF slag and 300 tons of EAF dust has been processed, whereby high zinc extraction (of 85% from LBF slag and 98% from EAF dust) was consistently achieved, resulting in zinc fuming rate of more than 100 kg Recyclability of the generated fume and the condenser drosses was proven in a top blown rotary convertor (TBRC), whereby more than 1000 kg of typical dross was treated for lead metal recovery. Lead recovery was 90% and greater, giving a metal phase containing more than 99% Pb that is suitable for re-use in the condenser. Throughout the developmental program, a great deal of experience and knowledge was gained with regard to the process fundamentals and their roles either in the smelting stage (fuming) or the condensation stage. In addition, the understanding of these fundamentals clarified many aspects concerning raw materials specifications, and thus the requirements of any pre-treatment step that could be needed. This paper is intended to highlight certain fundamental issues that are believed to be important in zinc recovery in the Enviroplas process. Selected test results are also included to emphasise the significance of the most critical factors that affect the process. Depending on the material to be treated, the Enviroplas process can be described as follows: for LBF slag, feeding of liquid slag from a lead blast furnace through a holding furnace is an attractive energy-saving option ( In the case of EAF dust ( Zinc and lead oxides contained in the molten bath are reduced to their metals at temperatures of 1400–1500 °C, and thus report to the gas phase. The residual, or spent, slag as well as any iron alloy that is produced, is tapped from the furnace as required. The volatilised zinc and lead exit the furnace through a refractory-lined duct and enter the lead splash condenser (operated at 500–550 °C), where they are condensed. The lead–zinc solution is then cooled down to separate the zinc (at about 450 °C). The condenser off-gas passes through a combustion chamber, and any metal oxides are captured in a bag house. Condenser drosses and the fumes are then pre-treated before recycling to the fuming stage. Due to the wide range of chemical species that are present, the reactions taking place in the fuming furnace are numerous and complex. However, the chemical reactions that lead to the extraction of zinc and its subsequent volatilisation can be described as follow, The preceding paragraphs indicate that coke addition and the operation temperature are among the factors that determine zinc extraction and its fuming rate. Other parameters include: slag basicity, Fe The amount of reductant (coke or coal) that is normally charged into the furnace depends on several considerations such as ( The level of zinc extraction to be achieved. CO/CO The relative amount of metallic iron production that can be tolerated. Reductant addition can also be influenced by its chemical composition, i.e., fixed carbon, moisture, volatile matter, and ash components. The chemical analysis of the dust and LBF slag could also affect coke requirements, particularly, the analysis of zinc and lead oxides, Fe The kinetics of the fuming process are greatly influenced by the operating temperature ( However, increased operating temperatures may contribute to refractory erosion, by both thermal degradation and slag attack, if a frozen slag line can not be maintained. In addition, the overall energy requirements will increase with higher temperatures. Typically, EAF dust requires a smelting temperature of about 1500–1550 °C in order to achieve a ZnO content in the final slag of 2% and lower. In comparison, LBF slag demands an operating temperature of 1400–1450 °C to extract more than 85% of the contained zinc at good fuming rates ( This can influence zinc extraction as follows (  As pointed out earlier, ferrous ions play a direct and major role in zinc fuming from LBF slags and EAF dust. In fact, many believe that zinc fuming is mostly controlled by the diffusion rate of ferrous ion when zinc concentrations in the slag is above 2% ( The plasma furnace is usually operated with an iron heel so that anode contact is readily maintained. A metal phase can also be formed when extra reductant is added to the furnace to achieve higher zinc extraction. Although this is normally avoided or kept to a minimum, because of increased energy and reductant consumption, the production of iron could be a contributing factor to zinc fuming by lowering Fe When the reductant addition is high enough to cause the reduction of iron oxide, the produced iron may influence zinc extraction through the reaction (Rankin, 1990; It is believed that zinc oxide reduction may be retarded by the presence of a relatively high sulphur content in the feed. This is believed to be due to a surface blockage at the slag–gas interface caused by the surface-active nature of sulphur in the slag, The negative impact of high sulphur content in the feed could be minimised by increasing the slag basicity by the addition of lime. In this case, zinc sulphide reacts with lime as follows ( Other elements that could influence the overall zinc recovery include chlorine, fluorine, sodium, potassium, arsenic etc. Their impact is believed to be more pronounced on zinc condensation as compared to its extraction. The slag bath area where the plasma arc impinges is referred to as the AAZ. This zone is characterised by elevated temperatures, relative to the bulk of the slag, and by a higher degree of mixing ( Bath Stirring ensures that the slag is well mixed and thus the rates of mass and energy transfer are high. As a result, the chemical reactions occurring at the slag–gas interface are driven to near completion. Bath stirring is caused by the following ( Transfer of jet momentum at the slag surface, namely at the AAZ. Electromagnetic forces induced in the bath due to the passage of the electric current. Natural convection caused by thermal gradients in the furnace. Gas bubble-driven circulation. The degree of bath mixing will depend on slag fluidity and depth. In general, slag depth relative to furnace diameter, should be relatively low and has to be optimised for good zinc extraction ( The proceeding section highlighted certain requirements and specifications that the raw materials should meet. Other requirements include the following: The reducing agent, whether it is coke or coal, should be high in fixed carbon and low in ash and volatile matter contents. The moisture content should be as low as possible, since hydrogen in the furnace off-gas could have a detrimental effect on zinc condensation efficiency. The moisture can be driven off at moderate temperatures (150–200 °C). However, the volatile content, which contributes to the hydrogen level in the off-gas, requires higher temperatures in the range of 400–500 °C. This temperature range ensures that the volatile and water contents are less than 2.0% and 0.5% respectively, a range that has been seen to have little influence on zinc condensation. The particle size and size distribution are factors to be optimised. The reactivity of the reductant can be improved by size reduction, however the fine fraction could lead to higher feed carry-over, which affects zinc condensation negatively ( The pre-treatment stage should aim at the following: Reduce the moisture content to less than 0.1%. This is usually achieved at temperatures of 600 °C, where the combined moisture can also be driven off. Removal of elements such as chlorine, fluorine, sulphur, potassium, sodium, arsenic, cadmium etc. Such components form volatile compounds in the fuming furnace and report to the condenser, adding to the dross formation problem and affecting the condensation efficiency. Zinc losses should be kept to a minimum. This can be done by operating at relatively low temperatures, and adding fluxing agents that tend to stabilise zinc oxide. The EAF dust, and to a lesser extent LBF slag, should be transformed to a physically suitable form that is easy to charge into the fuming furnace, such that dusting is minimised. Air ingress to the pre-treatment stage should be prevented in order to avoid the formation of magnetite and its possible precipitation in the fuming furnace. This is mainly important in the case of LBF slag. The pre-treatment operation should aim at low temperature as a means of reducing the overall energy consumption (in the order of 1250–1400 °C for the pre-melting option). The requirement for flux addition should be low. Pre-treatment of the feed should not adversely affect zinc extraction or its rate in the fuming furnace. For LBF slags, the Enviroplas process allows for a holding (pre-melting) furnace operating at 1200–1250 °C (about 50–100 °C above the liquidus temperature). The holding furnace receives molten slag from the lead blast furnace, and possibly granulated slag from stockpile, and delivers it into the fuming furnace at a controlled rate. EAF dust, on the other hand, can be treated in a variety of ways, depending on both capital and operating costs. When a pre-melting option is chosen, the operating temperature would range from 1300 to 1400 °C, depending on the composition of the dust and the amount of silica (flux) required to transform it into a molten material easily transferable in the liquid state. Pre-melting trials of EAF dust at Mintek in a DC arc furnace required about 10% silica addition in order to obtain a free flowing slag at 1350 °C, with less than 10% Zn losses. Removal of impurity elements during the pre-melting was above the target, resulting in a very suitable feed to the fuming furnace. The pilot-scale ISP condenser consists of a rectangular box that contains the molten lead and a rotor, a pump sump to allow circulation of Pb–Zn metal, a cooling launder, a flux bath and separation bath. The operating philosophy is as follows: the rotor speed is adjusted to attain a low condenser off-gas temperature (400–450 °C). Lead–zinc solution (about 3.5–4.5% Zn, balance Pb, at 550 °C) is continuously pumped from the condenser into the cooling launder, where it flows into the flux bath and finally into the separation bath, that is maintained at about 450–460 °C. As Pb–Zn solution cools down, zinc separates out and forms a layer, on top of the lead, and is tapped when required. The zinc-depleted lead flows back into the condenser at about 440–450 °C. The rotor speed and its immersion depth influence the amount of lead being splashed and the droplet size and distribution of these droplets. These two factors determine, in part at least, the rate of zinc condensation and absorption by the lead bath. Other factors include the concentration of zinc in the lead bath, pumping rate of the lead, and its temperature, relative to the gas inlet temperature to the condenser. Another important parameter that affects zinc condensation is the inlet gas composition, particularly, with regard to CO/CO In order to investigate the relationship between the furnace off-gas composition and dusting on zinc condensation, a test was conducted where ferrosilicon was used as a reductant, instead of coke. Fine EAF dust was fed to the fuming furnace at 1–2 tons/h. Doing so produced an off-gas containing more that 90% Zn and feed carry-over of less than 1%. The condensation efficiency during this test increased to more than 82%, as compared to 65–75% achieved when coarse EAF dust and coke were fed, and less than 60% with fine EAF dust and coke. This was a clear indication that the gas composition and feed carry-over played a major role in affecting the condensation efficiency. The ability to recycle the condenser dross is an important factor for the success of the Enviroplas process, where an industrial facility is projected to be able to condense 90% of the volatilised zinc. The rest is expected to report mostly to the dross phase as oxide, with an almost equal amount of oxidised lead. Generally, lead can be recovered from such material by reduction with coke or coal at 750–1000 °C. The extracted lead should be of such quality that it can be recharged into the condenser. The remaining solid residue is mostly ZnO with relatively high levels of Cl, Na, K and S, making it unsuitable for direct recycling. However, water-washing can be carried out to reduce the levels of these components to acceptable values. After drying, the final residue can be charged to the premelter or the fuming furnace. In the pilot-scale tests, condenser dross generation was typically between 800 and 1000 kg per ton of zinc produced. This is comparable with the industrial production rate of 300 to 400 kg dross per ton of zinc. The produced dross contains about 35–45% ZnO, 30–40% PbO, with lesser amounts of other oxides such as FeO, SiO Recyclability of the produced dross was investigated in a top blown rotary converter at temperatures between 750 and 1000 °C. Coke was used as reductant, and fluxing agents were added to investigate their influence on lead recovery to the metal phase. About 1000 kg of typical dross was treated at 40 kg/h. The results indicate that lead recovery was in excess of 90%, producing a metal phase analysing more than 99% Pb that could easily be recycled to the condenser. The remaining ZnO-rich solid residue contained about 80% ZnO. A washing step eliminated more than 90% of the contained Cl, Na, K, and S, with less than 2% Zn losses into the wash water. A zinc oxide rich fume is usually collected in the bag-house as a result of the combustion of the condenser off-gas which contains small amounts of Pb(g) and Zn(g). Typically, the fume contains 70–80% ZnO and 10–15% PbO. Depending on the levels of the impurity components (Cl, K, Na, S, Cd, etc), the fume can either be fed to the pre-melting furnace (low levels) or it can be combined with the lead-free dross for water-washing and drying. Pilot-scale testwork has proven the technical feasibility of the Enviroplas process for the recovery of zinc from EAF dust and LBF slag. The produced slag consistently met the USA EPA TCLP test for safe disposal. Very good zinc extraction, fuming rates, and condensation efficiency were achieved during the testwork. Chemical and physical factors that affect the fuming process include: temperature, reductant addition and reactivity, slag basicity, Fe