The behaviour of polymer depressant carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) onto talc was investigated as a function of ionic strength of potassium, magnesium and calcium ions. The effect of molecular weight of CMC was investigated and adsorption isotherms were constructed at various experimental conditions. Adsorption isotherms clearly demonstrated the presence of a two-plateau adsorption, which was less significant at lower CMC molecular weights. A systematic increase in talc depression was observed when the molecular weight of CMC was increased. The presence of ions was found to have a favourable effect on talc adsorption, where increasing the ionic strength of Mg2+, Ca2+ and K2+ from 10−3 to 10−2 increased the adsorption considerably. The presence of divalent cations achieved higher depression of talc in general compared to monovalent cation K+, with Ca2+ ions having the greatest effect.With few exceptions, the rich ore-bodies of South Africa have been depleted and the deposits that are being mined at present are those in which the desired minerals form only a small percentage of the ore-body, i.e. the ores are of a low grade. Furthermore, the valuable minerals are present as part of a coherent mixture of inter-grown mineral crystals, each having a definite chemical composition. Thus, to liberate the individual mineral particles, it is necessary to grind the ore to a very fine pulp. Of all the processes used to extract a desired mineral from the accompanying unwanted gangue minerals, froth flotation is acknowledged to be the most important. Talc is a common component of the gangue mineral associated with the recovery of platinum from typical South African ores. As a result of its natural hydrophobicity, the presence of talc results in a decreased grade of the floatation concentration. Talc is a hydrous magnesium silicate with a unit structure Mg There are significant differences in the properties of these two distinct talc surfaces. As can be seen from The ratio of planes to edges is reported to depend on the exact mineralogical nature of the talc. Polysaccharide depressants adsorb onto the surface of the talc and render it hydrophilic. Polysaccharides are condensation polymers of high molecular weights based on simple monosaccharide (sugar) units. Many different types of polysaccharides exist in nature but only a small number of them have been used by the mineral industry, especially in flotation. The polysaccharide depressants used to reduce the floatability of talc vary considerably with regard to charge, molecular weight, chemical composition and molecular structure. Typical examples of these depressants are carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), guar gum and dextrin. Carboxymethyl cellulose, or more correctly sodium carboxymethyl cellulose, is the sodium salt of a carboxymethyl ether of cellulose and is produced from cellulose, monochloroacetic acid and sodium hydroxide. CMC has carboxyl substituent groups along the cellulose chain, which render the polymer significantly anionic ( Polysaccharide depressants are expensive and constitute a large percentage of the reagent costs. However, little is known about the effect of molecular weight, polymer concentration and the presence of ions on their depressing action. To date, no conclusive evidence has been achieved with regard to polymer molecular weight. In the platinum mining industry, the plant water used for flotation contains ions. It is therefore important to determine how the presence of ions will affect the depression of talc. It has been reported ( As has been shown CMCs are anionic polymers, as a result of this, the presence of ions in a flotation system should have some affect on its depressing ability. The objective of this work is to investigate the adsorption of CMC onto talc and to study the effect of the polymer concentration and molecular weight on the adsorption properties in the presence of potassium, magnesium and calcium ions of various ionic strengths at a pH of 9.0. A sample of pure talc was obtained from Scotia Mines, Barberton, South Africa. The sample was of high purity, 96 wt.%, and the only noticeable impurity after X-ray diffraction was magnesite (MgCO The talc sample was decanted twice for 30 min using an IKA LABOURTECHNIK™ (model RW 20) overhead stirrer at 450 Hz. It was the decanted for a further 30 min and ultrasonicated using a DECON (model FS 100) ultrasonic bath for 5 min to remove ultrafines. The talc sample was then dried at 50 °C overnight in a GENLAB™ oven prior to use. The talc surface area was estimated using an ADSORBDEMATIC (model 1900) BET system. This apparatus uses nitrogen as an adsorbate and helium as a carrier gas. Approximately 2 g of sample is used for this analysis. The CMC depressants used were FF10, FF30 and FF150 provided by Noviant (Nijmegen, The Netherlands). The abbreviation FF indicates that they belong to the Finnfix reagent series. The numbers indicate the molecular weight of the CMC, which increases in the order FF10<FF30<FF150. The molecular weights of the Finnfix series as determined by size exclusion chromatography and laser light scattering are as follows, FF10-108,440, FF30-155,300 and FF150-193,500 g/mol. These polymers were found to be greater than 99% pure. For the CMCs, the average number of glucose hydroxyl groups substituted by CH A total of 200 mg of polymer was added to 1 l of distilled water and stirred for 30 min on a HEIDOLPH™ (model 3001) hot plate stirrer (1250 rpm). The polymer was added slowly to the vortex of the water to prevent the formation of lumps of undissolved polymer. The polymer solutions were then diluted according to the lower concentrations required for the adsorption tests. Fresh solutions were prepared every 4 days. When required, analytical grade potassium nitrate, KNO A 100-ml sample of the desired polymer concentration was taken in a beaker and the requisite type and concentration of salt added. The concentration of salts in the system are expressed in terms of their ionic strength rather that their absolute concentration. The concentration of the salts used to set the ionic strength of solutions is shown in A 2-g portion of talc was weighed and added to the polymer solution. As the talc was added an IKA LABOURTECHNIK™ (model RW 20) overhead stirrer at 450 Hz, and a timer, was started. After 30 min, two 30-ml aliquots were removed from the system. The solids were removed from these samples by centrifugation in an MSE MISTRAL centrifuge (model 1000). The centrifuge was maintained at a speed of 4000 rpm for 5 min. The resultant solution was filtered through cellulose nitrate membranes (pore size 0.45 μm) to remove any fine solids, and then send to the total organic carbon analyser (TOC) to be read for carbon content. An AQUADOC™ TOC was used as a means of assaying the concentration of the CMC in solution. The TOC analyser measures the total organic carbon present in liquid samples and is based on a technique for the determination of dissolved organic material in water. Calibration curves were constructed and equilibrium concentrations were estimated from the difference between initial and final CMC concentrations. The polymer concentration (mg/l) of the equilibrium solutions from the adsorption tests was then found and then converted to adsorption density using the following expression: Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET) method is used to determine the surface area of the talc. The BET apparatus was an ADSORBDEMATIC (model 1900). In this study, the surface area of talc was estimated to have a value of 1.724 m Adsorption isotherms for the various CMCs on talc under similar ionic strengths were determined. Preliminary experimental kinetic data indicated the time required to attain equilibrium was around 30 min. The equilibrium adsorption results are shown in the form of adsorption isotherms (adsorption density vs. equilibrium concentration).  Its can also be seen from Polysaccharides in various forms were used as depressants long before the exact mechanism of their adsorption was ever studied. Conclusions regarding the exact nature of the polysaccharide adsorption mechanism have progressed over a number of years. Initially, hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl groups of the polysaccharide molecule with charged surface sites was proposed to explain their adsorption onto a wide range of minerals, such as those tested by A different mechanism has been proposed by Hydrophobic bonding can be described as follows; when hydrophobic particles are in aqueous solution, the bonding between the water molecules is more entropically favourable than the bonding between water and the hydrophobic solids ( The behaviour observed in this study may be attributed to the fact that polymeric depressants initially adsorb onto the planar surface of the talc and spread out until monolayer coverage is reached, then adsorption begins to occur on the edges of the talc. From this, it would seem that hydrophobic bonding forces initially drive the adsorption of the polymer onto talc. The larger the CMC, the stronger its hydrophobicity and therefore, the stronger the hydrophobic bonding forces between the polymer and the talc surface ( The talc edges and the CMC molecules are both negatively charged and therefore repulse electrostatically. However, once a certain level of coverage of the talc planes by the CMC molecules is achieved, electrostatic repulsion would occur between these adsorbed molecules and the CMC molecules in solution. It can be seen from the structure of the CMC ( With regards to concentration of polymer, From this,  When the ionic strength was increase from 10 The same pattern was found in the case of FF30, a plateau was formed between 30 and 50 mg/l equilibrium concentration at almost the same surface coverage of 0.8 mg/m  However, unlike FF30 where a further increase in adsorption is found as the equilibrium concentration increased, there is no further increase in the adsorption of FF150 after the formation of the second plateau. This levelling off of the curve at high concentrations indicates that the addition of ions results in multilayer adsorption being depressed (or retarded beyond the equilibrium concentrations studied). Support for this can be found in the viscosity data reported by  The adsorption isotherms for the CMC depressants FF10, FF30 and FF150 in the presence of magnesium ions at two ionic strengths are shown in For the three CMCs investigated, the addition of magnesium ions at high ionic strength caused the first plateau to have a much higher surface coverage (approximately 0.3 mg/m This higher adsorption of the first plateau seen for the three depressants indicates that the hydrophobic bonding between the polymers and the talc planes is enhanced and a greater amount of polymer adsorbs on the talc. This is likely to be due to the smaller hydrodynamic volume occupied by the polymers due to the increased ionic strength of the system. It is also likely that charge shielding of the substituent groups on the polymers result in an increase in their hydrophobicity and, thereby, an increase in their hydrophobic bonding onto the talc planes. The magnesium ions were reported to reduce the multilayer adsorption,  This higher adsorption of the first plateau seen for the three depressants indicates that like magnesium ions, with the addition of calcium ions at high concentration, the hydrophobic bonding between the polymers and the talc planes is enhanced and a greater amount of polymer adsorbs on the talc. This is likely to be due to the smaller hydrodynamic volume occupied by the polymers due to the increased ionic strength of the system. It is also likely that charge shielding of the substituent groups on the polymers result in an increase in their hydrophobicity and thereby an increase in their hydrophobic bonding onto the talc planes. Although it is the CMC FF150 that is shown above, the same treads were found with both FF10 and FF30. The divalent magnesium cation is shown to be more effective in improving surface coverage of talc than the monovalent potassium cation. These ions form linkages between the CMC molecules and the talc surface and interact more strongly with the CMC molecules with regard to charge neutralisation along the chains. This agrees with the findings of  The divalent calcium cation is shown to be more effective in improving surface coverage of talc than the divalent magnesium cation. This also agrees with the findings of This could indicate that greater or stronger adsorption of calcium ions occurs on the talc surface compared to the adsorption of magnesium ions on the talc surface. It is also possible that the calcium ions interact more strongly with the CMC molecules with regard to charge neutralisation along the chains.  From this work, it can be concluded that the adsorption characteristics of CMC depressants is affected by the addition of ions as well as molecular weight and concentration of the CMC used. The leading credence to the postulate that the polymers adsorb preferentially onto the talc planes initially before moving onto the talc edges. Increasing the molecular weight of CMC depressant resulted in an increase in adsorption onto talc. The addition of magnesium, potassium and calcium to the system increased the tendency of the polymers to adsorb on the talc planes and changing the ionic strength from 10 The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of Noviant, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, which has facilitated this research.