The interaction between a particle and bubble in a liquid medium is important in processes such as mineral flotation or paper deinking. The sum of van der Waals, electrostatic, and hydrophobic interaction energies can be calculated to predict if the net interaction is favorable or unfavorable for the particle to attach to the bubble. However, conventional interaction energy calculations only relate to smooth and chemically homogeneous surfaces. Particles used in flotation have natural and induced heterogeneities such as surface roughness (SR), surface charge heterogeneity (CH), and surface contact angle heterogeneity (CAH). We therefore numerically investigated the bubble−particle interaction energy for seven hypothetical combinations of SR, CH and CAH on the particle. It was found that the strength in which the heterogeneities influence the interaction energy barrier is in the order of CAH < SR < CH. The present work is the first to provide a full theoretical view of how heterogeneities individually and in combination influence particle−bubble interactions.Combined Hamaker constant of particle (1) and bubble (2) interacting in water (3) Hamaker constant of particle Hamaker constant of air Hamaker constant of water Parameter characterizing materials of interaction particles Speed of light Surface charge heterogeneity Contact angle heterogeneity Bubble diameter Particle diameter Kinetic energy of particle Permittivity on a vacuum Dielectric constant of water Electric double layer interaction Fraction of low contact angle Fraction of positive charge Fraction of surface roughness Separation distance Height of surface roughness Hydrophobic interaction Debye–Hückel parameter Hydrophobic force constant of the particle–bubble-water system Constant for the water Mass of particle Ionic strength Secondary minima EDL interaction for homogeneous surfaces EDL interaction having SR and/or CH HYPB interaction for homogeneous surfaces HYPB interaction having SR and/or CAH Energy barrier Total interaction energy of a physically and chemically heterogeneous particle surface Retarded VDW interaction of a homogeneous surface Retarded VDW interaction having SR Surface roughness Relatively hydrophobic contact angle Low contact angle van der Waals interaction energy Particle velocity at critical distance Zeta potential of bubble Negative zeta potential of particle Positive zeta potential of particle Interactions between particles and surfaces are important in various science fields and applications such as for example: colloid transport and retention in porous media ( The Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey, and Overbeek (DLVO) theory is used to calculate interaction energies that physicochemically interpret the attachment of particles onto a surface and can predict whether it will or will not occur. Classically, the DLVO theory consists of the sum between the van de Waals (VDW) and the electric double layer (EDL) interactions. The presence or absence of an energy barrier ( In this study we investigate the attachment of a hydrophobic particle to an air bubble in water (flotation). From Dr. J. A. Kitchener in the 1950's the DLVO theory has been related to flotation ( The effect of surface roughness on particle–bubble interactions has been experimentally and theoretically investigated by a limited number of studies concerning flotation ( In this study we conduct a systematic theoretical investigation of the effect of particle physical (roughness) and chemical (charge and contact angle) heterogeneities on particle–bubble interactions. The effect of each heterogeneity is investigated individually and in combinations, resulting in a total of seven cases of heterogeneity. In this study, we assume that a spherical methylated glass particle interacts with an air bubble in a monovalent electrolyte solution of a given ionic strength (IS). Only the particle exhibits surface roughness (SR), charge heterogeneity (CH) and contact angle heterogeneity (CAH). The approach to calculate the interaction energies using the XDLVO theory considering surface heterogeneities is based on previous literature ( where where The VDW ( where Particle–bubble interaction can be divided in three steps which are collision, attachment, and detachment ( A sphere–sphere configuration for the interaction energies and numerical experimental parameters (range of roughness height, zeta potential, particle diameters, bubble diameter, contact angle, and others in the set of equations) were selected based on previous literature ( Information such as Contour plots of the The contribution of the roughness top surface to the interaction energy in Eqs. Contour plots of the Contour plots of the The roles of binary heterogeneities were investigated in this section after fixing selected parameters to relatively low and high values.    Lastly, case 7 considers a more realistic particle surface having combined SR, CH and CAH. The value of the  It should be mentioned that differences in the relative importance of SR, CH, and CAH may occur depending on selected parameter values, solution chemistries, collector type, particle sizes, phases, and whether detachment is considered. For example, the VDW interaction is attractive for particle–solid interaction, whereas it is repulsive for particle–bubble interactions. The HYPB attraction is much greater for particle–bubble systems than most particle–solid systems. Furthermore, CH and CAH mainly influence the This work investigated the individual and combined effects of particle SR, CH and CAH on the Φ  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: