Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) is commonly used as a depressant for talcaceous minerals. To assess whether CMC depressants are strongly, or weakly and reversibly bound to the surface of talc, desorption experiments were conducted on New York talc. The floatability was monitored through microflotation experiments, combined with the determination of the CMC coverage on talc by ToF-SIMS. CMC adsorption and desorption were carried out in distilled water and in electrolyte containing Ca2+ ions. CMC adsorption levels were higher using Ca2+ electrolyte, in line with the depression behavior in the microflotation tests. Washing did not affect the flotation behavior. ToF-SIMS showed that CMC coverage of the talc particles was good and the distribution homogeneous. Adsorption and subsequent desorption in distilled water however, showed a partially restored floatability after desorption, which could be related to an inhomogeneous CMC distribution on the talc surface as shown by ToF-SIMS. By additional exposure to Ca2+ ions CMC redistribution occurs causing depression.The gangue mineral talc is a common component of ores containing platinum group minerals (PGM) from the Bushveld Igneous Complex in South Africa. Talc is a magnesium phylosilicate of the general composition Mg Talc obtained from Balmat, New York, was size-reduced to approx. 20–30 Talc was conditioned in a solution of CMC (300 ToF-SIMS analysis was carried out with an ION-TOF IV instrument equipped with a Bi primary ion source. Spectral imaging was done in the bunched mode, which gives high spectral resolution at moderate lateral resolution. The average CMC content on talc was determined from areas of 500 As shown previously, the most representative and suitable CMC mass fragments in ToF-SIMS are [C Microflotation experiments were carried out in duplicate using the UCT flow-through microflotation cell, For the desorption procedure monitored by microflotation the following conditioning and washing program was followed. Talc (2 For the desorption tests monitored by size exclusion chromatography and ToF-SIMS the following procedure was followed. A stock solution (4500 Each of the two samples from the conditioning step was split in two (samples were kept wet and were not dried or flushed after the conditioning procedure). A sample of talc (40 Microflotation experiments were carried out to establish the flotation response of talc under various conditions. Talc was floated in distilled water and Ca(NO The results in The results of the desorption experiments of Depramin In the microflotation experiments, washing with Ca water resulted in the talc remaining depressed whereas washing with deionised water resulted in reflotation of the talc. It is possible that, although some CMC was removed from the talc by the Ca wash, there was still enough remaining on the surface to prevent good flotation and thus the talc was still depressed. In the experiments monitored by SEC only one wash was performed compared to four washings for the microflotation work. This may account for the differences observed. The Ca content of the stock solution (10 The Ca  The distribution of CMC on the talc particles for the different treatments is shown in The average CMC surface content after adsorption on talc in deionised water and after additional washing with deionised water is shown in After adsorption the apparent average CMC surface coverage was about 33% lower in comparison to the Ca conditioned system. Additional deionised water washing reduced the CMC surface coverage by about 80%, which is much more than for the Ca conditioned system. On the other hand, additional Ca washing for this cation free system gave a higher apparent CMC surface content, suggesting that CMC had been redistributed to yield a more homogeneous surface layer. The distribution of CMC on the talc particles for the different treatments is shown in the ToF-SIMS images of Due to the additional Ca washing, CMC seemed to be more homogenously distributed, although some enriched particles were still observed. The local analyses support the interpretation that the CMC has redispersed to yield a much better surface coverage ( These results clearly demonstrate that high talc recovery in flotation can result either from low CMC adsorption or from aggregation of CMC to yield poor surface coverage. Better depression after additional exposure to Ca ions can only be attributed to improved polymer dispersion. Apparently the type of cation in the solution and its ionic strength has a clear impact on polymer adsorption.  The bonding of CMC to talc surfaces has been shown to be largely irreversible in the presence of Ca cations. Microflotation, and desorption studies as monitored by ToF-SIMS analysis, showed that CMC could be desorbed from the talc planes by washing with deionised water but very little was removed by washing with Ca electrolyte. ToF-SIMS analysis indicated that CMC binding to the talc surface in the presence of cations was different (homogeneous coverage) to that which occurred when no cations were present (inhomogeneous coverage). When the water-washed talc was re-exposed to Ca ions the CMC coverage was converted once again to a more homogeneous layer. This was sufficient to cause redepression of the talc. This work highlights the importance of metal cations in the bonding of CMC depressants onto talc. Therefore under practical industrial conditions CMC adsorbs well onto talc, provided there are sufficient cations to neutralise the repulsion of negative charges on the minerals and CMC, and is not removed during further downstream water treatment where the ionic strength is usually high. We thank the University of Cape Town for financial support, and Anglo Platinum, Impala Platinum, Lonmin Platinum, Falconbridge and Rio Tinto for financial support through membership of the Depressant Research Facility, Centre for Minerals Research, UCT.