The effect of alkali and alkaline earth metals (AAEM) on fast pyrolysis of polysaccharides has been well documented. This paper examines the effect of AAEM on fast pyrolysis of lignin, which has not been as thoroughly investigated. Acetates of several metals were infused into organosolv cornstover lignin at a concentration of 1.0mmol AAEM cation per gram lignin followed by pyrolysis at 300–800°C.
                  One of the most notable effects was an increase in the yield of char with alkali metals producing more char than alkaline earth metals. Char yield was correlated to the electropositivity of the infused metal cations. Alkali metals increased the overall yield of volatile aromatic compounds while alkaline earth metals had the opposite effect.
                  The infusion of AAEMs into lignin led to an increase in methanol and a decrease in alkenyl side chains on the aromatic products. Methanol is hypothesized to result from cleavage of β-carbons from the 3‐hydroxyprop-1-enyl side chains of lignin linkages while the alkenyl side chains are hypothesized to result from cleavage of γ-carbons. Therefore, alkali metals appear to catalyze cleavage of linkages in the lignin structure.Lignocellulosic biomass consists of three major components: cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Lignin represents up to 30% of lignocellulosic biomass Plant cell walls consist of a matrix of lignin and hemicellulose surrounding cellulose fibrils. Lignin protects the more digestible holocellulose from microbial attack Many thermochemical processes fully utilize lignocellulosic biomass in the production of fuels, giving them an advantage over purely biochemical pathways. One such thermochemical pathway is fast pyrolysis, which involves the rapid heating (0.5–2 Fast pyrolysis of pure holocellulose produces predominately anhydrosugars, furans, and light oxygenates while lignin depolymerizes to a wide range of phenolic monomers and oligomers. Fractionating the products of biomass pyrolysis has been investigated by several researchers as a potential approach to optimizing the intermediates to fuels and chemicals Although the major components of lignocellulosic biomass are cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, biomass also contains lesser amounts of proteins, lipids, non-structural carbohydrates, nitrogenous compounds, chlorophyll, waxes, and mineral matter Lignin obtained from the Archer Daniels Midland (ADM) company was isolated from cornstover using the organosolv process. Organosolv lignin is expected to have a slightly different structure than native lignin; however, El Hage et al. Approximately 30 Alkali and alkaline earth metals (AAEM) were infused in biomass samples as acetate salts. These were used instead of more common salts because they decompose upon heating to pyrolysis temperatures To ensure homogeneous infusion of the salts into the lignin, the salts were first dissolved in water and the resulting solution was mixed with the lignin. Approximately 300 A Mettler-Toledo TGA/DSC 1 Each of the pure salts was subjected to proximate analysis to determine the amount of residue remaining after the salts are heated to pyrolysis temperatures. The known mass of residue contributed by the AAEM salts was subtracted from the mass of residue remaining after pyrolysis of the lignin samples. Therefore, the reported char yield represents only carbonaceous residue resulting from the lignin that may include incompletely pyrolyzed lignin and char. A Frontier single-shot 2020iS The instrument was calibrated using liquid standards. Pure standards purchased from Sigma Aldrich Char yields were measured in separate experiments using manual insertion and recovery of the sample cup from the pyrolysis furnace. Although the autosampler speeded pyrolysis experiments that only measured volatile products, it tended to expel carbon from the sample cup as the cup was removed from the furnace. Manual recovery of sample cups resulted in highly reproducible char yields. Quartz wool is typically used in GC experiments to prevent char from elutriating and contaminating the GC column. The quartz wool has, however, been found to lose mass due to evaporation of moisture. Therefore, no quartz wool was used in experiments where char was measured. At least five replicates were performed for each sample to collect sufficient char to perform mass balances. Samples were repeated until a coefficient of variation of less than 10% was achieved or a maximum of 15 replicates were completed. Error bars reported in the figures are based on a 95% confidence interval taking into consideration all of the replicates. Proximate analysis was performed on the mixtures of washed lignin and AAEM salts. Results are reported on a moisture and ash free basis (maf). The maf basis was calculated by subtracting the mass of moisture and ash found in the lignin via proximate analysis from the total sample mass. Results of the proximate analysis are summarized in Residue remaining after pyrolysis contains char, ash, and unconverted lignin. The mass of carbonaceous residue remaining was calculated by subtracting the calculated mass of inorganic residue (from the known concentration AAEM salts infused into the sample) from the total mass of residue in the pyrolysis cup. It was, however, not possible to separate the masses of unconverted lignin and char from the carbonaceous residue. Therefore, the reported yield of “char” throughout the manuscript is actually the sum of char and unconverted lignin. Char yield for the control decreased monotonically with increasing temperature as shown in the first row of Alkali and alkaline earth metals both increased char yield from lignin; however, alkali metals produced the most dramatic effect. Each of the alkali metals produced relatively uniform increases in char yield up to 400 Alkaline earth metals also increased char yield over the entire temperature range. The increase was, however, not as significant as for alkali metals. Differences in char yield among the alkaline earth metals was not significant at any pyrolysis temperature. The lower reactivity of alkaline earth metals toward char formation suggests that alkali metals and alkaline earth metals have different interactions with lignin. Alkali metals with a valence charge of one produced higher char yields as electropositivity increased; however, there was no discernible correlation between char yield and electropositivity of alkaline earth metals. Lignin infused with copper (II) acetate produced no significant change in char yield compared to the control. Judd et al. The group labeled “volatile aromatics” are volatile compounds containing an aromatic ring. These were quantified via GC/FID. As shown in the second row of Volatile aromatics from pyrolysis of AAEM infused lignin had different side chains than those from the control, which resulted in different average molecular masses. Therefore, volatile aromatics were also compared on a molar basis. Molar yields of benzene moieties from each treatment are summarized in the first row of The sodium infused lignin produced the highest mass yield of volatile aromatics at 500 Conversely, the infusion of alkaline earth metals reduced the yield of volatile aromatics over the entire temperature range. The yield of volatile aromatics decreased as follows: control Side chains attached to volatile aromatics were also investigated. Each volatile aromatic compound classified according to its individual side chains and parent benzene moiety. The moles of a specific side chain divided by the moles of benzene moieties produced at that point were calculated and termed MMB (mole of side chain per mole benzene moiety). In this analysis, each C As shown in the first row of The major difference in aliphatic side chains occurred in the alkenyl MMB. Vinyl (ethenyl) side chains made up from 87 to 98% of the alkenyl side chains with the remainder consisting of 1-propenyl and 2-propenyl side chains. As shown in the second row of The mechanism responsible for decreasing alkenyl side chains as a result of alkali metal infusion is not clear, although there are two distinct possibilities. First, similar to the action of alkali metals on carbohydrates, alkali metals may coordination bond to the oxygen atom of the monolignol β-O-4 linkages making them cleave differently during pyrolysis. Vinyl functionalities are released during cleavage of β-O-4 bonds in the lignin structure Second, it is possible that alkali metals catalyze the polymerization of vinyl side chains of aromatic moieties released from the lignin. Upon formation, the alkenyl side chains, especially vinyl moieties, are known to be highly reactive toward repolymerization The highest alkenyl MMB occurred for the control sample at 300 As shown in the first row of Methoxyl MMB resulting from all of the treatments is shown in the second row of Alkaline earth metals slightly decrease the methoxyl MMB from 300 to 600 Infusion of copper (II) produced a similar methoxyl MMB as the control sample, which is similar to the effect for alkali metals. Judd et al. Carbonyl side chains were a dominant group among several of the volatile aromatics and include aldehydes from compounds such as vanillin and sinapyl aldehyde and ketones from acetophenones and phenylacetones. The changes in carbonyl MMB are shown in the third row of Alkaline earth metals and copper (II) both slightly increase carbonyl MMB compared to the control. The increase was more significant with less electropositive alkaline earth metals (i.e. carbonyl MMB decreased in the order of Mg > Ca > Ba > control). The maximum carbonyl MMB of 0.18 occurred for magnesium infused lignin at 300 As shown in the third row of As shown in the first row of A relatively low acetone yield provides further evidence that acetate salts ion exchanged with the lignin structure. Judd et al. Thermal decomposition of acetic acid and other light oxygenates is one possible explanation as to why light oxygenates yield peaks near 500 The second row of One possible explanation of increased methanol with infusion of AAEM acetates is cleavage of methoxyl groups within the aromatic structure of the char. Infusion of alkali metals increased char yield compared to the control. At the same time, the volatile aromatics decreased. There was no observed increase in methoxyl MMB as volatile aromatics decreased. Thus, the volatile aromatics that became char precursors contain methoxyl side chains. As the char precursors carbonize to form char, some of the methoxyl side chains might cleave to form methanol. To further investigate this possibility, the structure of the char would need to be investigated in more detail. One other likely source of methanol is cleavage of the γ‐carbon of the 3‐hydroxyprop-1-enyl side chain, which is present in several of the α- and β-linked monolignols. Methanol increased substantially with the infusion of alkali metals; however, there was no decrease in methoxyl MMB. Therefore, the formation of methanol from the methoxyl side chains of volatile aromatics is not likely. Alkenyl side chains, many of which are known to form from cleavage of the β‐O‐4 linkage, decreased with addition of alkali metals. The simultaneous increase in methanol and decrease in alkenyl side chains suggests that alkali metals have an effect on the cleavage of linkages within the lignin structure. Thermally active AAEM acetate salts had a statistically significant effect on lignin fast pyrolysis. Lignin infused with alkali metals increased the yield of char, light oxygenates, and volatile aromatics compared to the control. Alkenyl side chains on volatile aromatics decreased for lignin infused with alkali metal acetates. In general, the effect on pyrolysis products correlates with electropositivity of the alkali metals. Increases in volatile aromatics, decreases in alkenyl side chains, and increases in light oxygenates for lignin infused with alkali metals suggests that they alter the cleavage of linkages within the lignin structure. Yield of volatile aromatics was one major outlier from the correlation of metal electropositivity and its effect on pyrolysis products. The yield of volatile aromatics was influenced most significantly by sodium; increasing 17% compared to the control at 500 Lignin infused with alkaline earth metals increased char and light oxygenates compared to the control. The increase in char from alkaline earth metals was not as prominent as for alkali metals; however, the yield of light oxygenates nearly doubled. The yield of volatile aromatics from lignin infused with alkaline earth metals was lower than for alkali metals. The authors would like to thank the