This paper presents a novel effective method for the optimization of some operating parameters of a laboratory scale thickener on the dewatering performance with multiple performance characteristics based on the grey relational analysis (GRA). Lab-scale thickener operation parameters including feed flowrate, solid percent, flocculant dosage and feedwell height were optimized based on multiple performance characteristics. Sixteen experiments were conducted using GRA to optimize the parameters for lab-scale thickener parameters to generate two quality characteristics (the underflow solid percent and bed height of thickener). Analysis of the grey relational grade indicates that parameter significance and the optimal parameter combination for the lab-scale thickener are identified. The analytical results from two confirmation experiments using the optimal process parameters confirm that the above performance characteristics in dewatering of tailing can be improved effectively through this approach.The thickening process is the primary method of producing high solids slurries for the minerals industry. Thickener outputs can accommodate a range of tailings disposal options from low yield stress, easily pumped suspensions for disposal in conventional ‘wet’ tailings dams to more concentrated slurries for delivery to ‘dry disposal’ and backfill applications. The thickening process, although operated successfully in a large range of sites around the world, is poorly understood and predictive design of thickening devices is still empirical. Although predictive models of thickening do exist, the correlation to reality is often poor and there is a desperate need to bring the two together to make rational improvements to thickener design and operation. Therefore, whilst some would dismiss the models as being unacceptable for predictive design, they are very useful in formulating expected operational trends and providing an understanding of the directions one should take in improving operational performance There are several parameters affect the thickener performance, which include feed flowrate, feed solid percent, solid density, flocculants type, flocculants dosage, feedwell height, etc. The performance of the thickener depends on the selection of suitable operating parameters. Therefore it is very important to determine the operating parameters at which the responses reach their optimum. In most experimental investigations of mineral processing, researchers have varied one factor at a time to analyze the effect of input process parameters on output quality characteristics or response. However this technique requires a large number of experimental runs because only one factor is varied in each run, keeping all other factors constant. Also, in this technique, the interaction effects among various input process parameters are not considered. To overcome these problems, some researchers have incorporated experimental design methodologies such as the response surface methodology (RSM) and Taguchi method (TM) during experimental research Experimental design methods and RSM has been applied for modeling process parameters to mineral processing systems. Central composite design has been successfully used to design an experimental program to provide data to model the effects of inlet pressure, feed density, and length and diameter of the inner vortex finder on the operational performance of a 150 The studies using experiments designs based mentioned above about mineral processing processes so far have been mainly aimed at the optimization of a single quality characteristic at a time. It has been found that the optimum parameter settings for one quality characteristic may deteriorate other quality characteristic. However it is always desired to optimize the multiple quality characteristics, i.e. grade and recovery, of the product or process at the same time. Antony has demonstrated the Taguchi quality loss function based multi-objective optimization technique for manufacturing process taking an electronic assembly problem as an example. He has found considerable improvement in multiple quality characteristics, in comparison to single quality characteristics Grey relational analysis (GRA) was first proposed by Deng to deal with poor, incomplete, and uncertain systems Most of the engineering applications or processes encountered in the real world comprise of multiple responses. This is also true for mineral processing plants. A small improvement in quality characteristics at the same time may be economically remarkable. Thus, an optimization study to be reached all quality characteristics simultaneously is very important issues in these processes. From the review of literature, it is observed that the grey relational analysis has found wide application areas for determining the optimal parameters through different producing processes. However, optimization of mineral processing parameters relevant with the grey relation analysis method is rather lacking. Multi-objective optimization of some process parameters of lead flotation using grey relational analysis has been introduced by Aslan The purpose of this present work is to introduce the use of grey relational analysis in selecting optimal thickener parameters on multi-performance characteristics, the underflow solid percent and the bed height. The setting of thickener parameters was accomplished using the Taguchi experimental design method. Moreover, the most effective parameter and the order of importance of the controllable parameters to the multi-performance characteristics in the dewatering process with thickener were determined by using grey relational grade. In simple terms, dewatering in a thickener involves gravity acting on the density difference between the solid particles and the carrier liquid (usually water), enabling the solid particles to settle. The dewatering tests were carried out using a lab-scale thickener with 74 and 56.5 Experiments were planed according to the Taguchi L16 orthogonal array to find out the relationship between the responses (the underflow solid percent and the bed height) and four process parameters (feed flowrate, feed solid percent, flocculants dosage, and feedwell height) of the dewatering process. In order to obtain the required data, the range of values of each of the four variables was defined as follows: feed flowrate of 9–18 Notably, GRA utilizes the mathematical method when analyzing correlations between series comprising a grey relational system, and thereby determines the difference in contribution between a reference series and each compared series. The compared series are alternative vectors created from sets based on attribute characteristics, which are the larger-the-better and the smaller-the-better, or optimization of specific values between the maximum and minimum values of an attribute. Applying a GRA algorithm can rank different alternatives by determining their grey relational grades. The grey relational grades of different series can be used to rank various alternatives, where higher values indicate superior alternatives In grey relational analysis, when the range of the sequence is large or the standard value is enormous, the function of factors is neglected. However, if the factors, goals and directions are different, the grey relational might produce incorrect results. Therefore, one has to pre-process the data which are related to a group of sequences, which is called grey relational generation In this investigation, “the-larger-the-better” is selected for the underflow solid percent and “the-smaller-the better” case is selected for bed height of thickener. This study conducted 16 tests in which dewatering were conducted using different process parameters. Following data pre-processing, a grey relational coefficient is calculated to express the relationship between the ideal and actual normalized experimental results. Initially, the deviation sequence of the reference sequence is calculated using Eq. The calculated grey coefficient is employed by choosing In the grey relational analysis, the grey relational grade is used to show the relationship among the sequences. If the two sequences are identical, then the value of grey relational grade is equal to 1. The grey relational grade also indicates the degree of influence that the comparability sequence could exert over the reference sequence. Therefore, if a particular comparability sequence is more important than the other comparability sequences to the reference sequence, then the grey relational grade for that comparability sequence and reference sequence will be higher than other grey relational grades To determine the performance of the thickener for dewatering process, GRA is applied to determine the optimal factor level conditions. The-larger-the-better case is desirable for the underflow solid percent and the-smaller-the-better case for the bed height in terms of multiple quality characteristics. In total, 16 experiment tests were conducted to identify the four important control parameters and normalize the data of two quality characteristics. Notably, GRA mathematical conversion enables limited experiments to obtain comparable coefficients and grades. The grey relational grade can acquire the optimal combination of the control parameters and effect contribution of each experimental parameter. According to GRA results (   This study adopts four control parameters for dewatering and GRA is applied to determine the optimal process parameter combination based on multiple quality characteristics. Additionally, the effect of each parameter is obtained using grey relational grades. Analytical results demonstrate that the flocculant dosage has a high value and, thus, has a significant influence on the thickener performance. To verify the optimal process parameters for dewatering, two additional experimental tests ( This paper presented an effective approach for the optimization of thickener parameters with multiple performance characteristics based on the grey relational analysis. For the analytical data generated by the 16 experimental tests using four thickener control parameters, GRA obtained the grade distribution and verified the thickener process parameters that improve multiple performance characteristics. By employing GRA, the contribution of each parameter was weighted according to its importance. Two additional confirmation tests using the optimal process parameters were also performed to confirm the effects of different parameters. The optimal process parameters were obtained successfully. As a result, optimization of complicated multiple performance characteristics could be greatly simplified through this approach. It was shown that the performance characteristics of the dewatering process such as underflow solid percent and bed height were improved together by using the method proposed by this study. We are grateful to A. Soltani Goharrizi, M. Ebrahim Zadeh Gheshlaghi, A. Sarafi, M. Razmirad for their contributions to the work and especially the Sarcheshmeh Copper Mine for facilities.