This paper reviews the ecological aspects of mined soil restoration, with special emphasis on maintaining a long-term sustainable vegetation on toxic metal mine sites. The metal mined soils are man-made habitats which are very unstable and will become sources of air and water pollution. Establishment of a vegetation cover is essential to stabilize the bare area and to minimize the pollution problem. In addition to remediate the adverse physical and chemical properties of the sites, the choice of appropriate vegetation will be important. Phytostabilization and phytoextraction are two common phytoremediation techniques in treating metal-contaminated soils, for stabilizing toxic mine spoils, and the removal of toxic metals from the spoils respectively. Soil amendments should be added to aid stabilizing mine spoils, and to enhance metal uptake accordingly.Mining activities generate a large amount of waste rocks and tailings which deposited at the surface. The land surface is damaged and the waste rocks and tailings are often very unstable and will become sources of pollution. The direct effects will be loss of cultivated land, forest or grazing land, and the overall loss of production. The indirect effects will include air and water pollution and siltation of rivers. These will eventually lead to the loss of biodiversity, amenity and economic wealth ( Mined degraded soils are man-made habitat which experience a wide range of problems for establishing and maintaining vegetation, depending on the types of mines such as metal mines, coal mines and quarries. The physico-chemical properties of the metal-contaminated soils tend to inhibit soil-forming processes and plant growth. In addition to elevated metal concentrations, other adverse factors included absence of topsoil; periodic sheet erosion; drought; surface mobility; compaction; wide temperature fluctuations; absence of soil-forming fine materials; and shortage of essential nutrients ( The original soil of mine degraded lands is usually lost or damaged, with only skeletal materials. There is commonly a lack of organic matter and its associated nutrients such as nitrogen (N) in most degraded land materials. Organic matter provides a continuous source of nutrients, e.g., it provides most of the N reserve in soils and comprises typically 5% N which is mineralized at about 2% per year ( For soils contaminated by heavy metals such as copper (Cu), lead (Pb), nickel (Ni) and zinc (Zn), metal toxicity would restrict the growth of all but the most tolerant plants. Toxic metals can also adversely affect the number, diversity and activity of soil organisms, inhibiting soil organic matter decomposition and N mineralization processes. However, toxicity is not a simple matter of particular concentrations of substances being toxic to a plant. The chemical form of the potential toxic metal, the presence of other chemicals which may aggravate or ameliorate metal toxicity, the prevailing pH and nutrient status of the contaminated soil will affect the way plants respond to the toxic metal. Substrate pH affects plant growth mainly through its effect on the solubility of chemicals, including toxic metals and nutrients. It is commonly recognized that at pH 6.5 nutrient availability to plants is at a maximum and toxicity at a minimum ( The bioavailability of heavy metals to plants and soil biota including fauna and microorganisms is controlled by their total concentration in the soil and their chemical forms. As to plants, the bioavailability is governed by the factors that control the activity of soluble metal species in the soil solution that is preferentially taken up ( Techniques such as crushing, compacting, ripping, grading, and drainage are employed to improve physical conditions of mine degraded soils. Terracing planting, use of run-off channels and stabilization ponds, and mulches should be practiced. Erosion control could be achieved once an overall plant cover has been established. Topsoil is used to cover poor substrates and to provide improved growing conditions for plants. To maintain a good topsoil quality is a must for any revegetation scheme. In addition to a suitable physical property, application of appropriate fertilizers, and inoculation of nitrogen-fixing bacteria and mycorrhiza would facilitate reconstruction of self-sustained ecosystems. The role of other soil organisms, e.g. earthworms in maintaining soil fertility should not be overlooked ( Organic wastes such as sewage sludge and refuse or manure compost can be used as soil amendment and to certain extent as a slow release nutrient source. Selection of appropriate plant species would be very important to ensure a self-sustainable vegetation cover. Phytoremediation refers to the use of green plants and their associated microbiota, soil amendments, and agronomic techniques to remove, contain, or render harmless environmental contaminants ( Some soils are so heavily contaminated that removal of metals using plants would take an unrealistic amount of time. The normal practice is to choose drought-resistant, fast-growing crops or fodder which can grow in metal-contaminated and nutrient deficient soils. Phytostabilization is the use of metal-tolerant plant species to immobilize heavy metals through absorption and accumulation by roots, adsorption onto roots, or precipitation within the rhizosphere. This process reduces metal mobility and also reduces bioavailability for entry into the food chain. By using metal-tolerant plant species for stabilizing mine spoils, it could also provide improved conditions for natural attenuation. Some plant cultivars tolerant to toxic metals are available commercially in some countries such as the UK and Australia ( There is literally growing evidence that phytostabilization can be achieved by selective planting in combination with a various soil amendments such as zeolites, beringite, steel shot and hydroxyapatite that immobilize metals in soil ( Vetiver grass ( An annual legume native to Africa It is commonly observed that heavy metals will inhibit the growth of rhizobia ( Phytoextraction is also called phytoaccumulation. It involves the uptake and translocation of heavy metals by roots into the aboveground portions of “hyperaccumulator” plants. Some plants have a quite extraordinary ability to accumulate heavy metals, to the extent they are described as hyperaccumulators. Hyperaccumulators are able to accumulate Zn concentration higher than 1%, and Cu, Pb and Ni higher than 0.1% of the tissue dry weight ( Hyperaccumulators of Ni, Cd and Zn have been identified and characterized. There is sufficient evidence showing that plants including certain species and clones of trees (e.g. willows and poplars) can remove sufficient heavy metals from soils to clean-up at least low-level contaminated soils ( Recently, we have observed that there is a potential plant species, namely Selective breeding, adding soil amendments to increase metal uptake and transfer of hyperaccumulator genes into genetically engineered crop plants are all real possibilities and huge advances in these areas have been made in the last few years ( Rhizofiltration is the removal of contaminants from flowing water; this can be achieved by the plant itself or the microorganisms associated with the rhizosphere. Floating plants such as water hyacinth and duckweed have been used in a large scale for the treatment of municipal wastewater in Asia ( Certain varieties of sunflowers have been identified as having the highest metal removal capacity after screening hundreds of plant species. It has been observed that within several hours, small amounts of roots of hydroponically grown sunflower plants were able to remove various metals (Pb, Cu, U, Sr, Cs, Co and Zn) from water to reach concentrations meeting accepted water standards. Several other terrestrial plants have been shown to accumulate Pb in their roots when grown hydroponically, e.g., Indian mustard, Emerging wetland species such as reeds and bulrush have been investigated and applied more recently for the removal of nutrients and/or heavy metals ( Special attention should be given to restore wildlife communities. Diversified crops and fruit trees should be planted, and agriculture should be integrated with forestry and animal husbandry, appropriate to local conditions. Assessment and monitoring should be made in order to ensure toxic substances are not transferred and accumulated through food chains, if the sites are used for agriculture and animal husbandry purposes. In order to achieve a self-sustainable vegetation on toxic-metal mined lands, it is essential to choose plant materials which are tolerant to the specific metals, as well as tolerant to drought and the lack of nutrients. Adding organic amendment is essential to facilitate the establishment and colonization of these “pioneer plants”. They can eventually modify the man-made habitat and render it more suitable for subsequent plant communities. Planting of different grass species, rotating with legumes and native species will be able to restore soil fertility and accelerate ecological succession. The use of hyperaccumulator plants seems to be only effective for cleaning up soils containing light to moderate toxic metal concentration. The author thanks the Research Grant Council of the University Grants Committee of Hong Kong (no. HKBU 2049/00M and HKBU 2072/01M) for financial support. Part of the paper was presented during the International Symposium on Land Reclamation held at Beijing, China, May 16–18, 2000.