Similar to many fields of sciences, recent deep learning advances have been applied extensively in geosciences for both small- and large-scale problems. However, the necessity of using large training data and the ‘black box’ nature of learning have limited them in practice and difficult to interpret. Furthermore, including the governing equations and physical facts in such methods is also another challenge, which entails either ignoring the physics or simplifying them using unrealistic data. To address such issues, physics informed machine learning methods have been developed which can integrate the governing physics law into the learning process. In this work, a 1-dimensional (1D) time-dependent seismic wave equation is considered and solved using two methods, namely Gaussian process (GP) and physics informed neural networks. We show that these meshless methods are trained by smaller amount of data and can predict the solution of the equation with even high accuracy. They are also capable of inverting any parameter involved in the governing equation such as wave velocity in our case. Results show that the GP can predict the solution of the seismic wave equation with a lower level of error, while our developed neural network is more accurate for velocity (P- and S-wave) and density inversion.Recent advances in recording data and computational power made a revolution in machine learning applications in many fields of sciences such as machine vision ( In most cases, deep learning algorithms are assumed as a Among all data-driven methods, Gaussian Process (GP) and physics-informed machine learning (PIML) are used here as intelligent In the second group, the PIMLs are a class of artificial neural networks (ANN), where the learning process is reinforced by physical governing laws. Although some researchers solved differential equations with ANN ( In this study, we also have implemented PIML for solving the seismic wave equation as a fundamental equation, which has many applications in geosciences such as earthquake seismology, seismic exploration, rock physics and etc. In this work, we have compared two physics-informed deep learning methods, namely GP and PIML, for solving a 1D form of a linear differential equation of seismic wave and simultaneously for inversion of the wave velocity. Suppose We assume a squared exponential although there are many covariance functions ( Both parameter After training the model and obtaining the optimized parameters and hyper-parameters, one can predict The Suppose a differential equation such the one shown in Eq. To induce physical differential equations into the network, one needs first to compute differentiation of The 1D time-dependent seismic wave equation in an isotropic and homogeneous medium can be expressed by ( According to Section Other covariance functions ( To add more complexity, we produced noisy data and generated The utilized network in this study is illustrated in The velocity value is introduced as an unknown parameter to the network, which allows the network to optimize it during the learning procedure. This means that the velocity inversion and displacement prediction are conducted simultaneously. To find the optimum numbers of hidden layers and neurons, we generated 1000 numbers of training data in a regular pattern in After finding the optimal architecture of the PINN, we randomly generated 1000 noise-free samples from Deep learning methods are accounted as data driven methods with many cons and pros, but being a Prediction of a field, function or parameter is one the main abilities of deep learning methods. For example, here we aimed to predict displacements of points in On the other hand, the optimization process in PINN is more stable than GP, but PINN cannot predict An inherent property of the GP method, as a Bayesian procedure, is computing the variances of predictions which is known as The other interesting point of these methods is their ability to invert the parameters of the governing equations while training, which is known as The PINN methods is also more flexible than GP with regard to involving more physical relations. For example, in this case, one could benefit from linear elastic relations for both P- and S-waves to invert other parameters such as Lame parameters and/or density. Since we use 1D equations, it is not possible to invert Lame parameters, but both P- and S-waves as well as density could still be inverted. To this end, elastic relations could be written as: To involve these relations into the learning process, one needs to compute the strain by computing differential of estimated To estimate the stress values, either one neural network with two outputs or two neural networks each with one output might be used. Previous studies ( We supposed the medium with P- and S-wave velocity of 2 and 1.2 ​km/s and a density of 2.2 ​g/cm According to this PINN, P- and S-wave velocities and density values have been inverted as 1.9998 ​km/s, 1.2001 ​km/s and 2.1983 g/cm The problem solved in this study is a 2D problem: 1D wave equation in space and time Physics informed machine learning methods belong to those data driven methods which are trained not only by the observed data, but also by the induced physics laws. In this study, we implemented the Gaussian process and physics informed machine learning to solve differential equation of a 1D seismic wave as one of the most popular equations in geosciences. In overall, the following points are concluded by this work: Both GP and PINN can solve the differential equation and predict the The prediction error is increased by adding noise into the training data, but both methods are robust to the random noise. In GP, minimizing the log marginal likelihood is likely to result in an ill-positioned covariance matrix or local minima. Due to probabilistic nature of GP, variance of predictions is also computed which can be used for uncertainty quantification. Both GP and PINN can invert the velocity of wave as an unknown parameter of the equation accurately. However, PINN is more accurate than the GP. The PINN is flexible enough to add more physical relations and, therefore, can invert more unknown parameters. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.