The dolomite dissolution in an acidic medium generates CO2 gas. The utilization of such phenomenon for dolomite separation from phosphate is limited by using a surface-active agent that can keep such gas adhered to the particle surface. Among several tested polymers and surfactants Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA) polymer showed promising results in forming stable bubbles of CO2 gas at the dolomite surface. The dolomite dissolution kinetics, in a sulfuric acid, was studied in terms of PVA coating and particle size under constant conditions of temperature and acid concentration. Based on the kinetic data, a dissolution mechanism was proposed. The suggested mechanism depends mainly on the availability of the acid to react with the dolomite particle. Thus, the reaction products play a crucial role either by preventing the acid diffusion or hiding the reactant sites. In addition, a mathematical model, representing the proposed mechanism, was developed to predict the time needed to float different particle sizes.Dolomite is a main gangue in the most phosphate deposits. However, dolomite removal is a challenge due to its similar physicochemical properties to phosphate In a previous work for the authors In present work, the dissolution of dolomite particle was studied in terms of PVA coating and particle size. Based on the dissolution kinetics data, a mathematical model was developed according to the second mechanism, i.e., acid blocking. The model was used to predict the time needed to float the dolomite particles of different sizes. In addition, more experiments were carried out to estimate the change of dolomite particle density as a validation test for the developed model. About 0.5 The concentration of the elements in the digested solutions was determined by Inductive Coupled Plasma, ICP, emission spectrometer, (Perkin Elmer Optima 3200RL Optical Emission Spectroscopy, Norwalk, CT). The ICP spectrometer was calibrated using AFPC rock check No.22. Standard sample concentrations were measured frequently in the course of the analyses to check the accuracy of the calibration curve. Five replicates were taken and averaged for each element. The dolomite samples used in the present study were hand-picked from phosphate rock provided by IMC phosphate Co., Florida, USA. The selected pieces were crushed, ground, and screened to achieve different size fractions. The experiments were carried out with two particle sizes (0.2–0.3 and 1–2 PVA, Celvol 165, (average Mw 150,000 and > Dolomite specimens (1–2  Generally, magnesium ion concentration, in the liquid phase, firstly undergoes a linear increase and then slowly approaches an asymptotic value. The solubility of the small particles is higher than the coarser ones. This behavior can be attributed to the higher surface area available for H The dissolution process of dolomite and/or calcite in aqueous sulfuric acid depends on the solution acidity To gain more information about the bubble formation in the RF process, modeling was used to describe the kinetics of the surface reaction and to elucidate the reaction mechanism in which the acidic species (H The different dissolution behaviors as a result of the presence of PVA coating needs to be explained. In addition, the estimation of the time needed to float different particle sizes helps in rationalizing the RF performance. Therefore, a mathematical model was developed based on the process controlling mechanism (i.e., acid blocking mechanism). The acid blocking mechanism assumes that the reaction products, i.e., CO Initially, in this model, the reaction depends on the transfer of the acid to the particle surface and then on the diffusion of the reaction products out to the bulk solution. The formation of the reaction products, i.e., Ca-sulfate and/or CO concentration of Mg at the surface, M concentration of Mg in the bulk, M concentration of acid at the surface, M surface area, cm reaction rate coefficient, cm transfer coefficient, cm transfer coefficient, cm mass transfer reduction coefficients, M ratio between the boundary layer volume to total solution volume (Vi/Vo)  The model shows no difference in all its fitting parameters between coated and uncoated particles except the ratio between the boundary layer volume and the total solution volume, γ, which increases in the case of coated particles. The higher value of γ in the case of the coated particle can be explained by the swelling of the PVA membrane due to the formation of CO To assess the validity of the developed model, additional experiments were carried out to estimate the change of dolomite particle density. The effective density change due to capturing the produced CO Using the CO From The dolomite dissolution tests of two different particle sizes were conducted with and without PVA coating. The dissolution of the uncoated particles is faster than the coated ones. The difference in the reactivity between coated and uncoated is attributed to the presence of PVA coating layer. On the other hand, the dissolution profile reaches a plateau due to the formation of insulating layer of reaction products, i.e., gypsum and/or CO The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from the