In this paper the representation of geological conditions in a numerical simulation model is considered. By the expression “geological conditions” we mean the 3D volume geometry of the geological formations, the spatial variability exhibited by the rock parameters inside each of these geological volumes and the necessary upscaling of the rock deformability and strength parameters that are determined in the laboratory from cores collected in the field. A specific theory is outlined of how to go from laboratory tests, geological information and field measurements and observations to the full-scale numerical or “ground model” that includes, apart from initial and boundary conditions and ground water, the rock constitutive laws and associated material parameters for use in simulation models. The term “specific” used in the title of this paper stems from the fact that other possible approaches for the same problem may be applied; i.e. empirical rock mass classification systems, explicit modeling of joints in the rock by the distinct element or finite element methods, homogenization techniques, etc. The method used to take into account the spatial variability of rock mass properties by virtue of Geostatistical Theory and 3D modeling tools is also outlined, with an example case study.Numerical simulation models based on the finite element method (FEM), finite differences method (FDM), boundary element method (BEM), distinct element method (DEM), etc., are essential tools in the pre-feasibility and feasibility stages of a project, for aiding the selection of the best design and construction method of a tunnel, cavern, mining system, etc. A numerical model allows the engineer to test various design scenarios before construction commences and to assess with respect to economy and stability different alternative construction sequences or support designs. Thus, the underground excavation system may be constructed in “virtual space” (i.e. the computer) prior to excavating it in reality. For numerical models based on On the top of the numerical simulation tools lies the geological model. This is because the cornerstone of a Rock Engineering project is the geological database upon which the definition of rock types, joints and material properties is based. The consideration of geological conditions in a numerical simulation program and appropriate rock mass parameters taking into account the presence of joints are important and challenging tasks, since geological and laboratory data have to be transformed into “digital information” that is required by the model. Even the most sophisticated simulation analysis can become a meaningless exercise if the geological information upon which it is based is inadequate or inaccurate. Here we describe a procedure for arriving at the input data required by the ground model. First, we analyze the information that is usually available at the outset of an underground engineering project. Then we look at the development of possible geomaterial constitutive models calibrated on standard tests in the lab that could be employed in a hierarchical fashion (i.e. from simple linear elastic and perfectly plastic laws of the Mohr–Coulomb type with five (5) parameters up to nonlinear yield laws with thirty (30) parameters and from isotropic to anisotropic cases with seven (7) parameters for each of the maximum three joint sets, and finally at the parameter determination at the scale of the underground excavation. This is performed with an appropriate upscaling theory that is based on the size effect exhibited by brittle or quasi-brittle rocks, fundamental Damage Mechanics principles At the design phase of the project the following data are available: The constitutive behavior of the rock at lab scale (i.e. of the order of 10 The mechanical properties of the joints at the lab scale, e.g. normal and shear stiffness and strength properties, respectively, that are derived from the laboratory shear tests on representative specimens collected in the field or from cores. From mapping on exposed surfaces, from (oriented) boreholes and from other exploration methods (i.e. geophysical surveys) the geometrical properties of the joints are collected and adequately described in a statistical context (probability density functions). These properties are the number of joint sets and their 3D orientation, persistence, frequency of joints and RQD, aperture, roughness, joint wall strength, water inflow, etc. The guidelines for the collection of these joint data are provided by ISRM The flowchart of The next step is to assign to each element, apart from the lithology, the parameters needed in the constitutive model of each distinct lithological unit. The simplest way to do this is to use The interpolation of the values of Subsequently, an exponential semivariogram model was selected from the library of models included in KRIGSTAT code and was fitted to each of the computed experimental semivariograms of each geological formation, that is The validated semivariograms shown in Subsequently, the initial and boundary conditions and field stresses are prescribed, ground water is added and the numerical or “ground model” based on finite elements, finite differences or coupled finite-boundary elements is ready to perform the necessary computations for the various tunnel alignment, rock excavation and support scenarios (e.g. If the upscaling problem is solved, then the definition of material parameters in the above manner in an FEM or an FDM model is fairly straightforward as each element (or indeed each Gauss Point inside an element) can be assigned different material properties. Since the BEM has a boundary discretization only, and no elements exist in the rock mass the inclusion of geological conditions requires further elaboration. As outlined in more detail in Constitutive models for rock can be divided into elastic and elasto(visco-) plastic models. Elastic models can be isotropic or anisotropic. Isotropic models only need two parameters ( However, elastic models are not very realistic for modeling the behavior of the rock mass since failure and inelastic deformations play a significant role. For example, the properties of joints can be significantly altered as asperities are sheared off after failure and during inelastic deformation. These phenomena can be modeled by appropriate plasticity evolution laws (for example strain-hardening/softening behavior) or using the theory of Damage Mechanics or both. In most cases the behavior of the rock mass is affected by the presence of joints and is therefore essentially anisotropic. The term “joint” is used here to cover all discontinuities; these might technically be joints, faults, bedding planes, slickensides, compaction bands or other surfaces of weakness Gens et al. The hyperbolic M-C criterion (HM-C) tends asymptotically to the linear M-C model for high enough compressive hydrostatic stress and gives good predictions of the rock strength at low or even extensional hydrostatic stresses. This multi-axial criterion is defined by a hyperbolic yield surface with a rounded tip and is given by the following expression In this equation, In the expression for In The failure criterion defined previously requires five parameters, namely under uniaxial tension with When the material is flowing inelastically the inelastic part of the deformation is defined by the flow rule that rests on the following constitutive assumptions: (i) principal axes of plastic strain rates are coaxial to the principal axes of the Cauchy stress and (ii) plastic strain rates are normal to the plastic potential surface The evolution of the yield surface is controlled by the evolution of each one of the parameters The plastic shearing strain intensity is an (isotropic) macroscopic measure of plastic slip that occurs at intergranular (or interblock) boundaries and across microcracks at the microscale or joints at the macroscale. According to the flow rule From the above relations Finally, from Eqs. As has been proposed by Gens et al. After a model is selected it is necessary to determine the parameters for the model at the scale of the project (i.e. 1, 10, 100 Before considering the joints that are added to the rock mass as we move from the lab scale (or mesoscale) to the scale of the discretization element (macroscale), one must take into account the “size effect” exhibited by the brittle or quasi-brittle rocks. It is recalled here that the class of semi-brittle solids is characterized by limited plastic flow, which is both due to nucleation and a sustaining mechanism for the growth of microcracks. Size effect is a subject of increasing interest due to the fact that current applications in rock mechanics involve a variety of length scales ranging from a few hundreds of microns (grain size) to centimeters (lab test specimens) up to several meters (scale of model discretization element). This range of scales and the corresponding necessity for modeling have revealed that there is a strong connection between the various length scales involved and that the response may depend on size for otherwise dimensionally similar structures. The size effect of intact rock strength is well known in the mechanics of brittle and quasi-brittle materials such as rocks and may be attributed to one of the following causes: (a) the failure of rocks in uniaxial compression in the form of spalling cracks with subsequent buckling of the individual rock slender columns that subsequently fail due to buckling In the simplest case of a scale- or size-dependent response, one may envision the interaction between the geometric length of the specimen/externally applied load and an internal length/internal force associated with the underlying microstructure (e.g. grain, microcrack, pore, etc.). The interaction between macroscopic and microscopic length scales in the constitutive response and the corresponding interpretation of the associated size effects may be modeled through the introduction of higher order stress or strain gradients in the respective constitutive equations. In turn, it is quite interesting that one may find a statistical interpretation of the stress or strain gradients based on the stochastic character of stresses and strains due to heterogeneity of the representative elementary volume (REV) This size effect may be described by any of the models discussed above. For illustration purposes the mathematical model proposed by Bazant et al. By inserting into Eq. According to (a) the following parameters of Lac du Bonnet granite listed in It is expected that the Recapitulating, in this work we consider the values for both ratios If we further make the reasonable assumption that the dimensionless internal friction angle of the intact rock does not exhibit a size effect, then according to Eq. Next, we turn to the problem of the effect of joints in the rock mass. The effects of joints on rock mechanics properties include increased deformability, decreased strength, increased permeability, anisotropy, scale effects and additional kinematic possibilities. The upscaling problem common to many aspects of rock mechanics is translating knowledge of microcracks to knowledge of excavation project-scale fractures. Currently, it is reasonably feasible to study microfracture orientation, frequency and permeability characteristics in the laboratory, but this is not yet possible for the field scale, the scale of most interest. Attempts to scale between the laboratory and the field using power laws and fractal dimensions have sometimes proven successful, but not always. Fractal and power laws have proven successful when the geologic mechanisms causing the studied characteristics were similar on both scales. When the large-scale discontinuities were formed by different mechanisms, e.g., thermal stresses locally and tectonic globally, these methods have found limited success. Other possible approaches that one could employ to derive a model at the scale of the discetization element of the numerical model, called herein the “macroscale”, are fracture mechanics (FM) and continuum damage mechanics (CDM). Although it may be shown that the two theories are equivalent, it is most appropriate to start with the latter for practical purposes since the former is based on not easily comprehensible parameters such as the stress intensity factor, each crack should be considered explicitly, nonlinearity is induced by the contact of joint lips and so on. Hence, a possible upscaling methodology may be founded on two basic hypotheses, namely: In a first approximation upscaling may be based on the scalar damage parameter It is noted that joints may also alter the constitutive law of the rock during the transition from the lab scale to the scale of the discretization element of the numerical model, i.e. they may induce anisotropy or they may induce nonlinearity and/or creep. Let us assume for the sake of simplicity that there are more than three joint systems in the rock mass so that it behaves like an isotropic material (the case of anisotropic geomaterial may be easily considered through appropriate tensorial analysis). If the area At this point we may introduce an “effective traction vector” From relations According to the above definitions the elastic deformation of the intact rock can be described by the relation In thermodynamics, the axiom of the “local state” assumes that the thermomechanical state at a point is completely defined by the time values of a set of continuous state variables depending on the point considered. This postulate applied at the mesoscale imposes that the constitutive equations for the strain of a microvolume element are not modified by a neighboring microvolume element containing a microcrack or inclusion. Extrapolating to the macroscale, this means that the constitutive equations for the strain written for the surface The above principle may be applied directly on the isotropic elastoplastic geomaterial obeying the HM-C yield criterion. In the presence of damage, assuming that it is constant, the coupling between the damage and the plastic strain is written in accordance with the above principle, that is to say the yield function is written in the same way as for the non-damaged material, except that the stress is replaced by the effective stress according to Eq. Hence, the relevant parameters of the failure function will be given by Since for the hardening–softening model the same yield function is valid for the initial yield, ultimate failure and residual phase, the same relations In addition, from relations It may be noted that from the above arguments it turns out that the internal friction angle of the rock is not affected by the joints. This result is in agreement with the experimental data  For the linear elastic isotropic rock mass the elastic strain tensor is related to the effective stress tensor through the elastic stiffness of the uncracked rock as follows: Due to Eq. Hence, the elastic stiffness tensor takes the form Although effective medium theories predict that damage in the form of open cracks will cause the Poisson ratio to decrease, whereas closed cracks will cause it to increase Next, the general equations for plasticity for the rock mass are derived. It turns out from Eq. Further, it may be easily shown that Prager's consistency condition that is expressed as follows: The second relation of Furthermore, the derivative The above plasticity equations are necessary because based on them it may be shown that the effect of damage is to reduce the history parameter This means that the hardening/softening function of the intact geomaterial contracts in a self-similar fashion as damage increases, since both the strength and the history parameters deteriorate by the same amount. This self-similarity property directly derived from the theory is illustrated in A universal relationship between the damage parameter This hypothesis is based on the fact that Such a function must have a sigmoidal shape resembling a cumulative probability density function giving In this formula the Based on this best-fit procedure, performed for These values of parameters mean that In the same figure the equation proposed in If The above empirical relationship of the moduli ratio with Furthermore, Another attractive feature of the Damage Mechanics approach followed here is that the second hypothesis stated above may be discarded if the damage parameter Assuming again that Poisson's ratio remains unaffected by the damage, the damage parameter can be estimated with the following simple Damage Mechanics formula In order to evaluate the applicability of formulae Taking In order to compare the above upscaling theory comprised of the two fundamental hypotheses, we first consider the data presented in Also, from the empirical relationship In a subsequent step, the eight sets of in situ Returning back to the creation of the “digital ground model”, based on the above specific upscaling theory the “mapping” of material parameters in the above manner at each element of the numerical model shown in In this paper, we have presented a specific upscaling theory on how information that is available about the rock mass from lab tests and in situ surveys can be converted into data that are suitable for a numerical model. Linking the geological conceptual model assembled from geological mapping, core drilling investigation and other measurements (e.g. geophysical data, borehole logging measurements, etc.), with the numerical model in the 3D space is essential for more realistic modeling of excavations in rock masses. In addition, a methodology for the representation of geological information in the numerical model has been given. The above approximate theory for the estimation of model parameters may be very useful in rock engineering, since: The state of joints distributed in the rock mass can be represented by the constant damage parameter which may be scalar or vector, and its mechanical effects are described by introducing the net stress which acts on the “net” surface excluding the joint surfaces. The constitutive equation is required only for the intact rock, which is obtained from a calibration procedure of the model on laboratory test results. Then the constitutive equation of the rock mass is derived by considering the size effect and the effect of damage as it was described above. It is obvious that the “engineering judgment” plays a role in the process of assessing the damage of the rock mass. Rock mass characterization systems are placed in a ‘Mechanics of Materials’ context since they are linked with the damage parameter, which is a central concept in Damage Mechanics theory. The damage parameter to be incorporated in to the constitutive rock models in the numerical simulation codes is linked with empirical approaches, which are faster although much less accurate, based on rock mass classification systems for rock support measures.  The disadvantage of the rock mass classification systems approach, namely that complex properties of a rock mass cannot be satisfactorily described by a single number, is surpassed with this approach in which the complexity of the constitutive model is considered. Also the hindrance that the same rating can be achieved by various combinations of classification parameters, even though the rock mass behavior could be different, is also eliminated because we may choose a different constitutive law based on experimental evidence. The other drawback that the user is led directly from the geological characterization of the rock mass to a recommended ground support without the consideration of possible failure modes is also eliminated. Using the proposed upscaling scheme the initial values of the model parameters for a back-analysis algorithm aimed at identifying these parameters are given, hence facilitating the quick convergence of the algorithm. Finally, as it was demonstrated here, the in situ seismic wave measurements may be used for the evaluation of the damage state of geological formations in order to bypass the second hypothesis of the relation between Benchmark tunnel sites have already been considered for the application of this type of analysis. The work performed in the project will lead to realistic results and knowledge of the applicability of the proposed methodology for certain problems. These benchmark cases will also indicate the applicability of the proposed upscaling relations for the deformability and strength of rock masses based on already existing rock mass indices ( The authors acknowldge the financial support from the EC 6th Framework Project TUNCONSTRUCT (Technology Innovation in Underground Construction) with Contract no. NMP2-CT-2005-011817. They also express their appreciation to Henning Schwarz of GISA, who kindly provided data from the L9 case study for the demonstration of the methodology. The authors also acknowledge financial support by PYTHAGORAS through the contract MIS 97510 “PYTHAGORAS II: Funding of research groups in Technical University of Crete-M2.2”, program “Operational Program for Education and Initial Vocational Training” (O.P. “Education”), Third Community Support Framework co-funded by the European Social Fund and National Resources—(EPEAEK-II) PYTHAGORAS. In This expression holds true both for tension and for compression if the joints remain open. But above some compressive load the joints may close and so the effective area in compression The stress–displacement constitutive relation Bandis et al. Then from Eqs. This expression for the joint closure parameter is plotted in