Magnesium alloys have come to the fore as attractive lightweight structural materials owing to their high specific strength, whilst some of them are considered for bioresorbable implant applications. A new Mg-4Li-1Ca (LX41) alloy, processed by two-step rolling followed by annealing, showed extraordinary properties outperforming the existing Mg alloys in terms of specific strength, strain hardening ability, ductility, and cytocompatibility. The record-breaking superiority in mechanical properties combined with cytocompatibility qualifies the alloy for applications in lightweight engineering structures and bone implants.The burgeoning activities in developing new magnesium alloys for structural applications, particularly in lightweight vehicles and electronic devices, have culminated recently in the introduction of a superlight Mg-Li alloy with high mechanical strength, good ductility and record-breaking corrosion resistance The new LX41 alloy, with a starting microstructure comprising α-Mg dendrites and dumbbell shaped eutectic phases ( The effect of the two-step rolling and annealing on the mechanical performance of the alloy can be followed in This improvement in UTS is mainly attributed to the fine grain size and distribution of fragmented eutectic particles, which hinder dislocation motion and, in addition, restrict grain growth during deformation. Along with the grain boundary and particle strengthening, a pronounced strain hardening ability also contributed to the high tensile strength of TA30 alloy. The observed increase in tensile ductility is associated with weakening of texture and activation of non-basal slip after annealing. Enhanced activation of non-basal slip in the TA30 condition is consistent with an increase in the extent of dynamic recovery and the concomitant decrease of the strain hardening rate upon annealing In view of the targeted implant applications, an important finding is the good bio-response of the TA30 alloy upon immersion in Earle's balanced salt solution (EBSS) for 7 days. Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and X-Ray diffraction (XRD) scans on the specimen surface revealed formation of octacalcium phosphate (OCP) and hydroxyapatite (HA) Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) revealed that certain amounts of Li  Another aspect in which LX41 outperforms other Mg alloys processed by hot rolling is low YS combined with high ductility, along with exceptionally high (UTS-YS) value of 124 Although the selection of the alloys for the above comparative assessment was only for hot rolled Mg alloys, the analysis would be incomplete if a very successful development of a bioresorbable Mg-Zn-Ca alloy ZX10 of different provenance A valuable outcome of this work is the demonstration that the newly developed alloy LX41 can acquire a range of excellent properties by means of readily available processing techniques - by two-step conventional rolling to just 60% of thickness reduction and subsequent annealing treatment. Other commercial alloys fail to show a similarly good property profile even after 80–90% working and annealing, as shown in In summary, the new Mg-4Li-1Ca alloy has a great potential for dual use both in structural lightweight applications (including automotive and aerospace ones) and in medical implant manufacturing. Its high strength to weight ratio would help reducing fuel consumption in automotive applications, whilst its use in resorbable bioimplants would reduce the need for repeat surgery for implant removal. The authors would like to thank Prof. R. Willumeit and Dr. B.J.C. Luthringer from Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht (HZG), Germany, for their valuable advice and support with biodegradation studies. Funding from the