Utilisation of supplementary cementitious materials (SCM) has been found as a suitable alternative to reduce CO2 emissions from cement production. Fly ash (FA) is the most well-known of these materials and has been used for decades in cement applications. Amongst these applications, the most significant is the replacement of clinker in cement blends, which reduces the consumption of resources and energy and at the same time, avoids the environmental burden associated with clinker production. Despite the existence of these opportunities, a large fraction of the FA produced worldwide is still unused and disposed as waste or stored in landfills. This occurs mostly because FA is unable to meet the quality requirements for replacing clinker in cement blends. Upgrading of FA to a suitable material that can effectively replace clinker is possible via upgrading processes (UP). These processes carry their own environmental impacts because in most of the cases, thermal and electric energy are used in them. Due to this fact, the use and implementation of upgraded fly ash involves additional environmental impacts to the life-cycle of the product. The most relevant of these impacts during the upgrading stage, is the generation of additional direct and indirect CO2 emissions from energy consumption. From a life-cycle perspective, the generation of these additional CO2 emissions decreases the net abatement achieved by using fly ash as a SCM. Therefore, it is necessary to account these emissions and calculate the net abatement achieved by replacing clinker and fossil fuel consumption.
                  A system dynamics model is presented by simulating five different cement life-cycle scenarios in order to quantify the net CO2 reductions when using upgrading processes of fly ash. Ultra-fine grinding for the mechanical activation of FA is the UP modelled using published and direct data from the equipment manufacturer. A material flow analysis (MFA) was carried out to describe the scenarios and to simplify the life-cycle approach. It was found that the upgrading process modelled can have maximum value of 3.98 GJ/tonne of fly ash and still be able to produce net reductions. The same model also estimated that an 80% of the total reductions are avoided when ultra-fine grinding consumes 0.75 GJ/tonneFA of energy, compared to emissions from the baseline cement. The model is also complemented by reviewing the current use of FA as a SCM in the cement industry and by presenting a holistic systems thinking analysis. The model can also be further expanded to simulate other life-cycle scenarios which can include multiple upgrading processes and other materials.Worldwide demand of cement and concrete has increased exponentially in the last twenty years and is a result of the combination of strong ongoing global trends like the accelerated growth of population, the increased need for buildings and infrastructure and the growth of urban populations relative to rural ones ( A suitable solution has been found in the use of supplementary cementitious materials (SCM), also sometimes referred in literature as mineral admixtures ( In addition, outcomes are not limited to the profitability of industries but also could be extended to strengthen corporate responsibility in the management of environmental impacts. To the present time, fine ashes from coal-based power plants, more commonly referred as “fly ash” (FA) are the most well-known and important SCM ( Therefore, the current paper attempts not only to show the benefits of using fly ash, but also to highlight the fact that non-compliant fly ash may become useful material via re-processing that involves additional environmental impacts. The paper specifically aims to measure the net reductions of CO Supplementary cementitious materials are used in cement and concrete applications because of their ability to become binding agents, hence replacing traditional binders like clinker ( Modern use of SCMs can be tracked to the late 1940s when fly ash was used in various massive infrastructure dam projects in the US ( Fly ash is the fine fraction in the by-products of the combustion of coal in power plants. It represents an 80% of the total waste ashes, while the remaining 20% is comprised of bottom-ashes ( Properties of the concrete produced are also influenced by the presence of FA, occurring due to the physical, chemical and physicochemical interactions occurring in the mix ( The use of FA in cement to avoid carbon emissions from the production of clinker should be considered from an integral and holistic perspective, in order to understand the real scope and the implications related. Some other studies have been performed from the perspective of systems thinking and system dynamics, although their number is limited (e.g. As presented in the causal loop diagram ( Local economic growth is also enhanced by an increased cement production and perceived taxes from abatement efforts (e.g. carbon tax). This growing economy consequently boosts the construction sector and increases demand for construction materials ( Cement production is an energy-intensive industry which mainly uses fossil fuels for thermal processes, in which temperatures go as high as 1400 °C ( The For the purpose of this paper, CO ξ ξ ξ ξ When producing cement with FA, the equation adds the contribution of FA upgrading and subtracts the fraction of energy not used in thermal processes: ξ ξ α = fraction of clinker substitution with FA, in percentage Equation E χ = cement produced, in tonnes of cement Combining Equations The reductions can be calculated as the difference between the emissions produced by the same amount of reference cement and the calculated emissions using FA: RCO E Substituting with Equations As shown above, reductions are a function of the variables α and ξ A group of constraints for the use of FA has been identified and summarised in Nevertheless, compressions strengths of FA-based cements at 90 days are considerably higher than those reported for non-FA ones, adding one significant long-term benefit to the use of FA in cement blends and concrete ( Communication between companies is found to be another barrier preventing the expansion of a wider use of FA ( At a worldwide scale, portland cement represents more than 80% of the total cement produced, in spite of proven alternatives that carry additional economic benefits and less environmental burden. This demonstrates that the whole industry experiences a narrow perception on the outcomes derived from the use of FA making it difficult to migrate into a more suitable direction ( Upgraded fly ash can be defined as the type of fly ash which has been re-processed via certain chemical or physical processes (upgrading processes) in order to comply with the quality standard for use in concrete. In the United States, ASTM These processes are needed to upgrade the properties of FA which can be used in cement applications ( This is also the case for upgrading processes, whose impacts from direct or indirect emissions have to be accounted. As mentioned in the previous subsection, fineness of fly ash is probably the most important and influential variable in upgrading and standardisation. Therefore, most currently available processes have been designed to increase FA fineness and to improve the granulometric curve ( Fine and ultrafine grinding are able to reduce particle size even below 10 microns, but at the expense of considerable amounts of energy. Current processes require about 0.75 GJ per tonne of material processed, and the initial investments are high, making it unattractive for potential investors and companies in the field ( Three types of cement are analysed in the current study based on the European EN 197 standard for cement manufacturing ( A generic material flow analysis for these cements is shown in The CO A system dynamic model ( Formulas of flows and converters are the result from combining equations in Section Five different life cycles are simulated for a plant producing CEM I, CEM II A–V and B–V cement at a daily rate of 5000 tonnes, 365 days per year using an ultra-fine grinding to mechanically activate FA and maximise surface area. World average values of CO Cement compositions and standards are taken from Non-clinker processes are considered to have the same CO Transport of cement is 10 km and transport of fly ash to the upgrading plant is 10 km each way, making a total of 20 km. Emissions factors are calculated as reported by Upgrading processes produce standard results on FA properties and no direct emissions. Simulations are carried out using the maximum value of FA in CEM II AV and CEM II BV cements as defined by the standard, 20 and 35% respectively. Simulation 1 ( The results in Simulation 2 (   The simulations indicate that incorporating FA in cement produces CO As shown in Simulation 1, the critical value is reached when the emissions of the UP applied are as much as the emissions avoided by replacing clinker with FA. In terms of environmental impacts and CO  The benefits of using FA as a replacement for clinker in cement production have been demonstrated in several studies and research. Maximising its use seems an acceptable and feasible path to lead the industry into a more sustainable direction. As discussed in previous sections, a considerable reduction of CO The authors would like to thank Dr. Kate O'Brien and Dr. Liza Moore from University of Queensland for their help and assistance for the development of the paper. We would also like to thank Rodolfo Espinosa and Mario Guzmán at Cengicaña and Federico Salazar from the University Mariano Gálvez in Guatemala for the valuable information shared. An additional acknowledgment needs to be made to An Deng from the University of Adelaide for his valuable comments on the use of supplementary cementitious materials.