The extraction of titanium (IV) from sulfate, and nitrate solutions has been studied using tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) in kerosene. Extraction of titanium was affected by acid concentration over the range of 0.5–4molL−1. The titanium distribution coefficient reached a minimum between 1 and 2molL−1 acid for both sulfate and nitrate solutions. Third phase formation was observed in the extraction of titanium from acidic media at all condition tested. At the next stage, the stripping of titanium was studied using H2SO4, H2SO4
                     +H2O2 and Na2CO3. The kinetics of the stripping were very slow for H2SO4. The use of complex forming stripping agents (H2SO4
                     +H2O2) and Na2CO3 significantly improved the kinetics of stripping. About 98% recovery was achieved by extracting titanium from an aqueous nitrate solution using TBP and stripping with sodium carbonate.Titanium and its alloys, due to their excellent characteristics such as thermal and corrosion resistance, are used for various purposes in industry. In particular, titanium has been widely used in the aerospace industry while titanium dioxide finds applications as pigment in the paint industry. Titanium ore can be effectively leached by H Many solvents have been tested for the extraction of titanium (IV) from aqueous solutions. It is recognized that neutral organo-phosphorous compounds are effective extractants for tetravalent metals, particularly for titanium (IV). Among these, tri- In this paper, the solvent extraction of titanium (IV) from sulfate, and nitrate solutions by TBP has been studied to determine the best conditions of extraction and stripping for the effective recovery of titanium from other impurity elements. The extractant tri- Titanium (IV) stock solution was prepared by leaching titaniferous magnetite in concentrated sulphuric acid (98%) and nitric acid (68%) to check the effect of competing ions on titanium extraction. Unlike of other studies the composition of the titaniferous magnetite is natural and it was analyzed by XRF. The results of XRF analysis and the composition of leach solutions for two concentrations of Ti (leach solution A with 0.01 Extraction and stripping was performed with equal volumes (50 About 1 Sulphuric acid is mainly used for the leaching of titanium oxide and its ores ( Higher extraction at 0.5  It was found that with increase of acid concentration, extraction increases up to 1 Based on the percentage metal extraction obtained with leaching solution A, selective titanium separation can be done efficiently at 1 The effect of stripping agents and their concentrations on titanium extraction from a loaded organic phase consisting of 0.5  A further interesting breakthrough was achieved when sodium carbonate was used as a stripping agent. The stripping of titanium was very fast and the yield was 99% ( The stripping of a loaded organic phase that also contained iron, using 2 Solvent extraction of titanium (IV) was investigated in order to study the effect of different acidic media, over the concentration range of 0.5–4 The extraction mechanism appears to change from cation exchange to solvation with an increase in the acid concentration. It is believed that the [TiO] From the practical point of view, the results of this study suggest that the extraction of titanium can be performed using TBP with each acidic solution. Regarding competition the among impurity metals, iron(III) seems to be the most competitive ion with 18.6–65% co-extracted, depending upon the acidic media.