In the combined calcium and copper chemical looping process, the chemical looping combustion of fuel by CuO is utilized to supply the energy required for the regeneration of calcium oxide for CO2 capture in the next cycle. However, the problem of loss-in-capacity of CaO observed in calcium looping still exists and becomes even severer in the new process. The present work synthesized a number of CaO/CuO based sorbents for the new process using selected precursors and examined the effect of thermal pre-treatment of CuO and steam addition on the cyclic reactivity of the composite sorbents. It was found that both thermal pre-treatment of CuO and steam addition were very effective in enhancing the cyclic reactivity of the composite sorbents, therefore can be potentially used to solve the problem of loss-in-capacity in the new process.Recently, a new CO A range of methods have been proposed in the literature to enhance the cyclic performance of calcium based sorbents which are potentially applicable for the composite CaO/CuO based sorbents as well. Among these methods, synthesis of sorbents was promising and has being extensively investigated for the ability of adjusting the structural properties, then enhancing the cyclic reactivity. For example, dispersion of CaO into inert MgO Another strategy that could be applied is that separate particles of calcium oxide and copper oxide are utilized in the CaCuCL process The objective of this work is to identify potential methods to enhance the cyclic reactivity of CaO/CuO based sorbents for the combined calcium and copper chemical looping process. To this end, CaO/CuO based sorbents were synthesized with various selected precursors, and the effect of thermal pre-treatment of copper precursor and steam addition during each reaction stage on the cyclic reactivity of the composite sorbents was then evaluated. The chemicals used in this work as calcium, copper and support precursors are listed in All the sorbent samples were prepared following a wet mixing method as described in our previous paper As shown in Typically, about 25 When the effect of steam presence on the reactivity of the sorbents was studied, steam was introduced into TGA by the steam generator and its concentration was varied in the range of 0–45.9%. During these tests, the total flow rate of inlet gas was kept at 343.2 The phase composition of sorbent was analysed in a Bruker AXS D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer equipped with a scintillation counter, graphite monochromator and copper target over the angular range 10–80° (2 A JEOL JSM-6610 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) equipped with Oxford SDD Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS) was used to investigate the morphology of selected sorbents and the elemental composition at areas of interest. Before image capturing, the sample powders were dispersed on a conductive adhesive carbon tab placed on a SEM mount and coated with platinum using EIKO IB-5 Sputter Coater for 3 The degree of reaction of CaO and Cu in the composite was separately quantified in the terms of conversion ( A number of CaO/CuO based sorbents were synthesized from various calcium, copper, and support precursors, and their degrees of conversion were shown in Unlike the good oxidation reactivity of Cu, the CO In order to remove the side reactions between CaO and Al  It should be noted that the high CuO/CaO ratio used in this work was determined by energy balance calculation based on the assumption of complete reaction in both carbonation and calcination. However, the conversion of CaO carbonation was usually much lower than the theoretical 100%, thus the content of CuO in the CaO/CuO based composite could be decreased accordingly. When there is a much lower CuO/CaO ratio in the sorbent, the negative influence of the agglomeration of Cu/CuO on the reactivity of CaO could be less severe. Therefore, future work on the combined calcium and copper chemical looping process will be conducted on the composites with a lower CuO/CaO ratio. The presence of Cu/CuO in the synthetic sorbents has been reported to hinder the contact of CaO with CO The varying CO Because of the experimental limitation in the number of gas streams that can be accurately controlled, O  The oxidation and carbonation conversions of CA–UA–MA for 10 cycles, in different cases including no steam addition, steam addition in all stages and in calcination or oxidation or carbonation only, are shown in These results agree well with the work by Donat et al.   The effect of steam addition on the carbonation reactivity of CA–UA–MA, CL–UA–MA and CH–UO–MA is shown in A number of CaO/CuO based sorbents were synthesized with selected calcium, copper, and support precursors for the combined calcium and copper chemical looping process. All sorbents showed good reactivity and recyclability of Cu/CuO for oxidation and reduction. However, continuous loss-in-capacity of CaO was observed for all sorbents. When the precursor of copper was thermally pre-treated at high temperature, all synthetic sorbents exhibited much better cyclic reactivity for CO Steam addition can greatly reduce the rate of decay in reactivity of CaO/CuO based sorbents, and the influence was the most significant when steam was present during all stages of oxidation, carbonation, and calcination. Additionally, the influence of steam addition was found to be not very sensitive to the steam concentration when the value was higher than 6.8%. The authors are grateful to the financial support of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism under the Australia-China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology grant scheme. One of the authors (Changlei Qin) acknowledges the scholarships by the China Scholarship Council (CSC), the GasFund and The University of Queensland. The authors also acknowledge the facilities and the scientific and technical assistance of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland.