Specialty gloves and buddy taping of adjacent fingers may cushion impact and dissipate twisting forces so that hands, thumbs, and fingers are protected during play. When fractures occur, athletes must be protected from contact until healing has progressed to a point where reinjury or complications are unlikely and performance standards and expectations can be met. This article outlines a program of fracture management principles and progressive graduated rehabilitation that phase the hand-injured athlete first into general conditioning and non-ball-handling drills, then into return to hand impact activities, body contact, ball handling, and catching with the use of protective hand gear. At this point, specialized playing orthoses, gloves, or taping may be added to the treatment regimen. Batting, the use of golf clubs, and racquet handling occur later, and finally throwing with precision, distance, velocity, and frequency is initiated. The importance of the particular sport, the position played, and hand dominance are factored into the decision-making processes. Safety of the patient and opponents is paramount. Extra-articular meta-carpal fractures are discussed as a prototype for treatment, rehabilitation, and early safe return to play because of their frequent occurrence in athletes. J HAND THER. 2003;16:171-179.Demographic information has been tabulated regarding sports-related hand and, in particular, metacarpal fractures. Two thirds of hand fractures are in the metacarpals. Isolated metacarpal fractures largely occur in athletes younger than 30, with approximately 75% occurring in athletes 14 to 18 years old. The number of overall sports fractures is higher in practice sessions (75%) than in games (25%) because substantially more time is spent in practice. Although stress fractures of finger metacarpal shafts are rare, they do occur, almost always in the dominant hand of a racquet sport player, golfer, batter, or, in one instance, the dominant hand of a softball pitcher. Metacarpal shaft fractures resulting from athletic injuries are caused by low-energy forces and usually are closed and simple. Treatment is designed to maintain or restore skeletal alignment and reestablish normal hand function while minimizing lost playing time and altered performance. Approximately 80% of sports-related metacarpal fractures are nondisplaced or only slightly displaced. Fracture stability is a function of fracture configuration, periosteal disruption muscle forces acting at the fracture site, and additional external forces, such as impact in contact sports. Instability usually parallels the amount of fracture displacement. Shortening, angulation, and rotation may occur independently or in some combination. Instability may be compounded further in cases of multiple metacarpal fractures. Metacarpal shortening usually is limited to <4 mm by the intermetacarpal ligaments. Metacarpal shaft fractures tend to angulate dorsally because of the unbalanced forces of the intrinsic muscles and extrinsic flexor tendons that tend to flex the distal fragment. The second and third metacarpals are immobile at their carpometacarpal joints where they form a part of the longitudinal arch of the hand. Angulation of these two metacarpals is tolerated poorly. The second or third metacarpals may tolerate 10° to 15° of angulation before grasping a baseball bat, racquet, golf club, or small handled tool causes painful skin pressure from palmar displacement of the metacarpal head. The fourth and fifth metacarpals have carpometa-carpal mobility. Consequently, they are more tolerant of angulation than the second and third metacarpals. Compensatory carpometacarpal joint motion of the fourth metacarpal of 20° to 30° may accommodate 40° to 45° of dorsal angulation. The small finger generally has 30° to 50° of motion at its base and so may adjust to 70° of dorsal angulation. Although these parameters reflect acceptable extremes, we usually prefer to correct clinically visible metacarpal angulation, especially when it is associated with clawing or marked loss of normal dorsal knuckle contour. Nevertheless, we all have seen excellent pain-free functional results when some dorsal angulation remains, provided that there is no significant rotational or lateral angular deformity. The actual residual average angulation reviewed in many athletes treated for metacarpal fractures was <10°. Finger metacarpals may tolerate 10° to 15° degrees of lateral angulation and still avoid impingement on an adjacent digit during synchronous flexion. Lateral angular metacarpal deformity and its effects may be seen best with the fingers in full extension. Rotational deformity, most commonly seen in oblique fractures, is tolerated poorly. Border meta-carpals (of the index and small fingers) are more likely to rotate and shorten because they do not have the suspensory effect of adjacent intermetacarpal ligaments acting as supports on both sides. A small amount of rotational deformity may be unapparent with the fingers extended, whereas it may cause impingement (scissoring) or overlap (crossing) when the fingers are closed to form a fist. As little as 5° of rotation may translate into 1.5 cm of finger overlap during finger flexion. Rotational deformity is suggested when a gap is seen between the fragments of an oblique fracture on anteroposterior x-ray. Clinically, digital malrotation is minimized and may not be apparent with the fingers fully extended and the metacarpophalangeal collateral ligaments relaxed. Progressive digital flexion shows the deformity as the metacarpophalangeal collateral ligaments tighten. An oblique fracture configuration is unstable by nature, but actual instability occurs only if periosteal disruption is substantial enough to allow fracture displacement. Oblique fractures may be uniplanar or spiral. Approximately 5% to 10% of sports-related meta-carpal fractures require Kirschner wire (K-wire) fixation to maintain fracture reduction and stability. We prefer one or more intramedullary K-wires for transverse or short oblique fractures (Figure 1). Transfixation wires stabilize all parameters of deformity, including rotation. They may be used for any configuration of simple fracture and are especially suitable for reducible but unstable subcapital (boxer's) fractures or long oblique metacarpal shaft fractures (i.e., the length of the fracture exceeds twice the diameter of the bone at the fracture site). The transfixation wires should be inserted with the metacarpophalangeal joints flexed to prevent intrinsic muscle tightness. Two wires are necessary distal to the fracture site. This prevents rotation of the distal fragment on a single wire. We prefer at least one transfixation wire proximal to the fracture site. The wires may be cut beneath the skin if the patient is going to be returned to play. At or near the end of the season and during the off-season, K-wires may be bent and left protruding from the skin. Bending prevents wire migration, whereas the protruding wire is more accessible than the buried wire for removal in the office. Pins may be removed 4 weeks after insertion or any time thereafter, provided thatthere is uncomplicated evidence of fracture healing. The x-ray appearance of fracture callus is especially helpful in making this decision. Only 5% to 10% of all sports related metacarpal shaft fractures (50% of those that require reduction and stabilization) require open operation. Multiple metacarpal fractures are rare as athletic injuries but may occur as injuries off the field. They tend to be less stable than individual metacarpal fractures. Open reduction and internal fixation may be the best choice for multiple metacarpal fractures to achieve the best and most timely anatomic and functional fracture restoration. When operation is necessary to achieve reduction or when secure internal fixation is considered advantageous for fracture healing and rehabilitation, spiral shaft fractures that are two times or more the diameter of the bone may be secured by mini-screws (Figure 2). Mini-condylar plates are preferred for the rare occasion when a subcapital metacarpal fracture requires open reduction and stable fixation. Straight mini-plates may be applied to transverse or short oblique metacarpal shaft fractures that require open reduction (Figure 3). Open reduction and internal fixation reliably restores structural integrity so that early return to play with a protective orthosis is often possible. In general, the time of functional recovery and return to play correlates with fracture stability. Achieving postoperative protection, graduated rehabilitation, and return to safe and effective play is an art that requires a strategy akin to the coach's construction of a game plan. The exact treatment plan varies with fracture severity; the sport; position played (skill level requirements); hand dominance; ball, bat, stick, club, or racquet handling requisites; and regulation equipment requirements (e.g., boxing, baseball, and hockey gloves) in addition to fracture-specific variables (location, pattern, displacement, deformity, instability, open wound, multiple fractures). Incrementally progressive exercises to regain digital motion are initiated early. Full ROM is the cornerstone for functional return to sports. Skill position players must have near-complete ROM to have the acceptable gripping, ball-handling, catching, and throwing ability that is required in most sports. Having full ROM also allows proper tendon gliding, which is essential for future strength gains in the hand and throwing precision, distance, and velocity. Synchronous wrist and digital tenodesis exercises and individual joint blocking exercises are two excellent nonresistive exercises to begin early to regain maximum ROM in all digital joints. The rules governing orthoses for competitive play vary with the specific sport, the level of play, and game official inspection and approval. Certain sports, such as swimming, wrestling, and (in some states) high school basketball, may not allow playing orthoses to be worn in competition (although they may be used during practice). A degree of uniformity for orthotic regulation has been attained in the rulebooks of the National Federation of State High School Associations, the National Collegiate Athletic Association, and the professional sports leagues. In general, firm but “soft” plastics (consistency approximately that of a pencil eraser), such as RTV11 (General Electric, Waterford, NY), a silicone-based paste applied in several layers alternating with gauze bandage wrapping, and Soft-Cast (3M, Minneapolis, MN), a preimpregnated gel roll, are popular approved ingredients for playing orthosis construction. Fiberglass (Lightcast-3M, Minneapolis, MN) or Gore-Tex may be used. Gore-Tex allows the patient to shower with the cast on. Prefabricated heat-malleable plastizote splints have become popular (Figure 4). Flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joints relaxes the intrinsic and extrinsic flexors, neutralizing their tendency to shorten and dorsally angulate the fractured metacarpal. The wrist may be positioned in 20° of extension. The metacarpophalangeal joints may be left free or placed in 50° to 60° of flexion at the discretion of the treating physician. The interphalangeal joints usually are left free. Buddy taping or splinting of the injured finger to an adjacent finger prevents snagging and reinjury. The index finger is paired with the middle finger, the middle and ring are paired together (leaving the index finger free for writing and independent pinching), and the small finger is matched to the ring finger as closely as possible. For skill players (players that routinely handle the ball), we prefer to avoid taping across the flexor pads and finger joint creases to preserve sensation and finger flexion. For nonskill players, even the dominant hand may be covered completely with a protective splint and padding (Figure 6). Although many manual laborers who are injured at work are reluctant to return until they are fully healed and pain-free, athletes may feel irrationally that they are exceptions to the natural and fundamental laws of healing. The cultural emphasis on winning; financial considerations at the professional level; and the desires and motivation of the player, coaches, and parents may pressure the physician to return the patient to play more quickly than is safely possible. It may be a tedious task to restore the patient to play as quickly as possible while protecting the patient's overall future athletic and vocational careers. No matter what the level of play, the injured athlete may press to return to normal competitive levels and expect the physician to be able to restore immediate or early functional excellence. The injured athlete may disregard the fact that the injury might impair his or her performance significantly, affect the team adversely, or even be season or career ending unless reminded. Notable exceptions include a few high-profile professional athletes who view their injuries more from the prospective of an injured worker. They do not wish to return to play until they are fully recovered because a poor performance owing to injury residuals might affect their future with their team, future salary negotiations, or their marketability. This attitude is even starting to be seen at the college and high school levels, especially in higher profile athletes who are beginning to understand their future worth. Nonskill athletes, athletes struggling to start or to make the team, and athletes who fear losing a starting assignment are more willing and even insistent on early return to play. Some may wish to defer definitive treatment until after the season or an important game. The psychology and strategy of return to play may be complex. A two-dimensional framework (time versus intensity of play) with a flexible range of progression is helpful to all of the involved parties and may be used as a reference from the onset of the injury until full recovery (Figure 7). To guide return to play, we prefer to see some evidence of fracture healing. Although there is no discernible difference in time of return to play among the various patterns of closed stable simple fractures, open, operated, and multiple metacarpal fractures usually take a little longer to recover. Athletes who require internal fixation may require several additional days before return to play. Even with mini-screw or mini-plate fixation, the fracture is vulnerable enough to mandate protection until there is evidence of healing by fracture callus on x-ray or resolution of local signs of injury on clinical examination. There is definitely a difference in the time for return to play between skill players and nonskill players, especially when the dominant hand is injured. Nonskill players with undisplaced or minimally displaced metacarpal shaft fractures of either hand may return to unrestricted play with an orthosis within a few days of injury. The average overall time lost from sports from all sports-related metacarpal fractures in one excellent study from a sports injury-oriented treatment center was 14 days (range 0 to 56 days). Continuous splinting off the field of play usually is stopped 4 to 6 weeks after injury in patients with uncomplicated x-ray evidence of fracture healing. Splinting during play is continued at least until fracture healing has progressed to a point at which impact is pain-free without it. Skill players with dominant hand injuries may be allowed to play without an orthosis. Taping or some type of sports glove may be useful. There are occasional extenuating circumstances when a skill player may be allowed to exceed these criteria. Skill players with nondominant hand metacarpal fractures and nonskill players often wear the protective orthosis during play for the rest of the season. Sometimes protective or padded gloves may be substituted for the playing orthosis as fracture healing progresses. In fractures treated by closed reduction and either molded plaster splints or splints with three-point pressure, the physician and patient must be vigilant for signs and symptoms of excessive skin pressure. Splints may be modified, loosened, or padded to prevent or deal with these problems. Although more common in weight-bearing bones, refractures may occur in the hand. Tendon adhesions or joint ankylosis is rare in closed simple metacarpal fractures treated nonoperatively. Of metacarpal shaft fractures, <10% are confounded by adjacent tendon adhesions or metacarpophalangeal joint stiffness. This usually occurs in open or operatively treated metacarpal fractures. A variety of pads and protective taping, including buddy taping, are used to prevent injuries. Refined playing gloves may contain dorsal protective padding. Gloves may be fingerless to preserve fingertip sensation or fit so as to improve and cushion the ball during the catch of a high-velocity throw. Proper contact and catching techniques may help to minimize injury. Good aerobic physical conditioning may minimize fatigue that may lead to consequent poor or compromised technique. Proper execution and technique and appropriate protective gear also help to minimize the number and severity of injuries. Universal hand fracture management principles are applied to athletes. The position of the fracture should be anatomic or nearly anatomic. There should be no impingement on adjacent fingers or crossing over of fingers during digital motion. Impingement or crossing is especially apparent during digital flexion when making a fist. Wrist or digital nerve blocks may allow a more thorough examination of digital motion in acute injuries. Most hand fractures in athletes are minimally displaced and require only protection and rehabilitation during healing. Fractures that spontaneously lose their reduction or that lose their reduction with progressive exercises are unstable. Closed simple fractures that are unstable or that are reducible but unstable usually may be fixed temporarily with K-wires until fracture callus is seen on x-ray and local signs recede (4 to 6 weeks). The wires may be cut beneath the skin to facilitate return to play. Fractures that require open reduction, open fractures, fractures with comminution or defects, and polyfractures may be treated with K-wires or other wiring systems, mini-screws, mini-plates, or combinations of these. Exercises are initiated progressively to recover digital motion during the first week after injury or fracture fixation. When callus is seen on x-ray and local signs of injury are minimal or resolved, strengthening and conditioning exercises may be initiated, and the patient may be returned to competitive play with protective hand gear.