A comparative study was carried out to investigate the effect of high-pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) comminution on agitation leaching of gold ore in comparison with the conventional jaw crusher (JC) comminution. The HPGR comminution products were evaluated in terms of particle size distribution, specific surface area and average pore volume, and the origin and density of micro-cracks. HPGR comminution produced finer particles with larger specific surface area and average pore volume, more surficial and internal micro-cracks. It was found that intragranular micro-cracks were dominant in JC products while intergranular micro-cracks were favored by HPGR products. Under optimum HPGR conditions (medium pressure of 5.5 N/mm2), gold metal recovery during agitation leaching was increased 6.79%–10.93% while cyanide consumption was reduced 5.82%–11.11%. These results suggest that more and narrower micro-cracks included in HPGR products may enhance contact between the leach solution and gold grains which contribute to the enhancement of gold agitation leaching. However, excessive grinding of HPGR products will moderate the advantage of HPGR comminution.Gold is a noble metal which shows relative inertia to most chemical reactions ( In order to improve gold leaching recovery and reduce energy consumption during the gold extraction process, many experimental studies have been carried out to explore the benefits of novel comminution methods. These methods have involved expanding existing cracks in the ore or creating new cracks until the particle breaks, both of which involve the substantial amount of mechanical energy ( High-pressure grinding rolls (HPGRs) have been used to propagate micro-crack formation ( However, studies of HPGR on finer ore particles are very rare, particularly in the leaching of fine size fractions. Hence, there is a crucial need to investigate the effect of different comminution methods on the micro-crack generation in finer ore particles, the dominant size fraction in agitation leaching. The objective of the current study is to investigate the effects of HPGR comminution on the particle properties and subsequent gold agitation leaching. A deep comparative investigation on properties of comminuted products was processed quantitatively through image analysis of micro-cracks obtained with microscopes. Subsequently, agitation leaching tests were carried out. There is a reason to believe that this type of research can be further used to optimize the current leaching practice and ore preparation. Low-grade gold ore samples (−120 + 60 mm size fraction) were obtained from southeast China. Samples were fed into two-stage jaw crushers (PEX-150 × 250 mm and XPC-60 × 100 mm) yielding particles < 20 mm. The feed material consisted of the following major minerals including: gold 0.38 g/t, quartz 91.89%, limonite 3.62%, pyrite 2.5%, and dickite 1.70%. The crushed particles were then thoroughly mixed and fed into either the HPGR or JC. Locked cycle tests were conducted, and samples were comminuted in closed circuit system with 3.2 mm screen size (yielding particles < 3.2 mm), after which, the powders were ground using ball mill before being fed into the agitation system. More information about the closed circuit HPGR can be found in the literature ( The HPGR comminution was carried out using a CLM-250 × 100 unit equipped with 250 mm diameter and 100 mm width rolls (Leejun Industrial Co., Ltd, China) and operated under three roll pressures (3.5, 5.5 and 6.5 N/mm The particle size distributions for both the JC and HPGR products were determined. After comminution, the representative product of 500 g was selected and sieved into eight size fractions (−3.2 + 1.0, −1.0 + 0.45, −0.45 + 0.15, −0.15 + 0.10, −0.10 + 0.074, −0.074 + 0.045, −0.045 + 0.038 and −0.038 mm) using standard test sieves (W.S. Tyler, USA). The cumulative percent passing (%) for each size fraction was obtained to compare the effect of comminution (JC vs HPGR) methods. The P80 value for each particle size distribution was used to compare the comminution efficiency of different crushing methods. Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET) method ( After crushing, 500 g sample was sieved into different size fractions (see above) and the occurrence of surficial micro-cracks was then examined and quantified using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). In addition to the surficial micro-cracks, the extension of the micro-cracks within the particles was also examined using SEM and, after mounting and polishing the particles (half of average particle size), measurements of internal micro-crack ( The type and the average width of each micro-crack were also determined. Micro-cracks resulted from different breakage are mainly existed in different types. Readers interested in learning more about the diagrams of micro-crack types should consult reviews by where In order to evaluate the effects of comminution methods (JC vs HPGR) on gold extraction, agitation leaching experiments were carried out at room temperature under atmospheric pressure in acrylic leach tanks (volume of 1.5 L). After each comminution process, the resulting product particles were subjected to ball milling prior to the leaching experiment. The ball milled particles (200 g) were fed to the tank with 300 ml tap water. The pulp pH was maintained at 11 by adding NaOH. Sodium cyanide solution (1.5 g/L) was then introduced and the contents were agitated at 550 r/min for 24 h. The gold leaching recovery was calculated from the gold content in the leaching residue analyzed by the graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS, Thermo Scientific, iCE 3400). The amount of gold metal dissolved from the ore sample and can be expressed by the following equation ( HPGR produced finer particles at all pressures used than those yielded by JC (see To characterize the comminuted particles further, the specific surface area and average pore volume of particles were also determined by BET for the different size fractions. As illustrated in It has been reported that HPGR comminution generates micro-cracks in ore particles ( As shown in Th pattern and width of the cracks inside the ore particles are frequently different from that observed on the surface ( The composition analysis on both sides of a micro-crack can provide information not only on the mineral species contained within the ore but also on the nature of micro-cracks whether they are intragranular or intergranular ( Analysis of the EDS spectrum of particles obtained by JC comminution revealed that intragranular micro-cracks were the major micro-cracks as similar mineral composition was observed on both sides of the micro-crack. From the results shown in In contrast, besides the intragranular micro-cracks, intergranular micro-cracks were also abundant in HPGR products as evidenced by great compositional difference on both sides of the micro-crack. From the EDS images shown in These results indicate that the interfacial breakage, which is the factor that results in intergranular micro-cracks, was more easily generated in the HPGR comminution process ( Micro-cracks are highly irregular and continuously change direction as they propagate through the ore particles ( In the volume control method ( In this study, ore particles prepared by HPGR and JC comminution methods were subjected to laboratory agitation leaching after grinding in the ball mill. A series of initial grinding experiments conducted with grinding times as the variable have shown that the fineness (content of −0.074 mm particles) of grinding products for the HPGR method is great higher than that for the JC method with same grinding time. The results illustrate that the difference in the slope of the grinding curve between these two methods is obvious, which agrees well with previous works ( Generally, crushed ores need to be finely ground before they were introduced into leaching system (  Limited research in the area of gold leaching when using HPGR technology is reported in the literature. However, most of them have been mainly focused on coarse particles. For example, it was thought that the increase in gold recovery for HPGR products during heap leaching benefited from the micro-cracks on particle surface ( In the present work, the gold leaching results suggest that the products prepared by HPGR comminution provided a better leaching response when compared with that from the JC method. They agree very well with previous leaching results for a gold ore ( It is expected that the HPGR comminution in operations with finer gold ore particles reflects the potential to achieve a better leaching recovery. The improvement of gold recovery can offset the problem of energy cost or not will be discussed in a subsequent paper. In this study, SEM has been used for investigation of the ore particles with abundant surficial and internal micro-cracks produced by HPGR and the properties were compared with those from the JC products. The particle size distributions of HPGR products were finer at three pressures than those prepared by JC method. It was found that the finest distribution was obtained at the medium HPGR pressure setting of 5.5 N/mm The specific surface area and average pore volume in the particles comminuted by HPGR were larger than those in the JC product. They were probably because of the microstructures in the particles, which were later confirmed by the observation of higher micro-crack density in the HPGR products. Besides the intragranular micro-cracks, intergranular micro-cracks were also abundant in the HPGR products as evidenced by compositional difference on both sides of the micro-cracks. The intergranular micro-crack is believed to be of greater significance to the gold exposure. The statistical interpretation of the micro-crack width showed that the particles prepared using the HPGR contained more and narrower micro-cracks than the particles, which were produced by the JC. It accelerates cyanide diffusion into the particles resulting in more gold dissolution and faster migration. The micro-crack characteristics observed in particles prepared by the HPGR could be the major reason for the optimization in the gold recovery and cyanide consumption. The results indicate that 6.79%~10.93% additional gold recovery and 5.82%~11.11% less reagent consumption is possible when the HPGR operated at the optimum condition. However, the overgrinding of the feed prepared using the HPGR could have a negative effect on upgrading the advantages of a HPGR. This is an indication that there is an optimum grinding fineness in HPGR application. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: