A high creep-immunity MEMS actuator is proposed for RF-MEMS tunable capacitor. The creep-immunity is attained using silicon nitride, SiN, for the spring portions, where the stress is concentrated. Compared with an aluminum spring, the creep-induced deformation is reduced by a factor of 23 at 100°C. We also confirmed by a billion cycle test that the SiN spring does not develop a brittle fracture.RF-MEMS tunable capacitors are suitable for tunable components of the future multiband/multimode mobile handsets, because of its low loss and excellent linearity To analyze the creep of RF-MEMS actuators, we first examined an electrostatic parallel-plate actuator whose movable element is composed purely of aluminum. The structure of the actuator (actuator A) is shown in A creep is known to be affected by total stress time, not by number of switching times. Thus a following test was done to measure the creep deformation. Firstly, a stress was applied to the actuator for a certain period by keeping the actuator in down-state position. The down-state position was attained by applying an actuation voltage difference (30   The same creep test described previously was carried out for the actuator B having the SiN spring. The results are shown in The creep tests were performed also at 100 While a brittle material does not exhibit creep, it still has a risk of developing a brittle fracture. To see this for the actuator B having the SiN spring, we carried out a switching cycle test. The cycle test was done at 25 Finally, we briefly explain about a creep-immune RF-MEMS tunable capacitor structure. We employed a structure composed of quadruple series capacitors (QSC) A high creep-immunity MEMS actuator is proposed. The actuator uses a brittle material, silicon nitride, for the spring portion, where the stress is concentrated. It shows drastically small creep-induced deformation compared with an aluminum-spring actuator. The change of up-state capacitance after the creep test is reduced by a factor of 9 at 25 Based on the investigation of the actuator structure, we fabricated an RF-MEMS tunable capacitor. The proposed structure improves power-handling and is capable of hot-switching under high RF power of +36