Latest chipper models feature new in-feed and evacuation systems that can be adjusted on the fly to match variable work conditions. Proper adjustments of the two systems are expected to produce significant effects in terms of productivity, diesel fuel consumption and chip quality. The study verified such claims by testing one of these new machines in a controlled experiment, conducted under two alternative in-feed and evacuation system settings on two different feedstock types (2×2×2=8 treatment combinations). Each treatment was repeated 5 to 10 times, depending on feedstock availability. The study showed that feedstock type has a dominant effect on all the studied parameters, whereas in-feed mode has no effect on any of them. In contrast, blower setting has a significant effect and offers a strong potential for increased wood fuel processing efficiency. In particular, decreasing blower speed when full ejection power is not necessary allows reducing diesel fuel consumption between 6 and 16%, while increasing chip integrity by 20%.Modern wood-to-energy chains require that wood fuel is comminuted before conversion, i.e. reduced in granular form by chipping or grinding Several actions can be taken for improving energy efficiency, productivity and product quality. One step is to match the right machine with the right job This third step is somewhat similar to the fine-tuning now commonly available on modern power packs, where the engine work settings are automatically adjusted to power demand, in order to maximize energy efficiency and minimize emissions In all professional chippers, the in-feed system may work according to two separate modes: on-off and proportional. In the on-off mode, feeding speed is constant, but feeding is stopped when the rotational speed of the engine falls below a certain threshold, to avoid stalling the engine. Feeding is then resumed when the engine regains its target speed. In the “proportional” mode, feeding speed varies along with the engine rotational speed, in order to achieve uninterrupted feeding and even workload. However, if the rotational speed of the engine falls below the set threshold despite all efforts to modulate workload, feeding will be momentarily stopped as with the classic on-off mode. Theoretically, proportional feeding should allow a faster work pace, but there is a risk that a continuously variable feeding speed may result in an increased variability of chip size, which would detract from product quality. Disc chippers do not feature a separate chip evacuation system, but chips are ejected by the power of the disc itself Unfortunately, no solid data are available on the actual benefits of specific in-feed and blower settings. Manufactures and operators can only guess about the benefits of any given setting, but they cannot quantify such benefits, which restrains their ability to optimize chipper settings. Therefore, the goal of the study was to determine the effect of feeding mode and blower speed on productivity, energy use and chip quality for one of the newest drum chipper models. Since the chipper used for the study was a mobile model powered by a diesel engine, diesel fuel consumption was taken as the reference for energy use. The mobile chipper used for the experiment was a Pezzolato PTH 1400/820 Allroad ( The in-feed system consisted of a lower steel conveyor and an upper feed roller, which pinched the wood and pulled it towards the drum. The system could be adjusted to work alternatively in the on-off and in the proportional modes. In the on-off mode, feeding was stopped when the rotational speed of the engine fell below 115 Both the feeding and the evacuation systems could be adjusted on-the-fly to match variable work conditions. All setting adjustments could be made in a matter of few seconds, through a user-friendly touch screen, installed to the right side of the operator seat. The tests were conducted in June 2015 at the wood yard of the Mombracco chip-fired power station, in Envie, North western Italy. During the experiment, the machine was alternately fed with two different raw material types: logs and mixed residues. Logs were 2 The experiment consisted of testing the combinations of two in-feed settings (e.g. on-off or proportional), two blower speed settings (e.g. minimum and full-speed) and two different raw materials. Since the availability of poplar residues was quite limited, only 5 replications per treatment were conducted with poplar residues (i.e. 2 Cut length and screen type remained the same for the whole duration of the experiment. In particular, cut length was set at 35 Product output was determined by taking the full trailer to the certified weighbridge available on site. The weighbridge had a rated accuracy of 20 The following data was acquired directly from the CAN Bus: pure chipping time, fuel use, engine torque and speed, blower speed and the number of times the feed rollers stopped as the result of the engine rotational speed falling below the set minimum threshold. Time and fuel inputs were also checked with manual methods, by stop-watching all work time with a Husky Hunter handheld computer, and by refilling the diesel tank with a fuel pump accurate to 0.1 The dataset was analyzed with the Minitab 16, SPSS and Statview advanced statistics softwares, in order to check the statistical significance of eventual trends. Before analysis, the data was tested for normality using Ryan-Noyer's test. Non-normal distributions were normalized using transformations. In particular, the logarithm transformation was used for time and fuel consumption data, and the logit transformation for the percent particle size data The difference between automatically and manually reported time and diesel fuel consumption figures was negligible, and therefore the data obtained from the on-board computer were accepted as valid, without introducing any correction factors. The analysis of material type detected a significant difference in the piece size and the moisture content of logs and mixed residues ( The angular speed of the blower was obviously different for the two blower speed settings, but raw material type and feeding mode also had an impact on blower speed ( Feeding was interrupted significantly more often when the wood was denser (i.e. chestnut) and the blower was set at full-speed ( The rotational regime of the endothermic engine was significantly lower when the proportional feeding mode was engaged and the blower was set at full-speed ( Raw material type had a strong and significant effect on time consumption per tonne, while feeding mode and blower setting had not ( Raw material type also had a strong and significant effect on diesel fuel consumption per tonne, which was between 29 and 45% higher with poplar residues than with chestnut logs ( In both cases, the effect of raw material was much stronger than the effect of any other studied factors ( The distribution of chip mass among different size classes was significantly affected by both raw material type and blower setting, as shown by the significant material First of all, the study confirms the dominant effect of feedstock type on chipper performance and chip quality, which is well documented in many previous studies The results of this study also hint at an economy of available power, which can be found in any machine. Directing more power to one of the systems will result in less power being available to the other systems. That is clearly shown by the higher frequency of feeding stops recorded when the blower is set at full power, meaning that less power is available to the drum for chipping, and that the drum drops below the minimum speed threshold more frequently. From this perspective, one may also infer that proportional feeding requires more power than on-off feeding, because the blower is slowed down when the proportional feeding mode is on. Once dealt with the known and obvious, we can move to the new information provided by the experiment, which has much practical value. The study specifically aimed at determining the pros and cons of alternative in-feed and blower settings, and that must be the main focus of the discussion. Apparently, neither in-feed mode setting offers any advantages in terms of productivity, fuel use or product quality. The productivity increase expected from proportional feeding was not verified, and neither was the lower chip quality trade-off. Under equal work conditions, the practical outcome is the same, and there are no specific circumstances (among those explored in the study) that make one system preferable to the other. In fact, proportional feeding seems to put a higher strain on the engine, which is faced with a continuously fluctuating workload. Real-time adjustment of feed speed is a theoretical assumption, invalidated by the delays occurring between sensor signal and actuation. In the end, the in-feed system and the engine are chasing each other, which adds instability to the engine rotational regime. That may be compounded by the fact that slowing down feed-roller speed does not necessarily results in a lower feeding speed. In all chippers, the main feeding action is exerted by the knives themselves, at least as long as they are sharp. The feeding rollers merely bring the wood piece to the knives, but once the knives engage the wood piece, then feeding pace is dictated by the drum, not by the feeding rollers. For this reason, feeding under the classic on-off mode includes a brief reversing of the roller movement whenever feeding is interrupted. Reversing the rollers serves to pull the wood piece away from the drum, and prevents self-feeding. No reversing is possible under proportional feeding, which may deny any real advantages to it. On the other hand, the study did not test the machine with worn knives, and it may be possible that proportional feeding is more effective when knives are worn. In this instance, however, knife replacement might be a better policy than changing feeding mode. Contrary to in-feed setting, blower speed setting does have an impact on both fuel consumption and product quality. While productivity is not affected, all indicators point at a significant power drain when blower speed is set at maximum: feeding stops become more frequent, engine speed decreases and – what is more – fuel consumption increases. Furthermore, maximum blower speed results in the expected higher chip fragmentation, as demonstrated by a downward shift in particle size distribution Concerning chip quality, the graph in On the other hand, there is a species effect: compared with mixed poplar residues, chestnut presents a much larger proportion of chips in the 8–16 The strong feedstock effect did not obscure the effect of blower speed setting, which results in a significant fragmentation of chips. Interestingly enough, the effect of blower speed is equal on both feedstock types, since none of the three way factor interactions was found to be significant. Apparently, a more energetic beating is not going to affect the weaker feedstock type (chestnut) more than the stronger one (mixed poplar). That may not deny the benefit of reducing blower speed when chipping chestnut, since lower fragmentation will result in a higher proportion of medium size (16–45 Adjustment of the in-feed and the evacuation systems has no effect on chipper productivity. Productivity is mainly driven by feedstock type, which also has a strong effect on diesel fuel consumption and chip quality. In fact, in-feed mode has no effect on fuel use and chip quality, either. Proportional feeding may only result in a higher power demand and a larger fluctuation of the engine rotational speed, which may represent a drawback rather than a benefit. This study did not find any merits in the proportional feeding technique, and its results favor the traditional on-off mode. In contrast, manipulating blower speed may offer distinct benefits in terms of diesel fuel consumption and chip quality. For this reason, operators could be attracted to new machines with adjustable hydraulic blowers. The research leading to these results has received support from the