In order to utilize low-grade manganese ore resources effectively, a hydrometallurgical process was developed for manganese extraction in dilute sulfuric acid medium, and the kinetics of leaching manganese was also investigated. At room temperature, manganese from low-grade manganese carbonate ores was extracted by sulfuric acid leaching without reductants. During the extracting process, single-factor analysis method was used to evaluate the effects of grinding fineness, sulfuric acid concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio, agitation rate and leaching time on the leaching efficiencies of Mn and Fe. The optimal leaching conditions are determined as coarse particles of below 2mm size (without ball-milling), sulfuric acid concentration of 0.86mol/L, liquid-to-solid ratio of 5:1, agitation rate of 150r/min and leaching for 180min at room temperature. Under the optimal conditions, the leaching efficiencies of Mn and Fe are 96.21% and 13.35%, respectively. In addition, through the experiments at different temperatures, it is found that the leaching process follows the shrinking core model under the conditions of changing acid concentration and intermittent reaction device. Moreover, the apparent activations of effective diffusion and chemical reaction in the kinetic model are calculated to be 18.83 and 27.15kJ/mol, respectively.Manganese is a strategically important metal in industry and human life. It is widely used for production of steel, non-ferrous alloys, dietary additives, fertilizers, dry cell batteries, paints and other chemicals Various hydrometallurgical processes of low grade ores have been studied and developed for recovery of manganese. When manganese is present in its bivalent soluble form Mn (II), manganese salts are generally obtained directly by acid leaching; when it is manganese dioxide, which is insoluble in dilute sulfuric acid and alkaline media, reducing agents are necessary to convert manganese dioxide into low-valence manganese (II) compounds In this paper, a low-grade manganese ore in Yongzhou of Hunan Province in China, in which manganese mainly existed in the form of MnCO The manganese ore samples were obtained from a manganese ore mine in Yongzhou, Hunan. The samples were crushed to below 2 Firstly, 300 Mn and Fe contents in the leaching solution were detected by chemical analysis. Mn content could be detected as follows: 25 Fe (II) content of the lixivium was determined by titration with the normality potassium dichromate solution, using four drops of sodium diphenylamine sulfonate solution (0.2% by weight) as an indicator. Therefore, the leaching efficiency of Mn/Fe was calculated as follows: The effect of grinding fineness on the leaching efficiency was studied by controlling the time of ball-milling process with fixing sulfuric acid concentration at 0.86 As indicated in With other conditions fixed (ore particle size, below 2 As shown in Maintaining ore particle size of below 2 With increasing the liquid-to-solid ratio from 2:1 to 5:1, the Mn leaching efficiency rises from 66.32% to 97.02%. At the liquid-to-solid ratio of 2:1, Mn extraction is too low because the sulfuric acid amount is insufficient to dissolve most of manganese. Under the condition of a fixed sulfuric acid concentration, the bigger liquid-to-solid ratio means more hydrogen ions in the solution, which accelerates leaching reaction. When the liquid-to-solid ratio reaches to 5:1, manganese has been practically leached. After that, the increase of the ratio has no significant effect on the Mn leaching efficiency while the leaching of Fe continues to increase, which will aggravate the purification process subsequently. Hence, the liquid-to-solid ratio of 5:1 is recommended in this investigation for the sake of a higher Mn and a lower Fe leaching efficiencies. To optimize the effect of stirring rate on the leaching efficiency, manganese ore was leached at the agitation rate between 0 and 450 r/min by keeping other conditions the same (ore particle size, less than 2  Fixing sulfuric acid concentration at 0.86 The leaching efficiency curves in As mentioned above, manganese of the ore exists mainly in a form of carbonate, and thus the significant leaching reaction can be presented as follows: In this study, the particle sizes of raw material and leaching residue were analyzed and results were shown in If the following assumptions are considered: (a) the leaching reaction is a first-order irreversible reaction and kinetically controlled, (b) the leaching process is a steady state approximation, (c) manganese-bearing substances and insoluble matters of sulfuric acid are dispersed evenly in the ore, and (d) slight influences of temperature and water produced in chemical reaction are negligible, the kinetic model can be expressed by following equation Several equations can be deduced by changing Eq. Keeping other conditions fixed (ore particle size of less than 2 Based on test results in For estimation of the activation energy, the relationship between Eq.  A simple and efficient hydrometallurgical process of leaching low-grade manganese carbonate ore was developed in this paper. At room temperature, the total leaching reaction could run nearly completely without reducing agents. Through using single-factor analysis method to design laboratory tests, the optimal conditions of leaching manganese are obtained: ore particle size of below 2 Kinetic analysis of the experimental data shows that the leaching process is fitted by the shrinking core model under the conditions of changing acid concentration and intermittent reaction device. In the kinetic model, the apparent activations of effective diffusion and chemical reaction are calculated to be 18.83 and 27.15 The authors acknowledge the