Flotation of fine ore is usually carried out with collectors that adsorb specifically, such as the derivatives of carboxylic acids in phosphate processing plants. Industrial flotation processes that use conventional cationic collectors, generally, have a stage of desliming to discharge the fines, as in reverse flotation of iron ore in Brazil. This study aimed to understand why the fines respond well to flotation with oleate (carboxylic collector), but do not have the same performance with usual cationic collectors such as dodecylamine (DDA).
                  The flotation tests were carried out in a modified Hallimond Tube using a pure dolomite sample. DDA, a cationic collector which adsorbs through electrostatic interaction (physical and non-specific adsorption), and sodium oleate (SO), an anionic collector which adsorbs via chemisorption (specific adsorption) were used as flotation collectors. The effect of adding a chain extender was tested and the influence of the size of the amine chain in the floatability of the fines was also observed.
                  The initial results showed that flotation with DDA is strongly affected by particle size. The floatability decreases from 82.6% to 52.6% when d50 decreases from 74 µm to 14 µm. In turn, particle size variation had little effect on the floatability with oleate. The better performance of the fines flotation with oleate was attributed to the hydrophobic aggregation during conditioning which increases the d50 by 43%. The floatability of fines increases with the hydrophobic aggregate size which, in turn, increases with the chain length of the collector. This explains the better performance of the oleate (17C), if compared with DDA (12C), and suggests the use of long chain collectors for the flotation of fines.Flotation is the result of three key steps involving solid (mineral), liquid (water) and gas (air): (1) collision of mineral particles with air bubbles; (2) adhesion or formation of air bubble-particle aggregate, and (3) transport of the aggregate to the surface of the liquid, where the particles are collected. The flotation of particles about 15 µm, or smaller, is not an easy task. The problem is related to inherent characteristics of the fine particles such as small mass and high surface area, that impair the steps of collision and adhesion ( The flotation of fines seems to be even more complicated when using conventional cationic collectors that adsorb through electrostatic interactions. This fact has been attributed to the high surface energy of the fines, due to higher proportion in edges and corners, besides cracks and other lattice imperfections arising from size reduction. The high surface energy contributes to a non-selective adsorption of he collector ( In fatty amines, used in cationic flotation, the hydrocarbon radical is saturated and contains no heteroatoms. The chain has 8–12 carbons. A smaller chain does not impart the required hydrophobicity to the surface, whereas a higher chain presents solubility problems. Amines with 12 carbons chain (dodecylamine) are the most commonly used. The functional group (NH The amines ionize by protonation according to the reaction: RNH In turn, carboxylic collectors are characterized by the carboxyl functional group (COOH) having the general formula RCOOH. The “R” represents a hydrocarbon radical, responsible for the hydrophobization induced of the mineral surface. The active carboxyl group has hydrophilic and solidophilic characteristics. So, it is responsible for collector solubility and adsorption on the mineral surface. The carboxylic acids ionize according to the reaction: RCOOH ↔ RCOO Therefore, while the dodecylamine has a smaller chain and adsorbs by a physical mechanism, the oleate has a long chain and a chemical adsorption based mechanism ( In commercial production, the flotation of fines is usually performed with collectors that adsorb specifically, like in phosphate processing plants that use collectors derived from carboxylic acids ( However, despite the evidences related to the advantage of using collectors that adsorb specifically (as SO) for fines flotation, the factors identified as responsible for the low efficiency of flotation of fine do not depend on the active group and the nature of the collector adsorption. Therefore, it does not explain the difficulty for flotation of fines with DDA. The research aimed at contributing to understand why carboxylic collectors, such as SO, are usually more effective in flotation of fine particles than conventional cationic collectors (such as DDA). The dolomite was chosen for this study since it responds well to flotation with both collectors. A pure dolomite sample from The purity of each sample fraction used in the flotation tests was checked by X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) using a BRUKER diffractometer the D2 PHASER model, Cu-α radiation. The average diameter of each fraction and the surface area were determined in a laser particle size analyzer Malvern, model Mastersizer 2000. The micro-flotation tests were performed in a modified Hallimond tube with 3.5 cm diameter and volume of 400 mL. An extender 20 cm high column was introduced in order to reduce entrainment. The tests were carried out with 2 g of sample conditioned for five minutes (oleate tests) or 1 min (amine tests) before introducing the nitrogen gas. The flotation time was 2 min, while the gas-flow rate was maintained at 80 mL/min. Collector concentration of 10 The following reagents were used: oleic acid (QUIMIBRAS), lauric acid (SIGMA-ALDRICH), dodecylamine (SIGMA-ALDRICH), octadecylamine (CLARIANT), kerosene (PETROBRAS), MIBC – metilisobutilcarbinol (FLOMIN) and pH regulators sodium hydroxide (QUIMIBRAS) and hydrochloric acid (QUIMIBRAS). Sodium oleate and sodium laurate were obtained, respectively, from the neutralization of oleic acid and lauric acid with sodium hydroxide. The amines were neutralized with hydrochloric acid.  The sample 4 (the finer fraction) has a surface area of 1.12 m The analysis by XRD result is presented in The X-ray diffractograms confirm the high purity of the sample used in the dolomite flotation tests. Grinding of such a pure dolomite would not be expected to introduce differences in surface composition among the size fractions.  The results (  The flotation of fine particles (d The poor outcome of fines flotation with DDA has been attributed to the fact that this collector adsorbs physically on mineral surface by electrostatic interaction ( The adhesion of the particle to the air bubble depends on the hydrophobicity of the surface and not on the mechanism by which the hydrophobicity was achieved. In other words, the particle-bubble adhesion depends on the hydrocarbon chain of the collector and not on its inorganic group, which determines the nature of the adsorption. Since DDA has a shorter chain than the oleate, it could be the true cause for the low performance of fines flotation with this collector. The results in The results in The surface coating of fine particles with molecules of the collector can result in a hydrophobic aggregation due to chain-chain interactions of the surfactant ( The results in Considering that the tests were carried out in the same hydrodynamic system, the stronger hydrophobic interaction in the aggregation with oleate (17 C chain) as compared with DDA (12 C chain) results in bigger aggregate size and higher efficiency of this collector for flotation of fines. The size of the aggregate after conditioning with oleate (20 µm) is suitable for flotation (20 µm) and this explains why the floatability with SO is less affected by particle size ( The aggregation of the fines increases the probability of collision with the bubble, which is reflected in increased flotation rate and recovery (Thahar, 1981; The formation of aggregates was confirmed by sedimentation tests. It is observed, in Regardless of the nature of the collector adsorption, the flotation velocity always increases with the size of the particles within the size range studied. This effect is attributed to the greater collision efficiencies between coarse particles and gas bubbles. Dolomite flotation with DDA is most sensitive to the influence of the particle size, presenting poor floatability for finer range (d The average size of hydrophobic aggregates formed after conditioning with oleate is 43% larger than the average size of the dispersed particles. In the case of conditioning with DDA the increase is minimal, passing from 14 µm to 15 µm. The efficiency of bubble particle collision and the density of adsorption of the collector increases with aggregate size. After conditioning with oleate the finer sample forms aggregates of appropriate size for efficient flotation. This explains why the flotation with oleate is not significantly affected by particle size, unlike to what occurs in flotation with DDA. Sedimentation tests with the hydrophobic aggregates confirmed the larger size of the aggregates formed with oleate. The hydrophobic aggregate size increases with the size of the collector chain. The use of kerosene as chain extender, as well as the use of a cationic collector with larger chain (octadecylamine – ODA) resulted in larger aggregates. The increase in size of the hydrophobic aggregation with respect to the dispersed particles was 28% for ODA (18 carbon atoms) and 7% with DDA (12 carbon atoms). There is a strong relationship between the floatability and the size of the hydrophobic aggregate formed by fine particles, after conditioning with the surfactant. The most efficient flotation was obtained with oleate (chemisorption) that produces the highest hydrophobic aggregates, but a good floatability was also observed with ODA (physical adsorption). Therefore, the size of the hydrophobic aggregate, more than the nature of the collector adsorption, seems to be the determining factor for the flotation of fines. So, long-chain collectors are recommended for flotation of fine particles. The authors are thankful to