The mold filling stage of the low-pressure powder injection molding process and the segregation of the injected part were numerically simulated and validated by an experimental approach. The numerical simulations were performed using the Autodesk Moldflow Synergy 2019 package to specifically investigate the injected length, the front velocity, the filling time, the pressure, and the shear rate, as well as to assess the magnitude of powder segregation after an injection. Furthermore, thermal and rheological characteristics of feedstock were experimentally measured to establish the constitutive equations to be provided to Moldflow. Numerical simulation results were validated with real-scale injections (with feedstock temperatures varying between 80 and 100 °C), using a laboratory injection press. Experimental characterization and injection were conducted using a feedstock formulation based on 17–4 PH stainless steel powder (60 vol% of powder) combined with a low-viscosity binder system. The injected length, the melt front velocity, and the filling times predicted by the numerical model were in good agreement with the experimental observations, with relative differences varying from 3.1 to 4.4%. Since the injections were performed and simulated at constant volumetric flow in a constant cross-section mold cavity, the mold filling results confirm that the feedstock temperature has no influence on the injected lengths, but rather, on the injection pressure. Moldflow also captured the absence of segregation occurring during injection, with experimental measurements of the local solid loading confirming the ability of the numerical model to successfully predict the homogeneous distribution of the powder (i.e., no segregation) within a simple shape mold cavity. Although theses interesting simulation capabilities of the injection and segregation behaviors were obtained for simple-shape components, the present work represents, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, the first simulation of low-pressure injection molding of metallic feedstock.Powder injection molding (PIM) is a manufacturing process used for the mass production of net-shape, precise, and complex-shape ceramic and metal parts. The PIM process involves four main stages: (1) mixing powder with molten binder to obtain a feedstock, (2) injection molding of the feedstock into a mold cavity, (3) debinding to completely remove the binder (catalytic, solvent, or thermal debinding), and (4) sintering under different atmospheres to obtain a final dense metallic or ceramic component Injection is one of the most important stages of the process for shaping a part while avoiding defects such as sinks, voids, dead zones, warpage, cracks, and welding lines. Computer-aided engineering has been successfully used to numerically simulate the injection molding stage of conventional high-pressure powder injection molding (HPIM) for metal and ceramic. The Carreau-Yasuda viscosity model was implemented in ProCAST simulation code to investigate the influence of the properties of the feedstock on mold filling characteristics Initially developed for the production of ceramic components, the LPIM process has been adapted for the fabrication of metallic parts in the aerospace and medical industries Numerical simulations were performed using Moldflow Synergy 2019 (Autodesk Inc.). The cylindrical mold cavity (∅11.75 × 100 mm long) was meshed using 3D tetrahedral-elements (the mold surface projection of the mesh is illustrated in The suspension balance model (SBM) combining the momentum conservation (MC) equations and the particle-phase mass balance equation (PPMB) were used to predict powder concentration through the injected parts. Because the SBM simulates the feedstock as a bi-phasic fluid (i.e., a blend of powder and binder) and that the MC equations only solve the powder-binder mixture as a uniform liquid phase, to take into account the volume fraction of powder and the particle migration flux. The Moldflow model is defined by the following governing equations. The conservation of mass for a fluid: The particle-phase mass balance: Since powder-binder mixtures generally exhibit a shear thinning behavior (i.e., a decrease in viscosity when the shear deformation rate increases), the influence of the shear rate and temperature on viscosity was captured with a Cross-WLF viscosity model (Eqs. A feedstock with 60 vol% of metallic powder was prepared from stainless steel powder and wax-based binder. Gas-atomized 17-4PH stainless steel powder (Sandvik Osprey, United Kingdom), with a spherical shape and a nominal particle size of 12 µm, was selected. This precipitation-hardening stainless steel is widely used in the aerospace, chemical, petrochemical, and food processing industries, as well as in many other sectors, for its high strength and good corrosion resistance. A scanning electron microscope (Hitachi 3600, secondary electrons detector) was used to assess the particle shape of the dry powder ( The powder was combined with a molten binder (90 °C) in a laboratory planetary mixer for 45 min under vacuum to promote powder coverage, remove air bubbles, and produce homogeneous feedstock. In this study, the solid loading was set slightly lower than the critical solid loading proposed by Hausnerova et al. The rheological behavior of the molten feedstock was characterized using an Anton Paar MCR 302 rotational rheometer with a CC-17 concentric-cylinder and a C-PTD 200 Peltier temperature-controlled measuring system. Molten feedstock was poured into the cup of the rheometer and the mandrel was introduced into the molten mixture to apply shear deformation rates ranging from 0.5 to 3500 s Melting points and specific heat capacities were obtained with a PerkinElmer Pyris 1 differential scanning calorimeter (DSC). The feedstock and sapphire specimens were encapsulated in standard aluminum hermetic pans and tested over temperatures ranging from 20 to 120 °C, using a heating rate of 10 °C/min under a dry nitrogen gas flow of 50 ml/min. The DSC thermograms were recorded from the second heating cycle to minimize the thermal history and to maximize the thermal contact between the pan and specimen according to the standard test method ASTM-D3418 The DSC thermogram for the feedstock is presented in The density of the feedstock at room temperature was measured by the Archimedes technique using a Sartorius YDK03 density kit, and Eq. The thermal diffusivities of the feedstock at different temperatures were obtained by the laser flash method using a NETZSCH LFA 447 NanoFlash system, according to the standard test method ASTM-E1461 The feedstock thermal conductivities obtained experimentally at different temperatures and calculated from the Maxwell model are reported in  Injections were performed using a laboratory injection press in which a new injection concept was developed to minimize segregation of low-viscosity feedstocks and to quantify the full moldability potential of the LPIM process Segregation was characterized using a PerkinElmer Diamond TG/DTA thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) according to a method recently developed and refined in a previous study During the filling stage, the injected length increases at a constant melt front velocity since the injection is performed at constant volumetric flow into a constant cross-section mold cavity. For constant-pressure LPIM injections, Medvedovski et al. A velocity distribution ranging from 0.750 to 1.125 cm/s was simulated through the injected part, as illustrated in The mold cavity filling time is a parameter generally used for the optimization of the injection process in terms of productivity. For a constant volumetric flow injection, this parameter is directly derived from the melt front velocity, and therefore being constant according to the feedstock temperature ( The simulated shear deformation rate experienced by the feedstock during the injection just before the mold is completely filled is illustrated in Another important characteristic of the LPIM process is the pressure developed in the mold cavity during the injection, as shown in The segregation occurrence during injection was captured by the Moldflow Synergy 2019 package and experimentally validated using thermogravimetric analysis. In Moldflow, the change in solid loading through an injected part is predicted using its powder concentration module. This module is based on a particle-phase mass balance in which the relative particle migration flux is evaluated using the particle normal stress. This formulation allows taking into account both shear-induced segregation and the convection of powder concentration from upstream to downstream. The simulation results presented in The commercial package, Autodesk Moldflow synergy 2019, was used to simulate the mold filling behavior of metallic-based feedstock with the low-pressure powder injection molding process (LPIM). Experimental characterization and injection were conducted with feedstock formulated from 17 to 4 PH stainless steel powder and a wax-based binder system at a solid loading of 60 vol% of powder. The feedstock properties, such as the viscosity, melting point, thermal conductivity, density, and specific heat capacity were experimentally characterized to determine the parameters of the constitutive equations required for the numerical model. Numerical mold filling simulation results were validated with real-scale injections, in a simple geometry, using different feedstock temperatures, while the simulation of segregation after injection was validated using a thermogravimetric analysis. The present investigation allowed us to reach a few conclusions, which are summarized as follows: The injected length, the melt front velocity, and the filling times predicted by the numerical model were in good agreement with the experimental observations, with a relative difference varying from 3.1 to 4.4%. Since the injections were performed and simulated at constant volumetric flow into a constant cross-section mold cavity, the mold filling results confirm that the feedstock temperature has no influence on the injected lengths, but rather, on the injection pressure. The absence of segregation during injection was also captured by the software simulation code, where experimental local solid loading measurements confirm the capability of the numerical model to successfully predict the homogeneous distribution of the powder (i.e., no segregation) within a simple shape mold cavity. Since to the best of the authors’ knowledge, the present work represents the first simulation of low-pressure injection molding of metallic feedstock, the interesting simulation capabilities observed for the injection behavior and segregation obtained for simple shape green metallic components must be tested for more complex shape parts in a future work. This work was carried out with the financial support of the