The removal of cobalt from zinc sulfate leach solutions by copper and arsenic activated cementation on zinc powder prior to zinc electrowinning was studied by considering the thermodynamics and kinetics of the cementation process. Arsenic increases the thermodynamic driving force for cobalt cementation in a zinc sulfate solution with the cementing of the cobalt ions as cobalt arsenide at more positive potentials compared to cobalt metal plating. The influence of temperature, the size and quantity of the zinc powder used, and the recirculation of cobalt precipitate on the kinetics of cobalt removal were investigated using batch cementation experiments. It was shown that the rate of cobalt cementation can be enhanced significantly by using finer zinc powder and by recirculating some of the cobalt precipitate such that similar or improved cobalt removal may be achieved at lower operating temperatures or with less zinc added. It was found that the cobalt is cemented by the zinc at an initially high rate with an activation energy of 43kJ/mol, followed by a slower temperature insensitive stage.Zinc is typically produced by roasting zinc sulfide concentrates to zinc oxide, which is then leached with sulphuric acid, followed by purification of the leach solution by cementation with zinc and finally electrowinning the zinc from the purified acidic zinc sulfate solution ( The metal impurities are typically removed from solution by cementing on zinc powder produced in house from the electroplated zinc product ( However, only copper and cadmium cement acceptably fast in acidic aqueous zinc sulfate solutions. The cementation of cobalt and nickel is strongly inhibited in the presence of dissolved zinc, unless the zinc is activated by activators such as copper and arsenic or antimony, using a high stoichiometric excess of zinc dust and increasing the temperature of the solution ( The more positive potentials at which cobalt can be plated in the presence of arsenic could contribute to its activating effect as the adsorption of inhibiting cationic species like Zn(OH) The zinc consumed in the purification processes is typically many times the stoichiometric quantity required for the precipitation of the impurities ( Arsenic on cobalt seed enhances cobalt cementation in a number of ways. Arsenic metal and arsenic in copper arsenide and in cobalt arsenide on the cobalt seed provide an additional reaction surface area with low cobalt deposition overpotential ( In this work the removal of cobalt from an industrial zinc sulfate leach solution was investigated using laboratory and plant experiments using the process solutions and purification plant of the Zincor Base Metals Refinery in Springs, South Africa. The aim was to improve the removal of cobalt and to reduce the mass of zinc required to achieve acceptable cobalt levels in the purified solution. Copper is cemented in the Zincor purification circuit at temperatures of 50 to 55 Impure solutions taken from the feed to the purification plant was used for all the testwork, with the chemical compositions of the stock solutions used for testwork as well as the theoretical solution used for equilibrium calculations shown in Arsenic additions to the solutions were done using an aqueous solution containing 24 Cobalt precipitate was harvested from the washed filter cake that contained about 40% moisture and from the second backmix reactor overflow and then decanted. The precipitates were stored in a closed container to prevent drying of the precipitate. Duplicate batch cementation tests were conducted in a fume cupboard in 5 The optimum cobalt seed concentration was determined for a temperature of 80 The cobalt seed concentration and the zinc dust particle size distribution that showed the most favourable results were then used to determine a new, optimized zinc dust concentration to achieve the desired cobalt removal. All tests were conducted at 80 The rate of cobalt cementation is significantly enhanced by increasing the temperature as indicated by the results of the batch cementation experiments, shown in The kinetics of the reaction was further evaluated by plotting the logarithm of the cobalt in solution concentration as a function of time, which should be a straight line for a first order reaction using a batch reactor. This was indeed found to be the case, as shown in The early transition to the second regime at 50 It is clear that a temperature of higher than 60 The cementation rate of cobalt is, as expected, enhanced by decreasing the zinc dust particle size, as indicated by a decrease in top size of the zinc dust, at a constant stoichiometric zinc addition ratio, as indicated in Note that the target cobalt level can be achieved in 35 The cementation kinetics were further analysed by considering the effect of zinc dust surface area on the initial stage apparent rate constant with the influence of decreasing zinc dust top size on the apparent rate constant as illustrated in The rate of cobalt precipitation is significantly enhanced by the addition of cobalt seed, i.e. zinc with some cobalt, copper and arsenic already cemented onto it, as indicated by the results shown in In the absence of cobalt seed, some time is required for the activation of the zinc as indicated by the initial low slope of the precipitation curve when no seed was added. The cementation kinetics were again analysed by considering the effect of the varying cobalt seed additions on the initial stage apparent rate constants as well as the influence of seed from different sources on the initial apparent rate constants, as shown in The initial apparent rate constants indicate the advantage of using seed from earlier in the process, i.e. from the No. 2 cobalt reactor of four instead of using the cobalt section filter press product, and also the diminishing effect of higher seed additions on the rate of cementation. The results of the test with seed from the cobalt filter press are in agreement with that of Characterization of the cobalt seed with scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) confirmed the presence of unreacted zinc dust as indicated in It is suggested that the increase in cobalt cementation rate with increasing cobalt seed concentration, as indicated by the increase in initial apparent rate constant, is due also to the increase in reaction surface area provided by the irregular surface of the various cementation products on the zinc dust surface. Measurement of the surface area of cobalt seed from the No. 2 cobalt reactor with BET analysis yielded a surface area of 8.34 It is proposed that the reduced activating action of the filtered cobalt cement is due to surface smoothing of the cemented metals, which occurs during the pressure filtration stage following after cobalt cementation, and after addition of dilute sulphuric acid to the final (No. 4) cobalt reactor tank, as is the practice to redissolve any basic zinc sulfate that may have formed. This would explain why cobalt seed from the filter presses was unable to activate cobalt cementation to the same level as does seed from the No. 2 reactor. Moreover, almost all the cobalt is removed in the first two reactors, of four, with very little corrosion of zinc occurring in the No. 3 and 4 reactors and the poor performance of the cobalt seed from the filter presses compared to the seed from the No 2 reactor is therefore not attributed to having less zinc available after reactions in the No 3 and 4 reactors. Further evidence of the leaching conditions in the cobalt filter press is the re-dissolution of cadmium precipitate with cadmium concentrations in the partially purified solution typically increasing from 50 The results obtained indicate that the efficiency of cobalt cementation by zinc may be increased significantly by using finer zinc and by recirculating cobalt seed from the earlier stages of the process, at least if a train of back mix reactors are used for the cementation process. This was further explored by studying the influence of decreasing additions of relatively fine zinc powder, with a top size of 106 The cementation kinetics were further analysed by considering the effect of combined effects of zinc dust particle size and zinc dust concentration as well as cobalt seed concentration on the initial stage apparent rate constant. The results presented in The minimum zinc addition rate to be used would depend on the process configuration, e.g. the residence time available and the maximum allowable cobalt concentration. The present results also indicate that for the zinc particle size investigated the complete dissolution of the particles and the resultant redissolution of the cobalt was not a problem within the time frame investigated. The present work indicates that considering the thermodynamics and kinetics of the cementation of cobalt by zinc in the presence of copper, arsenic and cadmium the following can be concluded: The thermodynamic data indicate that the cementation of cobalt should be enhanced, i.e. is moved to more positive potentials, in the presence of arsenic due to its precipitation as CoAs. Cobalt cementation on zinc occurs in an initially fast and temperature sensitive stage followed by a slower temperature insensitive stage. The Arrhenius activation energy for the initial stage was found to be 43.4 Increasing the zinc dust surface area by reducing the top size of the zinc powder used in the cementation can significantly enhance the kinetics of the initial stage of cobalt cementation. The kinetics of the initial stage of cobalt cementation can be significantly enhanced by recirculation of some of the copper–arsenic–cobalt activated zinc particles, i.e. so called cobalt seed, with seed recirculated from the second tank of a backmix reactor train being significantly more reactive than that of the filter cake produced by pressure filtration after the final stage of the process. The amount of zinc required for the adequate removal of cobalt from a zinc sulfate electrolyte can be significantly reduced by using finer zinc powder and by recirculating activated zinc seed from earlier stages of the process back to the feed of the process. Adding cobalt seed to the process appears to minimise redissolution of the cobalt precipitate, even when using finer zinc dust, most likely by providing cathodic protection to the cobalt precipitate through the unused zinc or by forming more stable precipitates.