Considering the potential for recovering Ni from pyrrhotite tailings though a (bio)leaching process, the fate of the large amounts of oxidized Fe and S produced in the form of residual hydroxide (goethite) and sulfate (jarosite) needs to be addressed. Low-temperature transformation of such ferric phases to an inverse spinel phase amenable to magnetic separation using biomass as a source of reducing gas can represent a clean option for iron management. In this context, biomass-induced reducing experiments at temperatures below 500 °C were performed to identify the mechanisms that influence the formation of magnetic spinel from goethite, K-jarosite and hematite decomposition. Microstructural characterization of the products from experiments on crystalline hematite at 450 °C indicates a solid-state transition to magnetic spinel initiated at surface defects, where the non-porous passivating reacted layer leads to slow kinetics. This study also confirms that efficient transformation of goethite to magnetite at low temperature involves an intermediate transition to a reactive hematite nanocrystalline phase with high microporosity inherited from the (oxy)hydroxide precursor, allowing effective percolation of the reducing gases throughout the grains. In the case of K-jarosite, the resulting phase assemblage is complex and sensitive to experimental conditions. Optimization of the release of reducing gases prevents the formation of ferrous sulfates leading to complete partitioning of Fe in oxide form associated with arcanite (K2SO4) down to 480 °C. However, although the abundance of magnetite is significant, persistence of residual hematite suggests that it has low porosity and hence limited reactivity. Nevertheless, for a jarosite-goethite assemblage, complete transformation to magnetite is observed suggesting that the early transition of goethite to spinel promotes magnetite nucleation during the subsequent decomposition of K-jarosite. As coexisting arcanite is water-soluble, rinsing of the product acts as a means of liberating the magnetic material and allows extraction of most of the residual potassium and sulphur. Consequently, low-temperature biomass-induced magnetization represents a viable option for managing Fe after Ni extraction from pyrrhotite-rich tailings where both goethite and jarosite are precipitated, with the additional potential to recover the produced biochar.In the Sudbury area, up to 100 millions metric tonnes of pyrrhotite (Fe In terms of Fe management, magnetization of the Fe-bearing phases can represent an interesting strategy, such as by the transformation to magnetite (Fe Biomass, a renewable solid fuel with low contents of sulphur, nitrogen and toxic elements (e.g. In this context, biomass-induced reducing experiments were performed at low temperatures (<500 °C) on single-phase goethite and K-jarosite as well as a mixture of both phases. In order to identify the optimal conditions for the magnetization process, the approach focused on a detailed characterization of the mechanisms that promote or hinder the transformation of goethite, and K-jarosite to the inverse spinel structure (e.g. magnetite-maghemite). As illustrated in The phase transformations were performed under inert argon atmosphere and peak temperatures ranging from 270 to 480 °C in a Lindberg Blue M three-zone horizontal tube furnace using the setup illustrated in X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were performed to identify major phases present in the starting materials and after the transformation experiments. Powder-XRD analyses were obtained with a Rigaku D/MAX 2500 rotating anode powder diffractometer using monochromatic CuKα radiation (λ: 0.154059 nm) at 40 kV and 200 mA. Collection from 5 to 70° 2θ was made with a step scan of 0.02° and a scan rate of 1° per minute. Phase identification was achieved using the JADE version 9.0 software interfaced with current ICDD diffraction databases. For some experimental products, high-resolution scans across the diffraction peak from the (5 1 1) crystal plane were performed between 55.5° and 58.5° 2θ with a step scan of 0.002° and a scan speed of 0.05° per minute to evaluate if the inverse spinel is closer to magnetite or maghemite based on the slight differences in their cubic lattice parameter (a axis) ranging from ≈ 0.839 nm to ≈ 0.835 nm respectively (e.g. Reflected light optical images of partially-reacted iron oxide phases observed in some of the magnetized experimental products were taken using a Zeiss Axio Imager polarizing microscope. To characterize the morphological and textural evolution of the phases during magnetization, backscattered electron images were collected using a variable-pressure Hitachi SU5000 field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) operated at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. Information on the relative crystallographic orientation of original and magnetized iron oxide phases was obtained by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) using an Oxford Nordlys detector attached to a Hitachi SU6600 FE-SEM. The EBSD analyses were performed at 20 kV with the polished sample surface tilted to 70° at a working distance of 19 mm. The Oxford HKL Channel 5 software suite was used to process and index the electron backscatter pattern. The required crystallographic data for hematite and magnetite were taken from the integrated American Mineralogist database. Pole figures where the normal of the main crystal lattice planes are projected in relation to the sample surface were used to visualize the phase orientation. The concentrations of Fe, S and K in some of the materials were obtained by wavelength-dispersive spectrometry (WDS) using a JEOL JXA 8900 electron probe X-ray micronalayzer (EPMA) operated at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. Multiple quantitative analyses were done on pressed pellets ( To obtain the polished surface amenable to EBSD analysis, the reacted crystals were vacuum-impregnated using epoxy resin. After curing, the epoxy blocks were polished using diamond lapping film. To insure that the surface was free of defects, chemomechanical polishing with colloidal silica (e.g. The biomass used was provided by Abri-Tech Inc. (Namur, QC) and consists of a mixture of sawdust of softwood (spruce, pine, and fir), homogenized and dried at 110–120 °C. For use in the furnace experiments, the sawdust material was ground in a small mill, and then loosely pelletized using a mechanical press. XRD analysis indicates that the biomass consists mainly of amorphous material with minor quartz ( To determine its thermal stability, TGA of the biomass sample was performed on a TA Instruments Q5000 IR. The data were collected in dynamic mode under nitrogen using a heating rate of 5 °C min The ferric oxide and oxyhydroxide phase transformations experiments were performed using natural hematite (α-Fe The ferric hydroxysulfate starting material used for the experiments was a synthetic potassium jarosite analogue (e.g. A sample obtained from the oxidized portion of sulphide tailings in Copper Cliff (Sudbury, ON) resulting from Cu-Ni mining was also used in this study. The tailings material is fine-grained, with all particles passing through a 65-mesh sieve (<212 µm). The oxidation of the major iron sulphide (pyrrhotite: Fe Considering that hematite is a major phase produced during the dehydroxylation of goethite (e.g. During the reducing experiments, the cm-sized single-crystal hematite (Run H1: The reducing experiment performed on the fine-grained hematite (fragment < 75 μm; crystals: 5–50 μm) was done at the same conditions, although the peak temperature (450 °C) was only maintained for 1 h (Run H3; The results obtained on crystalline hematite of various sizes indicates that replacement to magnetic spinel is initiated at surface defects. As the replacement involves mainly atomic rearrangement through a solid-state mechanism, the reacted layer is non-porous and leads to passivation by hindering access of the reducing gas to the internal portion of the fragments. Consequently, complete magnetization of massive hematite using biomass at temperatures below 500 °C seems unlikely, even for finely-ground material with crystal size down to a few micrometers. To investigate the transformation of goethite under reducing conditions, the fine-grained material (grains < 75 μm) was also exposed to a peak temperature of 450 °C with all the biomass in boat 2 (Run G1: The temperature of dehydroxylation of α-FeOOH (goethite) to form α-Fe In contrast to the limited reactivity of crystalline hematite ( In contrast to goethite, the decomposition of the ferric hydroxysulfate, K-jarosite, is more complex and involves the formation of multiple phases (e.g. However, the observed substitution of K by hydronium and deficiency of Fe determined in the synthetic K-jarosite used in this study ( The initial reducing experiments on the synthetic K-jarosite were performed at peak temperatures of 450 and 480 °C, using the same approach as for hematite and goethite with all the biomass in boat 2 (Runs J5, J6: Consequently, although iron reduction within the sulfates is confirmed, residual ferric iron partitioned in hematite and no magnetic spinel was produced. In fact, with increasing temperature up to 480 °C, the proportion of hematite, together with arcanite, actually increases, mainly at the expense of the potassium ferrous sulfate phases ( In light of these results, the biomass loading and heating strategy was modified in order to optimize the release of reducing gases throughout the progressive phase transformation. This was achieved by transferring a third of the total biomass into boat 1, adjacent to the K-jarosite load, and shifting the heating rate window to lower temperature within boat 2 that holds the remaining biomass fraction (Run J7: Therefore, complete magnetization of Fe from K-jarosite in the presence of biomass at temperature below 500 °C appears difficult. In contrast to the highly porous nano-hematite produced from the solid-state transformation of goethite ( As oxidation of pyrrhotite though bioleaching can lead to the precipitation of both jarosite and goethite (e.g. Considering that arcanite is a water-soluble phase, a portion of the experimental product was rinsed with DI water through vacuum-filtering using a 0.45 μm PTFE membrane as a means of purifying and liberating the magnetic material (e.g. The concentrations of Fe, S and K in the starting material, the rinsed experimental product, as well as the precipitate was also determined by EPMA and are displayed on a ternary diagram in To investigate the potential impact of accompanying residual phases that could be present after bioleaching, a final reducing experiment was performed on a sample from the oxidized portion of a pyrrhotite-rich tailings in Copper Cliff (Sudbury, ON) where the ferric phases are goethite and K-jarosite associated with gypsum, chlorite, quartz, feldspar, amphibole, and minor biotite (see The results of this study indicate that through controlled release of the reducing gases from biomass, it is possible, at a temperature below 500 °C, to fully partition the Fe from a jarosite-goethite assemblage into an inverse spinel phase amenable to magnetic separation. Most of the remaining sulphur is associated with K in the form of arcanite, a potassium sulfate that can easily be recovered through rinsing with water. Consequently, low-temperature biomass-induced magnetization may represent a viable option for managing Fe after Ni extraction from pyrrhotite-rich tailings through a bioleaching oxidative process where both goethite and jarosite are precipitated, with the additional potential to recover the produced biochar. In addition, to further optimize the process, the implementation of a sulphur management strategy to trap the fraction lost to the gas phase and to access the residual amount locked in the magnetized product is the focus of a complementary study (  None. Financial support for this project was provided by Natural Resources Canada (Ottawa, ON). Peter Fransham of Abri-Tech Inc. (Namur, QC) and John Dutrizac of CanmetMINING (Ottawa, ON) are gratefully acknowledged for providing the sawdust and synthetic K-jarosite samples, respectively. The authors also thank Derek Smith (CanmetMINING) for the XRD analyses, Rola Mansa (U. of Ottawa) for performing the TGA experiments, David Kingston (National Research Council, Ottawa) for access to the Hitachi SU5000 FE-SEM, as well as Ivan Barker and Desmond Moser (Western University) for help with the EBSD characterization. Finally, we appreciate the constructive comments of Ahmet Deniz Bas, editor, and two anonymous reviewers.