An on-line monitoring approach for froth stability in flotation processes has been developed based on electrical impedance spectroscopy. The electrical impedance spectrum (EIS) of the froth phase has been found to be sensitive to the froth structure and characteristics. The froth structure variation or fluctuation caused by bubble coalescence and rupture can be sensed by the variation or fluctuation of electrical impedance spectrum in the froth phase. The EIS electrodes can monitor the froth stability at real flotation conditions in a nearly non-invasive manner. An approach in which a stability index (SI) has been defined, has been developed to quantify the stability of the froth structure. A froth phase having a low SI value has been found to be stable and the corresponding operating conditions will be favourable in terms of the separation efficiency of flotation processes.Froth flotation process is widely used for the separation of a large range of sulfides, carbonates and oxides prior to further refinement. Phosphates and coal are also processed by flotation technology. Consequently, effective control of flotation processes, resulting in better product yield and quality, is of great significance. On-line measurement of the performance indices is a prerequisite for flotation process control. However, obtaining these measurements using current on-line techniques is both difficult and expensive. Due to the lack of appropriate sensors, the adjustments to flotation operating parameters, including frother, depressant and collector addition rate, aeration rate, pulp level and froth height, are often made by the plant operator on the basis of visual observation (colour and mobility of froth, colour of tails, proportion of coarse material in the tails) and depends to a large extent on the experience and ability of the operator. However, optimal control is often difficult to achieve for the human operators due to any combination of human error, lack of training and inadequate experience. Therefore, there is a need for an on-line monitoring system that can assist the froth flotation operators in their work. Previous work ( The froth stability has been measured using froth stability column ( Although there has been some research work on the monitoring of the froth stability in flotation processes, the effective on-line monitoring of froth stability and linking the stability to the optimal control of flotation processes are still far from being achieved. The objective of this research is, therefore, to develop an effective on-line technique to measure the froth stability that can be linked to flotation performance. The froth structure includes bubbles, inter-bubble lamellae with parallel walls and the Plateau borders at the junction of bubbles. The lamellae drain into the Plateau boarders under capillary pressure and down the network of the Plateau boarders under gravity back to the pulp. The stability of the lamellae defines the resistance to deformation and the degree of coalescence, which in turn affects the froth water content. The stability of the froth is determined by the stability of the lamellae. The water and solids contents of the froth phase greatly influence froth structure and characteristics, which in turn significantly affect the yield and grades of a coal flotation concentrate. The effects of operating conditions, such as feed solids content, reagent dosages, feed flowrate and froth depth, on the flotation performance are reflected on the froth structure and the froth stability. It can be envisaged that any technique measuring a froth property that adequately capture the fundamental structure and characteristics of the froth will provide useful information regarding the flotation performance. The electrical and dielectric properties of components in the froth phase are different from each other. For example, the conductivity of water is several orders of magnitude higher than that for coal. From the viewpoint of electrical behaviour of the froth, a body of froth phase between two electrodes can be regarded as a complex network of electrical conductance, inductance and capacitance (see In the measurement of EIS, a pair of electrodes is immersed in the froth phase. The electrodes used in measuring electrical impedance spectrum of the froth phase can have a number of configurations. In the case with a small diameter flotation cell having a non-conductive vessel wall, the electrodes can be tapped into the non-conductive wall ( A sinusoidal voltage with a small known amplitude at a selected frequency is applied to the electrodes. The resulting sinusoidal current through the sample is measured. The magnitude of impedance (| The electrical impedance spectrum, i.e. impedance as functions of frequency, of a froth phase is obtained by repeating the measurement of impedance and phase shift over a range of frequencies. The plot of The froth impedance spectrum was measured under conditions corresponding to different froth stability levels, and the measurement of the spectrum was repeated 5 times with each measurement taking 40 s. Due to the bubble coalescence and rupture, there were variations among the repeated measurements.  In each measurement of the EIS spectrum, frequency points were evenly distributed over the logarithm scale of the frequency range of 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The Two raw coal samples from BW and JP mines were selected so that their ranks represent the high and low ends in the wide spectrum of the vitrinite reflectance range (0.6–1.7). The coal samples were crushed to a top size of 0.5 mm. Sub-samples were extracted and characterised with respect to head ash and particle size distribution. Coal flotation experiments were carried out using a small generic flotation column of 0.08 m in diameter and 2.5 m in height. The process circuit consisted of a baffled 1 m The measurement system of electrical impedance spectrum (EIS) consisted of a pair of electrodes and an electrical impedance spectrometer. The electrodes used in measuring electrical impedance spectrum were tapped into the non-conductive column wall. The electrodes are made from copper with hard gold plating. The hard gold plating is essential to keep the electrode surface chemically inert. The electrode rods of 15 mm in diameter were located 2 cm below the froth overflow weir of the flotation cell. The electrical impedance spectrum was measured using the electrical impedance spectrometer–Solartron 1260 Frequency Response Analyzer. All the EIS measurements were carried out with a constant voltage excitation signal having an amplitude of 1 V and over the frequency range of 1 Hz to 1 MHz.  As shown in In order to establish the link between the The effect of frother dosage on the froth stability (i.e. Frothers are added to stabilize the bubbles for long enough to enable them to carry hydrophobic particles into the product and also plays a major role in the generation of small size bubbles for rapid flotation kinetics. For a given air rate, smaller bubbles result in more surface area and consequently more water and solids (hydrophobic and non-hydrophobic) are loaded or entrained into the froth phase. Increased water content of the froth phase is associated with reduced bubble coalescence, and hence reduced froth instability. It can be seen in A small amount of oily collectors are usually added with the frother to the flotation pulp to increase the flotation rate of coal, to float coarse particles, and to float less hydrophobic materials or slightly locked coal particles in order to achieve a high recovery of combustible material. Diesel oil is the most commonly used collector. The effect of collector dosage on the froth stability and flotation performance is shown The feed solids content also has a significant effect on the froth stability. The effect of volumetric feed flowrate on the froth stability and flotation performance is shown in  Froth depth is also an important operating parameter. Deep froth would produce ‘drier’ and low ash concentrates due to a longer time for water drainage and the particle detachment/re-attachment within the froth. As shown in The second set of experiments was designed to simulate plant operations and test the EIS electrodes as a monitoring tool to detect sudden changes in process operations or abnormal operations. In these tests, perturbations were introduced in the process variables and the stability index (  The comparison among the cases showed in Although the froth stability index ( The electrical impedance spectrum of the froth phase was measured on a laboratory-scale generic flotation column over a wide range of operating conditions. The froth structure variation or fluctuation caused by bubble coalescence and rupture can be sensed by the variation or fluctuation of electrical impedance in the froth phase. A new approach, in which a stability index ( The authors would like to thank ACARP for their financial support, the industry monitors (Dr. Andrew Vince and Dr. Richard Peck ) and research coordinators (Mr. Jim Craigen and Mr. Peter Newling) for their assistance and advice, and Mr. Andrew Taylor, Mr. Adrian Burger and Mr. Douglas Nemeth for their assistance in building the experimental rigs and carrying out experiments.