Chlorination of two chalcopyrite concentrates with Cl2+N2 was investigated under isothermal conditions in the temperature range of 20–750°C using boat experiments. The effects of gas flow rate, chlorine content of the gas mixture and residence time on the reaction rate were also investigated. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and chemical analysis are used for the physico-chemical characterization of the reaction products.
                  The chlorination of chalcopyrite concentrates started at room temperature generating chlorides of Cu, Pb, Zn, Fe, and S. The reaction of chlorine with sulfides is almost complete at about 300°C and the overall reaction is exothermic. At this temperature, the valuable metal chlorides were concentrated in the chlorination residues, while those of iron and sulfur were volatilized.
                  A flow sheet is proposed for the selective chlorination of chalcopyrite concentrates at low temperatures. Such flow sheet could be considered as an attractive route for the sulfide concentrates’ treatment without SO
                        x
                      emissions. It could be also regarded as energy saving with respect to the classical pyrometallurgical routes.The kinetics of the chlorination of the chalcopyrite concentrates at temperatures up to 300°C, using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), were studied by Kanari et al. At 300°C, increasing the mass of the sample or increasing the chlorine content of the gas mixture changes the kinetic data as shown in On the other hand, thermal treatment of metal sulfides in inert atmosphere at temperatures higher or equal to 500°C will lead to the partial decomposition of chalcopyrite and pyrite to cubanite and pyrrhotite, respectively For these reasons, the chlorination of several grams of the chalcopyrite concentrates was carried out from room temperature to 750°C using boat experiments. The results are discussed in terms of the effects of gas flow rate, temperature, chlorine content and reaction time on the chlorination rate of the chalcopyrite concentrates as well as on the selective volatilization and separation of valuable metals’ chlorides from those of iron and sulfur. Two chalcopyrite concentrates as well as relatively pure CuFeS Test of the isothermal chlorination of chalcopyrite concentrates was carried out using the experimental set-up schematized in As the boat used for the experimental tests was relatively long, attempts were made to measure the temperature profile of the sample. Thus, the temperature of the furnace was fixed at a desired value, between 200 and 600°C, and the temperature at the sample surface was recorded by setting a thermocouple inside the reactor. Similarly, the inner temperatures of the entire reactor and condenser were measured. The tests were carried out under nitrogen atmosphere. The sample’s temperature was also measured during the chlorination at 300°C of LGC and HGC by Cl Experimental tests to check the effect of the gas flow rate on the chlorination of two chalcopyrite concentrates were performed at 300°C using the Cl An extensive series of isothermal chlorination tests were carried out between 20 and 750°C. The materials subjected to chlorination were LGC, HGC, CuFeS The behavior of HGC chlorination is close to that of chalcopyrite, whilst that of LGC is similar to that of pyrite in Cl The sample percentage weight loss obtained during the chlorination of sulfides using boat experiments is the algebraic sum of those due to the partial thermal decomposition of sulfides, the formation of chlorides and their volatilization. Prior to the chlorination, it was observed that the weight of the sample was decreased during its heating under nitrogen atmosphere at temperatures ≥475°C. This is due to the partial or complete thermal decomposition of chalcopyrite and pyrite Systematic SEM, XRD, and chemical analysis of the reaction products of the chlorination of the two concentrates at different temperatures were performed. Details of these analyses are available in Several SEM spectra of the chlorination residues of LGC and HGC between 20 and 300°C are given in Condensates of chlorination of both concentrates were observed at temperatures higher than 200°C. All residues of the LGC and HGC chlorination at temperatures ranging from 20 to 700°C were subjected to XRD analysis.  A summary of the phases identified by XRD analysis in the residues obtained at different chlorination temperatures for LGC and HGC is given in Although the condensates were subjected to XRD analysis, the identification of the different phases was impossible due to their amorphous character. However, the presence of iron in the condensates at lower temperatures suggests that it was volatilized as FeCl In our experimental conditions, results of SEM and XRD indicate that full chlorination of sulfides contained in both concentrates and volatilization of sulfur and iron chlorinated-compounds was achieved at about 300°C. To check this hypothesis, iron and copper contents of the chlorination residues were determined by chemical analysis.  Results of chemical analysis concerning the extraction of iron and copper during the chlorination of HGC up to 600°C are illustrated in The agglomeration of the chlorination residues of HGC was probably caused by the increase of temperature thanks to the exothermic nature of the sulfides’ chlorination reactions. To confirm this hypothesis, a series of isothermal chlorination tests at 300°C using 2 As shown by As mentioned in the preceding sections, the chlorination of both concentrates was achieved for a reaction time of 2 This was studied between 175 and 300°C during the chlorination of LGC and HGC with Cl As temperatures closer to 300°C were necessary to achieve selective chlorination of both concentrates, tests to check the effects of chlorine contents of the Cl Results concerning HGC chlorination for the same conditions mentioned above are given in Results of the chlorination of two chalcopyrite concentrates in different conditions using boat experiments indicate that it was possible to achieve low temperature chlorination-volatilization of concentrates at about 300°C. This allows selective separation of valuable metal chlorides from the gangue. According to these results a proposed flow sheet is schematized in Based on the experimental results and the analysis of the reaction products, the main reactions of sulfides contained in both concentrates with chlorine are those described by The gas-phase of the concentrates’ chlorination is composed essentially of iron and sulfur chlorides. Ferric chloride is recovered by cooling the gas phase at room temperature. The interaction of ferric chloride with oxygen generates hematite and chlorine The residue of chlorination is composed of copper, lead and zinc chlorides and the gangue. Separation of metal chlorides from the gangue as well as the individual metal chlorides can be performed by classical hydrometallurgical methods. The generated final solid residue is mainly composed of quartz and clinochlore. Such residue is environmentally safe and can be used for civil work or land filling. The proposed process takes advantage of the exothermic nature of the chlorine reaction with the sulfide concentrate. Moreover, the generated sulfur chlorides can be used as chlorinating agents thus eliminating all sulfur compounds’ emissions. Finally, part of the sulfur is recovered in the elementary form and the final solid residue is environmentally safe. Although the chlorination process was conducted at low temperature compared with conventional pyrometallurgical ones, problems related to the equipment’s corrosion have to be considered in calculating the capital and operating costs using the suggested process on the industrial scale. The chlorination of LGC and HGC concentrates started from 20°C and full chlorination of sulfides was achieved at about 300°C for a reaction time ≥2 Chlorination of both concentrates is exothermic that may allows the development of a process with a reduced external energy supply. However, the exothermic nature of the chlorination reaction as well as the presence of low temperature eutectics in different chloride–chloride and/or sulfide–chloride systems may lead to some technical difficulties during the chlorination process. The chlorination of both concentrates at temperatures higher than 350°C leads to a partial volatilization of valuable metals’ chlorides. Consequently, careful temperature control will probably be necessary to achieve selective separation of valuable metal chlorides from ferric chloride. One may underline that cupric chloride is decomposed into cuprous one at temperatures higher than 500°C. At this temperature, clinochlore could be also decomposed. To avoid such reactions the chlorination temperature of both concentrates was limited to about 300°C. As this study was performed on the laboratory scale. The industrial application of the proposed flow-sheet will necessitate experimentation on the pilot scale. This will allow a better definition of the mass and energy balances of the proposed flow sheet. This work was performed in the frame of contract No. BRE2-CT92-0173 thanks to the financial support of the European Union (DG-XII). The authors thank Dr. H.L. Schmidt for discussion, suggestion and help. They are indebted to Dr. J.C. Mugica (INASMET, San Sebastian, Spain) and Dr. M. Coelho (INETI, Lisbon, Portugal) for providing samples and technical discussions. Authors are also thank Drs. A. Bonazébi, M. Djona, S. Ivanaj, N. Menad, N. Mirghaffari and B.R. Reddy (LEM) for discussions and help on different topics and to Mrs. C. Richard for technical and administrative support.