The paper describes a methodology to simulate product particle size distribution of an industrial scale VertiMill® engaged in regrinding duty. Using survey data, the time-based population balance model has been utilized to simulate mill product particle size distribution. A sub-model relating mill power to particle residence time is developed and applied to the population balance model to predict mill response in different operating conditions. The result showed that the new time-based population balance model applied to the VertiMill® is capable of predicting product particle size distribution with a change in mill power, feed size distribution, mill feed rate, and slurry solids concentration.Fine grinding is becoming an indispensable process for the mineral industry due to the increase in the volume of complex and fine-grained ores being mined, and consequently, fine grinding of the ore is required to prepare feed for floatation or leaching processes. The mining industry often needs to grind particles as fine as 7 μm to liberate valuable minerals locked in the gangue minerals ( With the increasing uptake of this fine grinding technology, there has become a greater demand for a practical process model for predicting particle size of the mill product, under different operating conditions for a given feed size distribution. An earlier JKMRC research project focused on fine grinding and flotation developed breakage and power models for Tower mills. Researchers have been using the population balance technique to model stirred mills for the last two decades, where the first attempt was recorded from The model structured followed the solution of the time-based population balance model proposed by  where,   The solution for the transfer function  b S  Average residence time, τ for the population balance model is calculated by dividing available volume for the slurry by the volumetric slurry flow rate. Available volume for the slurry is calculated by calculating the grinding media volume and then multiplying by the charge porosity. The residence time is directly dependent on the materials flow rate to the mill.  v : Volumetric flow rate of the slurry (m V : Available volume for slurry flow in the grinding zone (m Available volume for slurry (V) in the grinding zone can be calculated as follows:  m ρ ε : Grinding media porosity. The average porosity value was considered to be 40% of all media sizes as suggested by Volumetric flow rate of the slurry can be calculated as follows:v = Volumetric flow rates of the solids + Volumetric flowrate of the water  M : Solids flow rate to the mill (t/hr). SG : Specific gravity of the solids. Also, the solids hold-up (H) or content in the mill can be calculated as follows: The model initially takes its feed size distribution in the form of cumulative percent passing and calculates the mill contents at each size fraction from the mill feed rate data. Product size distribution for the given feed is calculated using Eqs. Empirical models proposed by where, A = α μ The breakage function in cumulative form (B  Slurry average residence time and mill hold up of the VertiMill® can be calculated if the amount of grinding media inside the mill is known. Eqs. ( Metso Minerals ( The relationship between the available volume for slurry and the VertiMill® power is shown in The model requires cumulative percent size distribution for mill feed and mill product, mill solids feed rate, power input, solids concentration of slurry feed to the mill and solids SG data. The model then calculates available volume to the slurry flow, mill solid feed rate, mill water feed rate, mill slurry feed rate, the weight of the ore in the grinding zone and average particle residence time to be used for calculating product size. The model fitting is accomplished by estimating parameters for the selection function (A, α, μ, Ʌ) and breakage function (Φ, ϒ, β). Researchers such as Lead regrind VertiMill® survey data of ( The lead regrind VertiMill® (800 HP) was installed in the Cannington Mine operation located in north-west Queensland to prepare −20 µm cleaner stage feed. The circuit arrangement is shown in Model fitting was carried out by using the fitting algorithm presented in The fitted parameters were used to simulate case 1 and case 2, as shown in The reasonable agreement between the measured and predicted product size for case 1 and 2 demonstrate that the model structure described in Section 2 can successfully predict a VertiMill® product size with changes in mill feed rate, mill power,% solids and feed size distribution by using industrial survey data. Simulation of different operating conditions was carried out by keeping the breakage function same. However, The paper describes a particle size reduction model to predict product particle size distribution of an industrial scale VertiMill®. The model is based on a time-based population balance model described by The predictive capability of the model has been verified by using industrial survey data for a VertiMill® engaged in regrinding duty where product size distribution was predicted for a change mill feed rate, power, slurry solids concentration and feed size distribution. The breakage parameters were developed by fitting one set of survey data and the model tested by predicting the product size distribution for two different surveys. The result showed good agreement between the measured and predicted size distribution indicating the effectiveness of the developed model. The model has the potential to be improved by incorporating ore specific breakage function and size based residence time instead of the average residence time. The work is conducted as part of a collaborative research project in the development of stirred milling technology funded by Metso Minerals.