The vertical shaft impact (VSI) crusher is a commonly-used machine in aggregate production. A comprehensive understanding of the physical phenomena that influence the power consumption and the particle output of the device are essential to enable development of protocols that minimize energy consumption during rock crushing.
                  While natural gravel has traditionally been the main choice of material for Swedish concrete manufacturers, the number of deposits is limited due to its role as a fresh water filter. It is therefore essential to achieve a product size distribution of aggregate that is on the same order as that of natural gravel to enable its use in concrete production.
                  This work aims to present a model that predicts capacity, power and particle size distribution in a VSI crusher.The vertical shaft impact (VSI) crusher is a commonly-used machine in aggregate production. One common application of the crusher is for the production of cubical particles in all fraction sizes. VSIs produce a larger amount of fine aggregate in comparison to a cone crusher; desirable products of the aggregate producer often include those with good cubicity and a low amount of fine aggregate. To meet this output requirement, in-depth knowledge of the crusher's operating mechanism is necessary. There has been little work done in the way of VSI modelling. Of this, the majority of the work has focused on predicting the outcome of the product size distribution.  In the work done by  Breakage behaviour depends on the rock type. In general, rocks can be categorized into several classes, such as gneiss, granite, diabase etc. However, it should be noted that characteristics of the rocks can vary even within a given class; for instance, gneiss rocks can possess a range of mineral quantities,, and the anisotropy can also take on a range of values. Hence, it is difficult to develop a material model that properly describes the characteristics for a certain class of rock. Moreover, the similarities between rocks can be used to guide prediction of how rocks within a certain class will break.   Full-scale crushing produces a consistent particle shape regardless of the rock type. A model for rock breakage in cone crushers was presented by The objective of this work is to present a model for calculating the capacity and power of a VSI crusher. We also present a method for calibrating a breakage model for full scale VSI with the use of laboratory tests. The experimental part of this work was conducted both in a laboratory and at a test plant. The crusher used in the laboratory was similar to the crusher located at the test plant, but the laboratory crusher is smaller in size. The capacity of the laboratory VSI crusher is approximately 1–5 tph, in contrast with a full scale VSI crusher whose capacity can range between 50 and 150 tph, depending on feed size. The VSI crusher is equipped with a rock box to enable rock-to-rock breakage. In the laboratory setting, the VSI crusher was operated in open circuit while, at the test plant, it was operated in closed circuit. The test results from the laboratory crusher were used to calibrate the proposed breakage model. In order to achieve a robust model, a test plan was constructed (see The full scale tests performed at the test plant where conducted in a similar manner, but with different feed and rotor speeds. During the tests, belt cuts were made before and after the crusher. The capacity and power consumption were measured when the process was considered stable. The two VSI breakage mechanisms are attrition and cleavage ( Due to the nature of the rock-to-rock breakage in a VSI, it is necessary to develop a model that can handle a bimodal probability density function. This paper will show a novel way to validate this type of function with the aid of measured data, and will furthermore use this function in a population balance model. A Weibull function is flexible and can be used to imitate different types of distributions (such as the Gaussian); the Weibull function is often used in reliability analysis where there is a need describe a certain distribution (see In the work done by  It can be assumed that the C-element can be excluded from the VSI crushing process, since the particle hits a rock wall when broken and afterwards exits the crushing chamber. In this case a dominant part of the kinetic energy will be converted to breakage energy. The machine parameter of a VSI crusher is the angular velocity of the rotor. The rock material to be crushed can be characterized by energy-based test methods, such as the drop weight test performed by The capacity of the VSI is determined by the size of the inlet. In order to avoid overloading the motor of the VSI, the inlet needs to be throttled. The capacity depends on the feed size and the distribution. In general, a smaller feed size will result in a high capacity and, for a larger feed size, the opposite will apply. The rock size influence must be modelled in order to understand how it will affect the capacity and power in the VSI. In order to avoid overloading the motor in the VSI, the capacity needs to be limited. The capacity is adjusted by the throttle (see The mass flow to the rotor is governed by the size of the open area in the crusher inlet (see Eq. The rate of the mass flow depends on the average size of the particles in the mass flow and the shape of the particles. The bulk density also influences the flow rate. The constant The mass flow into the crusher can be controlled in order to achieve a stable process. The principle means for controlling this mass flow is through use of a throttle. In The throttle itself can be modelled as a rectangular plate that moves linearly and covers the inlet to the crusher. The closed area is derived in Eq. The model for determining the mass flow and the equation for the average diameter of the inlet was validated with measured data from full-scale tests. The motion equation, which can also be used to model the power, describes the dependence of the exiting absolute velocity of the particle on chamber geometry, rotor velocity and friction coefficients due to contact between rocks and rotor walls (see The equation of motion was originally derived by One more assumption is made in the model: the friction coefficient is the same for both the rock–metal contact and the rock–rock contact. The value of the coefficient is between 0.3–0.5. The velocity The solution for the differential equation shown in Eq. The power is determined by the rotor velocity, the velocity of the mass flow entering the rotor, and the absolute velocity of the mass flow exiting the rotor. The equation for calculating the power can be derived from the same equation used for calculating power in turbines ( Four different rotor velocities with varying mass flows have been simulated. The input to the model is presented in The simulated results are compared with measured data from full-scale tests at the pilot plant, as shown in Simulations show that the capacity of the crusher is limited, and that the AC motor cannot be fully utilized at speeds below 51 m/s. Power decreases with decreased speed. Moreover, the capacity will drop when the speed is increased. In The VSI crusher is often used in the production of sand for concrete production. The desired product is often a 0–4 mm fraction or a 0–8 fraction. Sometimes there is a need to produce a 0–2 mm and a 2–4 mm fraction, which is achieved with a screen. In In order to validate the breakage model, a full-scale test is needed. In this case, a 4–10 mm fraction is fed into the crusher, and the resulting product is a 0–2 mm and 2–4 mm fraction. The purpose of this test is to see how well the capacity for a certain product can be predicted. Simulations were made to predict the VSI output. Three fraction sizes where simulated for a range of velocities. The simulations were then compared with measured data from full-scale tests; simulations were shown to correlate well with the measured data (see In aggregate production, it is desirable to minimize the generation of fine aggregate such as the 0–2 mm fraction. This becomes increasingly important when producing aggregate for concrete production. These simulations show that the production of fines increases proportionally with increased velocity, and that production of the 2–4 m fraction also increases, but at a much lower rate. This suggests that it is essential to run the crusher at as low a velocity as possible. The population balance model shows good correlation with the measured data, both when presented as a density function and as a cumulative function (see The present model deviates from the measured data at 2 mm. The deviation can depend on the resolution in the simulation, since the population balance model is optimised for calculation speed. The model we used predicts the value for − The work in this article has focused on a way to model the capacity and power consumption in a VSI crusher. The simulations of power consumption show very good agreement with measured data. In some cases, there is a deviation of a few percent between the simulations and measurements; the amount of deviation can depend partially on the accuracy of the readings are in both tonnage per hour and actual power consumption. Nonetheless, we conclude that this model can be used to predict the power consumption. The key equations for describing the power consumption are the equation of motion and that for power consumption as a function of the mass flow, angular velocity, and the difference in relative velocities. The assumption that breakage in the VSI crusher can be described as a bimodal function seems to work well when implemented into a population balance model; both the density function and cumulative density function from the model correlate well with the measured data. The model for predicting the output is a black box model, which means that it is not based on physical laws. This model needs validation depending on the type of rock that needs to be simulated; this can be achieved by using some sort of laboratory test such as, for instance, a drop weight test or Hopkinson bar test. The breakage model still needs to be calibrated against other ore types, with a focus directed toward mining applications. Future work should seek to understand the underlying mechanisms of rock breakage. It is therefore essential to either develop the current model further or to find other ways to model the output. A model to predict particle shape is also desirable.  particle size (m) constant (–) constant (–) constant (–) constant (–) constant (–) absolute velocity (m/s) constant (–) constant (–) bulk density (kg/m acceleration due to gravity (m/s average diameter of the inlet (m) constant (–) particle diameter (m) inner radius of the rotor (m) outer radius of the rotor (m) throttle placement (m) inlet area (m mass (kg) acceleration (m/s length the particle travels (m) angular velocity (rad/s) friction (–) friction (–) angle (rad) time (s) tangential velocity (m/s) relative velocity (m/s) absolute velocity (m/s) Torque (Nm) angular velocity (rad/s) power (W) particle velocity in to the rotor (m/s) particle velocity exiting the rotor (m/s) We thank Bengt-Olof Tjell at Sandvik Rock Processing in Svedala for all his help with the VSI tests. The personnel at Vikans Kross are gratefully acknowledged for their help in supplying the large amount of material used in the VSI. Skanska Teknik and Sandvik Mining and Construction are also acknowledged for their financial support.