Leaching column experiments of caliche were performed using seawater as the leaching agent because the caliche deposits are located in Northern Chile where water resources are scarce. The use of seawater without desalination is an attractive alternative for mining operations. The experimental recoveries of different ions were modeled using a hybrid model, which uses empirical information and fundamental principles. The following ions were considered: nitrate, iodine, sulfate, chloride, sodium, potassium and magnesium. The model explicitly considers different column heights, irrigation rates, and leaching agents. A sensitivity analysis showed that parameters associated with the particle level predominantly determined the calculated recoveries. The predictive capability was also tested, and the results were generally good, except for the sulfate ion, the dissolution of which was controlled by the presence of other ions.Caliche, also termed nitrate deposit, is a mineral composed of a high proportion of water soluble salts, of which nitrate, sulfate, and chloride are the main anions and sodium, magnesium, potassium, and calcium are the main cations. Nitrate and chloride are mainly found as sodium nitrate (nitratine) and sodium chloride (halite), respectively. Sulfate is frequently associated with a wide range of cations, the most relevant being the following: calcium, sodium, magnesium, and potassium. It is commonly found in complex salts, such as bloedite (Na The caliche mineral is exploited by both vat and heap leaching; the latter has increased its importance due to the gradual diminution of grades ( In contrast to the leaching of metallic ores, where the dissolution process is mediated by chemical reactions, caliche treatment is governed by simple dissolution ( Frequently, heap leaching is the first stage of mineral hydrometallurgical processing; therefore, a better understanding of the involved phenomena in this stage may help to improve the process in its totality, and optimal conditions of operation could be reached. Heap leaching is a complex system due to the simultaneous interaction of physical and chemical phenomena, such as simple dissolution of the mineral species, chemical interactions of the ions present in the leaching solution, presence of zones with stagnant solution in the heap, convective, diffusive, and dispersive transport for liquids and gases, heat generation and transport ( For a better understanding of a process and its management or optimization, modeling is a useful tool by which a phenomenon or process can be studied. Models may be phenomenological or empirical and its selection depends on the objective to reach. Phenomenological models are appropriate when the interest is centered on the understanding of processes. Conversely, empirical models may be suitable when the focus is on optimization or for operations where the model must be solved hundreds or thousands of times. However, the small amount of information that can typically be obtained from this type of model is a limitation that has motivated the development of another family of expressions named hybrid models. The hybrid models, also named empirical knowledge-based models, combine relations obtained from experimental data with expressions based on fundamental principles. For this reason, a hybrid system gives more information than empirical models but may be solved a large number of times in a reasonable time because such systems are sufficiently simple. Therefore, in industrial operations, it is advantageous to employ hybrid models for tasks such as design and optimization ( Although heap leaching is widely employed in both metallic and non-metallic mining, for the latter, modeling studies are currently emerging and are focused on understanding the dissolution phenomena and concentration variations of the major ions. The modeling of heap leaching has been widely developed for the processing of metallic ores; however, for the exploitation of water soluble minerals, such as caliche, the availability of information is limited. The first antecedent regarding the modeling of caliche leaching is the research of This article aims to validate the hybrid model obtained in Columns with a diameter of 0.2 The nomenclature of the experiments involves 4 characters; the first two are related to the leaching agent used: seawater (SW), tap water (TW), rich solution (RS) and diluted solution (DS). The third component of the abbreviation is the irrigation rate: 0.003 (3), 0.006 (6) and 0.004 (4) m The leachate samples were collected from the column bottom 12 The material was screened, and particles exceeding 2.4 The mineralogical composition of the caliche was determined by X-ray diffraction using a D5000 diffractometer (Siemens). This analysis provides general information about the most abundant species. The caliche used in this work had a high fraction of soluble species (approximately 45%). Nitrate and potassium had unique mineral sources, that is, nitratine and polyhalite, respectively. Chloride was predominantly present as halite (the main soluble component). All of these minerals are very soluble. Sodium, calcium, magnesium, and sulfate were found in a wide variety of minerals, whereas sources of iodine were not observed in the diffractogram because of its relatively low abundance. The insoluble species were present as silicates (quartz and albite). Anhydrite is partially insoluble. The complete list of minerals detected by XRD is given in Regarding the leaching agents, SW was extracted from the Antofagasta coast using a submarine outfall and filtered through a membrane filter with a 0.2 A hybrid model was developed for copper ore leaching that addresses the metal recovery over time ( The dimensionless times are then expressed as: where the time constant Some of the variables involved were taken directly from the operational conditions, such as the irrigation rate, heap height and ion mass fraction. Others were determined in the laboratory or directly from the literature, including the mineral density and the water retained fraction in the column. However, other parameters, such as The fitted parameters can be grouped in 2 adjustable constants: The dimensionless constant The model considers the variation of the particle radius and the height of the heap; these values are reduced as a result of the collapse of particles during mineral dissolution. Moreover, the model uses a constant porosity value in the column. Because the leaching experiments employed very small particles, the effect of the radius shrinking is not significant; for that reason and to keep the model simple, the particle size ( The fitting was performed using the least squares method considering the differences between the modeled and experimental recoveries at different times for each ion and column experiment listed in The recoveries of the column leaching experiments for each ion were calculated by determining the mass extracted at a certain time as a fraction of the total extractable mass, as indicated in For all of the ions, the response matched the expected results, where the highest recoveries were achieved for the leachants, irrigation rates and column heights in the following order: TW The sulfate recovery was the lowest in all of the leaching tests, possibly because the dissolution of this ion was initially controlled by the presence of other ions, such as sodium and calcium. At this point, the leachate was saturated in sodium sulfate; this finding was supported by the presence of crystals of sodium sulfate at the column bottom ( For all of the experiments, the particles used had small sizes (average particle diameter of 6.8 As discussed in the model presentation ( For the most loaded leaching agent, RS, the difference between the concentration in the leachant and the operational solubilities for the most soluble species, such as nitrate and iodate, was large (approximately 9 times), whereas for the other ions, the ratios were smaller (by 2–4 times). This finding confirms that the differences between these concentrations have a direct effect on the leaching behavior. The parameters used in the simulations are shown in The recoveries of the seven column experiments were adjusted for several ions (nitrate, iodate, sodium, potassium, magnesium, chloride, and sulfate). The fitted heap-related parameters Regarding the values of In general, an exponential trend of recovery was captured by the model, and when the fitting quality was analyzed separately, the agreement between the experimental recoveries with the calculated recoveries had different grades of accuracy: high accuracy for the seawater leaching experiments SW3S ( The deficiencies in some of the fittings can be attributed to the model not accounting for collateral phenomena that occur during the leaching of caliche, as the precipitation of specific ions. As a result, certain conditions of the modeled recoveries were below or above the experimental values. In the presented model, the dissolution of each ion was considered independently. Although the model included the term To determine which parameters were the most important in the recovery, a sensitivity analysis was performed. In this case, caliche-specific properties (  From these observations, it is apparent that the recovery calculated by the model is strongly influenced by the intrinsic characteristics of the material (such as To prove the versatility of the model, predictions were performed. The parameters When the predicted recoveries were plotted against the experimental recoveries, a large quantity of data was located in the upper part of the graph, which corresponds to the highly soluble species because these species reach high recoveries early. In contrast, less soluble ions, such as sulfate, show a more homogeneous distribution along the different recoveries because the release of these ions gradually increased during leaching. In the experiment RS6S ( When the analysis was used to predict the results of experiments with different initial column heights (or, indirectly, the mass of loaded caliche), the quality was less satisfactory (case 2). Further analysis showed that this lower R The model showed to be a useful tool in the prediction of pilot experiments, even when the operating parameters were changed; the determination coefficients of a majority of the experiments were greater than 90%. The contribution of this work is the validation of the analytical hybrid model for the heap leaching of caliche ores ( To study the importance of these parameters, a sensitivity analysis was performed. It was found that the most important parameters were those related to the particle, such as the operational solubility The applicability of the model was tested under different leaching conditions. Three cases were considered, where for each case, the parameters Some of the challenges for future work are focused on the measurement of physical properties of the caliche ores, such as the porosity, permeability, and capillary suction. Another important aspect to consider is the particle size; therefore, experiments using larger particles are planned.  Cross-sectional area of column (m Concentration of ion i in leachant (kg/m Solubility of ion i (kg/m Initial heap height (m) Heap height at time t (m) Adjustable parameter Adjustable parameter (m/h) Mass transfer coefficient of ion i (m/h) Kinetic constant of heap scale Kinetic constant of particle scale Mass added in feeding at time t (kg) Mass extracted from leaching at time t (kg) Irrigation rate (m Particle radius at time t (m) Relative recovery of ion i at time t Relative recovery of ion t at infinite time Time (h) Mass fraction of ion i in caliche Volumetric solution fraction Importance of heap leaching scale of ion i Mineral density (kg/m Dimensionless time related to heap scale Dimensionless time related to particle scale for ion i Dimensionless delay time The authors wish to thank