The paper presents the results of investigations directed to synthesis and study of novel oxidation–reduction monomers on the basis of monoethanolamine vinyl ether, allylamine and quinones of different structure. It has been shown that in contrast to monoethanolamine vinyl ether and allylamine its quinoid derivatives polymerize.We described previously oxidation–reduction polymers (redox-ionites) of different structure which can be obtained by chemical modifications of polymers and copolymers of styrene or other dienes with quinones, bis- and trioxybenzenes of their halogenated derivatives A possibility of the solution of different tasks of science and engineering with the help of redoxionites evokes a big interest to these compounds and requires intensification of researches in this field of polymer chemistry. The known methods of obtaining of vinyl redox-monomers include 3–5 stages We have developed an efficient single-stage method of obtaining of novel nitrogen-containing monomers on the basis local inexpensive raw material – vinyl ether of monoethanolamine (VEMEA) – a by-side product of carbide industry, produced in Kazakhstan, in the city of Temirtau, and allylamine (AA). Quinones of different structure have been used as redox-components, which makes it possible to simplify the process technology and to decrease the costs. An ability to regeneration presupposes their repeated use and it will compensate the expenses for their obtaining. Redox-monomers possess improved kinetic characteristics, due to the presence of aminogroups. Incidentally, a laborious additional stage of polymer hydrophilization – amination – is excluded. Monoethanolamine vinyl ether was dried over freshly calcinated potash and distilled over calcium hydride. A fraction, boiling at 114 1,4-Benzoquinone (Q), 1,2-naphthoquinone (1,2-NQ) and 1,4-naphthoquinone (1,4-NQ) of the “pure” qualification were recrystallized from methanol and after purification they had melting points of 116, 267 and 128.5 Azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) was recrystallyzed from absolute methanol, m.p. 102–103 Synthesis of VEMEA quinoid derivatives ( Quantum-chemical calculations of the electronic structure of the molecules of quinones, VEMEA, AA and their derivatives were carried out by a semi-empirical method MO. Polymerization was carried out in the following manner: calculated amount of monomers ( Polarography control was carried out on a mercury dropping electrode with the capillary characteristic at open chain The reduction–oxidation properties are investigated by a polarographic method. Reduction of >C Potentials of half-waves of non-limited bonds of quinoid derivatives differ from Oxygen was removed from the solutions by argon blowing for 10–15 Polymerization kinetics was studied by a polarography method by the amount of unreacted redox-monomer. The calculated amount of monomers, initiator, solvent was loaded in ampoules, thoroughly shaken, one ampoule was left for a polarography analysis (zero point), the remaining ones were placed in a thermostat, heated up to a definite temperature. On passing of the necessary time the ampoules were taken out one by one, quickly cooled with cold water with ice, the samples were collected for testing. Melting points were determined on an “apparatus for melting point determination PTP” (TU-25-11-1144-84). IR-spectra of the initial, semi-, and final products were registered on a spectrophotometer SPECORD M 80/M85 in tablets with KBr (200  Oxidation–reduction capacity (ORC) and static exchange capacity (SEC) were determined by Viscosity, measured at 25 Quantum-chemical calculations of the electronic structure of quinones of different structure and their VEMEA- and AA-based derivatives have shown that for VEMEA the existence of two configurations is theoretically possible, in which an ethylamine chain –CH The most active centers in a VEMEA molecule has been established – a nitrogen atom ( IR-spectra of the novel compounds are characterized by the presence of absorption bands (cm A comparison of Synthesis conditions, yields and physical–chemical characteristics of the synthesized monomers are presented in An ability of the initial quinones and their VEMEA-based derivatives to the reactions of oxidation–reduction has been established by a polarographic method. Since the values of polarographic characteristics depend on the electronic state of atoms in a molecule, the nature of their bonds, this method can serve as one of the ways of investigation of reactivity of organic substances, in particular, redox-properties. It has been established that VEMEA-based derivatives retain the ability to electron-exchange reactions This method is also successfully used for the study of polymerization of vinyl monomers For the given series of VEMEA quinoid derivatives there has been established an interconnection between a semi-wave potential and the ability of monomers to polymerization: the more negative By their ability to a radical polymerization the monomers can be arranged in the following row: VEMEA-Q-VEMEA From the logarithmic dependence of a polymerization velocity on an initiator concentration and the linear dependence of lg C of monomers on the duration it has been established that the reaction proceeds by the first order. Correspondingly, reaction constants have been calculated by a first order equation. Kinetic characteristics and pre-exponent multipliers ( A comparison of activation energies of the known vinyl compounds The values of reaction constants don’t remain constant, and possess a tendency to a decrease with an increase in the conversion of the initial monomer. An interaction of AA with quinones of different structure proceeds analogously to VEMEA. Synthesis conditions, elemental composition, IR-, In quinoid AA derivatives almost all carbon signals The Thus, by a condensation of AA with some quinones in the medium of organic solvents there have been synthesized novel monomers, containing in their structure groups, able to oxidation–reduction reactions. The presence of double bonds, represented by AA, will allow them to be used in the reactions of homo- and co-polymerization. With 1,4-benzoquinone AA forms both mono- and disubstituted monomers. The data of polarographic behavior of AA, 1,4-benzoquinone, as well as redox-monomers on their basis are presented in Also for VEMEA redox-monomers, for AA derivatives a dependence between Thus, the modification of VEMEA and AA by quinones of a different structure, possessing strong electron-acceptor properties, results in the re-distribution of electronic density and a shift of π-electronic clouds in the direction of a substituent. This is accompanied by a decrease of the degree of mutual overlapping of the clouds of double bond π-electrons, lowering of the energetic expenses for the opening of a double bond and its polarization. As a result of this a monomer reactivity increases, and the formed quinoid derivatives are rather easily involved in a radical homopolymerization, whereas the initial VEMEA don’t form homopolymers under these conditions Oxidation–reduction polymers are applied in hydrometallurgy and chemical industry for deoxygenization of water and water–organic solutions, deep purification of waste waters  oxidation–reduction capacity (mg-equ)/g static exchange capacity (mg-equ)/g characteristic viscosity, dl/g charge potentials of half-waves density, g/m vinyl ether of monoethanolamine allylamine 1,4-benzoqinone 1,2-Naphthoquinone 1,4-Naphthoquinone tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone (1,4-chloranil) tetrachloro-1,2-benzoquinone (1,2-chloranil) 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone azobisisobutyronitrile dimethylformamide molecular orbital The work is being carried with the support of ISTC (grant K-604).