Mineral sulfide concentrate oxidation by thermoacidophilic archaea was reported in the 1970s with a culture which was described as “possibly related to Sulfolobus” but which contained the species later named as Acidianus brierleyi. In the following two decades, the mineral sulfide-oxidizing capacity of Sulfolobus metallicus became the subject of many studies partly because it appeared to tolerate higher concentrations of copper and solids in bioreactors than those tolerated by the strains of Acidianus and Metallosphaera that were available. However, some bioreactor pilot plant developments followed with mixed cultures dominated by A. brierleyi at 70°C. At higher temperatures, pilot and industrial demonstration plants used mixed cultures dominated by poorly characterized novel species. Most of these novel species will require classification in novel genera to reflect their phylogenetic separation from previously named thermoacidophilic archaea.The extraction of copper from chalcopyrite in bioreactors can generally be more rapid and efficient when promoted by thermophiles instead of by microorganisms at lower temperatures. Some iron- and sulfur-oxidizing bacteria are active between 60 and 65 Ferrous iron- and sulfur-oxidizing archaea were observed during the 1960s in the USA ( The diversity and composition of cultures of thermoacidophilic archaea have not been extensively described in the context of their potential for mineral sulfide processing. Therefore, some major developments with regard to demonstrations of this potential ( The high temperature leaching of five concentrates is described in this study. The available information for the major mineral fractions and chemical analyses of the concentrates are given in  The culture medium contained (g Cultures (440 The major organisms present in mixed cultures were identified from their 16S rRNA gene sequences. Cell pellets from centrifuged culture samples were washed with de-ionized water adjusted to pH 2 with H The relative amounts of the major organism types in cultures were also estimated by hybridization of rRNA oligonucleotide probes to RNA which was spotted onto nylon membranes (Hybond-N). RNA was treated with RNase-free DNase (Boehringer Mannheim) after extraction using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen Ltd.) from ICHT cultures (grown on chalcopyrite with 30 One of the first reports of rapid copper extraction from a chalcopyrite concentrate during autotrophic growth of a From among several mineral sulfide-oxidizing cultures available during the 1980s, The influence of copper on the dissolution of chalcopyrite was first assessed with Mineral concentrate bioleaching with thermophilic archaea in laboratory scale bioreactors began with indications that sensitivity to agitation in the presence of high mineral pulp densities was generally a greater problem than with bacteria at lower temperatures. The activity of the thermophiles at about 70 The rate of pyrite leaching by More rapid and, in the case of chalcopyrite, more extensive dissolution of concentrates can occur with organisms growing above the optimum temperature of Microbial ferrous iron oxidation was observed at 80–85 Initial examinations of semi-continuous or continuous leaching with Continuous leaching of copper and copper/nickel sulfide concentrates was demonstrated in air-lift reactors with the ICHT culture at 78 From 1997, continuous leaching of mineral sulfide concentrates with ICHT cultures at 78 The ICHT culture (introduced in Sections The ICHT1 clone sequence most closely matched that of The ICHT2 cloned sequence was identical to that of a novel species of The relative abundance of the source organisms of the ICHT1, ICHT2 and At least four thermophiles were present in the ICHT culture when it was examined by 16S rRNA gene clone analyses in 1999 ( The ICHT culture that was used at Billiton and then BHP Billiton with different conditions and concentrates over several years was examined by 16S rRNA gene clone bank analysis of South African bioreactor samples that were processed in Australia ( Initial examination of the potential of There are several groups of strains or phylotypes that appear to have the capacity to dominate high temperature bioleaching in bioreactors, but it is difficult to define their individual merits or limitations when most of them have not been isolated in pure culture for further characterization. These groups include phylotype I and II strains (  In summary, bioreactor mineral sulfide processing has developed along at least two lines with respect to the microbiology and the key operating conditions. Work at Mintek has utilized   Copper concentrates have featured in at least two lines of pilot and industrial scale bioreactor developments: (1) using Key strains in mixed cultures at both temperatures require isolations as pure cultures for classification and characterization of the specific features that determine their merits or limitations in the context of development of the most economic process. Some other groups of potentially useful species have not yet been compared directly with the cultures described in this review. Various parts of the original work described in this review were sponsored by the UK Science and Engineering Research Council (1985–1988; 1989–1992), CRA Ltd., Australia (1990–1991, 1994–1997), the European Community Contract MA2M-0028 (1991–1993), the UK Mineral Industry Research Organization (Contract RC. 103) with the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (1994–1997), the European Commission (Brite-Euram III contract BRPR-CT96-020; 1996–1999) and Billiton PLC, Billiton International and BHP Billiton (1997–2010). This is gratefully acknowledged with special thanks to Charles Davis (CRA) Chris Bonney (MIRO) and Dave Dew and Chris du Plessis (formerly of BHP Billiton).