Uncharged and anionic copolymers Dextran-graft-Polyacrylamide (D-g-PAA) and linear PAA of similar molecular weight were tested as flocculants in model kaolin polydisperse suspensions (C=3g/dl) having high content of particles less than 2μm in size (more than 60%) which are difficult to settle down. The flocculation process was characterized by suspension sedimentation rate and degree of supernatant clarification. Dependence of flocculation on the degree of branched copolymers compactness as well as the degree of hydrolysis of the amide groups in the polymers was investigated. The main regularities of selection of suitable branched flocculants based on D-g-PAA and optimal their concentration for effective flocculation process was obtained. It was shown that D-g-PAA in ionic form with the lower grafting efficiency and long PAA grafts ensured the highest degree of supernatant clarification and the highest rate of the suspension sedimentation.Mineral industry waste water contains problem minerals such as clay, the majority being kaolinite Polyacrylamide is the most common type of polymeric flocculants used due to low cost and possibility to synthesize polyacrylamide with variable functionality (positive, neutral, negative). In the last years many investigations are focused on replacing linear flocculants with branched polymers. Branched polymers become of special interest because of their controlled internal molecular structure. There is now a good evidence that such polymers possess unique properties since the number of variable parameters are overwhelmingly large, namely, initial polymer architecture, average degree of polymerization, solubility properties, distance between grafts, nature and flexibility of backbone and grafts, etc. Star-like copolymers Dextran-graft-Polyacrylamide and linear PAA of similar molecular weight in neutral and anionic forms were tested as flocculants using model kaolin polydisperse suspensions. Dextran-g-Polyacrylamide (D-g-PAA) copolymers consist of Dextran core (M A theoretical number of grafting sites per Dextran backbone for both series of copolymers according to synthesis condition were equal to The samples were characterized self-exclusion chromatography coupled with light scattering (LS) and refractometry (Rf) after synthesis and their internal structure very analyzed in detail in Alkaline hydrolysis of synthesized copolymers and linear samples was used to obtain branched polyelectrolytes Dextran-graft-Polyacrylamide/polyacrylic acid (D20(70)-g-PAA20 PE). Synthesis and characterization of polyelectrolytes was described in details in Branched copolymers and linear PAA (in uncharged and anionic form) were tested as flocculants in model kaolin suspension. SEC analysis was carried out by using a multidetection device consisting of a LC-10AD Shimadzu pump (throughput 0.5 Potentiometric titration was performed using a pH meter pH-340 (Russia). Solutions of HCl (0.2N) and NaOH (0.2N) as titrants were used. Polymer concentration was 2 Flocculation tests were performed in 50 Molecular parameters of graft copolymers obtained by SEC are represented in Synthesized samples are branched star-like copolymers with dextran core and PAA-arms The branched and linear samples were saponified in the aim to obtain branched polyelectrolytes. The degree of conversion ( D20(70)-g-PAA20 and PAA samples were analyzed as flocculants at wide concentration range. Increasing in concentration of polymer-flocculant leads to enhancement of flocculation ability both uncharged and anionic branched and linear polymers ( The ability to remove the smallest kaolinite particles is the most important characteristic for flocculants used in mineral industry waste water recycling. Supernatant optical density after kaolin suspension treatment by flocculants of various molecular structure are shown in The stabilizing effect increases for star-like copolymer with closer distance between PAA-grafts decreasing (or higher compactness of macromolecule). The star-like PAA-flocculant at C The degree of polymer-flocculant hydrolysis considerably affects on the flocculation rate for samples with 7,5 and 15 Effect of molecular structure on supernatant clarity has complicated character at low concentration of polymer-flocculant, C The dependences have extremal character for star-like flocculants at C Finally, comparative analysis of uncharged and anionic polymer-flocculant testifies that D20(70)-g-PAA20(PE) are more efficient in flocculation rate at optimal concentrations in ( Branched noncharged copolymers Dextran-g-Polyacrylamide and their anionic derivatives were synthesized. The degree of conversion of amide groups is higher for branched polymers due to the higher local concentration of functional groups. Branched noncharged copolymers Dextran-g-Polyacrylamide and their anionic derivatives were tested and compared with linear polymer-flocculants in flocculation aim for clay dispersion setting. All investigated branched copolymers exhibit high flocculation activity as in noncharged and ionic forms. Moreover, in contrast to linear polymers not only the size of branched macromolecule polymer-flocculants, but its molecular structure influences on flocculation parameters in model kaolin polydisperse suspensions (sedimentation rate and degree of supernatant clarification). The analysis of the kinetics of flocculation process revealed that the flocculation activity is more significant for the branched sample having higher compactness. It was obtained, that at low concentrations of branched flocculants (C Degree of supernatant clarification for branched polymers at optimal flocculants concentrations is comparatively higher than for linear PAA. The branched polyelectrolytes Dextran-graft-(Polyacrylamide-co-Polyacrylic acid) are less efficient in clarification but rather more effective in sedimentation rate in flocculation process of polydispersed kaolin suspension in comparison with noncharged Dextran-g-Polyacrylamide copolymers. In the case of 20–34 % conversion degree of the branched samples the sedimentation rate increases, but further conversion of amide groups into carboxylate ones do not influence on flocculation substantially. Nevertheless, the best supernatant clarification was achieved for less compactness branched polyelectrolytes at flocculant concentration 10 Thus, to target specific technical tasks it can choose copolymer flocculant-D20(70)-PAAn (in nonionic or ionic form), which is due to peculiarities of the molecular structure of macromolecules in solution will provide high rate of flocculation and the best supernatant clarification. The authors are grateful to M. Rawiso and A. Rameau for SEC experiment at Institute Charles Sadron, Strasbourg, France.