The extraction of Ti from the simulated ilmenite sulfuric acid leachate was investigated using TRPO-kerosene extraction system. The effects of stirring rate, contact time, TRPO concentration, phase ratio, and temperature were examined. Optimized extraction conditions were found to be: 25% (v/v) TRPO in kerosene, O/A 4:1, and temperature 30°C. Under these conditions the extraction percentage of titanium was 78.5% with the extraction equilibrium and phase disengagement times of 40min and 30min, respectively. A continuous multi-stage extraction was unfeasible due to excessively long residence time. Upon the leachate being diluted by half and at the same time the sulfuric acid concentration increasing up to 150g/L, the titanium extraction significantly rose to ~96% while the co-extracted iron was ~7%. A batch operation extraction was suggested on account of still long phase disengagement time. The co-extraction of iron resulted from air oxidation of ferrous to ferric during the extraction. Under N2 atmosphere the iron extraction decreased to 1%. Thus, an almost complete titanium and iron separation was realized with a separation factor of 2367. With 1.7% (w/w) sulfuric acid, 63% of the titanium loaded in organic phase was stripped through a single contact. McCabe–Thiele analysis predicts that the number of stripping stage is at least 5 under O/A phase ratio of 1:5 of operation line if a 90% of titanium stripping can be obtained. Further study showed that the extracted titanium species possibly included TiOSO4·TRPO besides TiO(HSO4)2·2TRPO under the conditions of high titanium ion concentration and relatively low concentrations of sulfuric acid and TRPO.Titanium dioxide is the most important white pigment as well as photo- and bio-activity catalysts with comprehensive application prospects ( An alternative approach to addressing the wastes discharge as well as obtaining high quality of titanium dioxide is to separate titanium and iron from the ilmenite sulfuric acid leachate prior to hydrolysis ( The speciation of titanium in sulfuric acid solutions consists of cationic, anionic and neutral complexes ( Among acidic organophosphorus extractants, mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid ( Among neutral organophosphorus extractants, more attentions were paid to TBP (tri-n-butylphosphate), TOPO (tri-n-octylphosphine oxide) and TRPO (a mixture of C  The results of literature search showed that although TRPO had excellent extraction performance and selectivity for titanium over those competing ions, such as Fe, Mn, in sulfuric acid systems, systematic researches were rarely reported. It was noticed that with all these neutral organophosphorus reagents mentioned above, nearly all the extraction tests were conducted under low concentrations with maximum titanium ion concentrations in aqueous feed solutions of ≤ In the present study, the feasibility of extraction of titanium from simulated ilmenite sulfuric acid leach liquor with TRPO was investigated. The separation of titanium from iron was systematically studied, and the extraction mechanism of titanium was preliminarily discussed. In the typical suphate process with ilmenite as starting titanium source, the leach liquor obtained right after cooling and removing ferrous sulfate crystals generally contains ~ TRPO with a purity of 93% and an average molecular weight of 348 was obtained from Shanghai Laiyashi Chemical Co., Ltd. Kerosene (mostly aliphatic) was used as a diluent and bought from the local market. Both reagents were directly used without further purification. All the extraction and stripping tests were carried out in a 100 In each experiment, a preset volume ratio of an organic phase with prescribed TRPO concentration in kerosene and the simulated leachate or aqueous strip liquor with set sulfuric acid concentration were added to the flask and preheated to required temperatures. The two phases were mechanically mixed at a set stirring speed for certain period of time. Following the contact, the mixture was transferred to a separating funnel and settled at the same temperature as that in the contact for certain period of time before phase separation. The concentrations of titanium and iron in the raffinates or loading strip liquors were measured. Their concentrations in the organic phase were calculated by material balance. The distribution ratio, D, was taken as the ratio of the concentration of these metal ions in the organic phase to that present in the aqueous phase. The titanium-to-iron separation factor was calculated according to the following formula: To determine an equilibrium isotherm, the relative volumes of the two phases were varied and the experiments carried out in a similar manner. The titanium and iron concentrations in the aqueous phases were determined by reduction–oxidation titration ( Prior to the systematic extraction and stripping experiments, preliminary tests were conducted to determine the effect of stirring rate on extraction. The results are shown in On the other hand, with increasing stirring rates, emulsions formed became stable, resulting in increasing phase separation time. The time for phase separation was beyond 40 The effect of contact time on extraction of titanium and iron was showed in The relationship between the TRPO concentrations in organic phase and extractions of titanium and iron is shown in The relationship between the O/A phase ratios and extractions of titanium and iron is shown in The relationship between the extraction temperatures and extractions of titanium and iron is shown in In the present study, the extraction of titanium and the titanium-to-iron separation factor reduced to 73% and ~ The study above shows that it is difficult to obtain titanium extraction of more than 90% through a single contact. Hence a multi-stage extraction is needed in order to obtain a higher titanium extraction. On the other hand, both the phase contact and phase disengagement times were too long for a continuous solvent extraction, which means requirement of employing several large mixer-settlers in series for the extraction circuit. Thus the industrialization became difficult. An approach to solve the problem is to use batch extraction, which is compatible with the batch-operation sulfate pigment production process, if a single contact can obtain satisfactory titanium extraction. According to As can be seen, the titanium extraction increased monotonously with increasing acid concentration while the iron extraction varied only within 6%–9%. Upon the acid concentration increasing up to 150 Furthermore, it was observed that with these changes the extraction time remarkably reduced. The extraction kinetics for the diluted simulated leachate with the acid concentration of 150 The study above shows that the co-extraction of iron was always accompanied with the titanium extraction. According to Since the mechanism of Ti extraction with TRPO is solvating, the best strip liquor should be water. The stripped titanium, however, is readily subjected to hydrolysis. Therefore, an adequate acidity should be experimentally determined. In the present stripping experiment, the pregnant organic phase employed was prepared by contacting the 50% diluted simulating leachate with H The results show that the highest stripping was achieved in a 1% (w/w) H The stripping kinetics was determined at 40 The equilibrium isotherm for the stripping of titanium by 1.7% (w/w) H Upon extraction of titanium with TOPO, the extracted species was identified to be TiO(HSO In order to demonstrate the evidence, the SO According to  It needs to note that the conclusion that there are at least two titanium-containing extracted species existing in the loaded organic phases can also be drawn with the similar analysis to  The feasibility to directly extract Ti from the simulated ilmenite sulfuric acid leachate was investigated using TRPO-kerosene extraction system. The effects of stirring rate, contact time, TRPO concentration, O/A phase ratio, and temperature on the separation of titanium from iron were examined. The optimal extraction conditions were as follows: 25% (v/v) TRPO in kerosene, O/A 4:1, and extraction temperature 30 The simulated leachate was diluted with sulfuric acid solutions. At the Ti, Fe and H A batch operation extraction was suggested due to the still long residence time. To realize continuous extraction operation, further research is needed to shorten the phase disengagement time. One of possible routes is by adding another solvent as phase separation accelerator. The co-extracted iron was mainly due to oxidation of ferrous state to ferric one by air during the extraction. Under N With 1.7% (w/w) sulfuric acid, 63% of the titanium loaded in organic phases was stripped through a single contact. The stripping kinetic experiment showed that the stripping was fast with the equilibrium time of only 6 The extracted titanium species possibly includes TiOSO