Carbonation of abundantly available magnesium silicates such as serpentinites could be an attractive route to capture and store CO2. In this paper we describe a novel route to produce magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH)2, from Finnish serpentinite. The resulting Mg(OH)2 is much more reactive towards CO2 than the parent serpentinite. The process route of producing Mg(OH)2 as reported here involves a staged process of Mg extraction using a moderately high temperature solid/solid reaction of serpentinite and ammonium sulphate (AS) salt followed by precipitation of Mg(OH)2 using aqueous ammonia. Tests at 400–550°C showed promising results. An optimum range of reaction conditions for the extraction stage (Mg extraction) and precipitation stages (production of valuable products) of the process was also identified. The valuable solid products refer to Fe-containing compound (dark brown solid, exhibiting the properties of FeOOH) and Mg(OH)2 (white precipitate), both precipitated in an aqueous solution with 25% (v/v) ammonia at pH 8–9 and 11–12, respectively. In some cases all Mg extracted from serpentinite was converted to magnesium Mg(OH)2 with very small volumes of ammonia solution added. Apart from the relatively cheap AS salt reagent, the prospect of recovery and use of by-products of the process: ammonia gas, FeOOH, and AS salt presents significant benefits.CO It has been reported that ammonium sulphate salt (in solid or aqueous states) when reacted directly with serpentinite rock has the capacity for extracting Mg ( Thermodynamic equilibrium compositions and reaction enthalpies of the reaction of serpentinite and AS are presented in With slightly less than the stoichiometric amounts of AS salt needed for the reaction, SO The effect of pressure on the thermodynamics of the reaction was also simulated and was found to be insignificant. Enthalpies for reactions presented in this paper (see The reaction of serpentine and ammonium sulphate is thermodynamically feasible (with a negative Gibbs free energy) at temperatures above (roughly) 193 At 160 From the above thermodynamic and thermochemical behaviours of the possible reactions, the Mg extraction reaction through the solid/solid route may be presented as in Reaction equations Understanding the reaction behaviour of the iron compound(s) present in serpentinite during the solid/solid reaction is critical to modelling and optimisation of iron-based by-products of the process. There is conflicting information on the form that iron appears in the Finnish serpentinite rock used. Recently, The reactions are assumed to occur consecutively; as SO The second step of this process (precipitation) was planned with minimisation of cost and prospects of recovery and recycling of chemicals as important considerations. Bases (such as sodium hydroxide and ammonia solutions, see  The reactivity (with respect to Mg extraction) of Finnish serpentinite from the Hitura nickel mine, of Finn Nickel was studied. One particle size fraction, 75–125 The reaction container (see There was no special pretreatment performed considering that both reactants are solids of different physical properties. The two solids (serpentinite and AS salt) were measured into the reaction container and mixed together using a stainless steel spatula. It is difficult to mix solids (serpentinite and AS salt) having different physical properties, and even more difficult to measure the extent to which the solids are evenly mixed. However, the pretreatment method was the same with all the experiments. During the design of the experiments, the authors envisioned that using a rotary reactor during process scale-up should adequately address the issue of uneven solid mixing. Therefore, investigation of solid contact limitations of the reaction of serpentinite and AS salt is outside the scope of this paper; it is intended to be a subject of future scale-up study. In the scale-up reactor the reactants will be heated and agitated at the same time under a more process-like and controlled atmosphere. Besides, the application of any special pretreatment method was intentionally avoided in this preliminary study in order to reduce the energy requirements and costs of the process. The reaction container ( Aqueous ammonia solution (NH Removal of the impurities at the first precipitation stage is necessary in order to produce pure Mg(OH) From this stage of tests the amount of valuable products (Fe-rich by-product and magnesium hydroxide) produced per gram serpentinite reacted, purity of magnesium hydroxide produced, and effect of reaction parameters on conversion were determined. Also, a correlation between the Mg extraction and the magnesium hydroxide precipitation steps was identified and became useful in determining optimal reaction conditions as well as in predicting unavailable or unreliable data. In a separate test that served as a background experiment, used to simulate only the aqueous solution part of the process, 3 The results of thirty-two laboratory tests that aimed at producing magnesium hydroxide from Finnish serpentinite (75–125  As expected from the endothermic reaction of serpentinite and AS salt, an increase in reaction temperature leads to an increase in the extent of Mg extraction. More heat added to the endothermic process is absorbed, which favours product formation. The reactants of an endothermic reaction have a lower chemical potential than the products. In order to form the products, an energy equivalent to the reaction enthalpy (Δ The decline in Mg extraction above 450 Fe, Si and other elements present (though in minute amounts) in Finnish serpentinite were extracted simultaneously with Mg during the reaction of serpentinite and AS. ICP-OES results of the filtrate obtained when reaction products were dissolved in water show that the extraction reaction is most favourable to Mg extraction. Mg, Fe and Si together constitute about 90–98 The effects of temperature and reactants’ mass ratio on Fe extraction are more evident from Addition of few drops of ammonia solution (25% v/v) to the MgSO Samples of the FeOOH-rich product were analysed with ICP-OES analyses and were found to also contain large amounts of Mg and enrichments of Si, S and Al. While the elemental fractions of S and Si in the solid product remained fairly constant between 14–22 The pH of precipitation of the FeOOH-rich product appears to play a prominent role in its elemental composition (normalised for the major elements extracted from serpentinite in Mg composition exhibits a distinct and increasing trend with increasing pH. It is however desirable to regulate the pH of the first precipitation stage in order to ensure minimal Mg and maximum Fe compositions in the FeOOH-rich product. Thus, pH levels ⩽8.5 seem appropriate. Adding more ammonia solution to the MgSO Seven samples of magnesium hydroxide were analysed using ICP-OES and XRD. The elemental compositions of normalised ICP-OES results are presented in In Relationships between the two main stages of the process; i.e. extraction and precipitation steps and possible effects of the reaction parameters on Mg(OH) A correlation between the % Mg extraction calculated from ICP-OES results of samples from sixteen experiments (Mg extraction, Section 4.1.1) and the mass of valuable products being FeOOH-rich by-product and Mg(OH) Using the developed relationships of Mg extraction and valuable products (Eq. In general, S/AS, reaction temperature and time exhibit similar effects on both the extraction and precipitation stages. For example, the effect of reaction temperature on Mg extraction ( An optimum value was determined by replacing the mean of the Mg extraction values with the original values. While plotting the mean values of Mg extraction against the reaction parameters is useful in examining the trend; however, it does not adequately represent the full picture. Therefore a combination of  Quantitative and qualitative analysis of the solid residue obtained after separation of the MgSO It is desirable to minimise the amount of unreacted compounds. In order to investigate the effect of the reaction parameters on the amount of solid residues, experimental data for the tests with Finnish serpentinite are presented in For a set of experiments the gaseous product(s), mainly ammonia (according to stoichiometry) were collected in two class glass bottles, connected in series and each containing 150 ICIS® pricing information on chemical commodities Maximum AS recovery of 72% was achieved for the tests reported here. This value may be much higher if the process is operated at large scale where some losses experienced in the experiments can be avoided. The temperature of the solid/solid reaction and the amount of alkaline precipitant used for precipitation seem to significantly affect the extent of recovery of AS. Increase in reaction temperature leads to a decrease in the extent of recovery. This may be as a result of possible decomposition and formation of SO A mechanism for the reaction of serpentinite and AS salt has been proposed in Section 2.2. AS salt decomposes at temperatures >160 The decomposition of AS salt to ammonium tri-sulphate and ammonia gas (Reaction An analysis with other reaction orders than 1 was also performed but some initial parameter estimation results showed that the reaction order for the components A, S and A3S are very close to unity. The mass balances for all components in the system are as follows: These seven ordinary differential equations (ODEs) were solved with the backward difference method and the parameters were estimated with the Simplex and Levenberg–Marquardt method using the software Modest ( The parameters in Eq. Here, the objective function, C To check the identifiability of the parameters ( This study shows that magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH) In spite of the energy requirement of the process (to be addressed in more detail in a future paper), it is important to note its significance. Mg extraction shows promising results, and a high purity Mg(OH) Scale-up of this route will be part of future work. The use of a lab-scale rotary kiln we have purchased will allow for tests with better mixing as well as address possible solid contact limitations. Shell Global solutions International B.V, Amsterdam (NL) is acknowledged for funding and support, mentioning specifically Dr Marcel Verduyn. We want to acknowledge also the Academy of Finland Sustainable Energy “SusEn” Programme (2008–2011) and KH Renlund Foundation (2007–2009) for additional support. Paul Ek and Sten Lindholm from the Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry at ÅAU deserve some appreciation for the ICP-OES analysis, as Dr. Kaj Fröberg, Berndt Södergård and Jaana Paananen from the Laboratory of Inorganic Chemistry ÅAU for support with XRD analysis. Many thanks to Lauri Järvinen, currently with the Laboratory of Geology and Mineralogy at ÅAU for processing of Finnish serpentinite rock to required particle size. The mineral used here was provided by Mr. Olli-Pekka Isomäki from Finn Nickel Oy at Hitura, Finland.