Hydraulic fracturing technology, a technique for increasing productivity applicable in low-permeability oil-gas reservoir, has been used in the extraction of coal seam methane in underground coal mines. However, because of the more complex structure of coal seam compared with that of oil-gas reservoir, the hydrofracture propagation can easily extend to roof-floor rocks, limiting the range of permeability and making damages of roof-floor rocks in subsequent coal mining and support difficulty. How to control the hydrofracture propagation well-aligned in a large area of coal seam has become the key to long-time highly effective extraction of coal seam methane. Firstly, it starts with the perspective of stress field of crack tip, by means of thermal elasticity fracture mechanics theory, to get the stress intensity factor of hydrofracture tip while taking pore pressure into consideration. Next, a laboratory fracturing experiment using sandstone specimens was conducted to study the impact of non-uniform pore pressure on the direction of hydrofracture propagation. Lastly, a numerical simulation software RFPA2D-Flow is adopted to further verify the theoretical and experimental results. The study shows that pore pressure can effectively increase the stress intensity factor of the crack tip, the more pressure of pore, the smaller the needed fluid pressure for hydrofracture propagation. In a large area, affected by the direction and distribution of pore pressure gradient, the hydrofracture will propagate along higher pore pressure area. A method is put forward for controlling hydrofracture propagation in underground coal mines accordingly. Meanwhile, the matching relationship between the space between boreholes and the water injection maintaining pressure and maintaining time are studied together, with methods and steps for calculating key fracture parameters established.China is rich in CBM (coal bed methane), with a located quantity of geological resource in coal bed reaching 36.81 trillion m In recent years, chinese scholars have proposed a method of increasing permeability in underground coal mine by referring to hydraulic fracturing principle in the field of oil and natural gas ( As for the method for controlling hydrofracture propagation, fracturing for oil-gas reservoir and CBM ground is quite similar in techniques. The control method primarily uses horizontal drilling technology in which well track is effectively controlled by means of special downhole tools and measuring instruments, moving the drill towards the preset target through particular direction, which can substantially increase oil-gas production and reduce drilling cost ( Therefore, this research studies the impact of non-uniform pore pressure field on hydrofracture propagation by combining theoretical analysis and laboratory test in following ways. Firstly, it starts with the perspective of stress field of crack tip, by means of thermal elasticity fracture mechanics theory, to get the stress intensity factor of hydrofracture tip while taking pore pressure into consideration. Next, a laboratory fracturing experiment using sandstone specimens was conducted to study the impact of non-uniform pore pressure on the direction of hydrofracture propagation. Lastly, a numerical simulation software RFPA When there is fluid in pores of coal, a poroelastic medium, the solid skeleton is affected by strength. This strength can be summed up as a volume force in which the force equals to grad We think about the following physical model: suppose we have an isolated disc-shaped fracture whose length is 2 If a constant heat is given in fracture, to say, In that way, we got the stress intensity factor on the crack tip under the conditions of the given temperature field. As mentioned above, stress intensity factor of hydrofracture under the condition of pore pressure is attained through the analogy. If in the unlimited porous space there is a 2 Under the single pore pressure In the event of cooperation force of far field stress filed and water pressure By Bringing the expression of According to superposition principles, superposing (4) and (7) can help us get stress intensity factor of hydrofracture under the condition of pore pressure, as follows: As shown in As is shown before, non-uniform pore pressure field will force the hydrofracture to propagate towards high pore pressure area. In the this part, we conduct laboratory hydraulic fracturing experiments to verify the conclusion. We use cuboid sandstone specimen of the size 100 mm × 100 mm × 200 mm, on whose surface two boreholes being 55 mm in-depth will be drilled. Of the two, 1# is the hydrofracture hole. In order for the fracture to propagate vertically, a 2 mm deep slot will be carved straight down at the bottom of 1#. Before fracturing the 1#, the fluid is injected into 2# at a constant pressure so that a local high pore pressure area around 2# will be formed, as shown The schematic diagram of the experiment is shown in As shown in As the experiment is finished, the crack propagation results are shown in According to basic hydraulic fracturing theory, the hydrofracture propagation is a kind of tensile failure caused by the minimum principal stress. In the first group of experiment, the hydrofracture will propagate along the direction perpendicular to the maximum tensile stress when hole 2# is without any constant water pressure. However, in groups 2 to 5 where there are different constant water pressures in hole 2 #, a pressure increasing area is formed because of the pressure gradient around hole 2# caused by rock permeation. Meanwhile, with the increase of water pressure in hole 1# comes the strengthening of the pressure increasing area around hole 2#, creating the maximum tension stress in the direction perpendicular to line between hole 1# and hole 2#, and leading hydrofracture propagate towards hole 2#. Also, the higher the constant water pressure are, the more evident the asymmetric trend becomes, and the more control it exerts on crack direction. At the same time, we also find that when horizontal principal stress difference is same, the constant water pressure in hole 2# increases whereas the instability propagation pressure of crack in hole 1# decreases, which is primarily due to the asymmetric distribution of pore pressure of the specimen created by water pressure gradient of the pore between hole 1# and 2#. The bigger the water pressure in hole 2# is, the stronger the asymmetric trend of pore pressure will become, resulting in the impact on hydrofracture being more notable. To further analyze the trend of the hydrofracture propagation under the effect of pore pressure gradient, a numerical simulation software RFPA The coupling system of flow & solid in rock failure process analysis (RFPA RFPA In classic coupled seepage theory, the change of rock permeability caused by stress is without consideration, which does not meet momentum conservation. After taking the influence of stress into consideration, the coupled seepage and stress equation shall be provided. Therefore, the RFPA In those equations: When stress state or strain state of element meet some given damage thresholds, the element will start to damage. The elasticity modulus of damage element is: A 200 mm × 200  mm rectangular area in which 300 × 300 = 90,000 units are distributed is set with a plane strain model. The model is not restrained in its boundaries except its fixed base. Value of the mechanical parameters of the materials is demonstrated in As shown in The numerical simulation, theoretical analysis and experiment show nearly the same result, which means when crustal stress is certain, changes in distribution of pore pressure of coal mass around the hydrofracture can control the hydrofracture in its propagation towards high pore pressure area, with the needed water pressure in this process being reduced. Therefore, based on the above result, we propose a method of multiple-boreholes cooperation guiding hydrofracture propagation in underground coal mines. Before the beginning of formal hydraulic fracturing, we preset several pressure maintaining water injection boreholes along the predetermined propagation direction on both sides of the hydraulic fracturing borehole. This is to increase the pore pressure of the coal around by maintaining pressure through water injection, and form a continuous strap-shaped high pore pressure area, which could, on one hand, guide the hydrofracture to propagate along the preset direction and expand the range of effective hydraulic fracturing, and reduce the propagation pressure of the hydrofracture hole on the other hand, as shown in Parameters involved in the multiple-boreholes cooperation hydrofracture technology are primarily about selecting the parameters in such areas as ways of drilling holes arrangement, the water injection maintaining pressure and maintaining time. Of them, parameters of drilling holes involve angle, hole height, diameter and space between boreholes. To be more specific, determining drilling angle follows the rules of being vertical coal seam plane; hole height is determined by roadway size and the type of drilling machine. The aforementioned study shows distribution of pore pressure in the coal has impact on hydrofracture propagates towards high pore pressure gradient direction. Therefore, arranging several pressure maintaining water injection holes on both sides of the hydrofracture holes and forming a continuous strap-shaped high pore pressure area could lead hydrofracture move along the neighboring drilling lines. It is, therefore, necessary to study the matching relationship among the drill holes spacing, the water injection maintaining pressure and maintaining time. Because of the original gas pressure in coal, we can take water injection process as displacement of coal bed methane by fluid. In the coal seam, the process of water flow is consider as one dimensional radial flow problem. Suppose the wetting radius of coal seam is The speed of gas-liquid interface is: If porosity of coal seam remains constant when injecting water, the seepage equations for liquid and gas area can be shown as: In Based on the continuity of the seepage velocity and pressure distribution on the gas-liquid interface, as well as boundary conditions. Thus, the pressure distribution and seepage velocity of liquid and gas areas can be attained by ( Pressure distribution of liquid is: Seepage velocity of liquid area is: Pressure distribution of gas area is: Seepage velocity of liquid area is: Of them, According to material derivative and seepage velocity of gas-liquid interface, it is consistent with Dupuit-Forchheimer relation ( Thus, we can get the time it takes for gas-liquid interface to move to R: Therefore, The value of water injection pressure must be greater than the original gas pressure but less than initiation fracture pressure in the coal seam, which means: In In this formula, Values of In this formula, H is the depth/m. As a result, based on the study on the matching relationship among the borehole spacing, the water injection maintaining pressure and maintaining time. Parameters of multiple-boreholes cooperation hydrofracture technology are determined by taking following steps: Firstly, we determine the place of hydraulic fracturing drilling hole and the drilling parameters based on fracking areas as well as coal seam geology. On both sides of hydraulic fracturing drilling hole, the pressure maintaining water injection drilling holes are arranged according to the principle of equal spaces. Based on experience, the space between these drilling holes shall be less than 20 m. According to formulas (25)–(27), we determine the water injection pressure of pressure maintaining drilling holes, and if the greater the water injection pressure is, the more controlling power it exerts on hydrofracture direction. Based on the determined spaces between drilling holes and the water injection pressure of pressure maintaining drilling holes, we can confirm the needed time for pressure maintaining water injection through This research studies the impact mechanism of pore pressure fields on hydrofracture propagation by theoretical analysis, laboratory test and numerical simulation. The study shows that pore pressure can effectively increase the stress intensity factor of the hydrofracture tip, the more pressure of pore, the smaller the needed water pressure for hydrofracture propagation. In a large areas, affected by the direction and distribution of pore pressure gradient, the hydrofracture will propagate along the high pressure area. A method is put forward for controlling hydrofracture propagation in underground coal mines. We preset several pressure maintaining water injection drill holes along the predetermined hydrofracture propagation direction on both sides of the hydrofracture drill hole. This is to form a continuous strap-shaped high pore pressure area on both sides the fracture drilling hole, which could guide the hydrofracture to propagate along the preset direction and expand the range of effective hydrofracture, and reduce the hydrofracture propagation pressure. Meanwhile, based on Darcy seepage theory, the matching relationship among the drill holes spacing, the water injection maintaining pressure and maintaining time in the multiple-boreholes cooperation hydrofracture technology is studied, with methods and steps for calculating key fracture parameters established. Chenpeng Song and Yiyu Lu conceived and designed the article; Hongmei Tang and Yunzhong Jia performed the experiments; Chenpeng Song analyzed the data and wrote the paper. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This paper is jointly supported by