Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) was crystallized in (2-hydroxypropyl-3-butoxy) propyl-succinyl chitosan (HBP-SCCHS) solutions by a slow vapor diffusion method. The CaCO3 crystals were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) and N2 adsorption–desorption methods. By varying the concentrations of HBP-SCCHS and Ca2+, temperature and initial pH, the CaCO3 crystals with different morphologies were obtained. Based on the analysis of CaCO3 crystals obtained under different conditions, the mechanisms of the CaCO3 crystallization in the presence of HBP-SCCHS were proposed. It was found that the adsorption of HBP-SCCHS molecules on CaCO3 surfaces played a key role in the formation of CaCO3.In living organisms, calcium carbonate (CaCO A mass of works have studied the crystallization process of CaCO Chitosan and its derivatives have been used in many fields due to their outstanding characteristics, such as low price, rich resources, biocompatibility, biodegradation and low toxicity, etc. In organisms, biomineralization proceeds slowly under mild conditions, therefore, it is very important to investigate the biomineralization process under slow vapor diffusion method HBP-SCCHS ( CaCl The size and morphology of CaCO When the concentration of Ca HBP-SCCHS is an amphiphilic derivative of chitosan and begin to aggregate when its concentration is 0.5 As the concentration of HBP-SCCHS is 0.1 The XRD patterns (  In order to confirm the existence of HBP-SCCHS in CaCO To investigate whether the HBP-SCCHS molecules would adsorb on the surfaces or reside in CaCO The results indicate that when the concentration of HBP-SCCHS is 2.0 With the increase in Ca The XRD patterns ( The diffraction peak intensity of CaCO In FTIR spectra ( As the concentration of Ca With the increase of temperature, the amount of rod- and dumbbell-like aggregates increases. At higher temperature, more HBP-SCCHS is stretched, promoting the formation of HBP-SCCHS/Ca The typical SEM images of CaCO Interestingly, the CaCO In order to explore the CaCO  There are two formation mechanisms for crystal growth in solution The dissolution rate of inorganic crystals depends on the concentration gradient of its surrounding solution. The larger concentration gradient, the faster inorganic crystals dissolve. Under static conditions, the diffusing rates of Ca The existence of absorption peak (746 The dynamic light scattering (DLS) results (Fig. S6(a)) show that there are two different hydrodynamic radius (Rh) in 0.5 Typical TEM image of nanoparticles obtained from HBP-SCCHS (2.0 Based on the investigations of CaCO The random adsorption of HBP-SCCHS on (001) surface and asymmetric aggregation of nanosized vaterite particles promote the formation of lenticular aggregates. As the aging time prolongs, the diameters of lenticular aggregates increase and the smaller ones aggregate into larger ones for the bridging effect of HBP-SCCHS molecules. Meanwhile, some of the HBP-SCCHS molecules desorb from CaCO When the initial pH When the aging time prolongs to 30 In acid solution, when the concentration of HBP-SCCHS is small (0.1 The aging time and Ca The authors appreciate the financial support from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at