Nanoscale adhesive forces between a colloidal silica probe and a flat silica substrate were measured with an atomic force microscope (AFM) in a range of aqueous NaCl, CaCl2, and AlCl3 solutions, with concentrations ranging from 10−
                     6 to 10−
                     2
                     M at pH ∼5.1. Notably, the measured force curves reveal large pull-off forces in water which increase in electrolyte solutions, with jump-off-contact occurring as a gradual detachment of the probe from the flat substrate rather than as a sharp discontinuous jump. The measured force curves also show that the number and size of the steps increase with concentration and notably with electrolyte valence. For the higher concentration and valence the steps become jumps. We propose that these nanoscale adhesive forces between mineral surfaces in aqueous solutions may arise from newly born cavities or persistent subnanometer bubbles. Formation of cavities or nanobubbles cannot be observed directly in our experiments; however, we cannot disregard them as responsible for the discontinuities in the measured force data. A simple model based on several cavities bridging the two surfaces we show that is able to capture all the features in the measured force curves. The silica surfaces used are clean but not intentionally hydroxylated, as contact angle measurements show, and as such may be responsible for the cavities.It is well known that silica suspensions exhibit remarkable stability at their isoelectric point Glass microslides (B&C) typically 1 Here we are interested in the forces that arise in the separation of two perfectly clean silica surfaces but not hydroxylated after reaching direct contact. Given the repulsive character of the silica–silica interaction in the approaching of the surfaces, one might expect a separation virtually free of hysteresis. However, this is not so because the separation forces that we have measured for the silica–silica system show significant adhesive force with unusual intensity and long range. It is important to mention that contact time between the surfaces during the measurement is very short.  In a recent article, Guleryuz et al. For NaCl and CaCl Contact forces however are very short range and therefore should not be invoked to explain long range adhesive forces such as those measured by Guleryuz et al. Our force curves in Formation of vapor cavities has been observed experimentally (for pioneering work see  Formation of cavities or persistent air bubbles cannot be observed directly in our experiments; however, we cannot disregard them as responsible for the discontinuities in the measured force data. In a related work we have demonstrated by means of a simple macroscopic force balance (Eq.  Measured long range adhesive forces clearly increase with electrolyte concentration and valence. Contact forces may be too short range to be invoked to explain them. Likewise the attractive force of van der Waals. In our experiments the time of contact of the surfaces is sufficiently short to discard any sintering mechanism by the action of water. Notably, our force curves reveal large pull-off forces in water and in electrolyte solutions, the jump-off-contact occurs as a gradual detachment of the probe from the flat substrate rather than as a sharp discontinuous jump. The measured force curves also show that the number and size of the steps increase with concentration and notably with electrolyte valence. For the higher concentration and valence the steps become jumps. We propose that these nanoscale adhesive forces between silica surfaces in aqueous solutions may arise from newly born cavities or persistent subnanometer bubbles. Formation of cavities and or nanobubbles cannot be observed directly in our experiments; however, we cannot discard them as responsible for the discontinuities in the measured force data. We offer a simple model based on several cavities and/or nanobubbles bridging the two surfaces that is able to capture all the features in the measured force curves. In the model the least stable cavity fails first at small separation leading to a small step in aqueous solutions with low electrolyte concentration and valence and to a jump in the presence of high electrolyte concentration and valence, the second less stable cavity fails next and so on. Dehydroxylation of our silica surfaces may be responsible for the cavities/bubbles; however, cavities/bubbles need to be considered in the analysis of measured force curves between silica surfaces because they might never be totally absent. We thank Project Conicyt/Fondecyt 1101023, Centro CRHIAMProject Conicyt/Fondap-15130015 and Red Doctoral REDOC.CTA, MINEDUC Grant #UCO1202 for financial support. J.H.S. and R.J. thank CONICYT-Chile for graduate student fellowships.