In the context of the mining industry, smaller grain size and other mineralogical characteristics have motivated the need to grind finer. In order to address this need, the interest in fine grinding technologies has grown over the last 20years as is illustrated by a growing body of knowledge on stirred milling. Emphasis in recent years has been on the use of computationally intensive modeling and simulation methods such as the discrete element method (DEM) and computational fluid dynamics (CFDs). However, due to the computational requirements of these two methods, initiating a study that spans the stirred mill design space would take a lot of computational effort and time. Therefore the goal of this paper is to propose and apply a simplified stirred mill model that will then be used to assess configurations in the stirred mill design space.
                  To this end, a stirred mill model was proposed based on the assumption that the main if not only mechanism of ore breakage is shear. As the basis of this model is the fluid mechanics definition of shear stress, the stirred mill power model became a function of viscosity, mill speed and a new parameter called shear volume. An initial validation using published data indicated the shear based power model correlated well with measured power.
                  Establishing a morphological chart to delimit the stirred mill design space indicated that 24 design and operating conditions can be assess using the established shear volume measure. The results indicated for the mill configurations tested that a change in stirred mill liner design can potentially increase shear volume and power from 14% to 290% as compared to smooth chamber liners.Stirred mill technology dates back to 1928 ( In the context of the mining industry, smaller grain size and other mineralogical characteristics have motivated the need to grind finer. In order to address this need, the interest in fine grinding technologies has grown over the last 20 This body of knowledge indicates that there are a number of design and operating parameters that affect stirred mill performance. These include but are not limited to impellor type, tip speed, media size, impellor tip to mill wall gap size, filling, slurry rheology, media and slurry density, solid concentration and slurry flow. Emphasis in recent years has been on the use of computationally intensive modeling and simulation methods such as the discrete element method (DEM) ( In a thorough analysis, Kwade et al. ( In examining the resulting power relationship (Eq. As such and for the purposes of simplicity, it will be assumed that the only mechanism of ore breakage in a stirred mill is through two media particles sliding past one another, nipping some ore and, depending on the speed and applied force, breaking that nipped ore. This sliding mechanism also applies to layers of media particles sliding past one another grinding any ore found between these layers. Whether it is limited to single particles or sliding layers of particles, the predominant ore breakage mechanism is shear. From a fluid mechanics point of view, shear typically is described by two parallel plates sliding past one another and separated by a fluid of a given thickness (see In a rotating system, such as a rotating concentric viscometer ( If the surface over which the shear stress is applied to is known, it becomes possible to determine the force acting on that surface. In the case of a rotating system, the resulting force would define the torque acting on the system as: Assuming that all shear surfaces are in contact with the shearing fluid, the power needed to turn that cylinder can be determined as follows: It will be assumed that Eq. This allows the redefinition of mill power (Eq. Applying these relationships to a stirred mill would require not only the knowledge of the physical dimensions of the impellor and chamber, but also a determination of all parallel shear surfaces that are in contact with the fluid media. In any given stirred mill there are number of parallel or near parallel surfaces. However, only the parallel surfaces moving past one another would be admissible as parallel shear surfaces. This criterion means that parallel surfaces on the impellor, such as the surfaces of two adjacent disks, would not be admissible as these two surfaces are moving at the same rotation speed. However, the circumferential surface on the disk is parallel to the mill chamber wall and is definitely moving past the stationary mill chamber wall. Therefore these parallel surfaces are a parallel shear surface pair. Further, the surface of a disk found at the bottom or end of an impellor shaft would be parallel to the bottom of the mill and would also constitute a parallel shear surface pair. As a general guideline, if one parallel surface is found on the rotating impellor and the other is parallel surface is found on or attached to the chamber, then these two surfaces would be constitute a parallel shear surface pair. This can be illustrated using the following example of a single disk impellor in a 1 The first one is the disk circumference side (a), the second is the shaft surface (b) and the third is the circular end (c) (see Note that the radius, It should be noted that all parallel shearing surfaces should be in contact with the shearing fluid in order to be considered. In In the general case where there are several different parallel shear surface pairs, the shear surface calculation would take the form of a summation: In the proposed model, one performance metric was presented which is shear volume. However, the effect of shear volume can only be evaluated in relationship to mill power consumption which requires the use of mill power consumption data. In 1996, The shear volume, Assuming that the shear based power, The average of the viscosity, This correlation can be improved by observing that the viscosity is also a function of the rotational speed of the mill as shown in Using the trend relationship in The reference values are: It is important to note that this model provides a baseline viscosity value which is a function of rotation speed. Subsequently, this baseline value is corrected using power functions of adimensional ratios. Applying this model to Gao’s data set ( The resulting correlation between the shear power estimate and the measured power estimate is quite good with an Keeping in mind that that goal of the development of this shear based stirred mill model is to define a metric that can be used to evaluate the design parameters of a given mill, it becomes important to find an initial validation data set for a stirred mill of a different geometry than the one used by Assuming the auger thickness is 1 Using these shear volume results along with the associated operating parameters, it was possible to predict mill power using Eqs. More importantly, this comparison indicates that the shear based power model provides an estimate of the power consumption of the mills as a function of both the physical design and operating parameters. This observation confirms that the shear based power model and its components are sufficiently sensitive to changes in impellor design and therefore can be used to assess different stirred mill design configurations. All stirred mills are composed of four components which are ( The components and their variations can be laid out in the morphological chart found in However, with shear being assumed to be the main grinding mechanism, there is room to propose that a stirred mill can actually be defined by seven sub-functions as follows: in any orientation, the motor/transmission converts electrical energy into mechanical energy defined by rotation speed and torque. The mechanical energy is transfer to an impellor structure which then transfer this energy through a 1st shear surface to the mill fluid. The fluid in turn transfers a portion of that energy through to the 2nd shear surface to the containment structure. In this modified list of sub-functions, comminution is removed as it is actually part of the multi-phase fluid system which is composed of water, media and ore. Before redistributing the different stirred mill alternative components in a modified morphological chart, it might be of interest to expand the possible alternatives with those indicated in the review of Examining the stirred mill design space as described in The containment chamber is 1 The eight design combinations are found in A number of observations can be made from the results presented in The shear volume increases from a low for the pin impellor only to a high with the drum impellor only. Although the pin impellor mill has a lower shear volume than the screw impellor mill for this scale of mill, it is operated at a higher rotation speed resulting in higher power consumption than the screw impellor mill as seen in literature ( The additions of protrusions such as pins and then disks to the chamber liners increases the shear volume by 32% and 210% respectively for the pin mill shown. The additions of protrusions such as pins and then disks to the chamber liners increases the shear volume by 29% and 55% respectively for the disk mill shown. The drum impellor which represents the annular gap mill shows the greatest shear volume and associated mill power. There are a number of points that should be underlined from the results obtained starting with the design performance metrics defined and used. Shear volume is a new parameter that is based on a fluid mechanics description of shear stresses in a stirred milling. It is developed from the design parameters of a given mill. Along with mill rotation speed and viscosity it is possible to estimate mill power consumption. It is interesting to note that the shear volume of a given mill can be greater than the physical volume of that mill. This is mainly due to the fact that the shear volume is a function of the inverse of the gap distance between the impellor and the mill chamber wall. Essentially, as the gap distance decreases, the shear volume increases. Further, the ratio of shear volume to mill volume can potentially be considered as a measure of shear intensity of a particular mill design. The product of such a shear intensity ratio or factor with the square of the rotation speed and the viscosity of the slurry/media mix would equal the power intensity of the mill. A point should be made on the comparison of the shear based power model with the empirical model developed by The Gao power model is reproduced here: The differences between the two models are apparent. However, the form of these two models is very similar. The order of the exponents related to media and slurry density is similar. Further and more importantly, the exponent on the rotation speed in the two equations is identical. In the shear based power model (Eq. Despite this promising observation, further investigation and validation of this model using experimental data for different stirred mill configurations and operating conditions is required. It is expected that with such added investigations, viscosity as a function of rotation speed would be corrected not only with respect to media diameter, media density, slurry density and viscosity thinners, but also with respect to other parameters such as viscosity thickeners, slurry temperature, ore granulometry and gravity effects. With respect to ore granulometry, it has been shown to affect the power in an It is clear from the results presented in One last observation can be made related to the form of the power model (Eq. The fluid is considered a multiphase fluid composed of water, ore and media. The viscosity of this multiphase fluid is found to be a function of speed (shearing speed) similar to a shear thinning Bingham plastic. One could postulate that viscosity of a particular water/ore/media mix would be the same for any stirred mill and the differences would only be found in the operating speed and the impellor/chamber design. If after validation, this is found to be the case, then one can propose the development of a “viscometer” for the determination of stirred mill (multiphase) fluid viscosity independently of impellor/chamber configurations. The goal of this paper was to propose and apply a simplified stirred mill model that could then be used to assess the stirred mill design space. To this end, a stirred mill model was proposed based on the assumption that the main if not only mechanism of ore breakage is through shear. The basis of this model is the fluid mechanics definition of shear stress which led to defining a stirred mill power model as well as the establishment of a new measure of mill performance: shear volume. An initial validation using published data indicated that power defined as a function of shear correlated quite well with the measured power for the cases tested. The proposed model divides the mill power calculation into three distinct parts of physical, operating and fluid parameters. The shear volume, Establishing a morphological chart to delimit the stirred mill design space indicated that 24 design and operating conditions can be assess using the established shear volume measure. The results indicated for the mill configurations tested that a change in stirred mill liner design can potentially increase shear volume and power from 14% to 290% as compared to smooth chamber liners. It is apparent that further research is required to validate the power model based on the shear volume definition against industrial power data as well as computational models of stirred milling before it can be considered for use with confidence to predict stirred mill power. Such validation will contribute to determining and confirming how viscosity is affected by the media diameter, media density, media size distribution, slurry rheology, slurry solid content, slurry density, etc. Undoubtedly, viscosity will also be found to be a function of the granulometry which will require tying the power model defined from shear stress with either and energy-size relationship or a breakage kinetics relationship. If successful, the use of this model could contribute to the development of a better understanding of how different design parameters work together to produce the power required in any particular stirred milling operation.