The present work investigates gold recovery using DEAE-cellulose, a common biopolymer derivative, from synthetically prepared diluted gold-bearing solutions of 50 ppm. The effects of different recovery parameters on gold recovery efficiency were studied in detail. It was demonstrated that gold recovery efficiency increased with an increasing amount of sorbent, as well as increasing contact time. A gold recovery efficiency of 99% was attained under conditions of 20–40 g DEAE-cellulose per liter at a shaking rate of 130 rpm for 30 min at room temperature. On the other hand, with smaller amounts of sorbent (6 g/l), it was also possible to recover gold from the solution with 99% efficiency when the reaction temperature was increased to 60 °C. The shaking rate and temperature were demonstrated to play a vital role in the recovery process. It was also found that gold recovery by DEAE-cellulose is an intermediate-controlled process with an activation energy of 37.11 kJ/mol. The XRD pattern and SEM images revealed that the recovered gold was in the metallic form.Gold recovery from aqueous solutions has received significant attention because gold is present in appreciable amounts in electronic parts and plating materials ( There has been an increasing interest in biosorption, a property of certain types of inactive, dead, microbial biomass materials that can adsorb and concentrate metallic ions from aqueous solutions ( Cellulose, synthesized by many plants and bacteria, is one of the most abundant natural polymers in the biosphere. It is a carbohydrate polymer consists of repeating β- Native cellulose has a poor adsorption capacity and low physical stability because attachment of all three hydroxyls to the same ring may cause streric hindrance, and also the hydroxyl groups are not easily accessible to chemical reactions due to the crystalline regions in the polymer matrix (O' In this work, DEAE-cellulose, which is a weakly basic cellulose anion exchanger ( The objective of the present study was to outline an effective recovery process using DEAE-cellulose – a biopolymer derivative – as a sorbent for the high-efficiency recovery of gold from diluted gold-bearing solutions, and to describe the optimum conditions and parameters for this recovery process. For this purpose, the following parameters were studied to investigate their effect on gold recovery efficiency: DEAE-cellulose amount, reaction time, shaking rate, and temperature. Furthermore, the activation energy of the recovery process was calculated in a kinetic study. In this work, a gold-containing solution comprised of 50 ppm gold with a pH value of 4.07 was prepared from potassium gold chloride powder of 99.9% purity. Instead of the more usual gold cyanide solutions, chloride solutions were employed, because refineries in Turkey prefer working with chloride solutions to cyanide solutions due to environmental concerns. Distilled water was used for the wet chemical analyses. Analytical grade DEAE-cellulose (100 μ) (Fluka Biochemika) was employed for all experiments. Following each recovery process, the concentration of gold ions was measured both with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP) using Perkin Elmer Optical Emission Spectrometer Optima 2100 DV, and atomic absorption spectrophotometer using Perkin Elmer 1100B. Crystalline phases of the samples were determined with X-ray diffractometer using PANalytical X'pert Pro PW 3040-60. The particle size and composition of the samples were analyzed with scanning electron microscopy using JEOL JSM-6390 LV scanning microscope. The study was conducted in a batch system by varying one recovery parameter at a time. For each experiment, 10 mL of the synthetically prepared gold solution of 50 ppm was contacted with DEAE-cellulose in a falcon tube to avoid exposure to air. In this manner, air was not able to diffuse into the system. Experiments were conducted in a temperature-controlled shaking water bath to ensure uniform heat convection at the surface of the falcon tube. The first experimental series was performed by varying the DEAE-cellulose amount while keeping the other parameters constant. In the second experimental series, the influence of the shaking rate was studied in the range of 20 rpm to 140 rpm. Shaking was performed in a temperature-controlled shaking water bath with a manually adjusted shaking rate. The third experimental series was conducted to investigate the effect of varying the reaction time from 30 to 120 min. In the final experimental series, the influence of temperature was investigated in the range of 30–60 °C. Solid/liquid separation was performed following each run. For the ICP analyses, the 10 mL filtered solution was introduced into the machine following an appropriate dilution. The reaction time and solution pH were kept constant at 30 min and 4.07, respectively. After the amount of DEAE-cellulose was optimized, it was kept constant at 10 mg for the kinetic study. Thus, the DEAE-cellulose/gold weight ratio (10/0.5) was chosen to be around 20. The efficiency of this recovery process was calculated from the percentage of gold recovery using the following equation: The following results outline factors that play a role in gold recovery and the conditions for attaining gold recovery efficiency as high as 99%. It has been observed that gold recovery by DEAE-cellulose can easily be optimized to recover the gold present in gold-bearing solutions with a high efficiency. The first experimental series was performed by varying the amount of DEAE-cellulose from 10 to 400 mg while keeping the other parameters constant. The increase in gold recovery efficiency with an increasing amount of DEAE-cellulose can be easily explained by the fact that recovery reactions are thermodynamically favored by a high ratio of the sorbent to the metal to be recovered ( When the gold chloride solution is contacted by DEAE-cellulose, gold in the trivalent (Au The oxidation of hydroxyl groups in DEAE-cellulose is expressed as follows And the overall reaction is expressed as follows When the reaction was allowed to run for 30 min, the recovery efficiency reached over 90% with DEAE-cellulose amounts of 50 mg and above, and started to level off at approximately 100% beyond 100 mg. Thus, the 10–60 mg DEAE-cellulose was chosen for further experiments. In this experimental series, the gold recovery efficiency was investigated as a function of shaking rate in the range of 20 to 140 rpm. The duration of the experiments was limited to 30 min.  As it can be seen from the figure that increasing the shaking rate leads to an increase in the gold recovery efficiency for all quantities. Considering 10 mg DEAE-cellulose quantity, by increasing the shaking rate from 20 to 120 rpm, the gold recovery efficiency increased by In this experimental series, the effect of reaction time on gold recovery efficiency was studied in the range of 0.5–2 h.  In this experimental series, the effect of temperature on gold recovery efficiency was studied in the range of 30–60 °C. As can be seen from the figure that increasing temperature results in an increase in the gold recovery efficiency. It should be noted that this effect is more profound for lower quantities. When 10 mg DEAE-cellulose was employed, efficiencies were 77 and 91% for temperatures 30 °C and 60 °C respectively. Thus, by increasing the temperature from 30 to 60 °C, the gold recovery efficiency increased by around 15%, which indicates that temperature plays an important role for gold recovery from diluted gold-bearing solutions. This is also in accordance with the published literature ( To determine the rate constant ( The activation energy Ea was calculated by the Arrhenius equation, according to the following formula: The activation energy for gold recovery was calculated to be 37.11 kJ/mol, which indicates that this is an intermediate-controlled process ( To determine whether recovered gold is in the metallic form, XRD analysis was performed on samples after the DEAE-cellulose was burned off at 800 °C, after which pure gold was attained. The purity of the gold was found to be 99.8% by cupellation method. This indicates that gold can easily be isolated from DEAE-cellulose, resulting in pure gold powder. In the diffraction pattern, the peaks are clearly observed at 2 theta The present work has demonstrated that gold recovery using DEAE-cellulose is effective for recovering gold from diluted gold chloride solutions. Using excessive amounts of DEAE-cellulose (at DEAE-cellulose/Au weight ratios of 400 and above), a gold recovery efficiency of over 99% is easily attainable at 130 rpm after 30 min, even at room temperature, whereas increasing the temperature from 30 to 60 °C enables an efficiency above 99% with a significantly smaller amount of DEAE-cellulose (at a DEAE-cellulose/Au weight ratio of around 120) under the same conditions. By optimizing process parameters, gold recovery approaching the theoretical maximum should be feasible with relatively small DEAE-cellulose additions. Increasing temperature caused an increase in gold recovery efficiency, in accordance with the published literature. The gold recovery was found to occur via the reduction of trivalent gold ions present in the solution to metallic gold, which was proven by SEM images and XRD patterns. It has also been demonstrated that increasing the shaking rate and contact time leads to an increase in the gold recovery efficiency. Considering 10 mg DEAE-cellulose quantity, by increasing the shaking rate from 20 to 120 rpm, the gold recovery efficiency increased by around 50%, which indicates that shaking is necessary for gold recovery from diluted gold-bearing solutions. Among all parameters investigated in this study, the shaking rate was found to be the most effective in terms of recovery efficiency. The gold recovery by DEAE-cellulose is an intermediate-controlled process with an activation energy of 37.11 kJ/mol and obeys first order kinetics, in accordance with the published literature. This study demonstrates that gold recovery can successfully be achieved using DEAE-cellulose as an alternative to traditional sorbents used in industrial gold recovery. In addition, the outstanding characteristics of DEAE-cellulose for gold recovery offer the possibility of efficient recovery of other precious metals. The authors would like to thank N.Esra Engin and Isik Yavuz for their assistance with the analysis. Special thanks are due to Mr. Tayfun Aktas for financial support.