Trace elements bound in quartz lattice are efficiently removed by KCl-doping calcination and pressure leaching. Removal rate of lattice Al reaches 73.5% when 70.4% of lattice-bound trace elements are removed from quartz sand at optimum conditions. The lattice-bound trace elements in quartz are activated by high-temperature calcination, released during phase transformation from α-quartz to cristobalite, diffused to quartz surface by surface enrichment, and removed by oxidation, chlorination and pressure leaching.Lattice-bound trace elements in quartz either substitute for Si  The most common trace-element related defect center in quartz is the [AlO Lattice impurities in quartz are hard to be removed by conventional processing techniques including magnetic separation and flotation ( Although acid chlorinating agents such as Cl This study provides a novel combination process of KCl-doping calcination and pressure acid leaching for effectively removing lattice-bound trace elements from quartz and preparing ultrapure quartz sand. The research is focused on analyzing effects of KCl-doping calcination on removal of trace element Al and lattice structure of quartz, and elaborating separation mechanism of lattice-bound trace elements from quartz. Quartz ore samples are from a hydrothermal vein deposit in Hengche Town in Qichun County of Hubei Province (China). The bulk quartz was crushed by jaw crusher (PE-Φ100×125), and ground by Raymond mill (3R2115). Produced quartz sand ranging from 106 μm (140 mesh) to 212 μm (70 mesh) was selected by standard sieve, and used for purification experiments. The quartz sand (106–212 μm) was calcined at 900 °C for 5 h, and then leached by H Dried quartz materials (100 g per sample) are respectively calcined at 600 °C, 800 °C, 900 °C, 1000 °C and 1200 °C at air atmosphere for 5 h and 45 h, and leached by H Morphology and structure of quartz samples are analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-IT300, JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA, JXA-8230, JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, RU-200B, Rigaku Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Electron images of SEM were obtained at 5.0 kV of acceleration voltage, 3.7 mm, 5.3 mm and 6.7 mm of working distances, and 30 nm of spot size. Electron images of EPMA were obtained at an acceleration voltage of 20.0 kV and a working distance of 11.1 mm–11.3 mm. The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) used a rotation anode high power X–ray diffractometer employing CuKα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm, 40 kV, 50 mA) over scanning range 2θ = 5–70° with step width 3°/min. The CASTEP software based on density functional theory and method of plane wave turns potential was used to calculate substitution of lattice impurities and Si ( Contents of trace elements in quartz samples were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS, iCAP-Qc, THERMO FISHER SCIENTIFIC, Waltham, America). Mass spectrum of ICP-MS: 4–290 amu, sensitivity: >150 Mcps·ppm 2.0000 g per sample is dissolved by 12 cm As shown in Contents of impurity elements in quartz material, calcined quartz (2 wt‰ KCl, 900 °C, 45 h) and quartz concentrate (2 wt‰ KCl, 900 °C, 45 h; 0.30 mol/L H As shown in KCl-doping calcination can selectively destroy surface structure of quartz particle ( Sectional morphology of quartz material only shows fluid inclusions with zonal distribution. But sectional morphology of quartz particle after KCl-doping calcination shows that some fractures are formed in quartz surface during KCl-doping calcination, and further developed in interior of quartz particles ( Quartz sands after KCl-doping calcination were respectively leached by H KCl-doping calcination promotes a strong phase transformation from α-quartz to cristobalite. As shown in KCl, as a mineralizer, can reduce phase-transition temperature of α-quartz. As shown in Lattice-bound trace elements in α-quartz (  73.5% of lattice Al and 70.4% of all lattice-bound trace elements are removed when quartz material is mixed with 2 wt‰ of KCl, calcined at 900° for 45 h, then leached in pressure-tight reaction kettle by H Lattice-bound trace elements in quartz are activated by high-temperature calcination, released during phase transformation from α-quartz to cristobalite, diffused to quartz surface by surface enrichment, and removed by oxidation, chlorination and fluoric pressure leaching. This research was supported by the The authors declare no conflict of interest.