Understanding of the interactions between cells and surfaces is essential in the field of tissue engineering and biomaterials. This study aimed to compare the adhesion, proliferation and differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), an osteoblast cell line (MC3T3-E1) and gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) on tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS), glass and titanium (Ti). The average surface roughness was 5, 0.2 and 40×10−3
                     μm for TCPS, glass and Ti, respectively. Immunocytochemistry and image analysis made it possible to quantify the number and morphology of adherent cells as well as the density of the focal points. Regardless of the substrate, both hMSCs and osteoblastic cells were mainly branch-shaped. HGF-1 exhibited a significantly higher number of focal points on Ti than on TCPS and glass. Alizarin red quantification indicated that both hMSCs and osteoblastic cells were more differentiated on TCPS than on Ti and glass. The surface properties of substrates, such as roughness, wettability and chemical composition, modulated the behaviour of the cells. Early events, such as cell adhesion, may influence the differentiation of hMSC and consequently tissue healing around implanted biomaterials.A complete understanding of cell–surface interactions is necessary for many therapeutic applications of biomaterials, as well as in tissue engineering The presence of biomaterials or implants may greatly influence the tissue healing process. The surface properties of implants, such as chemistry, topography, wettability and elasticity, play an essential part in cell adhesion, but also in their differentiation The aim of this study was to compare the adhesion, proliferation and differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) and an osteoblast cell line (MC3T3-E1) on TCPS, glass and titanium (Ti). TCPS was used as control of the cell adhesion and proliferation. On the other hand, Ti was the surface of implant in contact with gingival tissue and used as implant surface. The properties of these substrates were carefully analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), contact angle and zeta potential measurements. The adhesion of the three types of cell was compared on the different substrates. The number of adherent cells, cell morphology and the density of the focal points were determined by using a custom-made image analysis system based on staining of nuclei, actin and vinculin. The influence of surfaces on the osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs, fibroblasts and the osteoblast cell line were also investigated by alkaline phosphate activity measurements and alizarin red staining of the mineralization. All experiments were performed in standard 24-well plates made of TCPS treated for adherent cells (Costar, Corning, Schiphol, The Netherlands). Glass coverslip discs, 14 Surface topography was recorded using AFM (VEECO Nanoscope IIIa, Veeco Instrument, Santa Barbara, CA, USA). Surface roughness measurements at the nanometer scale were taken in intermittent contact mode on 5 hMSCs were obtained from bone marrow cell aspirations harvested in the iliac crest of patients undergoing orthopaedic surgery and after receiving informed consent (Etablissement Francais du Sang, Centre-Atlantique, Tours, France). hMSCs isolated from three donors were used (age 18–47). Bone marrow cells were plated in 75 Sterile glass coverslips and Ti discs were put into 24 well plates. Three samples per group were used and the experiments were reproduced at least three times. Cell seeding densities of 10,000, 4000 and 10,000 hMSC, HGF-1 and MC3T3-E1 were seeded and incubated on the different substrates (TCPS, glass, Ti) for 4 After staining the actin, vinculin and nuclei, fluorescent images were analyzed by a custom-made programme using an image analysis system (Quantimet Q550, Leica, UK). Four images were recorded at magnifications of 10× and 20× for each staining. A semi-automatic binary treatment was performed on each image. The number of cells attached to the substrates was automatically counted using nuclei staining. Actin staining was used for identification of cell shapes into round, branched and spindle cell morphology. The circularity of the cells was determined by using the length/width ratio. Round cells were defined for a circularity superior to 0.8, while spindle cells had circularity below 0.8. Branched cells were characterized by more than two branches in their morphology. Cell areas were also measured for each type of cell morphology, giving insights into the spreading of cells on surfaces. The number of focal points was counted per cell for each type of cell morphology and normalized by the cell area for each cell morphology. For each condition, 80–300 cells were analyzed. As previously described in Section hMSC, HGF-1 and MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded and cultured as explained before. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and alizarin red staining were assayed for each cell type and substrate. Cells were cultured in both standard and osteogenic medium as positive controls. The osteogenic medium was supplemented with 10 Alizarin red staining was performed after 14, 21 and 28 Samples were analyzed in triplicate in order to ensure consistency of analysis ( The surface average roughness (Ra) values of the different surfaces are shown in The adhesion of hMSCs, fibroblast and osteoblast cells to the different substrates was determined at 1, 2, 4 and 8 Representative images of adherent hMSCs after 2 In order to discriminate the state of cell adhesion on the substrates, three different cell shapes were determined. As shown in The number of focal points was also measured for the three types of cell on the different substrates after 4 The number of cells was determined on the different substrates up to 16 Osteogenic differentiation was studied for the three cell types on the different substrates by measuring ALP activity and alizarin red under control and osteogenic cell culture media. Osteogenic differentiation was also studied by alizarin red S staining for each substrate after 14, 21 and 28 As Ti is not a transparent substrate, extraction of alizarin red staining was performed and measured via the optical density ( For osteoblastic cells, alizarin red extraction in the control medium reached a plateau after 14 In this study, the behaviour of hMSCs on different substrates was investigated and compared to that of fibroblasts and an osteoblast cell line. At the micrometer level, which is also the cell level, TCPS, glass and Ti substrates had similar surface roughness. However, the substrates had different surface compositions ( Regarding the role of surface properties on cell adhesion, we found that attachment of hMSCs was significantly higher on TCPS than on glass and Ti ( In order to study the difference in cell adhesion on surfaces, we developed a quantitative method using staining of vinculin and image analysis. The number of focal points, given by vinculin immunostaining, was determined for the three types of cell on each substrate ( Cell proliferation on the different substrates was in line with the adhesion yield. The correlation between cell adhesion ( The main objective of our work was to find a possible correlation between the initial adhesion steps, cell differentiation and substrate properties. Some authors have found that hMSC adhesion on different topographies and chemistries of implants commits cells to different lineages In order to demonstrate a possible role of surface properties on osteoblastic differentiation of hMSCs, we measured ALP activity and mineralization. The results were compared to that of fibroblasts and the osteoblast cell line on the different substrates in both standard and osteogenic media. After 28 In this study, the adhesion, proliferation and differentiation of hMSCs, and osteoblast cell line (MC3T3-E1) and gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) were compared on TCPS, glass and Ti. The TCPS, glass and Ti substrates had similar surface roughness but different chemistries. TCPS and Ti had a hydrophobic surface while glass was more hydrophilic. As previously found, hMSC attachment was significantly higher on TCPS than on the other substrates. This better adhesion was corroborated by the higher number of focal points and branched cell morphology observed using a custom-made image analysis system. A good correlation was found between adhesion yield and cell growth rates. Alizarin red quantification indicated that both hMSCs and osteoblastic cells were more differentiated on TCPS than on Ti and glass. Overall, the substrate surface properties, such as roughness, wettability and chemical composition, modulated the behaviour of the cells. Consequently, early events such as cell adhesion may influence the differentiation of hMSCs that conditions tissue healing around implanted biomaterials. The authors acknowledge R. Bareille and J. Amédée for their technical assistance with cell immunostaining. The authors thank P. Marmey from CTTM for contact angle and surface energy measurements. The Regional Council (Bioregos), Inserm, SFBTM and the French Ministry of Research are acknowledged for supporting the PhD thesis of S.L. The authors are grateful to Kirsty Snaith of Medicis Traduction for grammar and spelling corrections of the manuscript. Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 1, 3 and 8 are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at