Selective oxidation of minerals was investigated as a means to separate by flotation the copper sulfide minerals of chalcocite, covellite and chalcopyrite from the arsenic copper sulfide minerals of enargite and tennantite in mixed mineral systems. It was found that a separation of these minerals could be feasible after selective oxidation of their surfaces in slightly acidic pH conditions, or after oxidation and selective dissolution of the surface oxidation products with a complexant in basic pH conditions.Arsenic is an undesirable element that causes serious toxicological and environmental problems in smelting of arsenic-containing minerals (e.g., It would be more economically and environmentally beneficial to remove the minerals containing arsenic at an earlier stage such as during flotation. Their separation is nevertheless difficult as they generally have similar flotation behaviour to the valuable minerals with which they are associated. This is the case in separating arsenopyrite (FeAsS) from pyrite, or removing enargite (Cu The oxidation behaviour of non-arsenic copper sulfide minerals (chalcocite, covellite and chalcopyrite) is well established (e.g., Enargite and tennantite often occur at various quantities in copper deposits with chalcocite, covellite or chalcopyrite. being the major copper minerals. In this study, the separation by flotation of chalcocite, covellite or chalcopyrite from enargite or tennantite was investigated in mixed mineral systems by means of oxidation treatments. A two mineral system was preferred in this investigation to identify the flotation performance of each non-arsenic mineral against that of enargite or tennantite. To obtain a better understanding of the surface reactions occurring during oxidation, the surface of these minerals was monitored after the conditioning and flotation stages by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). XPS is a powerful surface sensitive analytical technique that can identify the surface species responsible for flotation. In general, flotation performance is closely related to the overall hydrophobicity of a mineral surface with a balance of hydrophobic contribution from collector coverage and hydrophilic contribution from oxidation products such as oxides/hydroxides. The layer thickness of these oxidation products is not only a measure of the extent of surface oxidation, but also an important indicator of the ability of the collector to interact electrochemically with the mineral surface. All chemicals were of analytical grade quality. High purity gas (nitrogen or oxygen from CIG Ltd) was scrubbed by bubbling it through a silica dispersion. High purity water, produced by reverse osmosis, two stages of ion exchange and two stages of activated carbon prior to final filtration, was used in all experimental work. This water was ‘pretreated’ at the required pH with KNO Chalcocite, covellite and chalcopyrite samples were purchased from Ward's Natural Science Establishment (USA). Enargite and tennantite samples were supplied by Continental Minerals (USA). The chemical analysis of these samples is reported in Flotation was conducted using a modified Partridge and Smith column XPS measurements were obtained with a Perkin Elmer Physical Electronics Division (PHI) 5100 spectrometer using an MgKα irradiation X-ray source operated at 300 W. A pass energy of 17.9 eV was used for all elemental spectral regions. The pressure in the analyser chamber was 10 At pH 5.0, N At pH 11.0, the flotation results were more complex with relatively good separations of covellite from tennantite, tennantite from chalcopyrite, enargite from chalcopyrite and enargite from chalcocite ( A high degree of oxidation of the copper and arsenic surface species occurred when the minerals were conditioned in oxygen and with H  Ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA), a strong complexant, has been commonly used in mineral processing to give information about the amount and type of oxidation products covering the surface of minerals, but also to remove these surface oxidation products The XPS analysis was also conducted on the flotation concentrate and tail fractions of the chalcocite–enargite system to confirm the previous interpretations. For mineral mixtures, a detailed analysis of the XPS spectra, as in These XPS results showing that more copper and, more importantly, less arsenic are found in the concentrate than in the tail samples are in a good agreement with the flotation results. Furthermore, the XPS results have revealed that the higher flotation recoveries of the non-arsenic copper minerals resulted from more collector adsorption and less oxide/hydroxide species on the surface of these minerals than on that of enargite or tennantite. It is likely that the surface oxidation layer inhibited collector adsorption on the enargite and tennantite surfaces. This study has shown that a separation of the copper sulfide minerals of chalcocite, covellite or chalcopyrite from enargite or tennantite by flotation is difficult in normal oxidation conditions. A overall better separation of these minerals has been obtained at pH 5.0 after selective oxidation with H The financial support for this work from Rio Tinto and the Australian Research Council, through the Special Research Centres Scheme, is gratefully acknowledged.