Microbial leaching via biocyanidation process enables efficient extraction of precious metals from low-grade ores and increases attention in mineral industries for applying green and environmentally friendly leaching methods. Microbial cyanidation can be applied in cyanidation process mobilizing precious metals from ores and scraps. Biological solubilization processes also recover metals from secondary raw materials such as e-wastes, car catalysts, coins, etc. In comparison with conventional technologies, biomobilization is associated with advantages including simple operation, reduced cost, and less environmental risks. This review was performed to describe a perspective on metal biocyanidation by applying cyanogenic microorganisms. Factors influencing yield of biocyanidation and electrochemical approaches of metal recovery were discussed. This study also addresses future advances of industrial applications of microbial mobilization of some metals as soluble cyanide complex from secondary resources.Growth of civilization has been reliant on discovery and use of metals. Humans̓ application of metals to make tools has played a major role in development of agriculture, transportation, and art ( Microbial mobilization is a green and effective approach for recovery of heavy metals using microorganisms via biotechnological techniques producing mobilized metal from insoluble ores by biological oxidation or complex formation processes from low-grade ores and various secondary source of precious metals such as coins, jewelry waste, electronic scrap products, and car catalytic converters ( For example, Lima bean (Fabaceae: In the present review, biological production of hydrogen cyanide as a precursor of amino acids was discussed. Microbial solubilization processes were reviewed concerning recovering of some metals from industrial wastes, which can serve as secondary sources such as e-wastes, car catalysts, and coins. In addition, potential industrial applications of microbial mobilization of metals as water-soluble cyanide complexes, termed as “biocyanidation” were also described. Metal mobilization, termed as “leaching”, is the process of extracting soluble ore from insoluble impurities by dissolving metals as soluble salts in aqueous media, that may occur in nature or through an industrial procedure ( Direct: Indirect: In a study, Nickel ore was leached using The influence of mechanical and chemical activation on biooxidation process of auriferous flotation concentrate using a consortium of Metal cyanides composing of metal atoms and one or more cyanide ions (monodentate ligand) are represented by the formula of A Cyanide complexes with low water solubility are formed,when metal ion A is replaced by a heavy metal ion allowing formation of mixed cyanide complexes containing other monodentate ligands such as ammonia, water, nitrogen oxide, halides, and sulfur compounds. Metal-ligand binding modes and geometries found in cyanide complexes are presented in Sodium cyanide and potassium cyanide with the greatest commercial importance are fairly soluble in water. Potassium cyanide is more common compound because of its easier production procedure through melting the mixture of potassium carbonate and potassium hexacyanoferrate. Water solubility of alkali metal cyanides is influenced by pH, and is presented by revisable equilibrium between hydrogen cyanide and alkali metal hydroxide (7). Dissolution of alkali cyanides in tap water may produce brownish-black amorphous polymerized product of hydrogen cyanide, even at room temperature, because of decomposition reaction in presence of CO The reaction of alkali cyanides with sulfur compounds in aqueous solutions is used to form alkali metal thiocyanates applied as an effective treatment in cyanide poisoning ( Heavy metals are usually able to form stable, slightly soluble or insoluble cyanide complexes dissolving in presence of excess alkali metal cyanides (see Supplementary material). Iron cyanide complexes with octahedral configuration are very stable and particularly non-toxic because of strong bonding between cyanide and iron. Calcium hydroxide, hydrogen cyanide, and iron (II) chloride are raw materials for production of calcium hexacyanoferrate (II) (10) on a large scale, subsequently converting to sodium and potassium salts (11−13). Adding stoichiometric amount of calcium hexacyanoferrate (II) to potassium chloride leads to precipitation of potassium calcium double salt, then converting to water-soluble potassium hexacyanoferrate (II) as a result of adding potassium carbonate. However, similar method is used for production of sodium hexacyanoferrate (II) by adding sodium carbonate to calcium hexacyanoferrate (II). Hexacyanoferrate (II) undergoes a slow decomposition reaction to form cyanide ion only under UV irradiation. In absence of UV light, only strong oxidants such as ozone (14), permanganate (15), and hydrogen peroxide (16) are able to oxidize hexacyanoferrate (II). Benzonitrile derivatives are produced using copper (I) cyanide as a main reagent in Sandmeyer reaction for introduction of cyano group into aromatic rings. Preferred approach for copper cyanide production is based on chemical reaction of hydrogen cyanide and copper (II) salt in presence of hydrochloric acid solution. Highly soluble copper cyanide complexes are formed by dissolving CuCN in alkali metal cyanide solutions (17, 18). Cobalt cyanides as one of the most stable cyanide complexes are usually applied as antidotes for treatment of cyanide poisoning. Cobalt (III) cyanide complexes are formed by heating solutions of cobalt (II) cyanide complexes in oxygen. Cyanide of precious metals may be considered as historical chemistry origin of inorganic cyanides. Yellow crystals of gold (I) cyanide are insoluble in water and soluble in thiosulfate and basic solutions of metal hydroxide. Gold is attacked by alkali metal cyanides with oxidizing agents or oxygen to form [Au (CN) Cyanogenic microorganisms form more than 50% of soil microbial community ( Many bacteria capable of producing cyanide are soil organisms such as   The use of radioactive containing glycine proved that carbon atom of cyanide is originated from methylene carbon of glycine and carbon dioxide derived from glycine carboxyl group in   H Two enzymes are known for glycine oxidation including D-amino acid oxidase, and oxygen oxidoreductase (an amino acid oxidase). Unstable imine HN=CH-COOH is suggested as an intermediate in formation of highly unstable nitrile N ≡ C-COOH leading to HCN production via non-enzymatic step ( Cyanide as a reactive group easily reacts with ketones to form cyanohydrins in presence of high intracellular levels of carbonyl containing compounds such as glyoxylic acid, pyruvic acid, and α-oxoglutaric acid. Hydrogen cyanide can be released from cyanohydrins by oxynitrilase. Properties and substrate spasticity of fungal oxynitrilase and intermediates of glyoxylic acid cyanohydrin and other cyanogen compounds are not clearly determined. Hydrogen cyanide has an important function in regulation of nitrate reduction in algal cells and all nitrate reductases are inhibited by HCN, strength of hydrogen cyanide binding varies with enzymes from different sources. Formation of HCN-inactivated enzyme has been reported in  Many higher plants such as alfalfa, almonds, beans, cassava, flax, peaches, sorghum, and white clover serving as important food crops for man or animals are able to release hydrogen cyanide from endogenous cyanide containing compounds such as cyanogenic glycosides and cyanogenic lipids (see Supplementary material) ( Amygdalin, in seeds of several members of the Rosaceae, is known as the first isolated and studied cyanogenic glycoside ( Biosynthesis of dhurrin in Optimum conditions for production of cyanide by bacteria depend on concentration of glycine in growth medium ( In addition, growth of Many metals and metalloids form cyanide complexes with high water-solubility and chemical stability. Cyanide is produced by a variety of bacteria as secondary metabolites such as Gold is extensively used by electrical industries because of its unique chemical and physical properties such as excellent electrical conductivity, low electrical resistance for inserting connections, and outstanding corrosion resistance ( Excessive use of cyanide for gold extraction is associated with environmental hazards, and therefore biological methods have been developed for gold leaching as environmentally friendly approaches (    The effect of various experimental conditions such as pH, incubation technique, particle size, and biooxidative treatment was investigated on bioleaching of low-grade ores containing gold by  Cyanogenic Recently, Although, biocyanidation is a more promising approach for extraction of precious metals (e.g. Au, Ag, and Pt) than traditional chemical methods, some challenges must be addressed prior to large-scale implementation of this technique such as optimizing process design and overall performance for recovery of metals in a biotechnological system. Further detailed studies in this subject may improve biotechnological approach to recover valuable and precious metals from ores and secondary resources. Traditional processes may not meet future industry requirements because of their extensive environmental contamination, high cost, and low efficiency. Considerable interest has arisen in developing microbial processes to help effective recovering of precious metals from refractory ores in association with biochemical processes in recent years. In the near future, mining industries will probably study the use of these combined electrical, chemical, and biological processes as a sustainable solution to maximize yield of metal recovery due to their economic and environmental advantages. Isolation of novel mesophilic and thermophilic bacteria, archea, fungi, and other bioengineered species for increased rate of cyanide production is a major contribution to mining industries for their potential field applications. Thus, more focused interdisciplinary collaboration is needed among microbiologists, chemists, metallurgists, and engineers to identify, characterize, select, and develop bioprocesses for industrial and commercial applications of biocyanidation involving extraction of precious metals from refractory ores. It is suggested to pay attention to isolation and identification of potent cyanogenic microorganisms from indigenous sources in futuristic goal of biocyanidation studies. Moreover, optimization of biocyanidation conditions is important for selective recovery of metals with high extraction efficiency. Cyanide leaching procedures have been used by mining industry for over 100 years in extraction of precious metals from ore and electronic scraps. After extraction of metals from ore or wastes via biocyanidation process, some approaches are applied for recovery of precious metals from cyanide complex solutions such as cementation, chemical precipitation, ion exchange, electrowinning, and coagulation. Zinc cementation process is applied since 1890 for gold recovery from cyanide leaching solutions through the use of a bed of zinc shavings or dust ( Cathode: Anode: Overall: Separated precious metal may be melted into final products and undergo further purification steps. Rate of cementation extremely depends on type of cementing agent and concentration of dissolved metals. The effect of cementing agents on rate of gold cementation has been shown to have a declining trend in the following order: Cu > Zn > Mg > Fe > Al ( Electrowinning process of copper from various copper cyanide species (e.g., [Cu (CN) Although, electrowinning of valuable metals (e.g., gold, silver, copper, nickel, and cobalt) from their cyanide complex solutions is known for almost a century, the usage of permanent anodes has some disadvantages such as maintenance costs of cleaning anode surfaces and refurbishing of wetted area. Generally, lead-based anodes are used in electrowinning processes, in which acidified sulfate electrolytes are applied, and when the electrolyte is alkaline, stainless steel is often utilized. Moreover, coated titanium anodes are usually used in nickel containing solutions ( Microorganisms play important roles in biogeochemical cycling of metals, and can be utilized in a number of ways for metal processing. Microorganisms can promote metal solubilization through excretion of ligands such as thiosulphate, organic acids, and cyanide oxidizing and forming complexes with metals. Cyanogenic microorganisms are able to mobilize various precious metals such as iron, copper, nickel, silver, gold, and platinum. In contrast to other bioleaching techniques, biocyanidation occurs under alkaline conditions, through which metals complex can be easily separated. Future research is needed to quantify extent of metal loss from alternative lixiviant systems by cyanogenic microorganisms. It is expected that future bioleaching technologies will be a combination of chemical and biological technologies, that are more cost effective, efficient, and environmentally friendly. Biocyanidation can be regarded as a rapid progressing technology revolutionized metal extraction as a green alternative method. This approach can overcome some problems associated with conventional pyrometallurgy and chemical hydrometallurgy in recovery of metals. In addition, application of cyanogenic microorganisms for bioleaching of precious metals has been proved to be a promising approach, which may be worthwhile to pursue as a part of overall objective to develop advantageous technologies for leaching and recycling of metals as an alternative to conventional treatments. Researchers are looking for new cyanogenic microorganisms and optimal conditions by which cyanide generation can be improved, consequently resulting in improved bioleaching efficiency. In this regard, a hybrid technique is proposed involving a combination of physical, chemical, and biological leaching to complement each other for an effective and improvised method in extraction of precious metals. More intensive research is particularly needed to understand biological community distribution in order to unravel mechanisms underlying bioleaching of metals from mineral ores and interactions between mixed consortiums. It is expected that, several new commercial-size bioleaching plants will be commissioned in the coming years. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at