A new methodology is proposed for flotation characterization in industrial operations. The approach considers the mineral recovery to be proportional to both the top-of-froth (TOF) grade and the froth discharge velocity down a bank of cells. The procedure allows for the identification of the fractional recovery profile from the discharge velocities and the TOF grades. In addition, if the total recovery of the bank is available, the cell recoveries can be estimated by scaling the fractional recoveries. For this purpose, a single parameter was used to scale the recoveries for each sampling survey in order to obtain the kinetic response along the flotation banks. Industrial tests were performed in two rougher banks; one bank consisted of six 250m3 self-aerated cells in a 1-1-1-1-1-1 arrangement, and the other bank consisted of nine 130m3 self-aerated cells in a 1-2-2-2-2 arrangement. The results showed good agreement with the recovery profiles obtained from the cell-by-cell mass balances along two industrial flotation banks.The metallurgical characterization of a flotation bank is typically performed using the feed, the concentrate and the tail grades. All of the key streams are sampled, and repeats are conducted to improve the data reliability ( The sampling of the different streams is subject to access limitations, sampling constraints (e.g., circuit layout, personnel) and measurement uncertainties ( Despite the usefulness of metallurgical evaluations, sampling surveys are not frequently conducted due to their high preparation requirements, time of analysis, and high costs ( The relationship between the mineral recovery and the air recovery has been studied in the literature based on vision systems in industrial flotation machines. Air recovery has been found to be a suitable estimate of the mineral recovery in rougher flotation banks ( Some authors have used the bubble load measurement to study the flow of particles collected by true flotation that enters the froth zone. In this short communication, a new methodology to estimate the fractional recovery profiles along rougher flotation banks is presented. Data on the TOF grade, the froth discharge velocity and the total recovery of the bank are required to obtain the recovery profiles. For this purpose, the TOF grade and the froth discharge velocity measurements were performed at industrial scale. The fresh feed, the final concentrate and the final tail were also measured to obtain the total recovery of the flotation bank. This total recovery was used to scale the fractional recoveries and for estimating the kinetic response along the flotation banks. Experimental tests were performed in an industrial copper flotation plant fed by approximately 8000 Metallurgical samplings for mass balances were performed in each cell of the rougher flotation banks. Three sampling campaigns were conducted in bank A, and one sampling campaign was conducted in bank B. The feed, tail and concentrate were sampled per circuit during the surveys of approximately 2–3 The top-of-froth measurements (TOF) were conducted along the rougher banks in parallel with metallurgical samplings. Each measurement corresponded to a sample of approximately 500 Repeats of the TOF measurements in cells PR, C1, C2 and C6 were conducted in the sampling campaign 1. From these datasets, the estimate for the standard deviation of the TOF grades was 1.3%, which shows an adequate repeatability and reproducibility of the measurement procedure. The froth discharge velocity was measured in each rougher cell using the installed VisioFroth cameras.   A new approach for the Cu recovery estimation along rougher flotation banks is proposed; this approach is based on two non-conventional measurements. The methodology assumes that the mineral recovery in a flotation cell is proportional to the TOF grade and to the froth discharge velocity, as shown Eq. In Eq.  Characterize the circuit by measuring the froth discharge velocities and the TOF grades in each cell of the rougher bank ( Perform the total mass balance for the flotation bank to obtain the overall recovery of the valuable mineral ( Determine Obtain a mineral recovery profile using Eq. The requirement to sample the flotation feed, the tailings and the concentrate of the bank of cells to determine the total recovery may introduce errors during sampling, assaying, analysing, amongst others. Another way of looking at the flotation rate characterization, which uses the top-of-froth grades and the froth discharge velocities, is by a dimensionless approach for estimating the fractional recovery profile in an industrial flotation bank. In this case, dividing Eq. Eq. The froth discharge velocities ( Based on the froth discharge velocities and the TOF grades, the A new approach for metallurgical characterization in rougher flotation banks has been proposed. The mineral recovery in a flotation cell was considered proportional to both the top-of-froth (TOF) grade and the froth discharge velocity. The proportionality parameter ( The weighted average A dimensionless approach for estimating the fractional recovery in an industrial flotation bank was derived. This recovery profile was obtained from the discharge velocities and the TOF grades with no additional metallurgical data. This approach will be useful when the total recovery is not available. The proposed methodology is a powerful tool for the characterization of flotation circuits at industrial scale using two simple and reliable measurement systems: the TOF grade and the froth discharge velocity. This approach has the potential to reduce the effort and expense of metallurgical audits and surveys for plants with installed froth discharge velocity sensors and especially when the collection of samples is complex (e.g., tails samples). Funding for process modelling and control research was provided by