The leaching of gold from a gold concentrate calcine using a novel thiosulfate leaching method that utilizes cobalt-ammonia complex as the oxidant in place of the traditional copper-ammonia catalysis was investigated. The result shows that the thiosulfate consumption can be evidently reduced without the impact on the gold extraction. The leaching kinetics of gold in thiosulfate solution with cobalt-ammonia catalysis has been studied. It was found that the reaction orders with respect to ammonia, cobalt and thiosulfate concentrations are 0.42, 0.20 and 0.34, respectively. The optimal pH value for gold leaching is 10.0, and gold can be effectively extracted at ambient temperature. The apparent activation energy is determined to be 5.68 kJ/mol, and this indicates that the gold leaching in the Co-NH3-S2O3
                     2− system is likely to be controlled by the diffusion of reactants and products through a solid layer. The XPS analysis results strongly support this hypothesis. The apparent activation energies of gold leaching in the thiosulfate-only and Cu-NH3-S2O3
                     2− systems are 30.9 kJ/mol and 8.01 kJ/mol, respectively. It can be concluded that the cobalt-ammonia catalysis for thiosulfate leaching of gold has higher catalytic efficiency than copper-ammonia catalysis. The tests for gold recovery from the pregnant solution of the Co-NH3-S2O3
                     2− system by resin adsorption were implemented, and the results demonstrated that the competitive adsorption of cobalt with gold did not occur owing to the weak affinity of the strong base anion resin for cobalt complex ions. Therefore, the elution of gold on loaded resin only needs to perform a simple one-stage process instead of the complex two-stage elution process for the Cu-NH3-S2O3
                     2− system, which will be contribute to reduce the cost of gold recovery from the pregnant solution.The process for the extraction of gold by cyanidation has been used for over a century and remains as a predominant gold leaching technique. However, due to the increasing environmental and public concerns with the toxicity of cyanide, there is a drive towards development a more benign substitution to cyanide. Perhaps the most promising substitution to cyanidation is thiosulfate leaching. This method is environmentally friendly, and furthermore has obvious advantage in the treatment of refractory gold concentrates, especially for carbon or copper bearing gold concentrates. Therefore, there has been a large amount of research on the use of thiosulfate to extract gold. These studies have ascertained that favorable leaching rate can be achieved in the presence of copper(II) and ammonia reaction is shown by Eq. Another problem associated with the thiosulfate leaching of gold is the high-cost gold recovery from its pregnant solution. Based on the comparative analysis for gold recovery techniques from pregnant thiosulfate solution At the present, there have been some studies about the replacement of copper-ammonia catalysis. As has been reported Base on the above, the work presented in this paper focuses on the kinetic studies of gold leaching from a gold concentrate calcine by the Co-NH In China, about 1/3 of gold ores are refractory, and the main type of refractory gold ores is sulphide The gold concentrate calcine used in this study was ground to a particle size of 80.0% < 0.044 mm before its leaching and analyses, and its chemical composition was indicated in The leaching experiments were carried out in a 250 mL beaker using an overhead stirrer, which was open to air. For each test, a given mass of calcine sample was firstly added into the beaker, and then 100 mL of distilled water containing desired quantities of requisite reagents was also transferred into the beaker. The formed pulp was agitated with a magnetic stirrer at a rotating speed of 300 rpm. Pulp pH value was adjusted to a certain value with the addition of sodium hydroxide (3.0 mol/L solution) or sulfuric acid (10 mass% solution), and was kept steady by readjustment every 1.0 h. Unless otherwise specified, the experiments were conducted under the room temperature of 25(±0.5) °C with the pH value of pulp in the range of 9.9–10.1. At certain time intervals, the pulp samples were withdrawn continually during the leaching for the subsequent analysis. Commercially available strongly basic anion exchange resins (IRA-400, Zhengzhou Qinshi Technologies Co, Ltd., Henan, China) was obtained in their wet form and used without pretreatment. The resin adsorption experiments were performed in a 250 mL sealed reactor at the ambient temperature (25 ± 0.5 °C), where the solution was agitated at a speed of 300 rpm and its pH was kept at 11.0 ± 0.2. At such a pH value, the poisoning of resin by polythionate can be avoided At the beginning of elution experiments, gold-loaded resin was prepared through the dipping of 7.0 g resin in 100 mL pregnant thiosulfate solution for 30 min. Afterwards, the loaded resin was transferred to an ion exchange column, which was constructed with a 10 mL burette with glass wool plug at the bottom. The bed volume (BV) was calculated based on the density of wet resin (1.5 mL/g). The eluent was pumped through the top of burette using a peristaltic pump, and its flow rate was 3 BV/h. The effluent was collected from the bottom of burette every 20 min, and the obtained solution was also analyzed for the concentrations of gold and cobalt/copper. The concentrations of gold, copper and cobalt in solution were measured through inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (PS-6, Baird). Phase constitution analysis was employed to determine the distribution percentage of Au for its every phase, which has been described in detail in our previous works    The effect of thiosulfate concentration on gold extraction is shown in The effect of temperature on gold extraction was investigated. The results shown in The apparent activation energy was determined based on the Arrhenius equation indicated in Eqs. As Calcine samples were subjected to XPS analysis for the purpose of identifying their surface species. The result of XPS analysis is shown in As shown in As seen in As indicated in The sulfur and iron species deriving from thiosulfate oxidation and hematite dissolution could form a coating layer on calcine surface, which acted as a physical barrier to retard the diffusion of reactants or products to or from the reaction site into the bulk solution, and thus thiosulfate leaching of gold was passivated. This well explained why the gold extraction percentage increased slowly after 2 h in The result for the simultaneous adsorption of copper and gold on IRA-400 resin from 100 mL pregnant solution containing 6.67 ppm gold and 486 ppm copper is shown in  For the Cu-NH As reported in the literature For the Co-NH From the above, in the Cu-NH 79.5% of gold in the gold concentrate calcine was extracted by thiosulfate leaching with copper-ammonia catalysis, and thiosulfate consumption was as high as 43.6 kg/t-calcine. Gold extraction from the calcine by thiosulfate leaching with cobalt-ammonia catalysis reached 80.1%, which was roughly consistent with the percentage of exposed gold, whilst the thiosulfate consumption was only 28.2 kg/t-calcine. The cobalt-ammonia catalysis can substitute the traditional copper-ammonia catalysis for gold leaching, resulting in the significant reduction of thiosulfate consumption without obvious impact on the gold extraction. The kinetics of gold leaching in thiosulfate solution with cobalt-ammonia catalysis was systematically investigated. The reaction orders with respect to ammonia, cobalt and thiosulfate concentrations are 0.42, 0.20 and 0.34, respectively. The optimal pH for gold leaching is 10.0, and gold can be efficiently extracted at ambient temperature. The apparent activation energy of thiosulfate leaching of gold is determined to be 5.68 kJ/mol. This indicates that gold leaching reaction catalyzed by cobalt-ammonia is likely controlled by the diffusion of reactants and products through a solid layer composed of passivation species mainly deriving from thiosulfate oxidation and associated mineral dissolution. XPS analysis results strongly support this hypothesis. The apparent activation energies of gold leaching in thiosulfate-only and the Cu-NH For gold recovery from the pregnant solution of the Cu-NH Financial supports from the