A feed of particles covering a wide range of particle sizes and densities was placed into a novel separator, referred to as the Reflux Classifier, and fractionated at a series of fluidization velocities. Double fractionation was then achieved when each product was sieved into narrow size fractions. For the coal particles used in this study, the ash % was determined for each of the samples. The ash % correlated strongly with particle density, and hence was a useful proxy for the particle density. A new Fractionation Algorithm was developed, which provided a method for estimating the feed size and density distribution from the Double Fractionation data. The cumulative yield % versus the cumulative ash % curves for each size fraction, and for the overall feed were then determined. The findings from the study were validated against accurate results obtained using the sink-float method. Excellent agreement with the curves obtained using the sink-float method was obtained. The sink-float method requires the use of heavy liquids; these are invariably toxic and expensive, hence a viable alternative is needed. The water based fractionation method, in conjunction with the Fractionation Algorithm, may prove to be a suitable substitute for the sink-float method. Precise details of the method and algorithm are therefore provided in order to permit the adoption of this new approach by other laboratories.Knowledge of the density and size distribution of a system of particles is valuable in a broad range of industries, most notably in the area of coal and mineral processing. In the coal industry, for example, the process modelling is based around tables of data listing the mass % and ash % versus the particle density, and applying partition curve models to simulate product recovery from a proposed or an existing plant. In parallel processing the optimum separation is achieved by ensuring the same “incremental assay” is targeted in each separator, irrespective of the particle size ( The present paper builds upon the previous work of  In this study, the validity of the empirical model of The potential of the Reflux Classifier in the area of particle fractionation was first described by  The above phenomenon contrasts sharply with the results achieved for denser particles such as illmenite, where  In Eq.  Combining Eqs.  Consider a batch quantity of particles having a range of particle sizes and densities. The size distribution of the feed is readily defined in terms of a series of size bands, for example We therefore define the overall feed size and density distribution through the feed matrix, A fixed fluidization velocity is applied by setting the flow rate of water through the distributor at the base of the vessel. The fluidized bed then expands, with the suspension forced to enter the inclined channels. There, particles segregate and deposit onto the inclined surfaces of the plates, and slide back to the fluidized zone. Some of the deposited particles are re-suspended as a result of the shear rate that develops through the channels, and hence become hydraulically conveyed. Other slower settling particles remain in a suspended state, passing up through the inclined channels, and leave the system altogether as an overflow stream. By commencing the flow fractionation process at a relatively low fluidization rate, particles having relatively low settling velocities report to the overflow stream. These particles will be relatively small in size and relatively low in density. This process is continued until the rate at which particles report to the overflow declines to a negligible level. Faster settling particles are then collected Each of these overflow fractions are dried and weighed before being separated according to their particle size using a series of sieves. This procedure then leads to a Double Fractionation matrix formed by the flow number, An appropriate assay is then performed on each of the size fractions formed in the sieve analysis, with the procedure repeated for each of the flow fractions. For a system of coal particles, the so-called ash %, the percentage of the mass remaining following combustion, is normally used. Hence a Double Fractionation matrix consisting of the ash % values, The Simplex Search technique of Initial values of the feed matrix, As shown earlier, the normalized partition curve obtained experimentally appears to be similar for all of the separations conducted by Note that at the end of the fractionation test a quantity of particles will normally remain in the vessel, typically the largest and densest particles. The number of overflow samples produced by the test will be The cumulative Double Fractionation mass values generated by the Reflux Classifier can be calculated using, An objective function, defined by the sum of the squares of the errors in the cumulative mass and cumulative mass of ash is needed in order to direct the feed distribution matrix, The initial Simplex is formed by establishing a matrix of search variables, with a new row of the search variables formed by adjusting just one of the search variables by a given step size. The value of the objective function, Given the initial guess for the feed matrix is so poor, as a result of setting all mass fractions to the same value, it is necessary to repeat the above procedure many times, but each time with an improved initial Simplex. Thus the solution obtained after 2000 iterations is used to establish a new initial Simplex, and then a further 2000 iterations is performed to direct the solution to an improved result. This higher loop is repeated ideally 2000 times in order to arrive at the best possible solution. Thus the total number of function evaluations is of order 4 This section is divided into two parts. The first is concerned with obtaining the actual particle size and density distribution using standard methods. These data are used later to evaluate the fractionation achieved using the Reflux Classifier, in particular, the results from the Fractionation Algorithm. The second part of this section is concerned with the procedure used to fractionate the feed using the Reflux Classifier. The data set used in this paper is sourced from previously published fractionation data ( The feed consisted of a coal and mineral matter sample, having a particle size range of 0.25–4.0 Once the size and density distribution of the feed is known, either from the sink-float work or from applying the Fractionation Algorithm to the data generated from the Reflux Classifier, the cumulative yield % versus the cumulative ash % can be calculated. The cumulative mass, Note that the simpler matrix A representative sample of the feed was placed in the laboratory scale Reflux Classifier. A suitable geometry was selected, with the inclined section composed of three equally spaced inclined channels 2.0 The actual feed matrix, Eq. The results obtained for the Double Fractionation of the feed are shown in    In water based processes there seems to be no way to overcome the discrepancy with the sink-float data. With mixing minimized in a fluidized bed separator, Reflux Classifier, or even a jig, there is still an inherent level of hydrodynamic dispersion that is present, with particles of similar size and density tending to exhibit mixing. The deviation between the results from the two methods is a significant concern, indeed the primary motivation for this paper. The objective is to apply the Fractionation Algorithm to the Double Fractionation data to firstly provide an estimate of the feed size and density distribution, and then in turn produce a good match with the cumulative yield % versus the cumulative ash % curve obtained using the sink-float method. If a good match can be obtained, then the water based Fractionation method could be used to replace the sink-float method.    As already noted, the experimental values and the values calculated using the Fractionation Algorithm are compared by forming an objective function based on the squares of the relative errors.  The ash % has been used in the Fractionation Algorithm as a “proxy” for the particle density via Eq. The results presented so far are based on the application of the Fractionation Algorithm to the experimental data generated by the Reflux Classifier. One way to evaluate the theoretical work is to simulate the fractionation data by applying the algorithm developed in this paper to the sink-float data. In this way it is possible to asses the algorithm in a manner that is independent of any experiment. The objective is to then apply the Fractionation Algorithm to the simulated data to reproduce the sink-float data. In order to produce a more complex problem, the sink-float data presented in  This study has shown that the Reflux Classifier in conjunction with sieving can be used to achieve a Double Fractionation of a feed. The Double Fractionation data provides a wealth of information on the feed. However, the degree of fractionation is not as effective as achieved by the sink-float method. Application of the Fractionation Algorithm, however, provides a method for generating an estimate of the feed size and density distribution. This distribution, in turn, provides data that is very similar to that generated by the sink-float method. Indeed, it was shown the cumulative yield % versus the cumulative ash % determined using the Fractionation Algorithm agrees very well with the data obtained using the sink-float method. Good agreement was obtained for each of the particle size fractions and for the overall feed. A comprehensive description of the feed is therefore established. The University of Newcastle holds international patents on the Reflux Classifier and has a Research and Development Agreement with the Australian company Ludowici Australia to develop the technology. The inventor of the Reflux Classifier, who is also the author of the publication, is a beneficiary of the University's policy on intellectual property. The author thanks the Australian Coal Association Research Program (ACARP) and the Australian Research Council for funding this work. See  The Double Fractionation data of The cumulative ash % is The flow velocities were treated in the Algorithm as search variables, with the initial values set equal to the experimental values listed in A trial and error routine is needed to obtain the separation sizes. According to Thus the particle terminal velocity is, This result is in good agreement with the value of   The above result is in excellent agreement with the experimental result of 384.7 The ash value is assumed to be a function of the particle density only. Based on Eq. For example, for So for densities of This result is in good agreement with the experimental result shown in