The effects of sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP), two sources of starch (potato starch: PS and rice starch: RS) and comminution degree (CD) on the technological, instrumental and sensory characteristics of reformed hams were studied using response surface methodology. Both starches reduced cook loss and decreased ham flavour intensity, but RS had stronger effects on instrumental measures of texture, while PS was associated with improved juiciness when low/no added STPP was included. Coarsely ground meat, processed 100% with the kidney plate was associated with slightly increased cook loss, reduced texture profile analysis parameters and a more intense ham flavour compared to the other treatment (80% ground with a kidney plate plus 20% with a 9mm plate). STPP was the sole factor affecting overall liking. If starch is included in the formulation, the standard level of STPP (0.3%) can be reduced by half with no increase in cook losses, but some decline in sensory quality cannot be avoided.The preparation of reformed cooked ham, also known as sandwich ham, can help add value to cheap cuts and trimmings from e.g. pork shoulder, through their incorporation into a relatively uniform and convenient cold ready-to-eat product. The correct binding of meat pieces is important in the manufacturing process of these hams, as is the retention of the brine added, as these parameters help to define the yield and the structure of the product. Optimal binding can be achieved through mechanical and thermal processing plus the addition of functional ingredients, which either enhance the functionality of the meat proteins (i.e., salt and phosphates) or have a direct functional effect in the meat system, such as starches ( The use of phosphates offers some remarkable advantages as they are cheap, effective and easily handled. Additionally, they permit a reduction in the use of salt whilst maintaining technological quality and they can improve the sensory quality of meat products ( It is well known that starch helps to retain water and can also affect other quality characteristics of meat products, such as texture, sensory, and colour. However, the magnitude of these effects differs according to several factors such as the botanical origin of the starch, chemical/physical processing and concentration, the matrix in which it is acting, the technological process, cooking temperatures, and salt concentration ( In reformed meat, a product is generally considered to be of higher quality, the larger the pieces are, and the lower the level of extension ( Due to the complex nature of the product and the interactions between influential parameters, more studies are required to enhance the understanding of the effects of starch in different meat matrices and to study possible interactions between ingredients, modulated by technological factors. Information generated could facilitate more straightforward optimization of ingredient usage levels in reformed products and permit a streamlining of new product development. Response surface/mixture design methodologies represent useful approaches to assess those aspects ( A response surface methodology (RSM) based on d-optimal experiment was designed using Design Expert software (v. 7.6.1, Stat-Ease Inc.). Four factors were studied: STPP, sodium tripolyphosphate, at 0–0.3% w/w in the brined muscle (Carfosel™, supplied by Redbrook Ingredient Services Ltd., Mulhuddart, Ireland); PS, modified potato starch, at 0–2% (AllinAll Ingredients Ltd., Dublin, Ireland); RS, rice starch, at 0–2% (Remyline XS, Beneo, supplied by Healy Group, Dublin, Ireland); and CD, comminution degree, with two levels: 100% coarsely ground meat using a kidney plate (100/0), and 80% ground with a kidney plate plus 20% of meat ground with a 9 A constraint (PS The experiment was conducted over five weeks with five or six ham formulations (runs) prepared each week, according to the design presented in pH (Thermo Orion Multimeter 250A, Orion Research Inc.) of brine, raw meat (4 Two 20 Ham colour (CIE L*a*b* system) was measured using a dual beam xenon flash spectrophotometer (Ultrascan XE, Hunterlab), with light illuminant D65, standard observer angle (8°) and a 25 Texture profile analysis (TPA) and expressible moisture were carried out using an Instron Universal Testing Machine (5542) using a 25 The panel consisted of eight members experienced in the analysis of meat products. The sensory profile was developed in two additional sessions. The resultant descriptors were: intensity of pink colour (low–high); number of holes (no holes–many holes); meaty odour, the odour associated with cooked pork; cooked ham odour, the typical odour associated with cooked ham; juiciness, amount of perceived juice released from the product during mastication (initial chews); tenderness, force required during the first bite between molars to deform the sample; springiness, degree and rapidity of recovery from a deforming force (compression by molar teeth); adhesiveness, force required to remove material that adheres to the mouth; cooked ham flavour, the typical flavour associated with cooked ham; and saltiness, taste of sodium chloride. Scores of the samples per plate were indicated in a 10 Statistical analysis was performed using Design Expert software. Each model was selected, i.e., linear, quadratic, by evaluating the regression coefficient (R An RSM experiment was performed to evaluate the effect of meat comminution level and two sources of starch (RS and PS) as substitutes for conventionally used STPP in reformed cooked hams. In general, the two studied starch types (RS and PS) improved cook loss and decreased ham flavour intensity in a similar fashion to each other, but RS had stronger effects on the instrumental measures of texture (expressible moisture and texture profile analysis, TPA), while PS could improve juiciness in formulations when low/no added STPP is included. Interaction between CD and RS effects was found for the colour of the hams measured instrumentally and with a trained sensory panel. Coarsely ground meat resulted in a small increase in cook loss, reduced TPA parameters and produced a more intense ham flavour. Finally, STPP was the sole factor affecting overall liking, which may be mostly explained by a reduced number of holes and improved juiciness of the hams at higher phosphate levels. Cook loss data was fitted to a quadratic model (R  With respect to instrumental colour measurements, only yellowness and chroma produced significant models (with R Many inter-related factors are thought to influence the colour of reformed hams, including the concentration and chemical state of myoglobin and the physical characteristics of the product ( Other than colour, another visual aspect presumably relevant in hams could be the presence of holes in the product ( Expressible moisture, measured by instrumental compression, was reduced with the inclusion of RS but no other factors significantly affected ( Texture profile analysis parameters produced significant linear models that were in general affected by all the factors studied independently (Table A2). Both starches reduced hardness, chewiness, gumminess (as opposed to STPP) and cohesiveness, with the effect of RS being stronger compared to PS. Previous studies ( While in whole muscle hams, phosphates reduced TPA hardness and gumminess ( Ham flavour intensity was affected linearly by all the factors tested (R The typical flavour intensity and the general liking increased with the inclusion of phosphates, as other authors have shown ( Cook loss was slightly higher for the coarsely ground meat using the kidney plate (100/0) compared with the more finely comminuted 80/20 treatment, but the effect of comminution degree on cook loss was much less than the effects of the functional ingredients tested (Table A1). The hams with 100% kidney plate ground meat were associated with a more intense flavour. In reformed beef, the acceptability of flavour of coarsely ground meat was improved compared to finely ground in one study ( In summary, the 80/20 treatment slightly improved the technological quality but dulled the flavour of the reformed hams. Although TPA measures indicate a better binding of the meat pieces in the 80/20, the sensory perceived texture was not affected; whereas the colour of the ham produced by each comminution level depends on the quantity of RS included (but does not affect product acceptability). In practical terms, the quality differences found in our study could be considered minor and both particles sizes could help to reach an acceptable quality and therefore, other factors such as easy handling and the quality of the raw meat used (quantity of connective tissue/fat) would weigh more in decision making. Through the use of the optimization tool of the RSM, using the criteria ‘minimizing cook loss, maximizing overall liking’, 82 different formulations were proposed, which are summarized in Based in our results we recommend a reduction in the use of STPP in reformed hams through the inclusion of starch at optimised levels to achieve a similar technological quality to products with standard phosphate inclusion levels (0.3%). It is likely that formulations achieving this level of reduction will be positively received by consumers. A total exclusion of STPP is not recommended by the models, largely because this work suggests phosphate plays an important role in the sensory quality of reformed ham products. The different type of starch (potato or rice starch) and the different comminution degree studied differed somewhat in their effects on several of the objective characteristics, such as the colour or the texture of the hams. However, both starches and comminution levels studied could be used similarly to achieve good yield and sensory acceptability of the product. Predicted optimal formulations for cook loss and sensory acceptability included 0.3% of STPP and > Research funding was provided under the National Development Plan, through the Food Institutional Research Measure (  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at