Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a morphogen controlling the skeletal and vascular development in the embryo but is also reactivated during adult repair processes. Thus, this molecule holds great therapeutic potential for biotechnological and biomedical approaches aiming to enhance tissue regeneration or to replace damaged tissues. According to present knowledge, Shh signaling controls the expression of several families of growth factors involved in neovascularization and vessel maturation and acts upstream of the most prominent angiogenic growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor. In this context, a very interesting feature of Shh is that it controls both angiogenic activity and vessel stabilization by mural cells. In parallel, Shh seems to have a direct effect on endothelial cell tube formation and seems to trigger the differentiation process of mesenchymal stem cells toward the osteogenic lineage. In this chapter, we will therefore shortly summarize the multifaceted potential of Shh for bone repair and vascularization according to the current literature. In addition, we will show how coculture models based on outgrowth endothelial cells and primary osteoblasts can be used to reveal some of the relevant mechanisms by which Shh drives and connects bone regeneration and vascularization.Bone regeneration is a complex process including the interaction of various cell types such as mesenchymal stem cells, chondrocytes, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and endothelial cells. In order to orchestrate the individual phases and mechanisms in bone repair, some of the key control elements which regulate bone formation during embryonic development seem to be reactivated. The molecules guiding these developmental or repair processes are often multitasking molecules affecting multiple differentiation and repair processes, as well as cells from several lineages. Thus, these molecules might serve as potential target molecules to improve the repair process as a whole, including the individual subevents such as callus formation, new bone formation, and vascularization. One group of molecules currently discussed as control elements during embryonic development as well as mediators of bone repair processes in adults are the morphogens indian hedgehog (Ihh) and sonic hedgehog (Shh). In this chapter, we give an overview on the role of these molecules during bone repair and discuss specifically Shh as a potent agent driving and coordinating osteogenic differentiation and vascularization. Hedgehog (Hh) proteins are morphogens playing an important role during embryonic development, during which they control the pattern of different tissues and organs ( In endochondral and intramembraneous bone formation, the morphogens Ihh and Shh seem to fulfill individual functions, although details in the mechanisms are far from being completely elucidated. During endochondral bone formation mesenchymal stem cells condense and differentiate into chondrocytes forming cartilage. In this context, Ihh is considered as one of the key elements controlling endochondral bone formation as described in the following section. Ihh is produced by prehyperthrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes ( In endochondral bone fracture healing, chrondrocyte apoptosis and cartilage degradation lead to the definition of a structural pattern and also result in the ingrowth of blood vessels from existing vessels in the periosteum. This process is mediated by two major groups of angiogenic growth factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and angiopoietins. Both classes of angiogenic molecules can be triggered by the morphogen Shh ( The role of Shh in the development of functional vasculature in embryonal stages has been observed for various tissues ( According to its impact on factors involved in vascular stabilization such as angiopoietin-1, Shh contributes to the recruitment of mural cells and thus offers additional beneficial effects on vascular stabilization ( The potential of Shh to support osteogenic differentiation ( In order to investigate the distinct role and the mechanisms by which Shh contributes to repair processes both animal models and OECs are a unique cell population appearing as distinct colonies with endothelial characteristics in culture of mononuclear cells from the peripheral blood ( In previous studies, we have shown that Shh might also guide the angiogenic activities of OEC in the coculture system in which both direct effects of Shh on the angiogenic activity and indirect effects mediated by the paracrine factors downstream of Shh play a significant role. Direct effects of Shh on the angiogenic activity of OEC can be observed for instance in simple angiogenesis experiments by seeding OEC on a Matrigel Such direct effects of Shh might as well play a role in the coculture, as indicated by similar blocking experiments based on cyclopamine. On the other hand, the proangiogenic effect of Shh is also mediated by indirect effects through the upregulation of proangiogenic factors in non-endothelial cell types, such as fibroblasts, mesenchymal interstitial cells, or cardiomyocytes ( In addition to the effects of Shh on the angiogenic potential of endothelial cells and on factors involved in vessel maturation in the coculture, Shh further enhanced multiple key features involved in osteogenic differentiation, suggesting a synergistic effect of Shh on both processes during bone formation. In the cocultures, Shh treatment resulted in an increased osteogenic differentiation as detected by increased levels of marker expression associated with osteogenic differentiation, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, and higher rates of calcification. We have already shown that Shh treatment of cocultures consisting of primary osteoblasts and OECs resulted in an upregulation of osteogenic markers, such as osteocalcin, osteonectin, osteopontin, and alkaline phosphatase at the mRNA level after 24 In summary, Shh treatment simultaneously enhanced angiogenesis, vascular maturation, and osteogenic differentiation, again highlighting the multifaceted potential of this molecule. In addition, the coculture model based on endothelial cells and osteoblasts can be considered as a valuable tool to understand the role of Shh in cellular interaction and might be applied as an advanced The beneficial effects of Shh on bone regeneration and vascularization might also be used for therapeutic applications. A recent