Prediction of stress distribution within a granular fill in a storage vessel is of great importance to a wide cross section of industries. This problem has been discussed in the past for storage vessels with vertical walls. This paper presents a general expression for the active stress coefficient, defined as a ratio of normal stress acting on the wall to vertical stress within the granular fill, during initial static loading in a storage vessel with sloping walls. The derivation presented is based on an improved concept of arching in granular materials and sound theoretical principles, and gives due consideration to wall friction and slope inclination. This is a significant contribution to the current state-of-the-art for determination of stresses within granular materials, and paves the way to further developments. Several special cases of the general expression have been presented for practical applications. It is clearly shown that the loading on the wall can increase substantially with the inclination of the wall. Any attempt to estimate the loadings without due considerations to the inclination can lead to unsafe designs.The study of stresses within cohesionless granular fills such as chemical powders, cement, coal, waste rock and sand has been an active field in chemical, civil and mining engineering applications. For example, in chemical and mining engineering applications, the analysis of initial material loading and associated gravity flow conditions in storage vessels such as hoppers, bunkers, silos and bins, and their design require stresses acting within the material and on the walls. Unlike fluids, the granular fill materials have significant shear strength, which is defined as the internal resistance of the material offered to shear stresses due to its self-weight or external loads. The shear strength of a cohesionless granular fill material is evaluated in terms of angle of internal friction or angle of shearing resistance ( The mechanics of the shear resistance developed in the form of friction and/or adhesion at the walls has been explained in the form of   In Equilibrium of forces in the vertical direction gives: Eliminating Eliminating  Eliminating Substitution of Eqs. Dividing Eq. It is noted that For vessels with sloping walls that are smooth, For vessels with smooth vertical walls, It should be noted that for fully mobilized shear resistance at the vertical wall, For rough vertical walls of the vessel with fully mobilized shear resistance, For rough vertical walls of the vessel with partially mobilized shear resistance, The expressions for the active stress coefficient presented in the previous section can be used to determine the normal stresses acting on the sloping walls of a storage vessel containing granular fills. It is a common practice to use the Rankine equation (Eq.   It is a general practice to calculate the average vertical stress According to Walker The problems associated with handling of granular fills in storage vessels such as hoppers, silos, bunkers and bins are of great industrial relevance in chemical, mining and other related industries. The design of vessels requires the determination of stress within the granular fill. The analysis for the stress determination is governed by the arching phenomenon occurring in granular materials. This problem has been discussed in the past for storage vessels with vertical walls. In the present paper, a general expression is derived for the active stress coefficient, defined as a ratio of normal stress acting on the wall to vertical stress within the granular fill, during initial static loading in a storage vessel with sloping walls. Several special cases of the general expression have been presented for practical applications. It is found that the Rankine equation is valid only for smooth vertical walls of a vessel, the Krynine equation can be applied to rough vertical walls with fully mobilized shear resistance, and the Handy equation is applicable to rough vertical walls with partially mobilized shear resistance. The selection of equation must be based on the evaluation of practical situations. The graphical presentation has shown that that wall inclinations less than 15° can be ignored and the expressions developed for vertical walls can be used for estimating active stress coefficient  Walker's stress distribution factor ( Active stress coefficient for sloping wall [ Ranking active stress coefficient for smooth vertical [ Active stress coefficient for rough vertical wall with partial mobilization of shear resistance [ Active stress coefficient for rough vertical wall with full mobilization of shear resistance [ Active stress coefficient for smooth sloping wall [ Stress coefficient at rest [dimensionless] Area parallel to the sloping wall (m Inclination to the vertical of the sloping wall [degrees] Wall friction angle [degrees] Friction angle of the granular fill [degrees] Major principal stress [N/m Minor principal stress [N/m Horizontal stress [N/m Vertical stress [N/m Average vertical stress [N/m Normal stress on the sloping wall [N/m Inclination to the horizontal of the minor principal plane [degrees] Shear stress at the vertical wall of the vessel [N/m Shear stress at the sloping wall of the vessel [N/m