This paper presents experimental data on using both flocculants and surfactants for aggregation and flotation of fines. The work has been performed with water suspensions of two oxides, ZnO and MgO. Conventional flotation collectors (sodium oleate (SOL), sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)) were used. Commercial high molecular weight polymers (MAGNAFLOC 1440, MAGNAFLOC E-10 and MAGNAFLOC 351) were the flocculants used. Adsorption isotherms of surfactants adsorbing onto the two oxides were determined at natural pH. Adsorption density was the greatest with sodium oleate. Zeta potential measurements indicated that addition of the cationic surfactant caused a positive increase of the zeta potential. The positive zeta potential of MgO decreased with increased anionic surfactant concentration. A decrease in stability indicated that the ZnO suspension pretreated with anionic surfactants caused the formation of larger flocs when the cationic flocculant (MAGNAFLOC 1440) was added. Similar observations were obtained for a MgO suspension pretreated with anionic surfactants and reacted with the nonionic flocculant, MAGNAFLOC 351. The negative charged collector (SDS) appears to be good collector for ZnO floc flotation when hydrophobic flocs are created by the combination of SDS and either cationic or nonionic flocculants.Small particle aggregation and flotation are of importance in the minerals industry. During the last few decades, various approaches to fine particle aggregation have been reported Aggregation of fine particles was developed as a shear flocculation process, where the hydrophobic particles were aggregated in a shear field One possibility of obtaining effective agglomeration can be through the interaction of classical ionic surfactants (flotation collectors) pre-adsorbed on the oxide fine particles with oppositely charged polymers (flocculants). Such interaction may lead to an agglomeration mechanism that combines electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions. Hydrophobic flocculation arises as a result of hydrophobic interaction between hydrophobic particles and an oppositely charged or nonionic flocculant. The separation of the hydrophobic flocs can then be achieved using froth flotation The object of this present paper was to investigate the interaction between surfactant and polymer and the effect of these interactions on aggregation and flotation of fine particles. ZnO obtained from Huta Olawa (Poland) was used in this study. This material has a medium particle size of 0.115 μm and a BET surface area of 5.75 m Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) used was obtained from BDH. Sodium oleate (SOL) and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) were also used. Sodium oleate was supplied by Riedel-de Haën (Germany). The flocculants used in the study were polymer reagents obtained from Allied Colloids, Bradford, England (MAGNAFLOC 1440 cationic polymer, MAFNAFLOC E-10 anionic polymer, MAGNAFLOC 351 nonionic polymer). All reagents were used without any further purification. Zeta potentials of oxide particles in the presence of surfactants were determined from electrophoretic mobility measurements. The NICOMP380 ZLS Zetameter was used for the measurement of zeta potential (calculated using the Smoluchowski equation). Measurements were made in triplicate and the average zeta potential values were reported as results. The ionic strength was maintained at 10 Adsorption isotherms were determined in the following manner: A suspension containing 0.5 g of solid in 50 ml of surfactant solution was taken at natural pH and shaken for a definite time (8 h) to attain equilibrium. Then the suspension was centrifuged and a supernatant was analyzed for remaining surfactant. A colorimetric method Stability or flocculation of oxide suspensions was investigated by simple sedimentation measurement using an Andreassen pipette. The concentration of suspension in these experiments was 1.25 g/cm Column flotation experiments were carried out in a glass column of 2.6 cm in diameter and 55 cm in height, fed with fine particles at the bottom. A stirrer bar magnet rotated on the bottom during flotation. A suspension of hydrophobized fines was prepared in a beaker and pumped to the column. The flocculant solution was led in the column at the opposite side. Compressed air was introduced into the column through the glass porous membrane. The gas flow rate during flotation was maintained at 64 cm The zeta potentials of investigated powders in the presence of the different concentrations of surfactants are shown in The addition of sodium oleate causes an increase of negative values of zeta potential for both oxides. In the case of SDS addition, zeta potential of MgO was positive at low surfactant concentrations and became negative in the high concentration range (10 Surfactant adsorption isotherms for the investigated oxides at natural pH are shown in The effects of surfactant concentrations on the stability of oxide suspension are presented in The aggregation process depicted in this study can be divided into two steps: (1) adsorption of surfactant on the oxide particles and (2) addition of flocculants for surfactant–polymer complex creation. The aggregates size may be expected to vary with the conditions of both surfactant and polymer addition. The orientation of the polymer–surfactant complex on the particle surface should be relevant in interpreting both the stability and flotation. In order to investigate the influence of surfactant–polymer interaction on the behavior of oxide suspensions, the stability of suspension was measured. The results obtained from these series of experiments are presented at There is a substantial decrease in the stability of a ZnO suspension when an anionic surfactant (SOL) and a cationic polymer (Magnafloc 1440) are added. The occurrence of such minimum stability is due to electrostatic attraction between the ZnO, surfactant and polymer. A similar phenomenon was observed for SDS and Magnafloc 1440. Pretreatment with cationic surfactant (CTAB) of a ZnO suspension leads to the increases of stability in the presence of the nonionic polymer (Magnafloc 351). On the other hand, for the MgO suspension the interaction of anionic surfactants (SOL and SDS) with cationic polymer is associated with poor flocculation (high stability). The optimum conditions for flocculation of MgO suspension occur when anionic surfactants (SLO and SDS) and a nonionic polymer (Magnafloc 351) were used. The significant increase in the size of flocs may be interpreted from the small electrostatic interaction between MgO particles covered by anionic surfactants and nonionic flocculant. Hydrophobic flocs flotation was examined by flotation of the flocs created by surfactant–flocculant interaction. The experimental conditions were identical to those used in the stability study (at the natural pH of both suspensions). The selected results for sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) floc flotation are shown in A comparison of flocs flotation recoveries for both MgO and ZnO shows that higher recovery was obtained for ZnO. This result did not correspond well with the adsorption data  Fine oxide particles are aggregated by the presence of surfactants as a result of a strong hydrophobic interaction after adsorption. The addition of a flocculant stabilizes and increases the size of the oxide suspension. The strong flocculation was observed when the anionic surfactants (SOL, SDS) and a cationic flocculant (Magnafloc 1440) were adsorbed onto the ZnO surface. In the case of MgO, the same effects were observed when the nonionic flocculant (Magnafloc 351) was used. Good flotation recovery of the flocs was obtained with an anionic collector (SDS) in the presence of both cationic and nonionic flocculants.