The sorption properties of the acrylic anion exchangers AN-108P and AN-108TP based on methylacrylate and long-chained cross-linking agent copolymer were investigated by means of the saturation method as well as by electron microscopy, IR and electron spectroscopy methods. It was found that AN-108TP is suitable for the selective Mo(VI) sorption from nitric acid solutions obtained after the breakdown of the molybdenum-containing ores and concentrates.Development of the chemistry and chemical technology of molybdenum depends on the application of its compounds in different branches of industry as well as on composition of the initial molybdenum-containing raw material According to the modern technological scheme, molybdenum concentrates are obtained from molybdenum and copper sulphide ores as well as from oxidized ores. In order to increase the molybdenum recovery degree from ores and to maintain all-round utilization of ore raw material, different chemical technologies (benefication, leaching, pyro- and hydrometallurgical processing) are developed and used under industrial conditions It should be noted that, apart from early times of mastering the leaching processes, when molybdenum was precipitated by various reagents from solutions In the present paper, we have investigated macroporous anion exchangers with long-chained cross-linking agents for molybdenum recovery from nitric acid solutions. Anion exchangers AN-108P and AN-108TP were taken for investigation. They were synthesized on the basis of methylacrylate aminated by ethylenediamine (EDA) with long-chained cross-linking agents—divinyl-ester of diethyleneglycol (DVEDEG) and tetravinyl-ester of pentaerythritol (TVEPE). The physical–chemical properties of these anion exchangers were investigated by the saturation method, potentiometric titration, IR spectroscopy, mercury porosimetry and electron microscopy. The characteristics of the sorbents are given in The molybdenum recovery was carried out under static (batch experiment) and dynamic (columns) conditions. The initial form of the anion exchangers was nitrate. In the batch experiments, the resin quantities (0.1 g, dry substance) were pre-swollen for 4 h in water with a fixed pH value, and after this, they were stirred in Na The dynamic experiments were carried out in glass columns with a sintered glass support (20 mm diameter, 500 mm height, 15 g exchanger mass) with a flow rate of ∼100 mL/h. The anion exchangers in columns were washed by water with pH value of ∼2.5–2.7. The Mo(VI) desorption was carried out by 15% aqueous ammonia solution. The concentration of molybdate ions in solutions was determined by a spectrophotometric method (KSCN as reagent in the presence of thiocarbamide) The ionic state of molybdenum in solutions was identified by electron spectroscopy method (Specord UV–VIS, Germany) using wavelength interval of 200–400 nm, 0.2 cm cell thickness. The samples of anion exchangers for IR spectroscopy were prepared according to the following procedure. The resin quantities were saturated with molybdenum ions (under static or dynamic conditions). Then the liquid surplus was eliminated with filter paper (without washing with distilled water, in order to avoid changes in ionic state of molybdenum in the sorbent phase) On the basis of the experimental data obtained, the static exchange capacity (amount of the molybdenum ions sorbed in mmol/g of the resin), the molybdenum distribution ratio ( The content of the nitrate ions sorbed in the anion exchanger phase was calculated from the difference between initial and equilibrium concentrations of these ions in the solution. The NO The temperature of all experiments was 21±1 °C. All tests were repeated three to four times. The total experimental error was about 6%. On the basis of previous works It can be seen that the monomeric molybdate ions dominate in the aqueous phase at pH>7. The decrease in pH value causes the formation of polymeric molybdenum forms and, at pH=0.9, the isoelectric point is reached, when the paramolybdate anions transform to the molybdenile cations. Therefore, such state of the Na The anion exchangers on the basis of methylacrylate and long-chained cross-linking agents compare favourably in their exchange capacity with the sorbents on the basis of styrene and DVB  The isotherms of molybdenum(VI) ions sorption are convex curves However, it should be noted that the character of the isotherms presented does not comply with the true equilibrium state of the ion exchange, since in the pH range of ∼2.5–4.5, HMoO As a result of the molybdate ions transformation into the polyanions with a lesser specific charge, a part of the ionogen exchanger groups is released and substituted with NO It should be noted that the presented reactions of the ion exchange sorption of molybdenum do not hinder Mo(VI) recovery under the dynamic conditions. For instance, we have determined that anion exchanger AN-108TP is saturated with the molybdenum ions to 92–96% during the first hour of the solution filtration through the sorption column with the underflow of the sorbent and solution. This is why we have carried out the large-scale tests using anion exchanger AN-108TP. The composition of the solution was the following (g/L): Mo(VI), 4.5–21.0; SO The washing of anion exchanger in columns after the sorption was carried out by water acidified with nitric acid (pH=2.5–2.7). The molybdenum was desorbed by 15% aqueous ammonia solution. As a result, ammonium molybdate solution (72–155 g/L Mo) was obtained. This solution is suitable for the production of the crystal ammonium paramolybdate. After the filtration of four to five volumes of eluent, the Mo(VI) desorption degree was 99.9%. The macroporous anion exchangers based on acrylic copolymers aminated with ethylenediamine with long-chained cross-linking agents are effective for the selective molybdenum recovery from nitric acid solutions obtained after the breakdown of molybdenum-containing ores and concentrates. The work was carried out with the financial support of the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation (grant 02.01.167).