Sesbania gum supported dithiocarbamate chelating resin (SGDSA) was prepared. The epoxy functional groups were introduced into sesbania gum to produce the sesbania gum supported resins and then reacted with triethylenetetramine, and lastly were converted to the respective dithiocarbamates by reacting with carbon disulphide. The structure of functionalized resins was characterized by FT-IR. The influences of various reaction conditions on the epoxidation were discussed. The prepared SGDSA exhibited high adsorption capacity for metal ions and the adsorption equilibrium could be arrived at shorter time.Sesbania gum (SG) is a natural polysaccharide growing only in China with an average molecular weight of 2.3 The work on SG is mainly concentrated on its modification and applications. Huang et al. performed pioneering studies on modified SG and synthesized carboxymethyl SG, hydroxyethyl SG, and carboxymethyl–hydroxyethyl SG ( Dithiocarbamate is supported by synthetic and natural polymers. Synthetic polymers used include polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride, polyether, and polymethacrylic derivates ( SG was commercially obtained from Hongtu Plant Adhesive Factory, epichlorohydrin, triethylenetetramine, and tetramethylammonium bromide were purchased from the First Reagent Factory of Shanghai, carbon disulphide, tetrahydrofuran, and sodium hydroxide were purchased from Tianjin Tiantai Fine Chemical Limited Co., glacial acetic acid, hydrochloric acid, and absolute alcohol were obtained from the Beijing Chemical Plant. FT-IR spectra were determined by a Vector 22 infrared spectrometer (Bruker Ltd. Co.). The dried sample power was mixed with KBr and pressed into pellets. The FT-IR spectra were obtained by scanning between 4000 UV–Vis spectra were recorded on a Cary 50 UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Varian Ltd. Co.). The measurements were processed in a quartz cell of 1 One gram of water-immiscible SG was added to 36 A volume of 1 After the aminated EP-SG solution was cooled to room temperature, the mixture of 7.5 The epoxide number was determined by acid–alkali titration with phenolphthalein as an indicator. The epoxide number Aqueous solutions of Co (II) (0.01 Adsorption capability labeled as Generally speaking, only the primary hydroxyl group possesses higher reaction activity ( Influencing factors on epoxide number mainly involve alkalizing time, epoxidizing time, and the amount of epichlorohydrin used. In addition, using phase transfer catalyst can increase epoxide number (  The adsorption capacity of SGDSA for Cr (III) and Co (II) ions was determined with values of 9.14 Sesbania gum supported dithiocarbamate chelating resin was prepared. It is evident that the epoxidation reaction is a key step during the preparation of SGDSA. The influencing factors on the epoxide number mainly comprise alkalizing time, epoxidizing time, and the amount of epichlorohydrin used. In addition, using phase transfer catalyst can increase epoxide number. Based on our experiment results the optimal reaction condition is as following: the concentration of aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide, the alkalizing time, the epoxidizing time and the amount of epichlorohydrin used are 2.75 This research is supported by Jilin Province Environmental Protection Bureau and we are grateful to Hongtu Plant Adhesive Factory for providing sesbania gum.