This study proposes a novel HVAC retrofit for the space heating systems of post-war multi-unit residential buildings (MURBs). Typically, these buildings do not have in-suite temperature control and each suite must be retrofit with a thermostatic valve to provide this control to residents. However, given the potentially high installed cost of these valves, this retrofit strategy can be cost-prohibitive. To alleviate this issue, a retrofit strategy that uses temperature sensors in each suite with a control system that combines the signals from these sensors is proposed. This approach allows for suite control to be grouped, thereby reducing the equipment quantity, and cost of the retrofit. Field data from a case study building in Toronto, Canada, was used to develop and validate an EnergyPlus simulation tool. Results show that with a financially optimal grouping strategy, a 14% reduction in space heating energy consumption, a 68% reduction in overheating, and a payback period 10 years can be achieved. These results compare favourably to the typical strategy of installing one valve per suite, which resulted in a payback period of 17.8 years. These findings support that using this novel control strategy can be an effective way of economically improving post-war MURB performance.Multi-Unit Residential Building Thermostatic Radiator Valve air flow rate (m pressure differential between spaces flow coefficient (m flow exponent (dimensionless) Climate change is caused by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from human society and is currently viewed as one of humanity's largest threats. In 2015, most nations around the world ratified the Paris agreement, which confirms their goals of reducing GHG emissions by 30% relative to 2005 emissions levels by 2030 This study investigates the effectiveness of implementing a novel grouped building space heating system retrofit strategy that can reduce upfront costs, reduce space heating energy consumption, reduce overheating, and reduce building operating costs. This system is based on the grouping of suites with similar locations, orientation, and exterior exposure in a building, which can exhibit similar indoor temperatures. By grouping suites, a single flow control valve can then be installed to modulate the flow of space heating fluid being sent to each group, thereby reducing the total number of valves that are required within a building, and reducing the upfront cost of installation. With careful selection of a grouping strategy, this system also has the capability to improve building performance by reducing overheating and the corresponding space heating loads. To achieve this goal, the proposed system leverages wireless in-suite temperature sensors, installed in each suite of the building, to measure indoor temperatures. These temperature signals can then be combined in various ways and adjusted according to the suite and riser layouts in a particular building to determine the current predominant thermal status of a group. Using these data, the flow control valves for each group can then modulate the flow rate of space heating fluid being sent to each group, achieving grouped space heating system control. This retrofit approach is novel as other in-suite radiator control retrofit strategies have only focused on the installation of a control device in each suite of a building, or hydraulic balancing of unbalanced hydronic systems, and not on the grouping of suites to reduce equipment quantity requirements. This paper contributes to the discourse on this topic by proposing this alternative retrofit approach, detailing the techniques needed to analyze performance and identify effective grouping strategies, and determining the efficacy of the proposed retrofit in the context of field measurements from a case study building in Toronto, Canada. To begin, a discussion of existing studies on MURB TRV retrofits will follow. The retrofit of MURBs that utilize hydronic baseboard space heating systems, which tend to be from the post-war era, is a topic of increasing interest in many parts of the world. Currently, buildings that do not include in-suite temperature control equipment often rely on outdoor air dry bulb temperatures as an input to a control system that adjusts the water supply temperature to in-suite radiators In China, many buildings are operated using district heating, where a fluid loop connects multiple buildings to a common heat source Another study, carried out by Cholwea et al., investigated the use of TRVs in nine MURBs in Lubin, Poland Monetti et al. investigated the implementation of TRVs to improve the energy performance of a historic building with district heating in Turin, Italy As illustrated by these studies, TRVs have the potential to reduce building energy consumption as well as improve occupant comfort, especially when combined with hydronic balancing. However, studies in the literature have only investigated the installation of these control devices in each suite of a MURB, which can be financially prohibitive based upon the previously mentioned costs. The study presented here builds on this existing literature by investigating the effectiveness of grouping multiple suites within a building into a single control group, thereby reducing the number of required TRVs. The purpose of this study is to determine if implementing a grouped building space heating system retrofit can reduce upfront costs, reduce space heating energy consumption, reduce overheating, and reduce building operating costs. To realize this purpose, a variety of grouping strategies were tested using a calibrated case study building energy model, such that the performance and cost-effectiveness of multiple group configurations could be compared. The development of the grouping strategies was based on grouping suites with similar space heating loads, such as those suites on adjacent floors or with the same orientation Nine different grouping strategies were tested, which resulted in different quantities of control valves being required. These grouping strategies were selected based on similar suite orientation to maximize similarity for solar and wind exposure, and height in the building to maximize similarity for stack effect. A description of each of these grouping strategies for a 20-storey building is presented in The case study building is a student family residence located in Toronto, Canada, and was built in 1968. The Canadian Weather Year for Energy Calculation (CWEC) Toronto data file was used for the simulation. The building includes an exposed floor slab edge, a pressurized corridor ventilation system, hydronic baseboard heating, and no central air conditioning. In the model, the total height of the building is 20-stories with 320 suites, housing approximately 700 people. A simplified typical floorplan is presented in An energy model of the case study building was developed in EnergyPlus version 8.9 Each individual suite was represented by an individual thermal zone in the building energy model. This model allowed for the temperature and thermal loads of each suite to be analyzed independently, which was necessary since individual suite data is needed to determine the effectiveness of the proposed system.  It is important to note that due to constraints with the operable window model (described in  These parameters were used with differential pressure measurements from the case study building to determine the pressure differentials throughout the building, which were −50 Pa to +26 Pa at the bottom and top of the building, respectively, in January Air infiltration due to wind was modelled using the  The boiler was modelled using a To approximate how the boiler outlet temperature varied with outdoor air temperature, measurements of the radiator surface temperatures within the building were used. From a review of these data, the boiler outlet temperatures set in this model were 80°C at −10°C, and 35°C at 15°C  The monthly natural gas consumption was compared to measured utility data and a plot of this data is shown in the supporting information of this article. The resulting coefficient of variation of the root mean square error was found to be 7.0%, and the normalized mean bias error was found to be 1.8%. These two parameters fall within the ASHRAE-14 model calibration guideline requirements of 15% and 5% The temperature data from the model was also compared to measured temperature data from the building. From the model, the average heating season temperature in a 13th-floor north-facing suite was 23.5°C, with a range of 13.3°C to 29.7°C. From the measured data, which was taken with a measurement interval of 4 h and occasional data drops of up to two weeks, the average heating season temperature in the same suite was 23.4°C with a range of 15.2°C to 25.3°C. Therefore, given these temperature results, combined with the acceptable energy prediction, this model was deemed acceptable for use as a tool to determine the effectiveness of installing TRVs, and compare the impacts of different grouping strategies. As mentioned in The method that was developed as part of this study implemented the equivalent of a theoretical economizer system in each suite, using the The main components required to execute this approach are a To ensure that this simulation setup can accurately represent an actual operable window, air leakage testing must be carried out to determine pressure-flow correlations for the pressure boundaries within a suite of interest. These pressure-flow correlations must then be combined with measured pressure data for a building to generate the minimum and maximum flow limits used in the controller, such that they correspond to real-world conditions. The pressure boundaries that must be considered are the boundary between the suite and the exterior (boundary 1–2), and the boundary between the corridor and the suite (boundary 2–3). A schematic showing the different pressure zones and boundaries is shown in After determining the pressure-flow characteristics of these boundaries through field testing or other methods, the air flow relationship shown in To determine the minimum flow rate limit, it can be assumed that the windows in a suite are closed and there is a pressure drop across both pressure boundaries. Alternatively, when the window is open, it can be assumed that the total pressure drop that normally would act across both boundaries only acts across the boundary between the suite and the corridor. These minimum and maximum flow limits can also be adjusted as a function of time in the simulation to capture the effect of changing building differential pressures due to stack effect. A simplified schematic of the proposed retrofit to the space heating system with a total of four suites and two groups is presented in As shown in The energy model is used to determine the hourly indoor temperature profiles and baseboard heating loads for each suite in the building. This information is then combined with a post-processing script, developed in MATLAB The next step involves combining the suites in the building into This post-processing analysis uses a time stepping approach with the previously generated simulation data. Minimum and maximum temperature thresholds must be set for the building, which represent when the installed suite temperature sensor will signal that the suite is too warm or too cold. In this study, the “too cold” threshold is 21°C and the “too warm” threshold is 24°C. At the first time step, the system is run at the 100% mass flow fraction and the temperature of each suite in a control group is checked to determine if it is above the maximum temperature threshold, or below the minimum temperature threshold. If a suite temperature is above the maximum threshold, a signal is generated for the suite to indicate that there is a need to decrease the temperature because the suite is too warm. Alternatively, if a suite temperature is below the minimum temperature threshold, that suite would generate a signal to increase the temperature because the suite is too cold. However, if a suite temperature is in-between these two temperature thresholds, no signal is produced. All of the signals for a control group are then assessed based upon a pre-defined control method to determine if the mass flow rate fraction for the radiators in that control group should be changed using the group flow control valve. If a change is needed, a step up or down to the next mass flow rate is made for the control group, resulting in a change of approximately 5% in space heating system capacity. In this study, the pre-defined control method that was implemented was based upon a minimum allowable suite temperature. In this method, if any suite in a control group signalled to increase the temperature, the flow rate fraction for that control group would increase, even if other suites signalled to decrease the temperature. At time steps when no suites signalled to increase the temperature, or decrease the temperature, the mass flow rate fraction was decreased compared to the previous time step to allow the lowest interior temperature to be maintained at the lower temperature threshold. Alternatively, if any suite signalled to decrease the temperature, and no suites signalled to increase the temperature, then the mass flow fraction was also decreased. The indoor temperature and space heating load from the corresponding mass flow fraction energy model simulation results were then selected to represent the suite temperatures and space heating rates for each control group. This process was implemented at each time step in the simulation and allowed for building performance to be determined for each hour in the simulation period, and for a variety of grouping strategies. To summarize and illustrate the solution process, a flow chart that represents the overall modelling methodology is presented in This section first presents the results specific to the case study building energy model, followed by a discussion of how these results can be applied in other buildings. Finally, this section concludes with a discussion of the financial implications of the proposed retrofit strategy. A summary of the results from testing the different grouping strategies is presented in For reference, the base case operating scenario resulted in a total of approximately 921,000 registered “too warm” signals over the simulation period, which corresponds an average of 49% of the building being above the upper temperature threshold over the heating season. With the minimum retrofit expenditure, by adding only one control valve to the building, a reduction in annual space heating energy consumption of 6% can be realized, and the number of “too warm” signals can be reduced by 24%. These reductions are achieved since the existing outdoor air reset strategy does not allow for reductions of space heating system output during periods with high solar or internal gains, which are accounted for when using indoor temperature sensors as a control input. Alternatively, with the maximum retrofit expenditure of one group per suite, as implemented in the buildings discussed in the literature review, the energy consumption of the building can be reduced by 26% and the number of too warm signals can be decreased by 93%. This energy reduction result compares well with the reported energy savings of overheated buildings of approximately 15% to 30% in the literature [ To better understand the broader trends that are exhibited when comparing the grouping strategies, such that this approach can be applied to other buildings, comparisons between intermediate options were also carried out. When comparing the “Five Floors per Group” and “One Floor per Group” strategies, there is both a reduction in energy consumption and too warm votes when using the “One Floor per Group” strategy. This trend is exhibited because, as more suites are combined on a wide range of floors, such as in the “Five Floors per Group” strategy, there is decreasing similarity between each of the suites. To quantify the similarity between suite temperatures, the variance of suite temperature at each timestep within each group was determined and averaged over the simulation period. It was found that the “Five Floors per Group” control strategy had an average intragroup temperature variance of 1.6°C, while the “One Floor per Group” strategy had an average intragroup temperature variance of 1.1°C. This decrease in temperature similarity is due to changes in stack effect as a function of suite height in the building, which results in changing infiltration rates on each floor of the building. Similarly, a comparison was carried out between the “One Floor per Group” and the “One Floor per Group with North-South Split” strategies, and it was found that the average intragroup temperature variances were 1.1°C and 0.6 °C, respectively. In this comparison, the splitting of suites on the south exposure, which receive more solar heating than those with northern exposure, allowed for increased similarity between suites in each group. This increased similarity then results in more accurate space heating system control, producing a reduction in energy use and too warm votes. Plots of the energy consumption reduction and too warm vote reduction as a function of intragroup temperature variances are shown in As shown in Since climate change has been shown to cause increasing outdoor temperatures, an investigation into the relationship between the outdoor air temperature and the heat loss related to window operation was also completed. This investigation was conducted by comparing the “Base Case Operation” strategy with the “One Group per Suite” strategy and determining the changes in space heating energy consumption and overheating as a function of outdoor air temperature. The results of this comparison are shown in As shown in Given that a major motivation of using this retrofit strategy is to reduce the capital cost of the retrofit by reducing the number of valves being installed, a financial analysis that determines the economic practicality of these strategies was undertaken. For this analysis, a valve unit cost based on the required flow rate for each valve in each grouping strategy was used, and a summary of these costs is presented in All costs presented in As shown in One additional investigation of interest is the relationship between the capital cost of the system and the reduction of overheating in the building. As shown in It is important to note that depending on the riser layout of the building, not all tested grouping strategies may be possible. For example, although the detailed riser layout for the case study building is not available, a review of other post-war MURBs in Toronto, Canada, shows that risers that run vertically to each suite stack are often used. Therefore, it may be necessary to install additional bypass valves to allow for grouping of suites along the height of the building, as needed for the two optimal grouping strategies in this case study. This requirement for additional valves may increase the cost of some grouping strategies, which would need to be considered on a case-by-case basis for each building retrofit. Finally, the cost of each valve will have an impact on the payback period of the system and may negate the benefits of reducing the number of valves being installed. For example, based upon the two quotations for conventional TRVs in Toronto that were acquired as part of this study, the installed unit cost showed considerable range from $745 to $1400. However, an installed cost closer to $50 per valve was mentioned by both Cholewa As shown in The results of this study show that the proposed grouped retrofit strategy is an effective way to reduce energy consumption and overheating, while still being cost-effective. For the case study building, it was found that creating groups with five floors per group, which required eight control valves, was the most effective strategy from an economical perspective. The strategy resulted in a 14% reduction in annual building space heating energy consumption, an 68% reduction in overheating, and a payback period 10 years. Other strategies were tested, and it was found that all implementations of the grouped strategy, except for the vertical stack strategy, were more cost effective than a conventional TRV installed in each suite. The effectiveness of each strategy was also found to be a function of the intragroup in-suite temperature variance, with lower variances resulting in higher retrofit effectiveness, and this trend is expected to be applicable to other buildings of this construction type, HVAC design and control, and vintage. It was also found that if different pricing is used to estimate the system capital cost, and if the same relative pricing of each strategy is used, the relative cost-effectiveness of each strategy will remain constant. These findings demonstrate that using this novel control and retrofit method can be an effective way of improving the performance of post-war MURBS. Future work will include refining the signal generation algorithm, replacing temperature sensors in each suite with occupant-driven data collection, development of the software needed to implement this control strategy, and a pilot project in Ontario, Canada, to further investigate the effectiveness of this strategy. Funding for this work was provided through the Dean's Spark Professorship (held by Dr. Touchie), which supported by the Dean of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering at the University of Toronto. Funding for this work was also provided through a CMHC-NSERC Postdoctoral Fellowship (held by Dr. Fine). We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all named authors and that there are no other persons who satisfied the criteria for authorship but are not listed. We further confirm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of us. We confirm that we have given due consideration to the protection of intellectual property associated with this work and that there are no impediments to publication, including the timing of publication, with respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we have followed the regulations of our institutions concerning intellectual property. We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact for the Editorial process (including Editorial Manager and direct communications with the office). He is responsible for communicating with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final approval of proofs. We confirm that we have provided a current, correct email address which is accessible by the Corresponding Author and which has been configured to accept email from: jamie.fine@utoronto.ca None. The authors would like to thank Xinxiu Tian for the air tightness testing used in the model, and the building owners for supplying the utility data and floor plans used for the model construction and validation. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 