Kraft lignin valorization is achievable via making it soluble in water for treating wastewater effluents. In this paper, acrylamide (AM), (2-methacryloyloxyethyl) trimethyl ammonium chloride (DMC) and kraft lignin (KL) were polymerized in an aqueous solution to produce a water-soluble lignin-based copolymer. Two cationic KAD polymers, with the same molecular weight, but different charge densities, were used as flocculants for simulated clay suspensions. The higher charge density copolymer (KAD1) had greater adsorption on kaolin (2.58 mg/g) and bentonite particles (1.83 mg/g) at 4 mg/g (based on clay) adsorption. Furthermore, KAD's higher charge density improved its performance in changing zeta potential and turbidity of the clay suspensions. At 4 mg/g copolymer dosage in clay suspensions, the particle size of kaolin was increased from 4.7 to 22.3 and 16.2 μm, and that of bentonite was increased from 6.1 to 31.9 and 19.8 μm for KAD1 and KAD2, respectively. In addition, the interfacial tension between water and kaolin and between water and bentonite dropped from 12.3 mN/m to 5.8 mN/m and from 9.5 mN/m to 5.2 mN/m when KAD1 was used, respectively. Moreover, KAD1 produced stronger flocs and showed high regrowth affinity at different shear rates.In recent years, industrialization along with unrestrained use and exploitation of natural resources have led to a significant industrial effluent production, which makes the treatment of wastewater effluents a challenging issue Therefore, the incentives for producing green flocculants are high in industry. Natural products can be rendered flocculants via chemical modifications. Previous studies demonstrated that acrylamide (AM) and 2-[(methacryloyloxy) ethyl] trimethylammonium chloride (DMC) are explored and utilized monomers to produce polysaccharide based flocculants for treating effluents The adsorption of polymers on particles has been extensively studied formerly FPInnovations in Thunder Bay, ON, produced softwood kraft lignin via LignoForce™ technology and provided the lignin samples of this work Kraft lignin-AM-DMC copolymers were synthesized in 250 mL three-neck glass flasks under the reaction conditions listed in The charge density of the copolymers (0.2 g) was analyzed by a particle charge detector, Mütek PCD 04 titrator (Herrsching, Germany) with a standard PVSK solution (0.0050 M) at pH 7 About 5 mg of dried KAD copolymers was dissolved in 10 mL of 5.0 wt% acetic acid solution while agitating at 600 rpm for 48 h and 35 °C, and then the solutions were filtered with nylon filters (pore size 0.2 µm). The resulting solutions were studied for the molecular weight analysis using Malvern, GPCmax VE2001 Module+Viscotek system with viscometer and UV detectors. In this analysis, PolyAnalytic columns were used, and a 5.0 wt% acetic acid was used as a solvent/eluent at a 0.7 mL/min flow rate. The column temperature was set to 35 °C. Poly ethylene oxide was used as standard polymers for calibration. A surface area analyzer, Quantachrome, Nova2200e instrument, was employed to measure bentonite and kaolin particles' surface area. To remove any moisture from the samples, they were initially oven-dried at 105 °C. Afterward, 0.05 g of sample was pretreated for 4 h at 250 °C before starting the analysis. The specific surface area of the samples was analyzed according to Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method using liquid nitrogen at −180 °C The size distribution of bentonite and kaolin particles was analyzed using a MasterSizer 2000 particle size analyzer (Malvern Instruments). In this study, 1.0 g of clay suspension (20 g/L) was mixed with 50 mL of deionized water or 50 mL of KL or KAD solution containing polymers at the dosage of 4 mg/g (based on clay) and stirred at 300 rpm and room temperature for 2 h for the analysis. To analyze the adsorption of KL or KAD on the clay particles, different amounts of KL or KAD (from 0.25 to 32 mg/g, based on the clay) were added to 50 mL of clay suspensions (0.4 g/L). After being stirred (300 rpm) for 2 h at room temperature, a 15-min centrifugation was performed at 3500 rpm and then the concentrations of KAD remaining in the supernatants were measured by UV/Vis spectrophotometer (Genesys 10S UV–vis, Thermo FisherScientific, USA) at 205 nm. The impact of pH was also studied on the adsorption of KAD on clay. The pH of the suspensions (ranging 2–12) was adjusted with 0.1 M NaOH solution or H For the purpose of investigating the effect of KL or KAD on clay isolation, different amounts of KL or KAD were mixed with 50 mL of clay suspensions (0.4 g/L) at 30 °C for 2 h. After mixing, clay suspensions were allowed to settle for 1 h. A 10 mL sample was collected from top of the suspension before and after the settlement and oven-dried at 105 °C overnight. The clay particle concentrations were tested, helping the assessment of clay removals from suspensions by developing a mass balance. Different polymer dosages (0.25–32 mg/g based on clay) and pHs (2–12) were investigated in this study. NaOH or H The zeta potential was characterized by a NanoBrook Zeta PALS (Brookhaven Instruments Corp, USA) for the systems of this study. Herein, 1 g of clay suspension (20 g/L) was mixed with 50 mL of distilled water and allowed to stir at 300 rpm for 2 h and room temperature. Then, its zeta potential was measured in a 1.0 mM KCl aqueous solution. The pH of the clay suspensions was adjusted by using 0.1 M NaOH or H The efficiency of the flocculation was determined using a photometric dispersion analyzer (PDA 3000, Rank Brothers Ltd) that was attached to a dynamic drainage jar (DDJ) To investigate the clay flocs’ strength after copolymer addition, 10 mL of a 20 g/L clay suspension was poured into DDJ while stirring at 300 rpm. After 100 s, KL or KAD was added to the DDJ. After 500 s and forming KL/clay or KAD/clay flocs, the shear rate in the DDJ was raised from 300 to 3000 rpm and kept for 100 s, during which floc breakage was expected. Subsequently, the shear rate was reduced to 300 rpm and kept for another 500 s, which would help with the regrowth of broken flocs. This experiment was repeated twice to evaluate the floc breakage and regrowth. The degree of breakage and regrowth was presented by flocculation index (FI), i.e., the ratio of the root-mean-square (RMS) to direct current (DC) of the PDA instrument Previously, it was demonstrated that the floc breakage or floc regrowth can be evaluated quantitatively in order to study the strength and regrowth ability of the broken flocs The surface tension of KAD polymers was measured using a tensiometer (Attension sigma 700), equipped with platinum loop Theta lite, Biolin Scientific, Finland, that contained a digital camera was employed to define the wettability of kaolin samples (20 g/L). After mixing, 2 mL of each clay sample was coated on glass slides using a spin coater, WS-650 (Laurell Technologies Corp) at 60 psi pressure and 250 rpm for 60 s. The contact angle of water droplet with kaolin and bentonite samples coated on the slides was attested following the sessile drop method The surface tension of kaolin was analyzed using the tensiometer’s OneAttension software via Zisman equation (Eq. The interfacial tension between kaolin and KAD1 or KAD2 droplet was determined by using Young equation (Eq. The copolymerization of KL, AM and DMC was carried out in an aqueous solution via free radical polymerization using potassium persulfate as an initiator (     A smaller contact angle indicated more adhesion of liquid on solid surface The volume fraction of particles in the presence and absence of KL or KAD at the dosage of 4 mg/g as a function of particle diameter is shown in  To understand if the zeta potential of clay particles is impacted by the overall surface charges of clay particles, the zeta potential of the suspensions was plotted as a function of theoretical surface charge density of clay particles ( Contrarily, the negative zeta potential of bentonite particles indicated that the diffuse layer remained negatively charged due to less adsorption of KAD onto bentonite particles. As can be seen in The influence of KAD on the relative turbidity and removal of kaolin and bentonite particles from the suspensions were presented in The effect of pH on the relative turbidity and removal of clay particles from the kaolin and bentonite suspensions was illustrated in The effect of adsorbed KAD and the influence of the surface charge density of the particles on the relative turbidity of the suspensions are shows in Interestingly, the results in The flocculation mechanism of KAD in kaolin and bentonite suspensions can be predicted by plotting the relative turbidity of kaolin and bentonite suspensions as a function of zeta potential in The variations in the FI of the suspension systems were shown as a function of time in On the other hand, as bentonite particles were larger than kaolin, KADs were generally weaker in patching or bridging them as the FI of bentonite system was lower than that of kaolin’s and they were more sensitive to shear rates. Hence, flocs formed in bentonite suspension were weak and soft. However, the neutralization of their overall charges was helpful in their regrowth but not as much the flocs regrowth for kaolin systems. This was confirmed by lower floc breakage (T The flocculation performance of KAD1 and KAD2 was compared with other cationic polymers and the results are shown in The interfacial tension between water and kaolin was reduced from 12.3 mN/m to 5.8 mN/m or 7.2 mN/m via adsorbing KAD1 or KAD2, indicating an increase in the wettability of the particles. Surface tension and contact angle results suggested an improved wettability of clay particles with increased adsorption of KAD1 or KAD2. The present study showed that the adsorption of KAD1 and KAD2 on kaolin particles (2.58 and 2.11 mg/g) was higher than that on bentonite particles (1.83 and 1.63 mg/g, respectively). The adsorption of KAD1 became more favorable as pH increased. The zeta potential of the kaolin suspensions increased significantly from −35 to 39 and 30 mV due to the adsorption of KAD1 and KAD2; while, the zeta potential of bentonite particles was increased slightly from −33 to −8 and −12 mV due to the low adsorption of KAD1 and KAD2, respectively. The more significant change in the zeta potential of kaolin was due to the higher adsorption of KAD on kaolin particles. KAD1 was more effective than KAD2 in flocculating kaolin and bentonite particles. However, the relative turbidity of bentonite was reduced more significantly than that of kaolin as its particles were larger, and thus more substantially affected by KADs. The relative turbidity of the particles was significantly affected by the overall charges introduced to the particles. It was observed that charge neutralization was the main factor in flocculating bentonite particles; whereas, polymer patching and/or bridging were the main factors for kaolin flocculation. The flocs formed by kaolin were stronger and showed better recovery than bentonite. KAD1 was also induced flocs with a higher strength than did KAD2. The results showed that the charge density of KAD would play a vital role in flocculation performance. As KAD is a promising flocculant, its properties should be improved so that it can have a superior performance to commercially used flocculants. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial supports from The authors have no competing interest. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: