Background
                  There is a paucity of information regarding pediatric dental emergencies in Taiwan. This study investigates the prevalence and characteristics of the pediatric dental emergency services provided at a medical center.
               
                  Methods
                  This study included a retrospective chart review of patients under 18 years of age with dental complaints who visited the Emergency Department (ED) of Linkou Medical Center of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital from January 2012 to December 2013. Information regarding age, gender, time/day/month of presentation, diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up was collected and analyzed. Statistical analysis included descriptive statistics and Pearson's Chi-square test with the significance level set as p < 0.05.
               
                  Results
                  This study revealed that dental emergencies in the medical center ED were predominantly related to orodental trauma (47.1%) and pulpal pain (29.9%). Most patients were male (p < 0.001) and <5 years of age (p < 0.001). The most frequent orodental trauma was luxation, both in primary and permanent dentition. The major management for dental emergencies was prescribing medication for pulp-related problems and orodental trauma. The follow-up rate of orodental trauma was the highest (p < 0.001).
               
                  Conclusions
                  For children, trauma and toothache constituted the most common reasons for dental emergency visits at a hospital emergency center in Taiwan. While dental emergencies are sometimes unforeseeable or unavoidable, developing community awareness about proper at-home care as well as regular dental preventive measures can potentially reduce the number of emergency visits. There is a paucity of information regarding pediatric dental emergencies for children in Taiwan. This retrospective chart review study investigates the prevalence and characteristics of pediatric dental emergency services provided at a medical center over a 2-year period. This study reveals that the majority of pediatric dental emergencies are either dental trauma or pulp-related problems. This information can be used to help improve future Emergency Department services. The Emergency Department (ED) visit is generally preceded by an urgent condition due to injury, accident, disaster, or disease that requires immediate medical management The Linkou Medical Center of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (LMCCGMH) is the largest hospital in Taiwan and has an ED that functions as one of the emergency medical centers and serves a wide geographic area in Northern Taiwan. About 100,000 patients visit the ED of LMC at CGMH each year. Among these visitors, more than 1000 have dental complaints. There is a paucity of information regarding the prevalence and dental emergency types of ED visits in a medical center setting in Taiwan, and the characteristics of pediatric dental emergency of LMCCGMH have never been reported. Therefore, the objective of this retrospective study was to investigate the prevalence and characteristics of the pediatric dental emergency visits of the CGMH ED over a 2-year period. A retrospective chart data review of patients under 18 years of age with dental complaints who visited the CGMH ED from January 2012 to December 2013 was conducted after obtaining Institutional Research Ethics approval from CGMH (IRB number: 103-1950B). Electronic medical records were reviewed by a single pediatric dentist (CPJ). Statistics were then derived from the data set. Standard quantitative analyses were conducted using Microsoft Excel formulas (2013, Microsoft Corporation). Statistical analysis was carried out descriptive statistics and Pearson's Chi-square test with the significance level set as The following information was collected: The time, day, and month of a patient's ED visit Patient demographics: age, gender Diagnosis (pulp-related problems, orodental trauma, eruption-related problems, orthodontics or space maintainers-related problems, bleeding, ulceration, etc.) Diagnosis of pulp-related problems: primary or permanent tooth and area of tooth (upper anterior, upper posterior, lower anterior, and lower posterior) were recorded. In addition, the presence of swelling or abscess was noted Diagnosis of orodental trauma: defined as those involving injuries to the teeth, soft tissues and jaws. Information about the type of tooth (primary or permanent) and its classifications of trauma were recorded. The classification includes injuries to the teeth, supporting structures, gingival, and oral mucosa Treatment: consultation and oral hygiene instruction only, dental treatment only (including local anesthesia injection), medication only, dental treatment with medication and oral hygiene instruction. Utility rate of dental X-rays in dental emergency room (yes or no) Whether a follow-up visit in the dental Out-patient Department within 2 weeks was needed. From January 2012 to December 2013, a total of 397 children with dental problems had visited LMCCGMH for dental emergencies, which represents 0.77% (397/51766) of all pediatric patients in ED during the 2-year period. Six cases were excluded due to incomplete chart data. Data were available for a total of 391 participants. The number of visits of patients with dental problems peaked in December and January (23.8%) [ Of 391 patients, there were 235 males (60.1%) and 156 females (39.9%) ( Reasons for seeking emergency dental treatment included pulp-related problems (29.9%), orodental trauma (47.1%), eruption-related problems (7.4%), complications related to orthodontics or space maintainers (3.3%), and other reasons (12.3%) including bleeding and ulceration. A total of 117 (29.9%) patients visiting the ED presented pulp-related problems. There were 74 males (63.2%) and 43 females ( A total of 184 children presented traumatic injuries and accounted for 47.1% of the dental emergency visits. Trauma occurred more frequently in children below 5 years of age (111/184, 60.3%). The number of patients with traumatic injury was significantly different between ages ( Eruption-related problems commonly occur in children with mixed dentition. A total of 29 children (7.4%) visited the ED due to eruption-related problems. Fourteen patients complained of pain due to exfoliating primary teeth. Fourteen patients had pain associated with an erupting tooth, and in addition, four of them suffered from facial cellulitis due to pericoronitis. A neonatal tooth eruption was the cause for dental emergency visit in one child. A total of 13 children (3.3%) visited the ED because of discomfort related to orthodontic appliances (such as a broken wire, broken appliance, dislodged bracket, or mucosa irritation). One patient presented with cellulites caused by mini screws. Two patients came to ED due to a broken space maintainer. A total of 48 children (12.3%) suffered from soft tissue pathoses. Bleeding and gingivitis were the most common problems. Twenty-two patients had bleeding gums, and eight patients had gingivitis, which was more commonly seen in teenagers. Six children complained of pain due to ulceration. Four patients came to dental emergency visit due to cystic lesions with active symptoms and signs. One patient had labial frenum swelling with The major management for dental emergencies was prescribing medication (mainly analgesics and antibiotics) (52.7%) for pain and infection control, followed by dental treatment with medication (28.4%), dental treatment (11.0%), and consultation and oral hygiene instruction (7.9%). Of 176 cases (45% of the total emergency visits) that used radiography in the dental emergency room, most were cases of patients who had had orodental trauma. Management based on reasons of visits is shown in After a dental emergency visit, the majority of patients were referred to local dental clinics (57.3%). However, 42.7% of the patients had a follow-up appointment in the CGMH pediatric Out-patient Department within 2 weeks. The re-visit rate of the orodental trauma group (50.5%) was the highest among the groups, whereas the re-visit rate of problems related to other issues was the lowest [ This retrospective study assessed the demographic and clinical characteristics of children attending an emergency dental service at a Northern Taiwan medical center. According to a search of the medical literature, this study provides the first pediatric dental emergency information ever reported. Several parameters, including the peak month, day, hour, and treatment, were assessed. This study sheds light on the emergency dental situation in Taiwan. These results revealed that orodental trauma was the most frequent cause of emergency care (47.1%). A previous dental emergency study conducted in Taiwan In this study, luxation injuries appeared more frequently in both primary and permanent dentition. According to the literature, luxation injuries were the most frequently occurred type other than avulsion in both the primary and permanent dentition Previous reports have indicated that boys experienced trauma injuries to the teeth more frequently than girls Previous studies conducted in the USA have reported that 30–40% of dental emergency cases in pediatric hospitals were due to carious teeth Dental caries are commonly seen in children in Taiwan. A previous national dental survey reported a very high level of caries problem, in which the deft index for children at age 3, 4, 5, and 6 was 2.58, 4.41, 6.94, and 7.31, respectively Emergency visits related to soft tissue pathoses in this study ranged from conditions commonly seen in children, such as gingivitis, gum bleeding, and pain due to aphthous ulcers, to less frequent lesions, such as cystic lesions. Gingivitis is a very common childhood oral condition and generally not associated with any discomfort, but it is frequently related to improper oral hygiene Eruption-related problems, such as permanent tooth eruption and primary tooth over retained, as well as pericoronitis around erupting permanent teeth, were commonly seen in mixed dentition children The proportion of children in this study presenting complaints other than caries/pulpitis, cellulitis, and orodental trauma was relatively high. Some of these patients were not in pain or had symptoms that were purely physiologic, such as primary tooth exfoliation or permanent tooth eruption. Almost one-fifth (81/391, 20.7%) of all ED visitors in this current study did not need immediate attention according to the ADA and AAOMS definitions For children, trauma and toothache constituted the most common reasons for dental emergency visits at a hospital emergency center in Taiwan. While some dental emergencies are unforeseeable or unavoidable, increasing knowledge and awareness about proper at-home care as well as regular checkups may be a social initiative that can help reduce the high frequency of ED visits that involved preventable conditions, such as early childhood caries. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. The authors are grateful to Dr. Ching-Ming Chen MD, PhD, for assistance in data collection. We are also thankful to all pediatric dentists in CGMH Pediatric Dentistry Department for their support and suggestions during the study.