An attempt was made to understand the sorption behavior of trivalent lanthanides (La, Nd, Gd, Er and Lu) onto amide functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CNT-DHA). The Kd values were found to follow the trend: Lu3+
                     >La3+
                     ~Gd3+
                     >Nd3+
                     >Er3+, which was attributed to a combination of the water exchange mechanism and the hydration number of trivalent lanthanides in solution. Analysis of sorption isotherm via Langmuir, Temkin, Freundlich and Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherm revealed the sorption process was physisorption and cooperative. Based on the linear regression analysis, the sorption processes were found to proceed via Freundlich isotherms. The sorption process followed pseudo second order kinetics with the trend in rate constants Nd3+
                     >Er3+
                     >La3+
                     >Lu3+
                     >Gd3+. CNT–DHA was found to be radiolytically stable with a slight decrease in sorption performance. Quantitative back extraction of Ln3+ from loaded CNT–DHA was effectively done by EDTA solution.Processing steps in the nuclear fuel cycle produce high–volume, low activity waste water, containing a variety of heavy metals, lanthanides and actinides. Environmental issues related to safe disposal of this low activity waste requires the removal of lanthanides, and actinides. Much attention has been given to the removal of actinides ( Rare earth elements (REEs) are always required in high purity for applications in phosphors ( Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been widely accepted as an excellent solid phase sorbent due to its unique physical and chemical properties. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are cylindrical nanostructure composed of single or multiple graphene sheet(s) rolled at specific and discrete (chiral) angles, first reported by S. Iijima ( In this investigation, experiments have been conducted to understand the sorption behavior of trivalent lanthanides (La, Nd, Gd, Er and Lu) onto N,N–dihexyl amide functionalized multi–walled carbon nanotube (CNT–DHA). The objectives of present work were to: (i) study the sorption profile of lanthanides onto CNT–DHA; (ii) study the effect of feed acidity on lanthanide sorption; (iii) investigate the sorption kinetics by fitting the experimental data into different kinetic models; (iv) understand the sorption process by analyzing data with different isotherm models; (v) to examine radiolytic stability and back–extraction efficiency of CNT–DHA. CNT–DHA (purity The analysis was carried out using a Spectro–Arcos inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (ICP–AES) (Spectro–Arcos, Germany), with argon plasma as the excitation source and a capacitive coupled device (CCD) as the detector system. The instrumental specifications and optimized operating conditions are summarized in The analysis was carried out using a Spectro–Arcos inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (ICP–AES) (Spectro–Arcos, Germany), with argon plasma as the excitation source and a capacitive coupled device (CCD) as the detector system. The instrumental specifications and optimized operating conditions are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. The detector system, consisting of linear arrays of the CCD detectors (3648 pixels/array), thermally stabilized together with an optical system, provides the ability to choose alternate analytical lines. For irradiation of CNT–DHA All the experiments were conducted at 25 The stripping experiment was carried out using pre-equilibrated samples from sorption experiments. Lanthanide ion loaded CNT–DHA samples were separated from the aqueous phase and were dried followed by equilibrating it with EDTA and oxalic acid for 3 All the experiments were carried out in 4 replicates. The relative standard deviation for each data was found to be < It was observed that with the increase in the feed acidity, the Effect of increase in sorbent concentration on to sorption behavior of lanthanides was studied and has been represented in Taking the sorption behavior of different lanthanides into consideration, the following trend has been observed for  To have a deeper understanding of the process involved in the sorption of Ln Langmuir isotherm model is a typical monolayer sorption and assumes that sorption occurs on a structurally homogeneous sorbent and all the sorption sites are energetically identical ( This model has been derived to explain the multilayer sorption process onto heterogeneous surface with uniform energy and can be expressed as ( D–R isotherm is an analog of Langmuir type but it does not assume a homogeneous surface or constant sorption potential. To predict, whether the sorption effect is physical or chemical, the mean free energy of sorption is calculated by this model. It is expressed as ( If Sorption heat can be estimated using this isotherm model. It considers the effect of some indirect sorbate-sorbate interactions on sorption isotherms and due to these interactions heat of adsorption decreases linearly rather than logarithm with increasing coverage. It can be expressed as ( By comparing the linear regression values of the examined isotherm models, it can be concluded that the sorption model followed by Ln Sorption kinetics is controlled by different kind of mechanisms like mass transfer, diffusion control, chemical reactions, and particle diffusion. The fractional attainment of the equilibrium ( In order to clarify the kinetic characteristics of sorption of Ln Sorption kinetics of metal ions from liquid to a solid phase is considered a reversible reaction where an equilibrium exists between two phases. Lagergren suggested a rate equation for the sorption of sorbate from a liquid solution onto solid sorbent and can be expressed mathematically as ( The intra particle diffusion model is a combined effect of pore and surface diffusion occurring simultaneously. Weber and Morris equation is expressed as ( It can be used to describe the kinetics of the sorption of metal ions onto sorbent materials. Mathematically it can be expressed as ( Kinetic data were fitted in three kinetic models and on the basis of linear regression values ( Separation of lanthanides from nuclear waste solution requires that sorbent material should be radiolytically stable. Due to high energy particles (α and β) and γ radiation, degradation in the structure of sorbent material is expected which can result in degradation in the sorption performance. To check the radiolytic stability of CNT–DHA, it was exposed to 500 Separation of lanthanides requires good stripping agents which can quantitatively back-extract metal ions from loaded CNT–DHA. In this context, loaded sample was treated with 1.0 The higher stripping efficiency of EDTA compared to that of oxalic acid is a direct consequence of “chelate effect”. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), a hexadentate ligand forms stable complexes with metal ions compared to oxalic acid which is a bidentate ligand and forms less stable metal complexes. The possible complex species obtained for Ln A comparative study has been conducted to evaluate the sorption performance of functionalized multi-walled CNTs for Amide functionalized multi–walled carbon nanotubes were taken as a solid phase sorbent for the sorption of trivalent lanthanides. The decrease in The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at