Over the past several decades, a number of coal upgrades have been developed to remove impurities such as ash and pyrite. Some of these methods include: washing, gravity concentration, agglomeration flotation. A large portion of the effort has been placed on sulfur reduction. The major problem in sulfur reduction represents the presence of organic sulfur, which is impossible to remove. Selection of the coal treatment method largely depends on the coal formation (genesis) and the particle size. For example, a fine coal can only be beneficiated using the flotation method.Introduction Coal genesis Beneficiation of coal Coal washing Coal gravity separation as a spirals Heavy media separation Oil agglomeration Coal flotation Reagents used in coal flotation Coal flotation flow sheets used for treatment of various coal ores References Coal is considered one of the most important sources of energy in the world. In the early days of the industry, coal was mined and delivered without any treatment to its point of consumption. Coal as mined is considered a raw material, which required treatment to remove impurities such as pyrite and ash. Over the past several decades, a number of coal upgrades have been developed to remove impurities such as ash and pyrite. Some of these methods include: washing, gravity concentration, agglomeration flotation. A large portion of the effort has been placed on sulfur reduction. The major problem in sulfur reduction represents the presence of organic sulfur, which is impossible to remove. Selection of the coal treatment method largely depends on the coal formation (genesis) and the particle size. For example, fine coal can only be beneficiated using the flotation method. Coal is a combustible mineral substance resulting from the degradation and alteration of vegetable matter largely in the absence of air. Coal deposits in North America can be of the Permian age or cretaceous and tertiary in age. The differences in genesis The chemical and physical properties of different coal origins are shown in From It is very important to understand coal flotation behavior. Coal flotation is a complicated process and is subject to rational interpretation. To develop an efficient coal treatment process, it is important to know (1) the coal rank and its chemical and physical properties, (2) the general geologic genesis, (3) oxidation pyrite and ash distribution and properties, and (4) the flotation process for different properties of coal. There are a number of methods by which coal is beneficiated and this largely depends on (1) the type of coal, (2) the type of impurities (pyrite, clay ash), and (3) the size of coal particles. The commonly used beneficiation method includes: Coal washing Gravity separation as a specific spirals Heavy media separation Oil agglomeration Flotation A large number of operating plants use coal washing to remove impurities such as clay ash and pyrite. There are several devices used in coal washing, which include specific jigs, water cyclone, screens, and tables. The washing rejects range from 20 to 38% of the feed. The flow sheet used for coal washing is presented in The use of spirals has become a standard practice in coal preparation plants worldwide. To their credit, spirals typically show very low coal losses The flow sheet for combined two-stage spiral and heavy media cyclone circuit is presented in Another concentration method involving combination of spiral and sizer is used in the plants to treat bituminous coal. The feed to the spiral is about −4 Metallurgical results obtained are presented in The actual flow sheet employed in the plant is shown in Heavy media separation dates back to several centuries. Initially, a fine magnetite was used as a heavy media. In 1936, a plant was designed employing organic liquid as a heavy media for treating anthracite coal containing ore. The heavy media process is usually used for treatment of coarse coal above 9.5 Nowadays, magnetic field has been used as a heavy media at fineness of between 100 and 325 Agglomeration is a process in which a liquid immersible in water is used to “bridge” hydrophobic (oleophilic) coal particle while leaving gangue particles (pyrite, ash, etc.) dispersed in the aqua medium. High-sheer agitation is needed to displace the water on the surface of the coal with the agglomerating liquid. Agglomerating liquid is typically a heavy oil like diesel fuel or No. 6 fuel oil or a light hydrocarbon like heptane or pentane. During the high-shear agitation step the organic matter is separated from the pyritic sulfur and other mineral matter components, hence it is often referred to as the cleaning step. Agglomeration and flotation are the only processes that presently deal with recovery of fine coal. Oil agglomeration has two entirely separable functions. First is its ability to selectively separate coal from mineral matter to produce high-grade coal. Second is the elimination of conventional dewatering of coal. There are several recent operating plants that use different approaches during oil agglomeration. These differences are smaller than similarities.     Coal flotation is practiced in many operating plants around the world. Flotation is applied to fine coal, i.e., 600  The short chain branched alcohols (MIBC) are usually considered to be a main frother in the flotation of the higher rank coals but an excess has been demonstrated to promote pyrite flotation The newer glycol frothers offer an advantage in floating coarse coal particles. Frothers must be added before collectors as prior additions of oil, which mitigates the problem by blocking coal surface to frother adsorption.  Kerosene is used to the lesser extent, with other collectors. Collector use is required for the flotation of low-rank and oxidized bituminous coal. Based on research studies  There are many variations of coal flotation circuits as there are coal types to be upgraded. In actual fact the flotation circuit design is a function of the type of impurities in a coal-containing ore. The following ore flow sheet is designed for various ore types Flow sheet for treatment of low pyrite and/or oxidized coal. The flow sheet used in the treatment of low pyrite and oxidized coal ( Flow sheet for treatment of high pyrite ore. The flow sheet used for the treatment of high pyrite ore is similar to that used for the treatment of low pyrite ore except that the cleaning circuit for both coarse and Flow sheet design for processing of strip coal with high pyrite and high clay. The flow sheet incorporated attrition scrubbing which was found to be advantageous. The attrition scrubber removes clay from the surface of the coal particles followed by clay removal by cycloning. The flow sheet does not require split circuit flotation of coarse and fines. Again, ferric chloride is used for pyrite depression during coal flotation. This flow sheet is presented in