Fractures of the distal femur account for 4–5% of all femur fractures and in the elderly are usually due to a low energy ground level fall onto a flexed knee. Incidence is common among elderly females with osteopenia, comminution, pre-existing osteo-arthritis and previous implants making the treatment options difficult. Increased deforming muscular forces, which act at the site of the fracture, threaten the union and the stability of the construct. Though various treatment methods are available for management, these fractures are difficult to treat and the prognosis is unpredictable. Non-operative treatment methods are associated with two to three times increased complication rates and mortality. We present in this case report, a 96-year-old community ambulator who had an undisplaced distal femur fracture, with a pre-existing hip implant, in whom we extended the fixation proximally and linked the peri-articular plate to the pre-existing implant, to create a biomechanically stable construct than a gapped implant. A 96-year-old female community ambulator, presented with pain and swelling over her left knee, after a ground level fall. Her medical and family histories were non-contributory. She had two separate surgical interventions for fixation, of bilateral hip fractures in the past. Physical examination revealed tenderness over the left distal femur. There were no overlying skin changes. Healed surgical scars were seen proximally over her hips bilaterally. The neurovascular status of the involved extremity was intact. Plain radiographs revealed an undisplaced Type A supra condylar fracture After lag screw fixation of the fracture with minimal exposure, a 16 hole peri-articular locking plate (Smith and Nephew USA) was secured to the distal femur using locking screws and extended proximally over the pre-existing implant. The plate was pre-bent before distal fixation and stacked over the pre-existing barrel plate proximally and secured to the barrel plate with locking screws, after removal of the second and third screws of the previously fixed barrel plate, under fluoroscopic guidance. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was advised full weight bearing in her left lower extremity. When re-evaluated, 6 months after surgery, she had no pain and had a pain free range of motion from 0° to 100° of flexion, with Grade V quadriceps power. She ambulates bearing full weight in her left lower extremity using a cane in her right hand. The radiographs reveal primary healing of the fracture, with intact hardware insitu ( Fractures of the distal femur in the elderly are usually associated with high levels of comminution, poor bone quality, pre-existing implants or prosthesis and frequently, arthrosis. Immediate return to pre-injury level of ambulation would significantly decrease the morbidity and mortality in the geriatric population. Various methods of treatment are available, for the management of distal femur fractures. Treatment methods, includes non-operative treatment and range to total knee replacement in the patients, with significant arthrosis. There are few comparative studies to aid, in decision making. Biomechanical studies have shown that the peri-articular locking plates perform better than the dynamic condylar screw. The supracondylar nail is not as strong, as the dynamic condylar screw or an angled blade plate in torsion, but performs similarly in axial loading and anterior–posterior bending tests in the treatment of the extra-articular fractures. Butt et al. reported, improved results with in the patients treated surgically. Venkateswaran and Smith reported a brief series of four patients in whom the fixation was extended beyond the working length of an intramedullary nail with a linked intramedullary and extramedullary construct. Treatment of supracondylar femur fractures in the elderly, with a history of pre-existing hip implant, is a technical problem. Kumar et al. reported stress fractures in the gapped area, in two elderly patients treated for the distal femoral fractures with a retrograde supracondylar titanium nail, who had a pre-existing hip prosthesis. If the implants are not overlapped, the proximal and distal implants act as stress risers to the intervening area of femoral diaphysis, and more so in the osteopenic bone. Implant overlap would minimize regional strain and increase the failure strength. Harris et al. in a cadaveric study reported that strain patterns are altered by the degree of implant overlap and concluded that the kissing or overlapping instrumentation, increases the load to failure and creates a biomechanically stable construct, than the gapped implants and further recommended that an overlapping implant orientation, increases the failure load at the implant interface. In our case, in view of the gross osteopenia around the juxta-articular area, we chose a peri-articular locking plate, which is very resistant to pull out. We were able to gain excellent fixation with minimal exposure and could avoid a stress riser in the gapped area. We report this method, since we are not aware of any case reports of similar type linking an extramedullary construct to a pre-existing extra-medullary construct, to achieve a biomechanically stable construct, in the treatment of distal femoral fractures in the elderly.