In this paper, three flotation approaches, bulk flotation followed by separation, selective Cu flotation followed by bulk flotation and then separation, and preferential Mo flotation followed by Cu flotation, were investigated to concentrate molybdenite from Dexing (Jiangxi Province, China) porphyry Cu–Mo ores. The bench-scale flotation results demonstrated that compared to other two flotation approaches, the preferential Mo flotation approach using a new non-thiol collector obtained a high recovery of molybdenite in a molybdenum circuit, while the tailing of molybdenum circuit was treated by a copper flotation circuit to obtain a high recovery of other co-present metal values. The industrial flotation tests indicated that compared to the bulk flotation approach, the preferential Mo flotation approach achieved an excellent cleaner concentrate containing 0.655% Mo with 88.49% Mo recovery, and increased Mo recovery and grade over 34.0% and 0.4% in the molybdenum circuit, respectively. For being uncontaminated with thiol collectors, this cleaner concentrate was readily treated to perform the Mo/Cu flotation separation which returned a superior Mo concentrate containing 48.83% Mo with 90.60% Mo operation recovery as well as saved about 1/2 Na2S consumption.Approximately 50% of the world’s molybdenum production comes from Cu–Mo ore as a by-product (   There are several flow sheets (listed in  In the present study, a novel flow sheet and high effective collectors for molybdenite flotation will be investigated to improve molybdenite recovery from Dexing (Jiangxi Province, China) porphyry Cu–Mo ores. The designed flow sheet includes a molybdenum circuit and a copper circuit. In the molybdenum circuit, a non-thiol collector and a Mo/Cu preliminary separation operation is used to obtain a high recovery of molybdenite in a cleaner concentrate uncontaminated with thiol collectors, which cleaner concentrate can easily be cleaned to yield a high Mo recovery product with a low consumption of Na The test material are porphyry copper ores from the Dexing copper mine of Jiangxi Province in China, and the copper bearing minerals are chalcopyrite, chalcocite, digenite, covellite, tetrahedrite, tennantite, bornite, as well as some oxide copper minerals such as malachite and cuprite. The main iron bearing minerals are pyrite and marcasite. The molybdenum form is molybdenite and the gold forms are native gold and electrum. The significant amounts of non-sulfide gangue minerals are quartz, sericite, chlorite, illite, carbonates and biotite. Based on electron probe and chemical analysis, molybdenite in Dexing copper mine contains 60.0% Mo, 39.8% S, and other trace elements such as Re, Se and Ag. In rocks, molybdenite commonly intergrows with quartz, carbonates, anhydrite, pyrite, chalcopyrite, etc. Molybdenite exists two modes of occurrence in Dexing porphyry copper ore. One is an automorphic–hypautomorphic and disseminated flake aggregation, which flake diameters are typically in the range of 0.05–0.1 In rocks, molybdenite commonly disseminates in the gangue non-sulfide minerals. The primary grind employed is to liberate molybdenite from these non-sulfide minerals. When a grind of about 65% minus 76 Two kinds of ore samples were used in the bench-scale flotation test. One was called as normal ore with 4.12% CuO, and the other was called as high-oxided ore with 13.26% CuO. These ore samples were taken from different deposits of Dexing Copper Mine, and their head assay was presented in The reagents used in the bench-scale flotation tests and their product names were listed in The ore (1 After wet grinding, the pH of the pulp slurry was pre-adjusted to any desired value by the addition of effective amounts of lime. Then, effective amounts of collector or frother were added to the slurry while agitating at about 1500 The industrial flotation was performed in the mineral processing plant at the Dexing copper mine. The experimental system M1 processed 8000 Using the high-oxided ore as the test samples, under rougher pH 7.5 and feed particle size distribution of 65% minus 76 Under the flotation condition of MC-103 64 Under the flotation condition of particle size distribution (65% −76 Under the flotation condition of particle size distribution (65% −76 Under the flotation condition of particle size distribution (65% −76 The locked cycle tests of preferential Mo flotation followed by Cu flotation (   The Mo recoveries of the cleaner concentrate 1 of every industrial-flotation-test shift were shown in The cleaner concentrate 1 of the industrial flotation tests was adopted to evaluate the floatability of molybdenite. The selected cleaner concentrate 1 with 0.632% Mo and 26.77% Cu collected from a day shift was used in the locked cycle tests. The flotation experiments were carried out under the reagent conditions such as overall 18.5 In this paper, a preferential Mo flotation approach was investigated to concentrate molybdenite from Dexing porphyry Cu–Mo ore through bench-scale and industrial flotation tests. The flotation tests involved in the systematic evaluation of flotation reagents, ore kinds, flotation flowsheets, particle size distributions, flotation pH values and Na The locked cycle flotation results of both normal ore and high-oxided ore indicated that compared with the bulk flotation and selective Cu flotation approach, the preferential Mo flotation approach using a new non-thiol collector MC-103 could obtain a superior cleaner concentrate with high Mo recovery and grade in the molybdenum circuit. While the molybdenum circuit tailing was treated by a copper flotation circuit to obtain a high recovery of other co-present metal values. The industrial flotation results demonstrated that the preferential Mo flotation approach obtained an excellent cleaner concentrate contained 0.655% Mo with 88.49% Mo recovery in the molybdenum circuit. Compared with the bulk flotation approach, the preferential Mo flotation approach increased the Mo recovery and grade over 34.0% and 0.4%, respectively. For being uncontaminated with thiol collectors, this cleaner concentrate was readily treated by flotation to separate molybdenite from copper sulfide minerals under a low consumption of Na The authors would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51074183 and 50604016), the Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (2007B52), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in Chinese University (NCET-08-0568), and the National Science and Technology Support Project of China (2007BAB22B01) for the financial support of this research. We would particularly acknowledge Dexing Copper Mine and Jiangxi Copper Corporation for providing financial support and convenient help.