Asymmetric aqueous electrochemical capacitors with energy densities as high as 22Whkg−1, power densities of 11kWkg−1 and a cell voltage of 2V were fabricated using cost effective, high surface carbon derived from coal tar pitch and manganese dioxide. The narrow pore size distribution of the activated carbon (mean pore size ∼0.8nm) resulted in strong electroadsorption of protons making them suitable for use as negative electrodes. Amorphous manganese dioxide anodes were synthesized by chemical precipitation method with high specific capacitance (300Fg−1) in aqueous electrolytes containing bivalent cations. The fabricated capacitors demonstrated excellent cyclability with no signs of capacitance fading even after 1000 cycles.The concept of integrating a redox or battery type electrode and a double layer electrode has been widely used to develop high energy density hybrid capacitors in both aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes Manganese dioxide has been shown to have specific capacitances in the order of 300–600 Activated carbon with mean pore sizes less than 1.0 In this investigation, coal tar pitch has been modified to yield a highly disordered carbon which upon physical activation, using CO Koppers Inc. supplied coal tar pitch (CTP) that contains 5.2 The pyrolyzed sample was then heated under argon atmosphere to 900 The synthesis of high surface area manganese dioxide was adapted from the procedure described by Subramanian et al. The pore size distribution of the carbon was calculated using methyl chloride adsorption. The pore sizes were determined using H–K model described elsewhere The AC electrode was prepared by combining 0.085 All electrochemical measurements were done using a 263A Potentiostat/Galvanostat. The active electrode materials were tested individually as the working electrodes using a platinum wire as a counter electrode and Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode in various aqueous salt solutions (2 AC and MnO   XRD of the synthesized MnO The electrode materials were tested in different aqueous electrolytes at a scan rate of 2 The specific capacitance of AC measured in the scan range of 0.3 to −1.0 Based on the specific capacitance and stable voltage ranges of the individual electrodes, asymmetric capacitors were constructed using AC and MnO  The specific capacitance of the cell was calculated as shown in Eq. Since the energy density of the asymmetric capacitor was limited primarily by the mass of the AC electrode in aqueous electrolyte systems Based on Eq. EIS measurements were done to calculate the ESR of the asymmetric capacitors ( Five different contributions namely An ideal capacitor would have a value close to Constant current charge/discharge measurements were done at various load current densities ranging from 200 The coulombic efficiency given by the ratio of time of charge and discharge was greater than 99% for all the systems and for 1000 cycles. The specific capacitance was calculated from the discharge curve as follows:  Energy density and power density of the capacitors were measured using the cell capacitance, cell voltage and load current from the galvanostatic charge/discharge measurements as follows: Energy densities stored in the three capacitors were in the order CaCl Coal tar pitch is a graphitizing precursor and, hence upon pyrolysis, it has very little porosity. Physical-chemical activation by CO Manganese dioxide is a low cost redox electrode that has high specific capacitance in aqueous electrolyte system. Since the pseudocapacitance is directly proportional to redox active surface area, it is important to make metal oxide particles that have both intrinsic and extrinsic surface area. Recently, Subramanian et al. have reported a facile synthesis of manganese dioxide powders with surface area as high as 250 The pseudocapacitive nature of MnO The sensitivity of the specific capacitance to the pH of the electrolyte illustrates the interaction of protons with the MnO The paper describes a cost effective method of fabricating high energy density aqueous capacitors, from low cost precursors. Coal tar pitch was used as the low cost precursor to make high surface area carbon with controlled pore size distribution while KMnO The authors acknowledge Consortium of Premium Carbon Products from Coal (CPCPC) for providing the funding for this project (Subcontract no: 3556-TPSU-DOE-1874) and Materials Research Institute at The Pennsylvania State University for providing access to characterization facilities.