Tunneling projects have their uniqueness in terms of engineering problems. The expertise gained from analyzing these projects establishes a sound basis for future application. This paper conveys experiences gained during the construction and support of the design of the Dicle–Kralkizi water tunnel, Turkey. Tunnel stability problems including overbreaks and surface subsidence are evaluated. An analysis of the breakdowns, factors controlling advance rate and the overall performance of tunnel are covered. The accumulated information presented here is believed to be useful and reliable for a successful tunnel excavation in similar formations.The Dicle–Kiralkizi project was developed for irrigation purposes serving the Mardin and Savur plain as part of South East Anatolia Project. The project was managed by General Directorate of State Hydraulic Works (DSI) and developed by GURIS Corporation. As seen in In the first 65 m of the formation overlaying the tunnel upper miocene age grey–brown coloured selmo formation which is formed by claystone, mudstone, siltstone, sandstone and gravel. On the surface, the rest of the 410 m part plio quaternary age grey–black cloured massive basalt formation takes place. Since the thickness of the basalt over selmo formation is in between 1 and 9 m, the tunnel was driven inside the selmo formation ( As seen in Information gathered included the thickness and underground water table mapping. The drilling program indicated that the tunnel would be excavated below water table. The geological and rock mass properties at the tunnel level are summarized as follows:    The New Austrian Tunneling Method (NATM) has been used since the tunnel diameter is relatively large and the geological formations varied frequently along the route. The tunnel has been excavated in a two bench sequence; upper and lower. The excavation of the upper bench for the total length of the tunnel (475 m) was completed before the lower bench was commenced the upper bench was a half-circle, 56.52 m For support design purposes, based on geotechnical information gathered and the Terzaghi classification system, the tunnel was categorized as possessing type 4 ground conditions. Due to the weak structure of the Selmo formation and the presence of underground water, the unsupported distance from the face was 0.80 m and the steel arch support distance was 0.5 m. For temporary support a combination of 5 The impact hammer has been used widely in the civil and mining industry since 1960 ( In general, the excavation process has been successful with hydraulic hammers attached change to hydraulic excavators. However, the excavation rate of progress declined 33% from change 419–430 m due to the strength of the rock (RQD  During the first 180 m of the tunnel length, the excavated ground consists of 3 m thick gravel–sandstone and the roof of the tunnel contains a 2.5 m thick claystone and marn alternation. During the excavation of the upper bench, the water inflow rate reached 10 l/s. The first perceptible collapse occurred at the tunnel spring line due to the excessive water inflow and weak roof formation that includes a very crushed and fractured gravel–sandstone zone. This overbreaks on the roof, which was measured every 2 m, caused some cavities of 10–20 cm in depth producing nearly 330 m Although underground water contributed to problems in the tunnel with respect to stability, its significant impact was the creation of considerable surface subsidence. Subsidence on the surface that occurs before and after the excavation, and the convergence, deformations in the tunnel were measured during a three month period of tunnel excavation. For the first 55 m of the tunnel, three different measurements were taken in the surface at the center, right and left corners of the tunnel by total station. Convergence measurements on the roof of the tunnel and deformation measurements in the right and left corners of the tunnel were also taken every 2.5 m. These measurement points are shown in the Even though the tunnel was driven in the Selmo formation, underground water and the tunnel collapses affected the rate of excavation of the tunnel significantly. Overbreaks that occurred in the roof were 10–20 cm (330 m The authors would like to thank Geol. Eng. Erbil Kanlicay, for providing information, assistance and guidance in this research.