The quality of a bend is determined by the accuracy and consistency of the angle along the length of the part. This accuracy is directly related to the penetration of the tool in the die.
                  Small variations in tool penetration can cause relatively large changes in bend angle. Such variations are caused by changes in the repeatability of the tool stopping point, by deflections of the press brake beams and by distortions of the tooling.
                  Earlier studies [Int. J. Mech. Sci. 22 (1980) 583; J. Mater. Process. Technol. 35 (1992) 129; Precision bending of sheet metal, Master’s Thesis, University of Twente, 1992; A finite element simulation of free bending, in: Proceedings of the Second International Sheet Metal Conference, SheMet’94, University of Ulster, 1994, pp. 201–211] on finite element modelling of the air bending process assume that the tooling is perfectly rigid. The present 3D finite element model of press brake air bending tools allows calculation of elastic distortions in typical tools and relates the distortion to the accuracy of the formed part. The finite element model has been validated by experiments conducted on a commercial press brake. Some suggestions are made for improvements to the direct and cross stiffness of the tools which should lead to improved alignment of the tool and die and, in turn, to improved product accuracy.Sheet metal is used as a raw material for the manufacture of a very diverse range of products, from high precision aerospace components to supermarket shelves. Several methods may be used for forming sheet metal parts and it is usual for the method selected to be strongly influenced by the volume of parts to be produced. The use of dedicated press tools and machinery for small batch production of sheet metal parts would be prohibitively expensive and this necessitates a search for more flexible methods of manufacture. Small batch sheet metal components are frequently produced by cutting out the required shape from a flat sheet and then forming a series of straight line bends using a press brake. Press brakes, with an appropriate range of tools and dies, are capable of forming a large variety of components from relatively simple parallel bend components such as industrial light fixtures, to complex box-like enclosures such as computer cabinets. The flexibility of press brakes is enhanced further by using the technique known as free bending, where the bend angle is determined by the length of the press brake stroke and not by the shape of the tools. This implies that it is possible to form many components without the need for tool changes. The versatility of modern press brakes have made them a much used and valuable asset for the fabricator of sheet metal components. The introduction of CNC press brakes has made the set-up process easier since the tool stroke is set automatically from the value of the angle to be pressed. Despite these advances the stroke length usually requires a series of adjustments in the early stages of a production run. Weinnmann The variations in stroke length are associated with the following factors: the variation in workpiece material properties and dimension; the deflection of the beams of a press brake; the deflection of the bending punch. Considerable progress has been made in the simulation of bending processes using the finite element technique; in these simulations the bending tool is assumed to be a rigid body. The present study, however, deals with the elastic deformation of gooseneck and other variants of press brake tooling using 3D finite element modelling. This modelling allows parametric design changes to the tool to be quantitatively assessed. Experimental results validate the finite element model. The tool geometry is illustrated in A specific sub-program “BTOOL.FOR” has been developed that automatically creates a descretised model of any bending tool. Gooseneck type tools have been analysed since they are very widely used and exhibit more complex geometries including asymmetric loading, see, for example  The procedure employed to obtain the deformation of the tool is illustrated in When a thrust is applied to a tool holder containing a tool, the upper beam of the press brake tends to deflect. Consequently, the tool holder follows the lateral movements of the top beam of the press brake and subsequently, to account for these movements, the nodal points on the top surface of the tool should be given a prescribed displacement equivalent to the deflection of the tool holder plate at the tool head. Since the primary objective of this paper is to examine the flexural characteristics of various designs of air bending tool, it is permissible to fix the top surface of the tool, thus the boundary condition at the upper surface is defined by constraining lateral movements of all nodal points on the top surfaces. The bending load producing the tool deformation is simulated by a static load defined in the following section. Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio for the tool material are provided. A simple equilibrium model of three-point bending ( A parabolic model by Anoyke-Siribor Values of bending force calculated by The axial component forces The blank material is a cold rolled steel, type CR4 drawing quality. The work hardening co-efficient, Blank thickness=1.6 Substitution of the forces given by The nodal deformations of the bending tool are given by The displacements of the lowest middle edge line nodes, for example node numbers 15, 14, 1, 6 and 7 are of interest as these are directly related to the tool performance. The axial displacement Referring to Before an in-depth evaluation of tool design and performance is conducted it is necessary to validate the finite element models of the bending tools. For this purpose the simulated case of gooseneck type tool geometry is compared against results obtained through experimentation. In A good correlation between the results of the finite element and experiment supports the validity of the finite element model. Displacement accuracy of the finite element model with respect to measurement are found to be in the order of 92%. The aspects of tooling which are of importance to press brake users are tool failure and dimensional accuracy of the product. Clearly, the product quality will improve if the stiffness of the bending tool is enhanced. Consequently, the design parameters of the tool such as position of clamping unit with respect to tool point, gooseneck web thickness are studied in detail. The effect of change in the tool geometry, L8/L6, on the direct and cross stiffness is shown in Analysis of the results indicate that there is a considerable improvement in the performance of the tool if the tool dimension L8 is increased while the dimension L6 remains unchanged. For the gooseneck tools the ratio L8/L6 (see The spring back angle The actual product angle  The symmetry of the flange widths along the bend length is displayed in The effect of change in the tool geometry, L8/L6, on the bent product angle is shown in Results demonstrate a measure of improvement in spring back angle due to elastic deformation of the tool if the tool geometry is stiffened (which accords well with results in The work described has resulted in the development of 3D finite element models of press brake tools of the type commonly used for free bending (air bending). The models allow the prediction of the elastic distortions that occur when tools are placed under load. Distortions in the Spring back due to plastic deformation of the blank decreases with increasing blank thickness. At the same time the spring back due to elastic deformation of the bending tool increases as the blank thickness is increased. Practical experience shows that spring back of 0.5° poses problems in high precision assembly work using robotic or laser welding and often requires additional work to meet the engineering standard. At the other extreme spring back of 0.1° may prove restrictive for high value added components requiring high strength to weight ratio. This implies that a compromise solution, such as the alternative tool design shown in Consequently, prediction of the correct spring back by FE modelling is desirable, with both forms of deflection having implications for bend precision and bend quality. The results of this work are of importance to tool designers, tool users, press builders and to the design of press brake control software. Two specific aspects of tool geometry have been analysed and the implications for elastic distortions quantified: the influence of changing the orientation of the clamping fixture relative to the positioning of the gooseneck; the influence of gooseneck/acute angle web thickness ratio. The alignment of the clamping unit relative to the location of the gooseneck tool tip effects tool stiffness as measured in both The acute angle tool is substantially stiffer than either of the gooseneck tools ( Accuracy of product angle improves as the blank thickness is increased ( The effect of tool penetration into the blank is important. Under the conditions employed significant errors in product angle occur when the web thickness ratio is reduced ( The research project is supported by UK–India Scientific Technical Research Funding. Relevant technical information was provided by Philips India Ltd. and Daewha Metal (UK) Ltd.