Hydrocyclone has been widely used in particle separation processes. Extensive efforts have been devoted to studying the liquid–solid flow in conical hydrocyclone, however, studies on cylindrical hydrocyclone were much less, regardless of its industrial importance. To this end, an Eulerian–Lagrangian model, dense discrete phase model (DDPM), was used to simulate the complex liquid–solid flow in an industrial-scale cylindrical hydrocyclone, where Reynolds stress model (RSM) was used to model the turbulence of liquid phase due to its swirling nature, and then the numerical results were validated against the experimental data obtained from an industrial-scale cylindrical hydrocyclone. The validated model was then used to systematically study the effects of operating conditions as well as the geometry of cylindrical hydrocyclone on its separation efficiency. It was shown that (i) particle concentration at inlet had a remarkable influence on particle separation efficiency, but had a negligible effect upon processing capacity, expressed as the inlet volumetric flow rate of liquid–solid mixture; (ii) the increase of the length of vortex finder resulted in a slight decrease of separation efficiency and larger diameter of vortex finder led to increased mass flow rate through overflow and slightly decreased separation efficiency; (iii) increasing the height of cylindrical part resulted in a larger mass flow rate through underflow and better particle separation efficiency. Present studies indicated that DDPM method coupled with RSM was an effective tool for the design of liquid–solid hydrocyclone.Due to the ease of operation, high throughput, less maintenance, space-saving and other advantages, hydrocyclone has been widely used in various industries ( The feed slurry, mixture of liquid and particles, is injected tangentially into the hydrocyclone at a relatively high velocity, yielding a large centrifugal force field with a strong swirling flow. The separation in this device is the result of the swirling flow and the particles moving relative to fluid experiencing centrifugal force, gravitational force and drag force ( Despite of its long history, thorough works related to understand the complexity of multiphase flow in hydrocyclone began only in mid-fifties ( In the company of increasing computing capacity, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) naturally becomes more and more popular throughout the world. As for the liquid–solid flow in hydrocyclone, particles are dispersed in continuous liquid phase, therefore, the motion of liquid can be described by continuum mechanics. With respect to the modeling of solid phase, the mathematical models by now can be grouped into two kinds. On the macroscopic level, the solid flow can be described by continuum mechanics like liquid, which is named as continuum model (CM). On the microscopic level, the motion of single particle can be tracked using Newton equation and then combined with CFD, this method is named as discrete particle model (DPM). Since the CM scarifies the details of particle motion and in return has higher computation efficiency, it has been increasingly used to study the multiphase flow in hydrocyclone ( As have already mentioned above, previous studies of hydrocyclone are focused on conical type with very few studies on cylindrical hydrocyclone ( The equations of DDPM are similar to those in traditional DPM, where a parcel presenting a lot of particles identical both in density and diameter is tracked in the Lagrangian framework following the Newton's law of motion, but the description of collisions between particles in DDPM is not in line with that in DPM where the collision is considered through hard-sphere model or soft-sphere model (  Owing to the fact that the interaction between particle and liquid is fundamental to the predicted distribution of particles in hydrocyclone and different drag correlations have visible differences, it is necessary to investigate the effect of different drag correlations may bring about, the results are shown in  And the turbulent stress is closed by turbulent model. Since the swirling flow in the hydrocyclone is so strong that anisotropy of turbulence plays an important role, the standard The turbulent stress can be calculated as where For the dispersed phase, the single particle acceleration can be derived from a force balance, The first term on the right hand side refers to drag force acting on individual particle, where When heterogeneous system is composed of billions of particles, it is not possible to solve these equations for all particles. Therefore these particles are collected together as a parcel, whose reference particle has specific diameter. Then the momentum exchange term  The last term Like continuous phase, solid phase is assumed as Newtonian fluid, and then its stress tensor is expressed as The radial distribution function where the packing limit And the collisional dissipation of energy is After calculating particle velocity, a new position of the particle is calculated as Then the solid volume fraction in a given numerical cell can be obtained as Three-dimensional CFD simulations using DDPM available in commercial software Ansys Fluent 13.0 are carried out. The governing equations for continuous phase are solved by the means of the finite volume method in Eulerian grid. The Lagrangian particles are tracked using an implicit discretization scheme. In every time step, the particle volume fraction, the averaged particle velocity and the drag coefficient between dispersed phase and continuous phase are computed once the new particle locations are known. As soon as these parameters are calculated, the governing equations of continuous phase are solved using an iterative approach. For decreasing computation complexity and improving the convergence, the momentum equations and volume fraction equations are discretized using first-order upwind scheme and second scheme respectively. The convergence criteria for continuity and momentum equations are all 0.001. The wall boundary conditions for both liquid and solid phase are no slip condition. The meshed geometry is shown in According to the experimental data shown in Initially, the hydrocyclone is full of liquid water, and then the mixture of mineral particle and liquid water are fed into hydrocyclone. Due to the incompressible property, the particles and water flow out through apex and vortex finder, where the pressures are set as atmosphere. The particle properties and simulation parameters are listed in As mentioned above, particle injects tangentially into hydrocyclone, and flows spirally with swirling water flow. Due to the coexistence of exterior upward swirling pattern near the wall and interior downward swirling pattern near the axis, the flow of particle in hydrocyclone is very complex. For showing clearly the particle motion in hydrocyclone,  Before applying DDPM for the optimization of hydrocyclone, it is necessary to validate the DDPM for simulating the liquid–solid flow in hydrocyclone. This has been done by comparing the predicted particle size distribution at both exits of this hydrocyclone with experimental data. There are mainly two aspects that need to be studied in the optimization of separation efficiency of the hydrocyclone, i.e. operating condition and geometry. In this section, the processing capacity represented by volume flow rate of feed is varied in simulation in order to see what this variation may bring about. In the practical operation, the volume flow rate is 500 Recently, some researchers found that the feed concentration imposed substantially affect upon separation efficiency ( According to some studies (  According to analysis of The effect of apex diameter has a considerable influence upon the separation performance of hydrocyclone ( Due to the fact that the sedimentation in cylindrical hydrocyclone is crucial to the particle separation performance, it is necessary to investigate the height of cylindrical part upon the separation efficiency. Here, the simulated results under three heights are to be compared. Although there are plenty of studies about the flow characteristics in hydrocyclone, most of these work are limited to the laboratory and/or conical hydrocyclone. Present study uses a recently developed DDPM to simulate the liquid–solid flow in an industrial-scale cylindrical hydrocyclone. The model is firstly validated against experimental data. The effects of different operating conditions and geometries are then investigated to optimize the separation efficiency for small particles, the results can be summarized as follow: The processing capacity imposes a negligible effect on the particle separation efficiency. The particle separation efficiency is sensitive to the feed solid concentration. The more dilute the feed concentration, the better the hydrocyclone performs. The vortex finder length imposes a negative influence upon the separation efficiency. The elongation of vortex finder yields a slight decrease of separation efficiency. In this hydrocyclone, the vortex finder diameter has a slight effect upon the particle separation efficiency other than the mass flow rate. The elongation of cylindrical part improves the particle separation performance in this hydrocyclone.  effective drag coefficient for a particle virtual mass factor particle diameter, m vortex finder diameter, m particle restitution coefficient additional acceleration from particle–particle collision, m/s additional acceleration from acceleration force, m/s addition force acting on continuous phase, kg/(m gravitational acceleration, m/s radial distribution function vortex finder length, mm diffusion coefficient for granular energy, Pa solids circulating flux, kg/m mass fraction of particle pressure, Pa Reynolds number real velocity, m/s volume flow rate, m cell volume, m particle position, m height, m drag coefficient, kg/(m collisional energy dissipation, J/m granular temperature, m time step, s voidage close packing density unit tensor bulk viscosity, Pa viscosity, Pa density, kg/m laminar stress tensor, Pa turbulent stress tensor, Pa continuous phase solid phase mixture This study is financially supported by the The effect of drag correlations used in the DDPM is studied, where three drag laws are chosen, including