Block and panel caving mines are increasingly being proposed for the excavation of massive ore-bodies located at depth. The lack of selectivity associated with the mining methods results in both ore and waste being caved and transported through material handling systems to the surface for processing and waste rock disposal. Sensor-based sorting systems provide an opportunity to automate the discrimination between ore grades and rock types, providing an enhanced level of selectivity for ore control and thereby improving mine productivity.
                  To evaluate the potential to add value to a caving operation, a sensor-based ore sorting study, incorporating bulk and particle sorting systems, was carried out for the New Afton block cave mine. Results showed that rock from the copper-gold porphyry deposit is amenable to prompt gamma neutron activation analysis, and to X-ray fluorescence sensors. A conceptual flowsheet, where both technologies are used as separate unit operations, was evaluated. Test samples of varying copper head grades allowed an ore value calculation method to be developed based on the integration of continuous bulk sorting and particle sorting. The calculation method can be applied to block models of a future cave at New Afton and used to evaluate the change in the economic footprint. It was found that the concept demonstrated an improvement in the net smelter return of excavated material.With current trends in declining discovery rates of significant near-surface mineral deposits, block and panel cave mining methods are gaining popularity as they allow massive, deeply situated ore-bodies to be mined economically. The lack of selectivity and potential for dilution associated with the block cave mining method results in many caving operations having to mine material that is below cut-off grade. Sensor-based sorting provides a means to separate ore and waste from caved material, either at the extraction level or after it has been transported to surface. Successful implementation stands to reduce milling requirements, improve the quality of mill feed and increase the size of the economic footprint. An evaluation of bulk and particle sorting technologies was carried out for a future cave, referred to as C-Zone, at the New Afton block caving operation, a copper-gold porphyry deposit in British Columbia, Canada. A growing number of mining operations are implementing sensor-based sorting technologies to pre-concentrate excavated material ( At Khumani, the grade of run-of-mine (ROM) material is measured with a PGNAA online analyser. Low grade ROM material is sent to waste stockpiles, intermediate grade material is sent to washing, screening and jig beneficiation circuits, and product grade material bypasses treatment and is sent directly to product stockpiles ( PGNAA grade sensors are also used at the Sepon copper-gold operations in Laos. The effectiveness of particle sorting systems relies on the use of grade sensing technologies that are suitable for the feed material ( With the Khumani ore sorting approach in mind, a combination of bulk and particle sorting systems was evaluated for the New Afton mine. PGNAA technology was tested as a solution to measuring the grade of material being conveyed from underground to surface and diverting bulk lots according to copper grade. For the particle sorting application, the amenability of XRF technology to New Afton ore was tested. A systems engineering methodology for cave mine operations, termed Cave-to-Mill, has been developed to give existing and future block cave operations an opportunity to improve productivity. Both mine and mill models are set up at the beginning of a project and continuously refined as the project progresses ( The New Afton Mine is currently a 17,500 tonne per day copper-gold operation located in British Columbia, Canada. The mine officially commenced production in July 2012. The B1 and B2 caves, which were in production at the time of this study, are located 615 m below surface and their combined mining footprint is approximately 800 m in length and 150 m in width. New Gold is currently evaluating subsequent development of the C-Zone cave, which can potentially extend mine operations from 2023 onwards at a full production rate of 15,000 tpd ( Most of the deposit occurs within crystalline and polylithic fragmental volcanics belonging to the Triassic Nicola Group and lesser monolithic intrusive breccias consolidated into a single-host package, which is informally referred to as BXF ( Samples were collected from different areas of the underground extraction level to ensure that the range of lithology and alteration types appearing in ROM material were included. Geotechnical and metallurgical tests, such as grindability and froth flotation, were carried out on the different lithology and alteration types. A summary of key rock types and their implications on productivity is shown in Nine samples of approximately 220 kg each were prepared for PGNAA testing. Samples were collected from drawpoints, mill feed and waste stockpiles. Overall, a wide range of copper grades and rock types, as outlined in The grade of each bulk sample was determined by crushing and screening to 100% passing 9.5 mm, homogenizing, sub-sampling, and assaying sub-samples with inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectrometry and fire assays. The nine samples were sent to Scantech testing facilities in South Australia for testing with a Geoscan-M unit, which was fitted with four detectors, shown in A sub-sampling and crushing procedure was established referencing From grind-recovery performance in the regrind circuit of the process plant, the liberation size, used to determine the liberation factor in Eq. Each sample was measured for a period of at least three hours. During the three-hour measurement time, individual instantaneous analysis periods were varied throughout the test work to achieve a number of results for different measurement periods. The expected accuracy of a Geoscan-M unit when installed on a conveyor could then be estimated for different measuring times (which are directly related to the quantity of conveyed material). The repeatability of copper grade measurements in relation to analysis time and number of detectors, reported by The gold grades associated with New Afton ore are below the threshold value of 500 ppm, equivalent to 500 g per tonne, of the Geoscan-M unit. Applications of the technology for gold grade measurement typically rely on proxy elements being used in a regression equation to estimate gold content. For the case of New Afton, drill core data and grades from regular drawpoint samples show that the average ratio of gold (g/t) grade to copper (%) grade is approximately 0.8.  An Olympus model 500316 XRF unit, mounted in a tripod stand, was used to measure the elemental content of surface rocks. Samples were separate from those used for PGNAA testing and consisted of material taken from drawpoints and mill feed stockpiles. The test workflow is shown in XRF measurements were carried out on the surfaces of 1226 rocks in the (−150, +25 mm) size range using a measuring time of 10 s. For each individual reading, the pXRF unit measured the elemental content of material located on the surface of the rock within a circle having a diameter of 1 cm. Four readings were taken per rock. From the master set of 1226 rocks, 291 rocks were selected based on rock type and subjected to crushing and pulverizing. A representative sub-sample of the finely pulverized material was measured with the same pXRF unit to determine the grade of each rock. To calibrate the pXRF unit, ICP measurements and pXRF measurements were carried out on 20 pulverized New Afton rocks. A coefficient of determination, R-squared, of 0.999 resulted from comparison of ICP and pXRF results for copper. Matlab R2016b was used to carry out stepwise regression analysis of pXRF readings for rock surfaces and powder material after pulverizing. Model terms with an entrance tolerance less than a p-value of 0.05 and an exit tolerance less than a p-value of 0.1 were accepted into the model. Eq. Results from the dataset of 291 particles, having a weighted average grade of 0.86% Cu, were used to simulate the sorting performance of a sorter. Grade and recovery curves in relation to sorter mass pull are presented in The XRF measurement time that is achievable during sorter operation is shorter than the 10 s measuring time that was used for portable XRF testing. Test data for a Steinert pXRF sorting unit from an independent study by  Grade and recovery curves in relation to sorter mass pull were calculated for sorter operation and are presented in The envisaged combination of bulk and particle sorting systems at the New Afton block cave mine is presented in Low grade material that is transported on the underground-to-surface conveyor is dumped to a waste stockpile and high-grade material is sent directly to the mill. Intermediate grade material is fed to a double-deck screen with aperture sizes of 100 and 37.5 mm. Oversize (+100 mm) is crushed in closed-circuit with the screen and the middlings are sent to a coarse (−100, +37.5 mm) particle sorting unit. Screen undersize is conveyed to a single-deck screen with a cut-point of 12.5 mm. The oversize is processed by a fine (−37.5, +12.5 mm) particle sorting unit and the fines are either milled or dumped to a waste stockpile depending on the head grade measured by the bulk sensor at the time when it was conveyed from underground, or depending on the measured grade should an additional PGNAA sensor be installed. Screening is carried out with wet sprayers to clean the surfaces of the rocks. Both coarse and fine particle sorting units are equipped with (1) XRF sensors that determine copper grades from surface readings, and (2) pneumatic ejectors, that send above cut-off grade material to a mill feed stockpile. The ratios of the maximum and minimum particle sizes for the coarse and fine units are within the guideline range of 3:1 for particle sorting; a guideline suggested by The amount of ore available for particle sorting depends on the proportion of fines (−12.5 mm) contained in the primary crushed ore. Sieving of primary crushed material was carried out as part of a comprehensive cave fragmentation study. Results showed that approximately 34% of primary crushed material would pass a 12.5 mm screen ( Constitutional Heterogeneity (CH), a concept presented by CH values for underground drawpoint samples and a surface sample, which is a blend of material from underground drawpoints, were calculated based on pXRF surface readings for copper and pXRF readings of the same rocks after pulverizing as shown in To simulate the performance of an XRF particle sorter operating with different head grades, the master data set for 291 rocks that had surface and pulverized sample measurements taken was separated into data sub-sets representing head grades ranging from 0.02 to 1.4% Cu. When selecting rocks for a target heard grade, a grade-weighted random selection function was used in Excel. Objectives of the selection function were to select rocks such that (1) the weighted average grade of the rocks corresponded to the target head grade and (2) the head grade and CH were within 15% of the trend line included in Particle sorting performance could then be simulated for a range of head grades while accounting for the heterogeneity occurring within lots of New Afton caved material.  The following flotation recovery model for copper in B1 and B2 hypogene ores was determined by New Afton metallurgists from site data and applies for mill process rates of 15,500 tonnes per day with an expectation that C-Zone will behave similarly: Recovery models based on historical mill data were also used for gold and silver recovery calculations. All cost and mill recovery assumptions were combined with the particle sorting model to determine the mass pull that provides the highest value for each head grade. For the case where material is screened, the oversize is processed by a particle sorter and the fines are processed by the mill, recovery of copper contained in screen feed is calculated by the following equation: The proportion of ROM material that is directed to the mill is given by: The grade of mill feed is calculated as: Similar calculations are used for the case where caved material is screened and the oversize is processed by a particle sorter while the fines are dumped to waste stockpiles. The mass pull, For both particle sorting scenarios, the value of recovered copper in copper concentrate is determined by the following equation: The overall value per tonne of ore is: An example of how the two sorting options compare for a feed grade of 0.22% Cu is shown in The modelling process was repeated for all sub-sets so that the optimum mass pull target (maximum sorting NSR) for a range of copper grades could be determined, which is shown in Models for economic sorter mass pull and the corresponding metal recovery were fitted to results using the following equations: For each block of ore within a grade block model, the value associated with direct milling (contained NSR), particle sorting with and without fines dumping (ore sorting NSR), versus disposal as waste can be determined and compared using the calculations presented. Running production schedules for a nominated footprint allows the capacity requirements of sorting equipment to be estimated. Incorporating assumptions for contained gold and silver ratios, a comparison of ore value and feed grade is presented in In caving operations, there are periods of operation where waste is caved and transported to surface due to: the requirement of achieving a suitably large footprint to ensure that the cave initiates and propagates, to access ore that is separated from the extraction level by blocks of waste and due to unplanned dilution. Once sub-economic material has been brought to surface, particle sorting may provide more value than disposal to a waste dump. For this reason, mining costs have not been included in the value calculation in The presented method for assessing the value of bulk and particle sorting systems was developed using material from an operating block cave mine. For block cave mines that are in the project development stage, drill core samples could be used in place of drawpoint samples. Grade-recovery results from alternative particle sorting systems, such as XRT-based sorters, can be modelled using similar calculation methods. Capacity requirements of particle sorting units, irrespective of sensing technology, would stand to be significantly reduced by the presence of the proposed bulk sorting system. The value of sensing systems extends beyond the opportunity to sort ore according to grade. Both pXRF and PGNAA test results showed that picrite, a waste rock that negatively affects copper recovery in the flotation circuit, can be identified by elevated concentrations of nickel and chromium, shown in The installation of bulk sorting systems prompts reconsideration of the approach to nominating underground production schedules. Although production schedules are constrained by cave stresses, flow geometry and cave geometry, they do provide the possibility to blend ore types in a fashion that increases mill productivity. At many block cave mines, production schedules are nominated to provide a consistent grade of mill feed. This approach encourages mixing of grades in the crushing and material handling systems. However, in the case where a bulk sorting system is in place, production schedules should be nominated to minimize mixing so that high-grade and waste material can be campaigned to surface. This provides more opportunity to beneficiate the ore prior to the mill. When calculating the cost performance of the sorting systems, it was apparent that a significant cost benefit was the improved flotation recovery due to improvements in mill feed grades. For a feed grade of 0.20% Cu, an improvement in ore value of $0.97 per tonne was calculated for the case where bulk and particle sorting systems are installed. Further evolutions of the approach involve implementation of bucket mounted grade sensors and tracking of load haul dump (scooptram) movements along the extraction level. Such an approach would provide opportunity to take advantage of the heterogeneity of caved material and improve mill productivity. To strengthen the assessment of XRF-based particle sorting, more test work is required to increase the database of 291 characterised particles for use in Net Smelter Return calculations. Bulk particle testing will provide opportunity to update the model to allow for sorting inefficiencies that are associated with material presentation to the sorters and fluctuations in throughput. Further work is focused on applying the outcomes of the paper to the grade block model to evaluate the size of the economic footprint for cases where sorting systems are used. Such an evaluation would also allow mass balances to be calculated for sizing and cost estimation of sorting equipment and the downstream process plant. The authors would like to thank personnel at New Afton and New Gold for supporting the Cave-to-Mill project and for providing access to samples and data from the New Afton block cave operation. Thomas Chudy, post-doctoral research fellow at the Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences at the University of British Columbia provided valuable input through review of the work and discussion. Marty Henning of New Gold assisted with sample selection and provided input throughout the course of the project. John Andrew, New Gold, carried out ICP analyses and fire assays at the New Afton assay lab. Kevin Swedburg, New Gold provided the flotation recovery model and assisted with cost information. Arvin Mazhary kindly provided dynamic XRF sensor data for the study. The authors would also like to thank NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) for the financial support provided to this research through a Collaborative Research Development grant (Grant No. 11R74149; Mine-to-Mill Integration for Block Cave Mines). ALS Metallurgy in Kamloops, BC carried out froth flotation tests and assays. MineSense Technologies provided access to an Olympus pXRF unit and ConductOre test unit. PGNAA bulk testing and supply of sensor data was carried out by Scantech Pty Ltd. at their facilities in Australia. (see (see