Enargite electrodes, made from mineral originating in the ‘Salvador’ mine (Chañaral, Chile), have been studied using SEM, EDX, CV and EIS in an alkaline solution for a range of different potentials in the positive sweep direction (PSD) and negative sweep direction (NSD). The results of SEM and EDX have shown that the principal changes in morphology and chemical composition take place on the surface of the electrode for oxidation potentials close to the value that corresponds to the most intense peak in the PSD, where there is clearly formation of a layer of oxidised material with areas of morphology which are irregular and high in oxygen content. These results are in accordance with the findings from XPS studies published previously. The charge transfer resistance and the resistance of the anodic layer of the electrode were determined by EIS measurements; the values depend heavily on the applied potential in the PSD or NSD. These changes are related to the changes on the surface of the electrode studied by SEM and EDXEnargite (Cu Enargite is a mineral which gives rise to significant arsenic pollution during the industrial procedure of copper mining; moreover, it is necessary to eliminate traces of arsenic from the metal after processing The behaviour of the mineral particle during the flotation process is affected by its surface properties and its interaction with the electrolyte. During flotation, ground mineral is placed in a basic solution containing a collector (usually a xanthate) and molecular oxygen (air bubbling). In this process the surface of the mineral undergoes considerable changes in its chemical composition due to interaction with the electrolyte. On the mineral surface there are redox reactions, adsorption of molecules, and in general, diverse electrochemical processes which modify the surface to such an extent that it can be considered as a heterogeneous film of modified mineral which is quite different from the substrate. These compositional changes on the surface alter profoundly the electrical properties at the mineral Traditional electrochemical methodology (cyclic voltammetry, CV, and, more recently, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, EIS) permit the study of electrical interactions between the electrode and the electrolyte, and how these vary with different oxidation potentials. Thus, EIS allows a tentative model of the electrode–electrolyte interaction via equivalent electrochemical circuits composed of capacitance, resistance, and impedance of diffusion whose values depend on the chemical composition of the electrode surface. However, these methods do not allow the morphological or chemical composition alterations, which in turn give rise to the electrochemical processes measured as a function of the applied potential, to be established. On the other hand, other analytical techniques such as SEM, EDX and XPS can be used to give complementary information about the nature of the electrode surface. But the use of SEM, EDX, and XPS The aim of the current work is twofold. Firstly, we applied SEM and EDX to the study of changes of a natural enargite electrode surface during cyclic voltammetry and contrasted the results with results from a previous study using XPS The working electrode is natural enargite (Cu SEM micrographs and EDX spectra were obtained with a Jeol JSM 6400 scanning electron microscope equipped with a Link analytical system. The electron energy used was 20 keV. For our study we used a glove box filled with Ar gas (99.999%) and coupled to the SEM chamber for both the electrochemical treatment and for the EIS experiments. In this way, the SEM and EDX analyses were carried out for the same points as the EIS experiments without changes in the chemical composition of the electrode surface. Previous voltammetry experiments have been done to determine the main peak currents. Those peaks are associated with redox processes in the electrode surface. In previous work, some of our team studied in detail the voltammetric behaviour of enargite and the possible electrochemical reactions that were taking place on the enargite surface on being subjected to varying potential The surface of the polished electrode appears as a flat surface with small holes and bright spots, which occupy approximately 3% of the surface area of the electrode ( The EIS measurements were taken at the same points as for SEM and EDX measurements. Nyquist and Bode plots derived from the results obtained in positive cycling input (points 0, 1, 2 and 3) and negative cycling input (points 4, 5, 6 and 7) are very similar ( The main transformation in the characteristic parameters of the PSD section, The oxidation of enargite in an alkaline medium results in a modification of the morphology and chemical composition of the surface. The joint application of analytical (SEM, EDX, and XPS) and electrochemical (CV, EIS) techniques permits the relationship between morphological and compositional changes of the surface and changes in the most characteristic electrochemical parameters, as determined by EIS, to be established. The measurements by SEM and EDX, performed at different potentials following the voltammogram, agree with the results obtained with XPS published in a previous study, and show clearly how the modification of the surface, as much morphologically as in chemical composition, results in a heterogeneous surface, with protrusions of differing chemical compositions and morphologies which are spread irregularly over the electrode surface. These islands contain a high concentration of oxygen, showing them to be centres of oxidation. These changes are greater in the case of potentials close to the peaks of the voltammogram. The transformations on the surface of the electrode cause changes in the kind of equivalent circuit that best represents the EIS data, changing from Randles circuits to circuits characteristic of partially covered electrode surfaces. Furthermore, the charge transfer resistance on the surface also shows a strong dependence on the potential considered on the voltammogram to which the SEM, EDX, and EIS measurements were subjected. Both resistances decrease greatly in the area around the last peak of the voltammogram in the PSD. The financial support of the Junta de Andalucı́a (Spain) through research group FQM192 and FONDECYT (Chile) through contract 1980316 is gratefully acknowledged; moreover, the bursary holder, P. Velásquez, wishes to thank AECI (Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional).