Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with vascular calcifications and atherosclerosis. There is a need for novel predictors to allow earlier diagnosis of these disorders, predict disease progression, and improve assessment of treatment response. We focused on microRNAs since they are implicated in a variety of cellular functions in cardiovascular pathology. We examined changes of microRNA expression in aortas of CKD and non-CKD wild type mice and apolipoprotein E knock-out mice, respectively. Both vascular smooth muscle-specific miR-143 and miR-145 expressions were decreased in states of atherosclerosis and/or CKD or both, and the expression level of protein target Myocardin was increased. The inflammatory miR-223 was increased in more advanced stages of CKD, and specific protein targets NFI-A and GLUT-4 were dramatically decreased. Expression of miR-126 was markedly increased and expression of protein targets VCAM-1 and SDF-1 was altered during the course of CKD. The drug sevelamer, commonly used in CKD, corrected partially these changes in microRNA expression, suggesting a direct link between the observed microRNA alterations and uremic vascular toxicity. Finally, miR-126, -143 and -223 expression levels were deregulated in murine serum during the course of experimental CKD. In conclusion, these miRNAs could have role(s) in CKD vascular remodeling and may therefore represent useful targets to prevent or treat complications of CKD.Patients with late stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD) exhibit a dramatic increase in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality To our knowledge, miRNA expression in large vessels during the course of experimental CKD and CKD-associated atherosclerosis has not been studied so far. We therefore decided to analyze the expression of six cardiovascular-related miRNAs The pro-angiogenic miR-126 is abundant in endothelial cells In the present study, we have obtained evidence suggesting that CKD-associated vascular damage leads to aorta down-regulation of miR-143 and miR-145 expression, up-regulation of miR-126 and miR-223 expression, and marginal changes of miR-221 and miR-222 expression, with concomitant changes in murine serum. These alterations were correlated with changes in the expression of their most important target genes. Treatment with sevelamer, a phosphate binder and modulator of other uremic toxins that also displays anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, partially reversed the changes in miRNA expression induced by this pathologic state. Altogether, our findings strongly suggest an implication of miRNAs in the vascular remodeling of mice with CKD and atherosclerosis. All experiments were performed in female mice (Charles Rivers), as they develop vascular calcifications more rapidly than their male counterparts Human endothelial cells from umbilical vein HUV-EC-C, No CRL-1730 were purchased from ATCC and grown according to the supplier's instructions. Anti-miR transfections were performed as described in ref. Cardiac blood was chilled and spun at 7000 Aortas were ground using Bio-Gen RNA isolation and RT-qPCR were performed as described previously Data from T2, T4 and T10 mice were analyzed by ANOVA two-way test (*CKD vs. SHAM, and † or §WT vs. Apo-E KO) and data from T0 mice and Sevelamer treatment mice were analyzed by Student CKD is associated with enhanced atherosclerosis and increased aortic stiffness by as yet poorly understood mechanisms As expected, serum urea levels were increased in mice with CKD, both WT and ApoE-KO, as compared to SHAM mice, 2 Four weeks after subtotal nephrectomy (T4), we still observed a CKD effect on calcium levels which were increased 1.2 times in all CKD mice (Supplementary Table I). Urea levels were still increased in CKD mice by almost 5 times vs. SHAM. In regard to Chol and TG levels, we ascertained both an Apo-E KO effect and a CKD effect: indeed Chol level were increased in Apo-E KO mice vs. WT mice by approximately 4 times, and in CKD mice vs. SHAM mice, by almost 1.5 times. We detected a doubling of TG levels in Apo-E KO CKD mice vs. WT CKD, and a decreased level in WT CKD mice vs. WT SHAM mice 1.7 times. At 10 Valvular calcifications were evaluated by von Kossa staining in cryosections of aortic tissue which allows distinction of intimal and medial calcifications (representative pictures are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1). In aortic root cryosections there was a significant increase at T10 of percent calcified area in Apo-E KO mice compared with WT mice ( At first, we verified that the expression of our endogenous control, the RNA spliceosome gene U6, was not significantly changed between WT SHAM mice and the various pathological conditions (data not shown). At baseline, there was no detectable effect of Apo-E KO state on either miR-143 or miR-145 expression. Subsequently, we observed a significant decrease of miR-143 in both Apo-E KO SHAM and Apo-E KO CKD mouse aortas, by respectively 1.3 and 1.8 times vs. WT mice at T2, 2.7 and 1.7 times vs. WT mice at T4, and 1.5 and 1.2 times vs. WT mice at T10 ( At baseline, no significant difference in miR-223 expression was detected between Apo-E KO and WT mice ( No significant difference was observed concerning miR-126 expression in aortas at T0. In contrast, at T2, miR-126 expression was significantly enhanced in CKD mice aortas (WT and Apo-E KO) 1.2 and 2.2 times respectively vs. SHAM mice; at T4, miR-126 increased significantly in Apo-E KO SHAM and Apo-E KO CKD mice aortas 1.3 and 2.9 times respectively vs. WT mice ( Significant variations of miR-221/222 expression were not detected in pathological conditions, from the induction of uremia to the end of the experiment except at T4. In these conditions, at T4, miR-221 was decreased in Apo-E KO mice (SHAM and CKD) 2.3 and 1.4 times respectively and miR-222 expression was diminished 1.9 and 1.2 times respectively vs. WT (Supplementary Fig. 4). Given these mixed results, we decided not to further explore miR-221 and miR-222 implications in our models. We tested Spearman correlation coefficients between blood parameters and the expression of miRNAs in aortas ( In order to assess a causality link between the miRNAs we studied and aorta pathology, we treated SHAM and CKD WT mice with the phosphate binding drug sevelamer. We measured levels of miR-126, miR-143 and miR-223 in order to respectively assess the endothelial dysfunction, the smooth muscle cell biology, and the inflammatory state. Sevelamer or placebo was administered mixed with animal chow, at a proportion of 3%. Sevelamer treatment was started 2 To assess miR-126, miR-143, miR-145 and miR-223 as putative noninvasive biomarkers in our murine models, their expression was analyzed in the serum of uremic (CKD) and Apo-E KO mice 2 At T2, corresponding to the earliest stage of uremia, miR-126, miR-143 and miR-223 expressions were significantly decreased in sera from Apo-E KO SHAM mice versus WT SHAM mice ( At T10, expression of the inflammatory miR-223 and the endothelial-specific miR-126 was strongly and significantly decreased in WT CKD mice versus WT SHAM mice ( The purpose of our study was to assess the expression of cardiovascular-related miRNAs during the course of rapidly progressive atherosclerosis and vascular calcification in association with the progression of CKD The biochemical data described in our paper confirm previous reports already published by our laboratory One of our study's most important findings was the up-regulation of miR-223 in aortas of CKD mice and also in SHAM operated Apo-E KO mice. miR-223 is widely considered as a tumor-specific miRNA (e.g. miR-126 is prevalent in endothelial cells, where it enhances blood vessel formation Sevelamer has been demonstrated to prevent the progression of vascular calcification in CKD and to normalize the endothelial dysfunction induced by uremic toxins In support of miR-126, miR-143, miR-145 and miR-223 as putative noninvasive biomarkers in our models, we show that they were all detected in normal and pathological murine serum. Furthermore, most of these miRNAs are regulated during the crucial stages leading to CKD and atherosclerosis. At the earliest stage of uremia, miR-126, miR-143 and miR-223 expression was significantly decreased in sera from Apo-E KO mice versus their WT counterparts, indicating that these miRNAs are potential early biomarkers of atherosclerotic damage. At the later stage of uremia, Apo-E KO mutation induces a decrease of miR-126, miR-143 and miR-223. Also, CKD at this later stage of uremia triggers a decrease of miR-126 and miR-143 expression. Interestingly, miR-223 at T10 was decreased in serum from CKD mice compared to SHAM mice, while miR-223 expression was increased in aortas. A similar phenomenon was observed by Kin et al. We show in our CKD and atherosclerotic models that four miRNAs are deregulated during the course of aortic vascular calcification and atherosclerosis and that sevelamer treatment reverses the alteration of these miRNA expressions. Taken together, our results have led to novel suggestions concerning miRNA regulation during the course of CKD, and the treatment of its vascular disorders. These findings may be useful in understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the vascular complications of CKD in patients suffering from cardiovascular diseases, and, in the longer term, in designing innovative miRNA-targeted treatments. None We are indebted to Marie-Alix Conte, of the Centre De Biologie Humaine (CBH), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Hôpital Sud, Avenue René Laënnec Salouël, 80054 Amiens Cedex 1, for blood biochemistry determinations. We thank Julien Maizel for expert advice on quantification of vascular calcification. Sources of funding: This work was funded by grants from the Picardie Regional Council (MARNO-MPCC and Modulation des calcifications cardiovasculaires), including a PhD fellowship for FT and a post-doctoral fellowship for EMM.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at