Production of metallic oxide/graphene aerogel composite systems is of great importance regarding their superb electrochemical and adsorption characteristics. Developing a facile and economic synthesis route is a necessity for thriving exploitation especially when the synthesis process has to compete with other chemical/physical synthesis processes. In the present work, nitrogen doped cobalt oxide/graphene aerogel nanocomposite (N-doped Co3O4/GA) was successfully synthesized via a facile, cost-effective and environmentally friendly route. In this mild chemical reduction based route, the pre-adsorbed GO solution was exposed to L-Ascorbic Acid (LAA) that acted both as the reducing agent and cross-linker. In order to incorporate nitrogen atom within the nano-composite structure, ammonium solution was added to the prepared cobalt–graphene hydrogel (GH); this resulted in doping of the nitrogen atoms as well as strengthening of the composite. The freeze drying process was then conducted to convert the prepared N-doped cobalt–GH to N-doped cobalt–GA and finally, N-doped Co3O4/GA was obtained after heat treatment. The formation of Co3O4 was confirmed by X-Ray diffraction analysis and according to microscopic images, the spherical Co3O4 nanoparticles were randomly distributed over the graphene sheets with a size distribution of 8–10 nm. In addition, the BET specific surface area and the pore volume of composite were estimated 215 m2 g−1 and 1.22 cm3 g−1, respectively. Moreover, the bulk density was 19 mg cm−3 and the load bearing limit of N-doped Co3O4/GA was higher than 2000 times of its own weight. Due to the excellent mechanical strength as well as favorable density, the synthesized nano-composite system can be promisingly a preferred candidate for the electrode materials in the energy storage devices.Graphene, as the two-dimensional (2D) one-atom thick carbon sheets, has been widely employed in the fabrication of energy-storage devices During recent years, many efforts have been devoted to the production of 3D graphene aerogels and graphene hydrogels (GH) with the aim of integrating the superb properties of graphene and aerogels specifically the intensified electrochemical characteristics as well as the enhanced adsorption capacity In mild chemical reduction route, a mild reducing agent such as Among different reducing agents employed in the mild chemical reduction process, LAA exhibits remarkably low acute toxicity and, it is not only an ideal reducing agent for graphene oxide (GO) Generally in mild chemical reduction route, 3D graphene hydrogel is first made from suspension containing GO and reducing agent. Then, by removing water from hydrogel via various methods (such as supercritical CO Metallic ions can also support the self-assembly phenomenon of GH/GA sheets; this effect can be explained by the fact that the metallic ions interact with the oxygen-containing groups present on the GH/GA. In other words, GH/GA sheets can replace the water molecules surrounding the metallic ions via hydrogen-bonding like interactions A survey of previous literature provides information on the synthesis of metallic oxide – graphene (reduced graphene oxide) composites GO was prepared according to the modified Hummers method. Briefly, 5.0 g of graphite powders and 2.5 g sodium nitrates were added into 120 mL concentrated sulfuric acid under ambient conditions. The mixture was then put into an ice bath for 25 min under mild agitation; after slow addition of potassium permanganate (15.0 g), the system was kept at the temperature lower than 10 °C for 25 min. Thereafter, the well mixed suspension was heated to 35 °C and was kept for 45 min to form a thick paste. After addition of 140 mL deionized water, temperature of the solution was increased to 98 °C for another 45 min where the color of system changed from brown to yellow. Subsequently, 30 mL hydrogen peroxide (H The obtained mixture was filtered and washed with 50 mL of diluted HCl solution (10% v/v). Finally, the mixture was centrifuged for several times at 12,000 rpm until pH of the system reached to 6. The resulting sample was dried in freeze dryer for 24 h. For preparation of GO solution 1 g GO was added in 1 L water and well sonicated for about 2 h; the coarse aggregates were then removed via mild centrifugation (4000 rpm for 10 min). The resulting mixture was ready for next run of the process. In the adsorption step, 10 mL of the prepared GO solution (1.5 mg/mL) was well mixed with 10 mL of Co solution (1.5 mg/mL) under ambient conditions for 2 h. The samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min. The concentration of Co in the solution was measured and the sorption percentage was estimated as: In which, C  A brief description about the conditions and considerations related to each experimental runs together with the codes assigned to them, are given below: GH1: The as-prepared GO mixture was treated by LAA for 4 h at 90 °C; the pH of mixture was kept at 3. The freeze dried GH1 was named GA1. GH2: The as-prepared GO mixture was treated by LAA for 4 h at 90 °C; then, it was treated by ammonia solution (20% v/v) at 90 °C for 1 h in a sealed vessel. The freeze dried GH2 was named GA2. GH3: The GO mixture previously adsorbed cobalt was treated by LAA for 4 h at 90 °C; the initial pH of mixture was set at 3. The freeze dried GH3 was named GA3. GH4: The GO mixture previously adsorbed cobalt was treated by ammonia solution (20% v/v) at 90 °C for 1 h in a sealed vessel to reach a pH value of 7. Then, it was treated by LAA for 4 h at 90 °C. The freeze dried GH4 was named GA4. The final product (as-prepared GA) was thermally treated at 400 °C for 2 h with a heating rate of 10 °C/min; this thermal treatment could effectively help to: Enhance the nitrogen doping process Convert the probable remained cobalt hydroxide to cobalt oxide; Higher reduction percentage of GA for achieving higher electrical conductivity; All the above mentioned items are necessary to achieve a favorable GA/Co The Co concentration was measured by Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) using Varian. The apparent (bulk) density of samples was simply estimated by dividing the mass sample over its volume. The cylindrical volume is used in order to comparative to other reports. The morphological feature of the obtained GAs were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (XL30 Philips) with an accelerating voltage of 30 kV together with the field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (XFlash 6130 Bruker) with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) equipment for chemical analysis. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) (Philips) was used to measure the crystal structure of the obtained samples by using CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) in the 2θ range of 5–90°. Functional groups and chemical bonds were evaluated by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (P.E. Spectrum 100). Specific surface areas of the samples were measured by nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms performed at 77 K on a Micromeritics BELSORP volumetric adsorption system. The specific surface area, degree of oxidation, purity and size of GO sheets were considered as the most important characteristics of GO as the starting material for the synthesis of GA. According to SEM images presented in Based on the value of C/O ratio presented in From the N It is worthy of note that the adsorption step was conducted under certain conditions regarding the scope of this study. According to our studies, about 88% of cobalt ion can be absorbed by GO under following conditions: initial cobalt concentration = 15 (mg/L), GO concentration = 1.5 (mg/L), pH = 4, t = 120 min. This adsorption level is in good agreement with the literature According to Pourbaix diagram presented in As in introduction section mentioned, the presence of metals within the GO structure can effectively facilitate the self-assembly GH/GA sheets due to their interaction with the oxygen-containing groups present on the GH/GA. In According to Another point regarding the GH making is that the time required for the formation of GH decreased by introducing cobalt in the system which can be ascribed to the enhancement in the self-assembly of the GO sheets; i.e. the formation time of GH3 is shorter than that of GH1 (see the supplementary materials of the paper). In order to evaluate the effect of LAA concentration, three experiments were conducted in which the mass ratio of GO to LAA (GO/LAA) was set at 1:1, 1:3 and 1:5 (named GH1-1, GH1-3, GH1-5, respectively). According to the images presented in The effect of initial pH on the hydrogel formation is presented in In In order to obtain the graphene aerogels, the freeze drying step was conducted on GH1, GH2, GH3 and GH4. The freeze dried GH1, GH2, GH3 and GH4 are named GA1, GA2, GA3 and GA4, respectively. The load bearing limit of the freeze dried sample was considered as the criterion for the evaluation of mechanical strength A comparison between mechanical strength of GA1 and GA2 indicated the load bearing limit of GA2 is approximately 1000 times higher that of GA1 which is not in agreement with results obtained in section 5.3.1. Such this dubious inconsistency can be justified by the fact that the GH2 sample was previously treated by ammonia solution and its dry freezing temperature was reduced. Consequently, the ice nuclei cannot grow and collapse the porous structure due to the lower freezing point of ammonia solution in hydrogel It is worthy of note that the mechanical strength of the self-assembled graphene aerogel was greatly enhanced after treating by ammonia solution. This is due to the fact that by introducing the NH In order to assure complete conversion of cobalt hydroxide to cobalt oxide and, to enhance the nitrogen doping process In The sample GA2 was also thermally treated for comparison purposes. It should be pointed out that GA2 preparation conditions were the same as GA3 except in the Co adsorption step; i.e. there was no cobalt in the structure of GA2. GA3, with a cylindrical shape, can tolerate a compressive force that is 2000 times higher than its weight without any deformation. In addition, load bearing limit of GA3 was two times higher than that of GA2. In order to characterize the morphological features of the obtained nitrogen-doped GA/Co In addition, EDS spectrum of GA3 is shown in Based on the results presented in In addition, TEM images ( The XRD pattern of GA3 is presented in It is worthy of note that no characteristic peak related to other impurities, including Co(OH) In order to a better understanding of the interaction between different species present in the GA/Co The characteristic bands for GO appeared at 1718, 1047 and 1228 cm Another point regarding the spectrum corresponding to the GA3 is the appearance of band at 580 cm In In the case of pure GA, the characteristic D and G bands appear at 1291 cm The specific surface area and pore size of the GA2 and GA3 were obtained from BET analysis are Based on the In the present study, a mild chemical reduction based method was employed for the synthesis of nitrogen doped cobalt oxide/graphene aerogel nanocomposite. The synthesis method comprised the preparation of graphene oxide, adsorption process of cobalt, hydrogel making, treatment by ammonia solution and freeze drying. The addition of cobalt, in the adsorption step, resulted in the decrease in hydrogel making period due to collective attractive interaction between ions and functional groups of GO. The direct role of L- ascorbic acid was the reducing agent and its byproducts played the role of binder. After heat treatment process, spherical Co Apart from the advantages of the employed synthesis method (facility, cheapness and environmental friendliness), the light weight and large surface area, together with their excellent mechanical property, can promisingly provide the conditions for successful commercial exploitations. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 