In this study, we have synthesized nanostructured FexCe1 − xO2 (0≤x≤0.5) particles by microwave refluxing method. All the samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Raman, UV–vis, photoluminescence and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The microstructural characterization reveals that at lower concentration of Fe (x=0.1), the sample predominantly has spherical shape particles along with nanorods. The nanorods become prominent with increased Fe content. Further, the substitution of Fe3+ ions in CeO2 caused formation of defect states between Ce4+ conduction band and O2– valence band. These defect states or oxygen vacancies caused increase in the saturation magnetization (Ms). Even the anisotropy of the nanorods reduces the localized antiferromagnetic interaction between Fe3+ ions and hence MS value found to be increasing.The metal oxide semiconductor CeO In addition to the type of dopant, size and shape of the particles also influence the formation of defect states in CeO For the production of undoped or doped CeO Saini et al. based on their theoretical calculations argued that the induced magnetization in Fe The precursors FeSO XRD measurements were carried out using a Phillips X'pert Pro Advanced powder X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ In order to identify the crystal structure, XRD patterns were recorded for FS1, FS2 and FS3 samples ( To characterize the shape of FS1, FS2 and FS3 nanoparticles, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed.   Optical absorbance spectra for FS1, FS2 and FS3 samples are shown in where λ For FS1, FS2 and FS3 samples, the onset absorption edge of optical spectra were 426, 427, and 439  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy for FS1 sample was employed to identify the surface species and their chemical states.  It is reported that RTFM arises in undoped CeO The RTFM nature of FS1, FS2 and FS3 samples may be attributed to the formation of Fe  The θ values for FS1, FS2 and FS3 were − The systematic studies on the effect of Fe substitution on the structural and magnetic properties of nanostructured CeO We are thankful to Dr. Ranjan Kumar Singh, Department of Physics, BHU, Varanasi for spectroscopy measurements.