Significant levels of ultrafine particles remain in the feed after desliming via cyclones. These slimes represent a challenge for downstream processing due to the increased viscosity, moisture retention in the product including associated materials handling issues, and entrainment of contaminant with the product. This paper examines the influence of slimes on the recovery of high-grade iron ore fines across a size range of 0–0.3 mm using the REFLUX™ Classifier. Experiments were performed using closely spaced inclined plates (3 mm apart and 1000 mm long) over a range of solids throughputs of 3.5–28 t/(m2 h). Lower feed solids concentrations led to higher recoveries due to the reduction in the viscosity arising from the slimes. At the higher volumetric flowrates used to increase the solids throughput, the very high shear rates generated in the channels further reduced the viscous effects of the slimes. The results are supported by rheological data, based on the ultrafine solids collected from the overflow stream which show strong shear thinning at the relevant shear rates within the inclined channels.Increasing demand for resources has led to a greater need for efficient beneficiation of ultrafine iron ore. Among the valuable ultrafines are high levels of alumina, silica and phosphorous that pose issues for sintering and smelting. Hence, effective gravity separation, and classification are often necessary. There are many difficulties in processing ultrafine particles. The low particle inertia limits throughput and challenges density-based separations. The presence of slimes increases the pulp viscosity, and entrainment with the product stream, and in turn the final product moisture. Removal of slimes using large banks of cyclones provides a low-cost but often inefficient solution. Not only do ultrafine high grade particles report to the tailings, but a significant portion of the slimes still report to the underflow, meaning the downstream beneficiation suffers from the negative effects of the slimes. For cyclones, a finer separation size requires ever smaller diameter units, and hence more of them for a given total flowrate. The REFLUX™ Classifier, shown in The perpendicular spacing of the inclined channels has been shown to have a significant effect on the separation performance. Early designs of the REFLUX™ Classifier featured large spacings resulting in only limited success in separating dense minerals. Studies showed that increasing the aspect ratio of the inclined channels, especially through narrow channel spacings, led to enhanced separation performance ( The improved performance was later attributed to the formation a parabolic laminar flow profile through the channels ( This paper examines the performance of the REFLUX™ classifier in processing a high-grade iron ore feed containing a moderate amount of slimes. In practice this feed would not require beneficiation due to its high grade, however, through rejection of the slimes, a low moisture product, with reliable handling can be achieved. The main motivation for the study however, was to examine the impact of the slimes on the gravity separation process, especially the recovery of the Fe as a function of the particle size. Solids throughputs ranging from 3.5 to 28.0 t/(m Experiments were performed in a lab scale RC™100 REFLUX™ Classifier unit with cross sectional dimensions of 0.1 m breadth and 0.1 m width. Both the vertical and inclined sections had a length of 1.0 m. The inclined plates had a perpendicular spacing of 3 mm. The feed enters part way up the vertical section, 700 mm above the distributor flange. The water distributor comprised of sixteen 0.75 mm diameter holes over four faces of an inverted pyramid. Through this, fluidisation water was supplied at 0.55 L/min. An automatic PID controller was used to maintain the suspension density within the column by controlling the underflow valve. The average suspension density was determined from the pressure difference across two transducers set at heights of 60 mm and 440 mm above the distributor flange. A set point of 2500 kg/m A novel underflow buffer ( The feed used in the study consisted of a hematite ore prepared using a Kason vibratory screen to limit the top size at 0.30 mm. The screened suspension had a high grade of 65% Fe. The size distribution of the feed as a volume and mass percentage is shown in The feed was prepared in an agitated 1300 L tank. A pump was used to withdraw suspension from the bottom valve to the top of the tank to help prevent solids building up at the base of the tank. From this circulation line, feed was pumped at a set rate into the REFLUX™ Classifier. For a longer running time the tank was regularly topped up with containers of representative solids and the corresponding amount of water to maintain the same solids concentration. As feed entered the Reflux Classifier, the underflow valve was closed, resulting in the build-up of large/dense particles in the lower fluidized section, whilst smaller/less dense particles were elutriated to the overflow. Enhanced settling in the inclined channels gradually increased the concentration of ultrafine dense particles in the upper vertical section. The concentration gradient then caused the downwards dispersion of these particles towards the lower fluidized bed, and into the underflow, resulting in the system reaching steady state. At steady state, full stream samples of the overflow and underflow were collected simultaneously. Then the feed stream was sampled. Samples were collected continuously for upwards of 20 min, depending on the flow rate, to collect enough material for at least 800 g of dried solids. Additional samples of each stream were collected for filtration and rheology measurements. Each sample was weighed and dried to determine the solids concentration. Small representative samples of each stream were taken to determine the head grade and the remaining solids screened at 38, 45, 63, 90, 125, 180 and 250 µm to obtain the size distribution. Each size fraction and head grade sample were then sent to a commercial laboratory for XRF analysis. With the assumption of steady state, the yield to the underflow (product) and recovery of a component are calculated using the two-product formula ( A representative sample of the overflow reject stream was allowed to settle for several days before decanting, keeping the supernatant aside. The concentrated solids were then deslimed over a 38 µm screen and the undersize portion decanted again to remove as much water as possible. The concentrated slimes were then mixed well and separated into 9 smaller representative samples. The original supernatant was then added in different portions to create different concentration samples. The viscosity of each sample was then measured in an AR-G2 rheometer made by TA Instruments at shear rates ranging from 0.002 to over 100 s A small representative sample of the underflow stream was also collected to test the filterability of the product. The filtration device consisted of a pressurised steel cylinder 500 mm in height and 50 mm in diameter with steel and fabric mesh at the base. The cylinder was pressurised to 1 bar and operated until the air broke through the filter cake. In the case of no breakthrough after 3 min, the pressure was increased to 7 bar. Seven experiments were performed at varying volumetric flowrates and solids concentrations. The data presented in this section follows mass balance reconciliation, with the raw data for each experiment provided in the  Clearly, the feed pulp density produces a physical impact on the separation performance, so is fundamental to the results obtained. Normally, in the absence of slimes, the feed pulp density is not of significant importance. At 7 t/(m For each experiment, the solids yield to underflow and the Fe recovery are presented in After settling, the −0.038 mm portion of an overflow sample was taken as a representation of the slimes. After diluting to different volume fractions, the viscosity was measured. For the conditions and shear rate considered in this work it is appropriate to compare results to the correlation of Samples of the underflow from the last five runs were charged to a filtration device to determine the moisture content of the filtered product. A summary of the results is provided in Very low product moistures of less than 5.0% were achieved for the most dilute and lowest throughput runs. The moisture of 34.6%, which is a clear outlier, represents the poorest performance due to having both a high feed pulp density of 18.5%, and high yield, thus higher presence of ultrafines. It is noted, however, that after increasing the filtration pressure to 7 bar the moisture was reduced substantially to 7.8%. Run S24B3 had the second highest moisture of 6.8%. In this case the feed pulp density was even higher at 36.5% solids. The lower moisture of 6.8% reflects the very low yield and hence reduced presence of the ultrafine material in the product. The minerals industry faces the challenge of processing feeds containing significant levels of slimes not properly removed in cyclones. This study examined the performance of the REFLUX™ Classifier on a high-grade iron ore feed containing significant slimes. Through variations to the feed solids concentration and volumetric flowrates, the impact of the slimes on the performance was assessed. When diluted to 18.5 and 9.3 wt% solids the overall Fe recovery increased from 35% to 63%. The yield and recovery improved across the full particle size range through the reduction in the feed solids concentration and solids throughput. Strong gangue rejection was evident at the coarser sizes. Rheological experiments on the slimes portion of the overflow provided a clear explanation for the improvement in performance due to dilution of the feed and effect of shear rate. An increase in viscosity is evident beyond a solids volume fraction of 0.064, with a sharp increase occurring above 0.079. Comparing results to a semi-empirical model indicates the slimes behave as though their volume fraction is 5.5 times higher than the actual volume fraction of solids. Filtration of the product samples at 1 bar of pressure resulted in moistures of less than 4.9%. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the See