Ultrafine coal dewatering is of great importance to the coal industry due to its impacts on the handling and utilization characteristics of coal products. Commercially available filtration techniques are either ineffective or costly for dewatering of ultrafine coal to the desired moisture level of about 20%. Considerable efforts have been devoted to understanding the dewatering process and developing new technologies for applications in the coal industry. Most of the previous work on ultrafine coal filtration was focused on the final filter cake moisture and few studies have been conducted to investigate the filtration kinetics. The present investigation was undertaken to better understand the kinetics of vacuum filtration of ultrafine coal under various conditions. The filtrate weight was continuously monitored using a precise load cell during the entire filtration process. Operating parameters such as vacuum pressure and reagent conditioning time were examined for their impacts on filtration kinetics. Use of cationic and anionic flocculants showed significant improvement in filtration kinetics. Kinetic data obtained from the study were used to determine the fundamental parameters of filtration such as cake permeability, specific cake resistance, and filter medium resistance using the integrated form of the Darcy's law.Fine (−0.6 mm) and ultrafine coal (−0.15 mm) can be effectively upgraded using advanced separation technology such as column flotation. The separation is accomplished in aqueous solution and produces a clean coal product that contains approximately 80% moisture and 20% solids. The product is often dewatered by filtration to produce a filter cake, which is then blended with coarse coal products from heavy medium and gravity concentration circuits. Due to the difficulty of removing moisture from coal fines during filtration, the filter cake of ultrafine coal often contains substantially higher moisture than coarse coal. As a result, the overall moisture content of the product of a coal preparation plant is controlled essentially by the moisture of fine coal filter cake and the amount of filter cake produced. Many coal preparation plants discard some of the coal fines to meet product specifications on moisture. In addition, high moisture content in the coal product reduces the heating value, creates shipping and handling problems, increases transportation cost, and reduces the input and coke yield of metallurgical charges. The effective dewatering of ultrafine coal is becoming increasingly important for the coal industry. Even relatively modest reductions in product moisture will lead to large financial savings in an industry, which has an output of hundreds of millions of tons per year. Vacuum filtration is one of the dewatering processes widely used in the coal industry Many studies of fine coal dewatering have been performed recently in response to the industry's needs. It is now well known The difficulty of fine coal dewatering arises mainly from its small particle size or large surface area which results in a small pore radius in the filter cake and a large quantity of surface moisture. Moisture in small pores is difficult to remove due to high capillary pressure as determined by the Laplace equation. The present study was carried out to achieve a better understanding of the effect of process parameters on vacuum filtration kinetics of ultrafine coal (−0.15 mm). A continuous filter leaf dewatering system was employed in the filtration tests. The parameters described in this publication included flocculant type, flocculant dosage, conditioning time, and vacuum pressure. Filtration kinetics is an important aspect of fine particle dewatering. It determines the water removal rate and filter throughput. It also has profound impacts on filter product moisture. The filtration kinetics can be described by the Darcy's law The cake resistance can be assumed to be directly proportional to the amount of cake deposited, i.e., Substituting Effects of filtration additives such as flocculants on filtration kinetics and filter cake moisture are related to changes in filter cake properties such as permeability (  The ultrafine (−0.15 mm) clean coal slurry sample used for dewatering tests was collected from the ‘Ken-Flote’ column flotation circuit at the Powell Mountain Coal, Mayflower Plant located in St. Charles, VA. The slurry sample was transported in a 208-l drum and split into several 19-l plastic buckets upon arrival at the laboratory. The buckets were then sealed and stored in an air-conditioned room at about 22 °C. It contained about 12% solids with a median size ( The flocculants used in the present study included a moderately charged anionic flocculant Percol 156 with a molecular weight of 8–10 million and a moderately charged cationic flocculant Percol 371 with a molecular weight of 4–6 million; both flocculants were supplied by Ciba Specialty Chemicals, Suffolk, VA. Flocculant conditioning time was 2 min, unless specified otherwise. The continuous filter leaf dewatering system used in this study is shown in   It should be pointed out that the above conclusion on cake moisture change with flocculant dosage was drawn under the condition that the total filtration time was kept constant. If the cake drying time was maintained constant after the cake formation was completed, which took longer time with the cationic flocculant than with the anionic flocculant, the cationic flocculant generated lower filter cake moisture, as shown in Slurry conditioning with flocculant is an essential step for flocculant enhanced filtration. Conditioning time and intensity affect floc size, density, and strength. The application of excessive shear to flocculant may lead to chain rupture, reducing the capacity of flocculant for bridging  The kinetic filtration data shown in  The effects of the cationic flocculant on filtration characteristics were shown in  This study has led to the following conclusions: The higher molecular weight anionic flocculant Percol 156 was more effective than the cationic flocculant Percol 371 in enhancing ultrafine coal filtration rate. The cationic flocculant Percol 371 produced lower cake moisture than the anionic flocculant Percol 156 for a given cake drying time. Addition of flocculant into ultrafine coal slurry not only considerably reduced cake resistance but also significantly reduced filter medium resistance. The anionic flocculant Percol 156 was more effective than the cationic flocculant Percol 371 in reducing both cake and medium resistance. Prolonged flocculant conditioning time had adverse effects on filtration kinetics and cake resistance. Reduced cake resistance by use of flocculant rendered the filtration rate less dependent on the filtration driving force. Filter cake area, m Concentration of solids in the slurry, kg m Filter medium thickness, m Filter cake permeability, m Kozeny constant Pressure drop across the filter cake, N m Medium resistance (= Cake resistance (= Specific surface area of particles, m Filtration time, s Filtrate volume, m Mass of cake deposited per unit area, kg m Specific cake resistance, m kg Cake porosity Coal density, kg m Absolute viscosity of water, 0.001 N s m