The atomic and electronic structures of semiconductor heterostructures are studied using the density-functional tight-binding molecular dynamics simulations. Atomic structures of misfit dislocations both edge type 1/2 〈110〉 (001) and 60° dislocations in the semiconductor heterostructures, like Ge/Si(001), InAs/GaAs and InP/GaAs(001) systems are studied by using order of N [O(N)] calculational method. The path probability method in the statistical physics is used to study the influence of the interface disorder on the atomistic properties of the semiconductor heterostructures. It is shown that the compositional intermixing influences quite significantly on the electronic and thermodynamic properties of semiconductor heterostructures, especially on the critical layer thickness h
                     c for the generation of misfit dislocations.The semiconductor heterostructures, quantum wells and quantum dots are now of crucial importance for the modern device technologies and material applications The compositional intermixing in the semiconductor heterostructures is undesirable for many devices based on the heterostructures where a smooth and abrupt interface is needed for the device performance. On the other hand, because the interface intermixing alters the electronic and optical properties sensitively, it may be used to tune the optoelectronic quantum-well device parameters In the present study, the atomic diffusion in the semiconductor interface is investigated via the vacancy mechanism of diffusion using the non-equilibrium irreversible statistical mechanical approach, the path probability method (PPM) The PPM is applied to study the interface disorder due to interdiffusion at the tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductor heterostructures Our energetics for obtaining the semiconductor heterostructures is based on the linear combination of atomic orbitals scheme of Seifert, Eschrig and Bieger Then, it is possible to apply the O( In the present study, we use the PPM to study the interlayer mixing of the semiconductor heterostructures. In the PPM procedure, the path probability function (PPF) is given in terms of the path variables, and then we maximize the PPF to derive the most probable path relations, to obtain the differential equations to describe how the system changes in time. The PPF According to the PPM calculations, one can expect that the large and measurable interlayer mixing occurs at the heterojunctions like Ge/Si(001) at the initial stage of the relaxation. For heterojunctions like InAs/GaAs(001) we allow cationic intermixing, which very likely takes place during the growth process. For treating the interdiffusion in the (001) direction of zincblende structure, we simply take one of the sublattices. We now describe the main calculational results of the present study. In Fig. 1, we show the atomic configurations of misfit dislocations, 60° shuffle and 90° shuffle at the (001) interfaces of a InP/GaAs(001) system. The electronic structure calculations are performed by using the sp The similar conclusions can be also given for compound semiconductor heterostructures. We have found that the critical layer thickness The electronic structures of misfit dislocations at the compound semiconductor heterostructures are also calculated by using the recursion method of sp We have studied the atomistic and mechanical (stress relaxation by misfit dislocations) properties of nanoscale semiconductor heterostructures, using the O(