Zirconia-based mixed-potential sensors are a promising technology for monitoring levels of nitrogen oxides and ammonia in diesel engine exhaust. However, in addition to the target gases these sensors react to unburned hydrocarbons present in the gas mixture. The observed cross-interference between target and non-target gases cannot be fully mitigated by applying different bias currents to the sensor. On the other hand, sensor sensitivity and selectivity toward various components of the mixture depend on the bias current setting, allowing us to effectively create an array of sensors by applying different bias currents to the same device. Here we show how such an array can be used to predict absolute concentrations of ammonia in the presence of propylene. Our Bayesian framework can be easily generalized to other types of sensors and to more complex chemical mixtures. It consists of two steps: the calibration step, in which the parameters of the model are determined a priori in the laboratory setting, and the prediction step, which mimics the deployment of the device in real-world conditions. We investigate a linear model, in which response of the sensor to each gas is assumed to be additive, and a nonlinear model, which takes interference between gases into account. We find that the nonlinear model, although more complex, yields more accurate predictions. We also find that relatively few sensor readings and bias current settings are required to make reliable predictions of gas concentrations in the mixture, making our approach feasible in a variety of automotive and other technological settings.The potential health consequences resulting from exposure to diesel engine exhaust have been well documented; these transportation-related pollutants are responsible for a number of negative health and environmental impacts In contrast, the enhanced-EGR (EEGR) approach uses extensive exhaust gas recirculation in order to deprive the combustion event of oxygen by introducing cooled exhaust gas into the intake system and therefore does not use, or require, urea for on-board ammonia generation Despite these recent advances, there remains a demand for suitable exhaust gas sensor technologies to monitor tailpipe emissions and to control and maintain efficient operation of SRC and EGR systems Mixed-potential sensors are electrochemical devices that measure the non-Nernstian potential of a mixture of gases, where the mixed potential is fixed by the rates of different electrochemical reactions occurring simultaneously at an electrode/electrolyte interface In general, the scientific community has addressed only some of the various issues with electrochemical sensors such as accuracy, temperature-dependent sensitivity, response time, sensor drift (baseline and signal), flow-rate dependence, poisoning from fuel constituents, cross-sensitivity, and thermal cycling durability and shock. Cross-sensitivity to non-target chemical species within a diesel emission system is an area of concern that this work specifically focuses on. Existing commercial solid-state electrochemical technology (Au and Pt electrodes and yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) electrolyte) exhibits significant cross-sensitivity to hydrocarbons (HCs) when exposed to a complex gas mixture of diesel engine exhaust Mixed-potential sensors based on 8 Once the tape was cast, it was allowed to partially dry for several minutes. This resulted in a tape that was dry on the outside (facing air) but wet on the inside (in contact with the carrier film). This tape was then turned upside down, exposing the wet side to air while the dry side was in contact with the carrier film. The pre-fabricated electrode pairs were placed on top of this wet tape such that a length of 7.5 Next, the electrolyte tape with the partially enclosed electrodes was allowed to air-dry fully, forming a mechanically stable, green sensor body (the green sensor body refers to the unsintered and flexible form of the tape before it is heated to a high temperature to densify). Individual sensors were cut from the green tape using a razor. The tape used to fix the electrode gap and to facilitate handling during the sensor-forming procedure was then removed, and the sensor green bodies were placed into an alumina (Al The sensor response or sensitivity (defined as the difference in voltage generated upon exposure to the test and base gases, respectively) was recorded using a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit with the Pt electrode connected to its positive terminal. The base gas mixture was prepared by mixing pure streams of N  Sensor response voltage readings were taken at 4 bias current settings (0, −1.5, −3.5, and −6  Note that in order to reconstruct [TOTAL] We use voltage measurements collected during sensor exposure to each test gas separately (   We use a least-squares fit to estimate parameters We assume that the sensor voltage measurements are Gaussian-distributed around values predicted by the model, and compute the log-likelihood of the data: The total log-likelihood is given by We use uniform priors (invariant with respect to translations, We estimate all posterior probabilities by nested sampling   In light of the unavoidable HC interference discussed above, we carried out a series of experiments aimed at collecting NH  The linear model assumes that the total response to a mixture of gases is simply a sum of responses to each individual gas in the mixture (Eq.  To model nonlinear sensor responses, we employ a straightforward generalization of Eq. Next, we employ polynomial fits to infer Models trained on 5 training data subsets are then tested on their test set counterparts. RANSA is utilized again to predict individual analyte concentrations (or, more specifically, Our computational framework for predicting gas analyte concentrations consists of two steps: the calibration step, in which the parameters of the model are inferred in a laboratory setting using an array of sensors, and the prediction step, in which the same sensor setup is employed to predict Our predictions in Our algorithm depends on voltage measurements taken at more than one value of the total concentration for a given mixture (cf. Eq. We repeat the calculation starting at the high concentration end (‘Range 2’), first using two points corresponding to [TOTAL] Next, we check the ability of our algorithm to predict Finally, we evaluate the benefit of combining data collected at multiple bias current settings. We monitor errors in our predictions as additional sensors are incorporated into the array. Using fewer current settings would simplify construction and operation of the device. Here, we use the nonlinear model calibrated earlier on all 5 training datasets and all 4 bias current settings. However, instead of combining the data from all 4 bias currents, we estimate the errors in Modern diesel engines require continuous monitoring of NO Here we show that target gas concentrations can nonetheless be inferred from sensor readouts if data is collected under several bias current settings. We focus on mixtures of NH The simplest model we have investigated assumes that the gases in the mixture do not interfere with one another, and hence the total voltage is a sum of contributions from each individual gas. We train the parameters of this linear model using sensor readings from individual gases, and then apply it to predict gas concentrations in mixtures. The linear model is easy to set up and calibrate, and has few fitting parameters. Its accuracy does not depend on the relative proportions of the gases in the mixture. However, it neglects cross-interference between gases at higher gas concentrations, which causes nonlinearities in sensor response ( In order to check whether modeling this effect improves the accuracy of our predictions, we have built a nonlinear model as a straightforward generalization of the linear model (cf. Eqs. Using our sensors and models in real-world conditions will be greatly facilitated by making as few measurements as possible. To check what the minimal requirements are for the deployment of our system, we have carried out four tests in which we reduce the number of test datapoints in various ways and monitor prediction accuracy of the nonlinear model. First, we kept all 4 bias current settings and the entire available range of total concentrations of NH Next, we tested the robustness of our framework with respect to extrapolating to the values of This research was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 