In the present effort, Aluminium Matrix Composites (AMCs) were produced by the addition of submicron sized TiC and WC particles of low (up to 1.0vol%) content into a melt of Al1050. Casting was assisted by the use of K2TiF6 as a wetting agent and mechanical stirring to limit particle clustering. An extensive presence of intermetallic phases was observed in the cast products, as a result of both the inoculation by K2TiF6 and the intensive – mainly due to the fine carbide particle size – reactivity of the carbides with the molten matrix. Particle distribution was reasonably uniform comprising both clusters and isolated particles. The intermetallic particle dispersion has changed the intended nature of the composites. Instead of one type of reinforcement, that of carbide particles, the aluminium matrix contained two main types of reinforcement: (a) in-situ intermetallic particles and (b) carbide nanoparticles, as such, or more often as clusters of remaining carbide nanocores and aluminide particles. The reinforced materials exhibited a notably improved sliding wear performance over that of the alloy owing to the beneficial effect of both the carbide and the intermetallic phase dispersion. A wear mechanism was formulated based on microstructural features of the wear surface (repeated “hill-valley” morphology, surface oxide layers, crack formation and grooving). Cyclic potentiodynamic polarization in Dilute Harrison’s Solution (DHS) revealed that the corrosion behaviour of the reinforced materials was mainly controlled by the corrosion of the alloy matrix. As such, the predominating form of corrosion was intergranular corrosion (IC) of Al associated with the presence of alloy matrix impurities. Carbide nanoparticles, aluminide phase associated with them and their Al-matrix remained essentially intact of corrosion. IC progress was often inhibited by the presence of clusters of aluminide and carbide particles.Due to properties, such as high specific strength and stiffness, low density and low thermal expansion coefficient, Aluminium Matrix Composites (AMCs) have attracted great scientific attention as candidate materials for high-tech, structural and functional applications including aerospace, defense, automotive, electronic packaging, precision instruments, thermal management areas, sports equipment and recreation. Among them, particulate reinforced AMCs (PRAMs) have extensively been investigated owing to their low production costs and versatility in employing conventional techniques for their production and shaping Regarding the first drawback, amongst the great variety of manufacturing methods adopted for AMCs, the conventional casting processes are always at the research forefront due to their relatively low cost, ease-to-handle advantages and large scale production capabilities. Works on cast nano-particle reinforced AMCs have mainly involved Al Regarding the second drawback, in conventional casting processes, the particle-molten Al wetting behaviour is the most crucial factor for a successful particle insertion in the melt. Towards this direction, ceramic phases with a strong metallic character, such as TiC and WC, may ensure enhanced particle – liquid metal wetting compatibility Regarding the third drawback, it is well established that the aqueous corrosion behaviour of AMCs can be affected by many AMC features. The matrix-reinforcement interface, the matrix/secondary phase interface, the secondary phase nature and content, the reinforcement/secondary phase interface, the electrolyte active ion concentration, the production route, the heat treatment, the surface treatment can significantly affect the corrosion resistance and mechanisms However, Griffiths and Turnbull On the other hand, a number of works have reported superior corrosion performance of the particulate AMCs in relation to the respective alloy. The corrosion resistance of LM13-Al to 1 The wear performance of AMCs is of major importance, since it has to satisfy the necessity for long-lasting applications. The sliding wear behaviour of PRAMCs has extensively been investigated during the last decades Overall, the main objective of the present effort is to fabricate PRAMCs by adopting four approaches: (a) low cost conventional casting assisted by stirring and salt fluxing for improved particle wetting and distribution, (b) addition of submicron TiC and WC particles as the primary reinforcement in order to combine the advantages of ultra fine dimensions with the excellent intrinsic properties of these carbides, (c) employment of low primary reinforcement volume fractions to limit segregation, (d) optimization of surface property response by attaining further in-situ reinforcement (whilst at the same time keeping production costs low). AMCs were prepared by the addition of sub-micron sized WC particles (of approximate particle size of 200–400 Specimens were cut from each cast bar, mounted and prepared for metallographic examination. Standard metallographic procedures were carried out, which included grinding by SiC papers followed by polishing with diamond suspensions. Inspection of all samples was performed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (JEOL JSM 6510LV SEM/ Oxford Instruments X- Act EDX). Specimens polished to Ra Corrosion testing was conducted on cylindrical coupons that were cut with a diamond saw, ground to 1000 grit, ultrasonically cleaned and encapsulated in PTFE, leaving a surface area of ∼1 First of all, the interpretation of the results herein presented, utilizes the Al–Ti  In the case of the TiCp reinforced alloy, the intermetallic phase present has been identified by quantitative EDX as Al The origin of the Al At the temperature of the melt (830 Reaction The non-detection of Al In the case of WCp/Al, two types of tungsten aluminide are observed ( The great reactivity of WC with molten Al is not only due to its submicron particle size (finer than that of TiCp) but also due to its thermodynamic instability. {The enthalpy of formation of WC is higher than that of TiC {Δ Another important feature, observed in Despite the reaction product extent in both types of composite materials, it could be stated that the particle incorporation within the melt was successful and of high rate. Such a successful incorporation is attributed to both: (a) the beneficial action of K The carbide nanoparticle distribution, characterized -as aforementioned- by clustered and isolated particles located mainly in the vicinity of the grain boundaries, could be a result of: (a) initial particle clustering of the precursor powder that could not be broken by mechanical stirring. The very fine particle size enhances such clustering endurance; (b) cluster formation due to particle pushing by the solidification front. Such pushing could also be responsible for the final particle location at the grain boundaries and the areas of the lastly solidified liquid. Thermal conductivity difference theories, proposed by Zubko et al. Here it should be noted that the term “carbide nanoparticle” actually refers to the cores of the original sub-micron carbide particles remaining after the reaction of their peripheries with the Al-melt. To conclude, the distribution of intermetallic particles, isolated carbide nanoparticles and clusters of intermetallic/nanocarbide particles was reasonable uniform. However, it changed the intended nature of the composites. Instead of one type of reinforcement, that of carbide particles, the AMCs contained two main types of reinforcement: (a) in-situ Al  The positive effect of the carbide volume fraction on the wear resistance of the composites is both direct and indirect: the direct effect stems from the TiC and WC particles, as such and as clusters; the indirect effects originates from the hard intermetallic compound particles formed by the reaction of the carbide phase with the Al-matrix. This dual effect has led to a notable decrease in the wear rate with carbide volume fraction increasing despite the low carbide volume fractions employed. In particular, additions of just 0.5  The wear track topographies of the monolithic alloy and the AMCs are illustrated in Comparison of the wear track morphologies of the reinforced materials with that of the monolithic alloy in EDX analysis on selected “hill” areas, illustrated in Higher magnification micrographs of the wear surfaces, in High magnification micrographs of the wear surfaces, in Overall, the wear mode of the produced AMCs is characterized as mild, as it lacks any significant seizure, material delamination or extensive material deformation. The mild wear regime is attributed to the beneficial action of two main factors: (a) the extensive hard phase (carbides and intermetallics) dispersion has restricted matrix flow and delayed crack growth and (b) the surface oxide layer has protected underlying matrix areas from direct contact with the counterbody material. Comparison of the micrographs of the WC reinforced alloy with those of the TiC reinforced alloy and the monolithic alloy, shows that the wear tracks and the neighbouring external zones of the WC-AMCs present notably more debris than the corresponding surface zones of the TiC-AMCs and the monolithic alloy (compare EDX analysis of debris particles from the wear surface of the WC reinforced alloy ( EDX analysis of debris from the wear surface of the TiC reinforced alloy ( Based on the EDX analysis of debris, as aforementioned, and the microstructural examination, as presented in Sections Although the number of abrasive particles produced during sliding wear is higher in the case of the WC-AMCs than in the case of the TiC-AMCs, the relatively shallow and fine grooves along the wear tracks in the case of WC-AMCs (compare Based on the aforementioned observations, a likely wear mechanism for the composites of the present effort can be summarized as follows: On the onset of sliding wear testing, the soft aluminium matrix was subjected to intensive plastic deformation in front of the counterface ball. As a consequence, significant material flow occurred that, as sliding progressed, led to the repeated “hill-valley” morphology. Carbide and intermetallic compound particles restricted the matrix flow resulting in smoother wear surfaces. At the same time, the frictional heating during dry sliding wear induced the formation of surface Al-based oxide layers, enriched by Ti- or W- oxides. The frictional forces, the brittleness of the alumina-based surface layer and wear fatigue enhanced by thermal fatigue (due to the repeated interruption of the test for mass loss measurements) caused the formation of cracks in the oxide layer. Crack propagation and growth eventually led to material removal. Crack propagation was delayed by the carbide/intermetallic phase dispersion and the refined αAl grain boundaries. The abrasive action of debris (TiCp/Al: oxides mostly originating from the matrix; WCp/Al: oxides originating from mixtures of Al matrix and W-, Ti- aluminides and oxides originating from fragments of large Al The cyclic voltammograms of the tested materials are presented in The only differences that are worthwhile to mention concern the cathodic current density values recorded. These differences are more clearly seen in SEM micrographs of the corroded materials (cross sections) are given in The adsorption of the reactive anions on localized sites of the surface film of aluminium (i.e. sites where the film presents inhomogeneities The chemical reaction of the adsorbed anion with the aluminium ion in the aluminium oxide/hydroxide lattice. The thinning of the oxide film by dissolution. This dissolution is a flaw assisted/ flaw centered process. (The passive film on Al-alloys exhibits semi-conductive properties owing to the non-stoichiometry of composition and local structural inhomogeneities The direct attack of the exposed metal by the anion possibly assisted by an anodic potential. Al-Fe based intermetallic compounds are nobler than their Al matrix Based on the above postulations, the following mechanism is considered to have taken place: Once aggressive anion adsorption on the aluminium oxide surface film at the Al/Al–Fe intermetallic interface occurred, an active centre was developed. The active centre was then the site for accelerated film thinning Once the film was sufficiently thinned, direct attack of the exposed metallic Al occurred. Because the film was thinned locally, the attack on the metal was also concentrated. In this stage, the electrochemical behaviour of the iron aluminide became of major importance. Consequently, due to the electrochemical potential difference between Al and Al–Fe or Al and Al–Fe–Si (even with the film on the intermetallic phase), localized dissolution of the anodic Al (in or adjacent to the eutectic microconstituent) occurred and small pits were formed. As the pits were getting deeper, differential aeration cells were formed between the bottom of the pits and the pit walls. Pitting was evolved to intergranular corrosion at the boundaries where the Al-Fe intermetallics exist. On closer inspection of The microstructural observations correlate well with the potentiodynamic polarization performance of the reinforced materials, with respect to the following aspects: The fact that corrosion was mainly associated with the intergranular iron aluminide phase (a feature of the monolithic alloy), whilst features associated with the carbide reinforcement have remained essentially free of corrosion traces support the claim deriving from the similar polarization behaviour in The only notable evidence of corrosion associated with the reinforcement is the anodic dissolution of Al around A It should also be noted, that although clusters of aluminide particles and carbide nanocores do not appear to have acted as cathodic sites (even in the case of large surface area occupation, as in The above observations suggest that the matrix/primary reinforcement interface was not the main factor in the corrosion behaviour of these composites. The fact that the Al/WC and the Al/TiC interfaces have remained unaffected in conjunction with the sliding wear response, indicate the existence of clean and strong reinforcement-matrix interfaces. Aluminium Matrix Composites (AMCs) were produced by the addition of sub-micron sized WC and TiC particles (⩽1.0 The AMC contained two main types of reinforcement: (a) in-situ Al Particle distribution was considered as reasonably uniform comprising both clusters and isolated particles. Carbide nanocores, in clusters with aluminides or isolated were mainly located at grain boundaries and the areas of the lastly solidified liquid. The sliding wear performance of the alloy was markedly improved by the addition of the carbide phase through a direct effect stemming from the TiC and WC particles, as such and as clusters with intermetallic phase, and an indirect effect originating from the intermetallic hard particles. WCp-AMCs presented higher wear resistance than TiCp-AMCs. A wear mechanism was formulated including four steps: (a) plastic deformation of the Al-matrix leading to a repeated “hill-valley” morphology of the wear surface; (b) formation of surface alumina based oxide layers due to frictional heating; (c) crack formation due to friction, fatigue and brittleness of the oxide surface layers; (d) fine groove formation along the sliding direction. The wear mode was characterized as “mild”. The corrosion behaviour of the reinforced materials in DHS, at 25 Features associated with carbide reinforcement (clusters of aluminide and carbide nanoparticles) along with their Al-matrix have remained intact of corrosion, whilst in several cases, they have acted as physical barriers to the IC progress. However, a cathodic action of large Al Overall, the addition of submicron reinforcing carbide particles had a beneficial effect on the wear response of the monolithic matrix, whilst it did not worsen the corrosion response irrespective of the particle volume fraction. To the Greek General Secretariat for Research & Technology and the European Commission (NSRF 2007-2013) within the framework of Joint Research & Technology Programs /Hellas-Hungary.