In the present investigation, graphite felt (GF) activated by KOH at high temperature is adopted as the electro-Fenton cathode for degrading organic pollutants contained in the wastewater. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and contact angle results show that through KOH activation the raw graphite felt (RGF) could be provided with: (i) higher surface area, (ii) more oxygen-containing functional groups, and (iii) more hydrophilicity. Experimental results show that H2O2 accumulation concentration reaches the maximal value at −0.7V of applied cathode potential and the apparent rate constant for dimethyl phthalate (DMP) degradation at the AGF-900 (optimized activation conditions: at 900°C for 1h) is 0.198min−1, much higher than that (0.020min−1) obtained at the RGF (∼900% of enhancement). In the meanwhile, AGF-900 possesses good stability without significant performance decay even after 20 reaction cycles and desirable universality for degrading other organic contaminants. Moreover, the comparison with other commonly used materials confirms the effectiveness of AGF-900 as the electro-Fenton cathode. From the obtained results it is shown that KOH activation at high temperature is a desirable way to decorate graphite felt with more functional groups and then make it more applicable as the electro-Fenton cathode to remove organic pollutants in wastewater. A distinct advantage of EF technology is the Carbonaceous materials As known, KOH activation method is an effective route to change the surface chemistry and structure for In the present investigation, KOH activation method was firstly used to modify GF in order to improve the All used chemicals were of analytical grade. The commercial GF (Hunan Jiuhua Carbon High-Tech Co. Ltd., China) was firstly degreased with acetone in an ultrasonic bath for 15 The surface morphology of the as-prepared products was obtained by The H  As known, for a determined material, a proper cathode potential is quite important to guarantee the effective H In order to obtain the optimal KOH activation parameters for GF, the performance of DMP degradation was adopted as the comparison basis. Their DMP degradation percentage and the corresponding apparent rate constant ( In As clearly shown in To further understand the surface states of GF after KOH activation, XPS is adopted to analyze their electronic properties and chemical states. Peak fitting of C1s and O1s were carried out and the results are shown in The relative content of these surface groups of the samples were obtained by measuring the relative peak areas based on In order to obtain the wettability of GF, the contact angle of water at RGF and AGF-900 surface were measured and are schematically shown in Considering that H In the EF process for DMP degradation at AGF-900 cathode, the DMP adsorption by AGF-900 electrode itself and its direct oxidation by O In order to obtain the optimal applied cathode potential for DMP degradation, a set of experiments with different applied cathode potentials were carried out and the corresponding results are shown in Fe Therefore, Fe The recycling performance of AGF-900 cathode for DMP degradation was investigated. As clearly presented in In order to further check the effectiveness of AGF-900 as EF cathode, the other commonly used EF cathodes (with the same geometric area) were used for DMP degradation. As shown in In order to investigate the universality of AGF-900 electrode, it was adopted to degrade some other contaminants in the wastewater, such as Graphite felt was successfully decorated with high surface area and functionalized with oxygen-containing groups through KOH activation at high temperature. This favors H With the optimized KOH activation process, i.e. at 900 Last but not the least, AGF-900 can be employed universally to remove a variety of contaminants, which makes it an attractive alternative cathode for EF system to deal with wastewaters. This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (21107145, 21077136), the project of Pearl River Science and Technology New Star of Guangzhou (2011Z220061), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (12lgpy13). We also thank the Fund for Fostering Talents in National Basic Science for funding. Prof. Tsiakaras is grateful for funding to the research program “Bilateral R&D Co-operation between Greece-China 2012-2014”, which is co-financed by the European Union and the Greek Ministry of Education-GSRT. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: