The production of nickel and cobalt from primary sources involves beneficiation, and hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processing. Nickel is recovered from lateritic oxides either as ferronickel from saprolite ores or as an intermediate mixed sulfide or hydroxides from limonite ores. Sulfide ores are converted into matte. Intermediate products are refined into high-purity nickel. Cobalt in nickel ores is recovered during refining. A majority of cobalt is now produced from copper–cobalt ores in central Africa as an intermediate product, which is sent to existing cobalt refineries. Recycling of nickel and cobalt also occurs at significant levels through the reuse of alloy materials.The objective of this chapter is to provide an overview of nickel and cobalt extraction. It summarizes many of the chapters from the recent tome by Crundwell The primary processing of nickel and cobalt is complex, and many routes are taken to produce a salable product. These routes depend upon the original ore and the technology expertise and existing capacity of the producer. Nickel and cobalt often occur together in either oxide (laterite) or sulfide ores. Each type of ore is processed differently. Sulfide ores are amendable to mineral beneficiation. Comminution followed by flotation produces an enriched mineral concentrate. Sulfide concentrates are typically treated by smelting and converting to produce a nickel-rich matte. The matte can be processed by pressure acid leaching, chlorine leaching, carbonyl refining, or electrorefining. If leaching is employed, then solution purification occurs by solvent extraction prior to high-purity metal production by electrowinning or hydrogen reduction. Carbonyl refining requires prior production of impure nickel metal from the matte. Laterite ores can be upgraded slightly by mineral processing. Laterite ores are processed differently depending on their composition. Lateritic deposits typically change composition as a function of depth from the surface. The lower material is called saprolite, which is processed pyrometallurgically to produce ferronickel due to its lower Fe and higher Mg (slag former) content. Saprolite ore is dewatered and calcined with carbon to produce a partially reduced feed for an electric furnace. Ferronickel is produced along with significant slag from the electric furnace. Small amounts of matte are also produced from saprolite and refined with mattes from sulfide processing. The upper lateritic material is called limonite, and these ores are typically processed by hydrometallurgical methods due to their high Fe and low Mg content. High-temperature/pressure leaching produces a pregnant leach solution containing soluble nickel and cobalt. Mixed metal hydroxide or sulfide precipitates are produced from the leach solution by adjusting the pH or introducing hydrogen sulfide. The precipitates are then processed on-site or sent to a refinery where they are refined using hydrometallurgical processes similar to those employed in sulfide matte refining. Limonite ores can also be processed through a pyro/hydrometallurgical route called the Caron process. Significant recycling of nickel and cobalt occurs. Most recycling involves the reuse of alloy materials. Recycling reduces the depletion of natural resources and consumes less energy than primary production. Ni and Co occur in (1) lateritic hydroxysilicate and hydroxide ores, mostly in tropical regions and (2) sulfide ores, mostly in northern North America and northern Siberia. These ores are mined for Ni and Co when their Ni and Co concentrations are greater than ~ Another source for Ni and Co is recycled end-of-use scrap. It accounts for ~ 2010 world mine productions of nickel and cobalt were approximately 1,500,000 and 60,000 About 40% of the world’s primary nickel production starts with laterite ores. Lateritic Ni, Co deposits contain layers of one or both of (1) nickeliferrous, cobaltiferrous goethite Fe[Ni,Co]OOH ore, near the surface and (2) nickeliferrous, cobaltiferrous garnierite (Mg[Ni,Co]) Both were created by natural leaching of igneous rock by warm tropical rains and vegetation acids—leaving behind Ni-, Co-enriched laterite layers. Laterite ores are often characterized geologically as limonite or saprolite. The layer nearest the surface is limonite. The lowest layer is termed saprolite. In some ores, there is a transition zone between the layers. The main nickel-bearing mineral in limonite ores is goethite. The main nickel-bearing mineral in saprolite ores is garnierite [ The ore layers are always near the earth’s surface. They are always mined by surface mining methods. Mined laterite ores typically contain 1–2% Ni and ~ Laterite ores are upgraded before smelting or leaching. The upgrading entails gently crushing and/or grinding the ore and then separating the resulting small, soft, low-density Ni-rich laterized mineral particles from large, hard, dense, Ni-lean, unlaterized precursor rock and by-product laterization products, e.g., quartz [ Upgrading minimizes the amount of material that has to be transported, smelted, and/or leached per ton of product nickel. It thereby minimizes: (1) the energy, reagent, and equipment requirements for shipping, smelting, and leaching and (2) gas, liquid, and solid effluent production. Unfortunately, upgrading of lateritic ores only increases the concentration of Ni and Co by a factor of 1.5–3. Garnierite ores are mostly smelted to ferronickel (30% Ni, 70% Fe) for use in stainless steel and other ferrous alloys [ Ferronickel production begins with moist garnierite concentrate. Garnierite concentrates usually have nickel grades of 1.5–3% Ni. The feed is always low iron (~ Ferronickel production ends with refined ferronickel with a composition of 20–40% Ni, 80–60% Fe. Ferronickel is ready for making stainless steel and other ferrous alloys. The most common process flow sheet to produce ferronickel is shown schematically in The The Of course, iron in ferronickel is not a major disadvantage because it is a key ingredient in stainless steels and other ferrous alloys. However, the iron is expensive relative to Fe made in a blast furnace. The main steps as shown in A recent trend is the production of “nickel pig iron” in China where saprolite ores from Indonesia and the Philippines are added to iron-making furnaces. Tollin estimated Chinese nickel pig iron produced 160,000 Ni laterite ores are mined from the earth’s surface usually in tropical climates. They are almost always moist and sticky. Their moisture content varies from wet season to dry season. Concentrates made from these ores are also wet and sticky. For ferronickel smelting, all the concentrate’s H The goals of dewatering are to make a product that (1) has a consistent moisture content (e.g., ~ Rotary kiln dewatering entails continuous passing of wet concentrate down a sloped rotating kiln while blowing hot (~ The kiln contains “lifters” which lift the wet ore as the kiln rotates and cascades the ore through the passing hot gas. The latter exposes all the concentrate to hot gas so that its water is evaporated evenly and efficiently. The products are dusty 120 The objectives of calcination/reduction are to: (1) remove the remainder of the concentrate’s H Calcination/reduction is always done in long (up to 185 Energy and reducing gas are continuously supplied to the rotating kiln by partially combusting hydrocarbon fuel at the discharge end of the kiln. This combustion produces hot reducing gas which (1) heats and dries the feed and (2) partially reduces the feed’s Ni and Fe minerals as it travels countercurrently up the kiln. The products of calcination/reduction kilns are dusty CO Ferronickel smelting makes the calcine into hot, molten ferronickel—ready for refining and use. The calcine is fed continuously into an electric furnace, see The molten ferronickel and slag are tapped separately from the furnace through different tapholes. This is possible because ferronickel and slag are immiscible, and molten ferronickel is more dense (~ The off-gas is sent to an afterburner for CO combustion. It is then dedusted in cyclones and a baghouse. Finally, the off-gas is released to the atmosphere or occasionally sent to the dewatering kilns—where its sensible heat is used to evaporate water. Virtually, all laterite smelting is done in electrically heated, suspended carbon electrode furnaces. Heat for melting the furnace charge is provided by passing large (~ The ferronickel product from electric furnace smelting contains up to 0.06% phosphorus and 0.4% sulfur from the smelter’s concentrate and coal feeds. These elements lower the strength, toughness, and corrosion resistance of ferrous alloys—so they must be removed before the ferronickel is used for alloying. Typical market requirements are < Two companies produce Ni–Fe–S matte from laterite concentrate: (1) PT Inco in Indonesia [ PT Inco produces its matte by spraying molten sulfur into its calcination/reduction kilns and then smelting the kiln’s sulfided calcine to molten matte ( PT Inco sends all of its matte to Asia. The matte is either (1) oxidation roasted to Ni oxide (75% Ni) then used directly in stainless and low-alloy steel manufacture or (2) oxidation roasted then reduction roasted to 95% or 97% Ni melting grade nickel. The latter is used for all purposes in the steelmaking and foundry industries. The sulfur content of the reduction roaster product is ~ Le Nickel produces its matte by injecting liquid sulfur into some of its molten refined ferronickel. Nickel is recovered from this matte by crushing, grinding, leaching, and electrowinning of high-purity nickel, 99.99% Ni. Goethite ores are mostly treated by hydrometallurgy methods ( Laterite hydrometallurgy produced about 100,000 Goethite ores are also usually upgraded before metallurgical treatment—by rejecting hard, unlaterized, low Ni, Co precursor rock (see High-temperature leaching is performed in an autoclave (shown schematically in Goethite concentrate particles are very small, mostly less than 1000 Most Ni and Co in goethite concentrates occurs as atoms in the goethite (FeOOH) mineral lattice. Ni and Co leaching may, therefore, be represented by Reactions Most of the goethite’s Fe also leaches rapidly to produce ferric ions. Fortunately, the ferric ions hydrolyze rapidly to form hematite or jarosites. The net result is that less than 3% of the feed’s Fe ends up dissolved in the pregnant leach solution [ Following leaching, the slurry is flash-cooled as it leaves the autoclave and then neutralized. The pregnant leach solution is then washed from the waste rock using countercurrent decantation (CCD). A CCD circuit involves a series of thickeners with solution and thickened slurry flowing in opposite directions. A typical laterite CCD circuit contains seven stages and recovers 99% of dissolved Ni to clarified pregnant leach solution. Polymer flocculent (usually polyacrylamide) is always used to accelerate residue settling in each of the CCD settlers. Following washing, the solution is purified in two stages. First, the pH is raised to precipitate impurities (Al, Cr, Fe, Si) and then these solids are removed. Then zinc and copper are removed by selective precipitation using H The Ni and Co in clarified, neutralized, and purified solution are then typically precipitated as a mixed sulfide. There are a few plants that have been operated, constructed, and/or commissioned that created a mixed hydroxide intermediate product (Ravensthorpe) and/or use direct solvent extraction (Bulong and Goro). As these are in the minority, only sulfide precipitation will be discussed in more detail. Sulfide precipitation occurs in an autoclave [ This sulfide product is often releached in an autoclave, thereby creating a strengthened and purified solution for subsequent Ni–Co separation and recovery. The separation and recovery of high-purity nickel and cobalt is addressed later in this chapter. Goethite ores are also treated by the Caron reduction roast/leach process. The process entails reduction roasting of the ore’s Ni and Co to solid Ni–Co alloy. Then leaching of the alloy in ammonium carbonate solution with NH Cobalt is recovered by precipitating Co sulfide from the pregnant ammonium carbonate leach solution—using ammonium hydrosulfide. The Co sulfide is then releached in an amine solution with air and oxygen. This pregnant solution is purified, then boiled to precipitate Co oxide hydroxide (66% Co) which is dried, and sold to Co chemical manufacturers [ About 60% of the world’s primary nickel production starts with sulfidic ores. Ni, Co sulfide ores were created by (1) intrusion of molten Ni, Co group bearing magma from the earth’s mantle into the earth’s crust and then (2) natural formation of localized metal-rich sulfide ore bodies by differential solidification and/or by hydrothermal leaching/precipitation. The sulfur in the ore bodies was in the magma itself or came from preexisting sulfate rock. Far and away the most common Ni mineral in these ores is pentlandite (Ni,Fe) A general flow sheet for the processing of nickel–cobalt sulfide ores is shown in Prior to smelting, the nickel and cobalt need to be concentrated from their sulfide ores. This is done by crushing and grinding the ores to liberate the nickel- and cobalt-bearing minerals from the other minerals. The ground ore is processed through two stages of flotation. The first stage of froth flotation separates the nickel-, cobalt-, and copper-bearing minerals from the gangue rock and pyrrhotite. The second stage of froth flotation separates the nickel- and cobalt-bearing minerals from the copper-bearing minerals. This produces a nickel- and cobalt-rich concentrate and a copper-rich concentrate. A typical comminution circuit for Ni–Co sulfide ore is presented in Following comminution, particles are separated by froth flotation. A typical flotation circuit to produce a nickel-, cobalt-, and copper-rich concentrate from gangue (oxides and pyrrhotite) is shown in Multiple stages of flotation are used to insure the highest possible recovery of pay minerals at an acceptable grade for efficient subsequent processing. To improve the recovery and grade of flotation, several chemicals are used. The most common collector is xanthate. Short-chain aliphatic alcohols and polyglycols are far and away the most common pentlandite flotation frothers [ The concentrate from the first flotation circuit is treated in a second flotation circuit to produce a nickel–cobalt-rich concentrate and a copper-rich concentrate. The second flotation circuit is a slightly different configuration of flotation equipment than that shown in The nickel-, cobalt-rich concentrate is then thickened, filtered, and dried to remove water and then processed in a nickel smelter. Roasting/electric furnace smelting accounts for about 1/4 of Ni sulfide smelting [ Roasting Ni concentrates is performed in a fluidized bed roaster. It entails the Both reactions remove sulfur from concentrate—thereby increasing Ni concentration in the product calcine. Both reactions are also exothermic so that they heat up the incoming concentrate feed and air. Typical industrial roasting is performed at ~ The air input rate to Ni concentrate fluid bed roasters is typically 40,000 The warm (~ Roaster calcines inadvertently contain some Ni oxide. Fortunately, this oxide is mostly resulfidized during smelting, so that its Ni mainly reports to the furnace’s matte product rather than to its slag. The resulfidation takes place in the smelting furnace’s slag by reactions like: Δ Heating and melting the furnace’s calcine charge requires ~ The main advantage of roasting/electric furnace matte smelting is its highly efficient recovery of Ni, Cu, Co, and by-product precious metals. Its main disadvantage is its large consumption of electricity. Other advantages of electric furnace smelting are (i) its ability to attain and control high slag temperatures, which is critical when the calcine feed contains considerable high melting point MgO and (ii) its ability to efficiently smelt metal-rich scrap and other recycle materials. Flash smelting combines roasting and melting in one furnace. Most of its heat comes from oxidizing Fe and S in the concentrate feed. It requires very little hydrocarbon fuel. It accounts for ~ Flash smelting entails continuously blowing oxygen, air, dried particulate sulfide concentrate and silica flux into a 1300 The advantages of flash smelting over roasting/electric furnace melting are that flash smelting: (1) requires much less energy than electric smelting and (2) avoids the electric furnace’s emission of weak SO Most of the heat needed for smelting comes from concentrate oxidation, i.e., from reactions like: Flash smelting’s main disadvantage is that it loses more Ni to slag than electric furnace smelting because it is more oxidizing. It almost always needs a subsequent electric settling furnace matte-from-slag recovery step. The electric settling furnace is sometimes included as an appendage to the flash furnace. Nickel flash smelting furnaces are either Outotec’s ( Ni flash smelting is a high-productivity smelting process which efficiently uses the heat from sulfide mineral oxidation to heat and melt the furnace products and efficiently captures its by-product SO The final product of a Ni smelter is low-Fe (1/2–4%), molten Ni–Fe (Cu, Co) sulfide matte. It is the best starting material for making high-purity metals from matte. It is made by oxidizing Fe from molten smelting furnace matte with air (sometimes O Converting removes Fe from matte by reactions like: Some S is also oxidized during converting, i.e.: Reaction The two basic principles of converting are (1) O The products of converting are an Ni-lean, Fe-rich layer of molten slag (specific gravity ~ Ni converting typically occurs at a temperature of ~ An alternative to Peirce–Smith converting is flash furnace direct-to-low-Fe matte production. It avoids the SO Most high-purity nickel and cobalt are recovered from low Fe matte produced from smelting/converting of sulfide concentrates or from sulfide precipitates produced from hydrometallurgical treatment of laterites. The major process steps involved in this recovery are: (1) chlorine, ammonia/oxygen, or sulfuric acid/oxygen leaching, (2) pregnant solution purification, (3) production of separate Ni and Co solutions, and (4) electrowinning or hydrogen reduction of high-purity nickel and cobalt. Several other processes are also used, e.g., electrorefining of matte and impure metal anodes and carbonyl nickel refining which will be briefly discussed at the end of this section. Known refineries, the technology used, and estimated nickel production are provided in Ni intermediates (matte or sulfide precipitate) are leached to dissolve Ni and Co into an aqueous solution. Three technologies are used: (1) chlorine leaching, (2) air–ammonia leaching, and (3) oxygen–sulfuric acid leaching. Chlorine leaching accounts for ~ The process entails atmospheric then high-temperature (~ The main reactions in the chlorine leach tanks are: The principal product is Ni About 90% of the matte goes to Reaction Oxygen–ammonia leaching accounts for ~ The main Ni and Co leach reactions in the ammonia system are: Ni and Co leach efficiencies in ammonia are 99% and 97+%, respectively [ Oxygen–sulfuric acid leaching of sulfide intermediates is carried out for: (1) flash furnace and electric furnace mattes at Harjavalta, Finland [ The simplest process is the leaching of sulfide precipitates. The main reactions are: 98% Ni and 99% Co extraction, and 99% total dissolution of solids occur during high-temperature sulfuric acid leaching of sulfides. Fe and other impurities are removed by neutralization with aqueous ammonia solution and sulfidation. Separate Ni Matte leaching is more complicated than the above especially if the matte contains considerable Cu. Details are provided by Latva-Kokko [ The nickel and cobalt contained in the pregnant leach solutions from leaching of sulfide intermediates need to be separated prior to metal recovery by either electrowinning or hydrogen reduction. The most common modern method to do this is solvent extraction. Fractional crystallization is an older method that will not be discussed in this chapter [ Co/Ni solvent extraction does not remove impurities, e.g., Fe, As, Pb, Mn, Ca. It only divides them between its Ni-rich and Co-rich products. Thus, these impurities if present must be removed before and/or after solvent extraction. Precipitation and/or ion exchange are used to remove impurities. For example, the Nikkelverk refinery (1) precipitates Fe, As, and Ca with Cl Ni/Co solvent extraction is described in Solvent extraction and solution purification produce highly enriched and purified nickel and cobalt chloride or sulfate solutions for electrowinning or hydrogen reduction. Chloride solvent extraction is applied at Xstrata Nikkelverk, Kristiansand, Norway; Sumitomo Metal Mining, Niihama, Japan; and Eramet, Le Havre-Sandouville, France. This section is based on the Nikkelverk plant, which is described in several publications [ While tri-isooctylamine extracts Co, it chemically extracts very little Ni. Co is extracted because it tends to form tetrahedral Even so, a little Ni is carried forward from extraction and must be removed from the Co-rich organic. Removal occurs by washing the Ni from the organic. The wash aqueous phase is sent to the extraction stage to recover the Co loss. The loaded and washed Co-bearing organic solution is transferred to Co extraction. Co is stripped from the loaded-and-washed Co-bearing organic solution by mixing with a low HCl aqueous Co electrolyte (upper right, Solvent extraction of Co from pregnant Ni, Co sulfate solutions is practiced at Minara Resources, Murrin Murrin, Australia; Norilsk Nickel, Harjavalta, Finland; and Sherritt, Toamasina, Madagascar. It accounts for ~ Extraction of cobalt from the sulfuric acid leach solution is similar to chloride solvent extraction described in Electrowinning produces high-purity nickel and cobalt by passing direct electrical current through the solution (electrolyte). Metal is electrodeposited on the cathode. Chlorine or oxygen is evolved at the anode from chloride and sulfate solutions, respectively. Nickel electrowinning is always performed in separated cells. There is a diaphragm placed between the anode and the cathode. The diaphragm is usually a bag placed around a frame which contains either the cathode or the anode. Anode bags are always used in chloride electrolyte. Cathode bags are typically used in sulfate electrolyte. The diaphragm is needed to ensure the pH near the cathode surface remains relatively high (pH > To minimize migration of high-acidity electrolyte produced at the anode, high-pH catholyte is added to the top of each cathode [ Industrial electrowinning from chloride electrolyte is done with large 0.8-m wide, 1-m deep anodes and cathodes interleaved in an electrolyte-filled rectangular tank (cell). The anodes in the cell are all at one electrical potential (ergo in parallel electrically). The cathodes are all at another (lower) potential. The anodes and cathodes are spaced evenly along the cell to equalize current among all anodes and cathodes. This ensures equal plating on all cathodes. Direct current for the process is provided from the plant’s input power mains via thyristoformer AC/DC rectifiers. Cell currents are typically 23 In nickel chloride electrolyte, nickel is electrowon on starter sheets or as “crowns” on masked stainless blanks. Starter sheets are produced by plating (for 1 or 2 days) nickel onto permanent titanium “mother” blank cathodes. Polymer edge and bottom strips are fitted on the blanks to permit easy stripping of the starter sheets. The stripping is mostly done by automated machinery [ In nickel chloride electrowinning, coated titanium anodes are used. Lead alloy anodes are not used because they corrode quickly. Modern anodes are made of titanium wire or mesh, coated with ruthenium and/or iridium oxide. They are conductive but inert. Each anode is placed in a permeable polyester cloth bag topped with a solid polypropylene gas collection “lid.” Chlorine and chlorine-saturated electrolyte (anolyte) are continuously sucked from each anode compartment by vacuum through an individual polymer tube. The cells are typically made of (i) acid-resistant polymer concrete or (ii) concrete with fiber glass-reinforced polymer inserts. They are connected in series electrically, in such a way that individual cells may be “cut out” for maintenance and repair. New cells are mostly polymer concrete. Industrial nickel from sulfate electrowinning is similar to industrial nickel from chloride electrowinning. The major difference is that chlorine is not generated at the anode. This means that lead alloy anodes can be used, and anode bags do not have to be used. Anglo American Platinum commissioned a new nickel sulfate electrowinning tankhouse in 2011 using state-of-the-art equipment and technology. Permanent cathodes, mechanical stripping, anode skirts, and cell hoods are used to reduce worker exposure to aerosols and solutions that contain nickel sulfate and acid. The development and testing of the technology was performed in-house [ The electrowinning of cobalt from aqueous chloride solutions is similar to the electrowinning of nickel from chloride solutions. The process produces cobalt with a purity greater than 99.95% Co. Current efficiency is ~ Electrowinning of cobalt from sulfate solutions is also similar to that of electrowinning of nickel. The major difference between nickel and cobalt electrowinning is that cobalt can be plated from sulfate solutions in cells with or without a separator between the anode and the cathode. Industrially, hydrogen reduction is practiced at BHP, Kwinana, Australia; Murrin Murrin, Leonora, Australia; Sherritt, Fort Saskatchewan, Canada; Ambitovy Joint Venture, Toamasina, Madagascar; Norilsk Nickel, Harjavalta, Finland; and Impala Platinum, Springs, South Africa. It produces about 240,000 Nickel hydrogen reduction was originally developed for the pregnant solutions produced by air/ammonia leaching of Ni sulfide concentrates. These plants still use the process but now for pregnant solutions produced by air/ammonia leaching of sulfide mattes [ New hydrogen reduction plants have also been built for the sulfate solutions from oxygen/sulfuric acid leaching of sulfide mattes and intermediate precipitates [ Ni hydrogen reduction may be represented by Reaction Reaction Excessive NH Hydrogen reduction of cobalt from ammoniacal sulfate solutions is also practiced [ Operational differences from nickel H Otherwise, Ni and Co behave quite similarly. Co recovery from sulfide precipitate to metal is ~ Electrorefining of Ni matte anodes to produce high-purity nickel occurs at Thompson, Canada (50,000 Molten matte with a typical composition of 76% Ni, 19% S, and 3% Cu is produced. At Thompson, this occurs by roasting, electric furnace smelting, and converting. The matte is then carefully poured into open horizontal molds to give flat matte anodes 1.1 The anodes are then loaded (long dimension vertically) into electrolytic cells (electrolyte in place) inside lug-supported woven polypropylene bags, 27 anodes per cell. Simultaneously, thin high-purity nickel “starting sheet” cathodes are loaded into the electrolytic cell, each inside a woven canvas cloth compartment, 26 cathodes per cell. Anodes and cathodes are all hung on copper conductor bars. Electrical current is then applied (~ The solution inside the anode bag (i.e., anolyte) is removed and purified in an electrolyte purification plant before being returned to the cathode bags as a pure catholyte. The catholyte is returned to the cathode compartments in such a way that the flow is always away from the cathodes into the anolyte, preventing catholyte contamination. Physically, this is indicated by a “head” of catholyte in the cathode compartments above the anolyte. After 10 days, the enlarged cathodes are pulled and replaced with new starting sheets. After 16 or 17 days, the anodes and their bags are pulled and replaced with new anodes and bags. The cathodes are washed and sent to market. The anode scrap and solid corrosion products (mainly sulfur) inside the anode bags are sent to a Sudbury smelter for Ni, Co, Cu, Ag, Au, and Pt group metal recovery [ Electrorefining of cast impure nickel anodes to pure nickel cathodes was once a common way of producing high-purity nickel. It is still used at Norilsk, Russia; Pechenga, Russia; and Jilin, China. It is well described by Boldt and Queneau [ Crude nickel anodes are made by reducing nickel oxide with coke at temperatures around 1540 About 25% of the nickel converter matte is made into high-purity nickel by gaseous carbonyl refining. This process is practiced in Canada, China, Russia, and Wales. It is performed with ambient pressure or pressurized carbonylation.  Gaseous Ni(CO) Similarly, gaseous Ni(CO) The equilibrium constants for Reactions Ni carbonyl refining works because Ni tends to form carbonyl gas while other metals do not. This gasification allows Ni to be separated from its companion impurities. Furthermore, Ni can be carbonyled to Ni(CO) Ni(CO) The Vale Ltd. refinery in Sudbury, Canada, carbonyls its impure nickel alloy feed at 70 A schematic process diagram for high-pressure carbonyl refining is shown in While most cobalt (~ Central African copper–cobalt deposits usually consist of two layers: (1) a weathered “oxide” surface—containing mainly heterogenite CoOOH and (2) unweathered Cu,Co “sulfide” deposits below these “oxide” caps—containing mainly carrollite Co A typical flow sheet for the processing of the weathered oxide surface is presented in As-mined ore is typically less than 1/4 meter in diameter. It is ground (wet) to 80% passing 100 Cu The major impurities in the Co-rich solvent extraction aqueous raffinate are Fe, Al, Mn, and Cu. All must be removed in order to produce high-purity Co hydroxide. Fe, Al, and Mn are removed by (1) bubbling SO The last step in a mine-site Co product plant is precipitation of high-purity cobalt hydroxide Co(OH) Co–Cu sulfide ores are being exploited in several Democratic Republic of Congo and Zambia mines. Cobalt and copper are extracted by (1) flotation concentrate production, (2) sulfation roasting, (3) leaching (sometimes along with additional “oxide” concentrate or ore), (4) solvent extraction separation of Cu from Co, (5) copper electrowinning, (6) Co-rich raffinate purification, (7) Co(OH) About 40% of nickel consumption and 20% of cobalt consumption comes from recycled end-of-use scrap. Production of these metals from scrap has the advantage that it (1) slows depletion of the earth’s resources, (2) uses less energy than metal production from ore, i.e., it avoids mining, (3) avoids mine waste products, and (4) slows the wastage of valuable land for waste landfills. Most recycled nickel and cobalt is recovered by recycling alloy scrap. It is made into alloy alike in composition to the scrap. Complex scrap is also smelted to metallic alloy in secondary (scrap) smelters. This alloy is also refined to high-purity metals. Nickel and cobalt are produced from laterite and sulfide ores. Cobalt is also made from Central African Cu–Co ores and cobalt arsenide ores from Morocco. The processes and production schemes involved are fairly complex. Processing of the ores include mineral processing, hydrometallurgical, and/or pyrometallurgical operations. There is no standard flow sheet for nickel/cobalt production. Significant quantities of nickel and cobalt are recovered by treating recycled end-of-use scrap.