Lanthanum tungstate is a promising material to be used as electrolyte in proton conducting fuel cells, or as a mixed proton–electron conducting membrane for hydrogen separation, and its mechanical properties are crucial for these applications. Lanthanum tungstates with a La/W atomic ratio between 4.8 and 6.0 have been investigated at room temperature at micro/nanoindentation range. Lanthanum tungstates exhibit a strain gradient plasticity at the vicinity of the imprints, which implies that the hardness presents an indentation size effect that was corrected using the Nix and Gao approach. The hardness and Young's modulus have therefore been determined to be 8–9GPa and 130±15GPa, respectively. The fracture toughness was estimated to be ∼2MPam1/2 for LWO56 using the Palqmvist equation. Both hardness and Young's modulus did not present a significant dependence with neither the sintering temperature nor the composition. The different imprints were visualized by Atomic Force Microscopy.Lanthanum tungstates close to the 3:1 La Characterization of the mechanical properties, such as Young's modulus ( According to Magrasó et al. The purpose of this work is to determine the mechanical properties of lanthanum tungstates with a La/W atomic ratio between 4.8 and 6 by using micro- and nano-indentation techniques. The indentation size effect (ISE) was determined and ruled out for the final given properties. The effect of sintering temperature and composition on the mechanical properties is discussed. For the sake of simplicity, the compositions will be hereafter labelled as LWO Microindentation tests were performed on the polished longitudinal section using an ISOSCAN OD Galileo Durometer. This study was carried out using a Vickers diamond tip indenter. The maximum applied load was 5000 Nanoindentation tests were performed on the polished longitudinal sections with a Nanoindenter The residual imprints of each sample were observed by AFM (Digital Instruments Multimode) in contact mode, and the images were treated using WSxM software A critical mechanical parameter in brittle materials is the fracture toughness In order to observe the indentation size effect (ISE) contribution, the hardness has been obtained at different penetration depths (from 150 Although numerous mechanistic approaches have been proposed to explain this experimentally observed phenomenon  The difference among all these lanthanum tungstates is the chemical composition, the grain size and the presence of impurities, as summarized in Representative SEM micrographs of different compositions annealed at different temperatures are presented in Another relevant result is that both hardness and Young's modulus do not seem to vary significantly with sintering temperature. This first indicates that there is no appreciable size effect during the first stages of contact between the indenter and the specimen for this penetration depth. As shown in  We therefore conclude that the hardness after correction of the ISE is 7.9–8.9 There are no reported mechanical properties for this material that can be compared with, but lanthanum tungstate may be compared with other fluorite-type structures and proton conducting materials used as electrolytes in SOFCs or proton conducting SOFCs, respectively. The hardness for GDC and the lanthanum tungstates reported here are approximately the same, while the Young's modulus is lower for LWO compared to GDC: from 180 to 200  From the imprints that present radial cracks, the fracture toughness can be estimated. This was calculated for LWO56 sintered at 1400 and 1500 Although fracture toughness could only be determined for these two specimens, the measurements seem to indicate that the fracture toughness does not differ significantly with sintering temperature (grain size) between 1400 and 1500 Nanoindentation has been employed in order to extract the mechanical properties of a new material to be used as proton conducting electrolyte or membrane material for gas separation. The hardness without strain gradient plasticity contribution and Young's modulus were determined to be ∼8–9 Fracture toughness has been calculated to be ∼2 The authors would like to thank the Serveis Cientificotècnics (SCT, University of Barcelona) for the AFM data (SCT, University of Barcelona) and the Spanish MCTE under Project MAT2008-06785-C02-01 by the financial support. Support from “