The simultaneous efficient use of water and energy in long distance hydraulic transport of copper or iron concentrates in dynamic energy and/or water cost scenarios has been recently studied as an optimization problem (Ihle, Int. J. Miner. Process, 2012, submitted), including static input parameters of hydraulic interest, such as the specific gravity of solids, slurry particle size distribution and loose packing concentration. It is common that such variables fluctuate throughout the concentrate line operation, and thus the optimal estimated values in the light of the aforementioned optimization model. In the present paper, a continuation of the latter analysis including the effect of input parameter variability by means of a Monte Carlo analysis is proposed. Results show that, under a variety of unit water and energy cost scenarios, lack of process follow-up in front of relatively small variations of input parameters might cause important effects in optimal water and energy consumption, ultimately resulting in increased operational costs. By taking a copper concentrate long distance pipeline example case detailed in Ihle (2013b), present simulations reveal fluctuations on water and energy use close to 8% and 17%, respectively, whereas total costs may have variations up to 18%.The hydraulic transport of ores through long distance pipelines, though not belonging in the heart of the mining and mineral processing operations, is among the important energy consumers and greenhouse gas emission agents in large-scale mining plants ( In P1, a set of optimal operational conditions (flow, pipeline utilization and volume concentration) have been found taking into account the effect of water and energy costs in a 100 Here, the same rheology, deposit velocity and pressure loss model assumptions than in P1 are assumed. In particular, a Bingham plastic rheology ( Each objective function evaluation requires to solve numerically the referred implicit Wilson–Thomas equation for wall friction, thus requiring some iterations to converge, along with a significant amount of repetitions of the optimization problem to allow for statistically meaningful results. The present input parameters are in the order of those found in copper concentrates. However, as discussed in P1, there is a clear similarity and applicability of present computations to iron concentrates, despite the distinctly different typical system tonnages of the latter. To assess present results in the context of a fluctuation metric, a dimensionless variability parameter is defined the same way as the coefficient of variation ( The effect of the input parameter variability has been assessed through the Monte Carlo approach described above.  It is observed that, for the low-tonnage case ( Given the present set of hypotheses, including tonnage, unit cost ranges and, importantly, pipeline inner diameter and length as controlling geometrical parameters, the decreasing portion of the low water cost regime found for Except for the pipeline utilization The ultimate purpose of assessing the process variability is to evaluate the potential benefit of process parameter follow-up in the context of the optimization formulation (1). Such process follow-up depends on the ability to continuously adjust the system to minor changes, as required. In concentrate pipelines, the flow properties are primarily set From the variability results presented in A resource leak exists when slight variations of process input parameters such as the specific gravity of solids, particle size distribution and solids loose packing fraction, cause variations on the energy consumption which, if handled statically in time, depart from the optimal operation. Using a Monte Carlo approach, the importance of process follow-up in the optimal energy and water consumption is shown as a complement of the static analysis proposed in P1. In the example developed herein, a sub-optimal use of water and energy of 7% and 14.5% was found when static operation is performed instead of a dynamic follow-up of the fluctuations of input parameters, and can increase further depending on different operational conditions and cost scenarios. Overall, the present computations show potential variabilities in the water and energy consumption and cost that may be, under specific operational and cost scenarios, close to 8%, 17% and 18%, respectively. Although this result is particular to the copper concentrate pipeline case developed, it gives a glimpse of the possible variations of larger scales pipelines, such as iron concentrate ones, and suggests a significative potential for pipeline operational and infrastructure design improvement, in front of commonly decreasing ore grades, where increasingly challenging economic, environmental and social constraints around present and prospective mining plants are becoming the rule rather than the exception. The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Department of Civil Engineering of University of Chile and the Chilean National Commission for Scientific and Technological Research, CONICYT, through Fondecyt Project No. 11110201.