There is a growing interest in exploring the application of bioleaching for treating copper sulfide ores of decreasing grade and located at larger depth by in situ recovery (ISR) for its potential savings in ore extraction, crushing, grinding and the avoidance of tailings. As copper sulfide ores are usually present in well consolidated rocks a crucial aspect for ISR to be successful is to increase the ore permeability in order to allow a good access of solution to the valuable metal values. However, in bioleaching an additional critical aspect is to guarantee an adequate supply of oxygen, the final electron acceptor in the reaction chain. Two alternative schemes to solve this issue are here characterized and compared using process simulation.
                  One approach considers pre-treating the rock with hydrofracturing and/or confined blasting in order to create a network of cracks adequate for pumping the pressurized leaching solution into the ore bed in a saturated flow regime. In this scheme oxygen needs to be added in an external bioreactor where ferric iron is generated by bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron. A second approach considers pre-treating the ore by application of sublevel stopping techniques with partial removal of the rock to be able to irrigate the solution into the ore bed under an unsaturated flow regime. In this scheme oxygen can be directly supplied into the ore bed enabling in situ generation of ferric iron by the oxidative action of microorganisms present in the ore.
                  The influence of irrigation rate, leaching solution concentration, bacterial population and ore bed dimensions on copper recovery and bioreactor requirements was assessed for these two process schemes. Some economic aspects of these two alternatives are discussed.In-situ recovery (ISR) offers the possibility of treating ore bodies with an approach radically different to conventional mining. In ISR metal values can be recovered from the rock by direct dissolution with leaching solutions which are supplied to the ore body and then pumped out for further processing of the dissolved metals ( However, a crucial aspect for ISR to be successful is to have the ore permeability necessary to achieve a good access of solution to the valuable metals ( Dissolution of sulfide ores requires oxidative leaching conditions, then ISR can be conducted by applying bacterial leaching, a technology which is established in the copper industry for the treatment of copper sulfide ores in heaps and dumps ( The global reactions for ferric leaching of copper sulfides for the case of chalcopyrite and covellite are: and for oxidation of ferrous iron oxidation: The stoichiometry of the global reaction is for each case: which shows than oxygen is the only consumed oxidant. As dissolved oxygen acts as the final electron acceptor for copper sulfide dissolution to efficiently occur is critical to have an adequate rate of oxygen transfer from air into the leaching solution. Therefore, when selecting the permeability stimulation approach for ISR application of bioleaching, apart from considering the requirements for good circulation of leaching solutions inside the ore body it is also critical to define the scheme in which oxygen will be incorporated into the solution circuit. There are currently two main proposed schemes for developing ISR bioleaching which include quite different approaches for supplying oxygen into the process. One approach (see An alternative approach for developing ISR bioleaching is to form an ore bed with sufficient permeability to operate as a trickle-bed (see The purpose of this work is to conduct a preliminary comparative assessment of implementing bioleaching using these two different approaches for oxygen supply. Modelling has proved to give a valuable insight to guide engineers in selecting alternative bioleaching approaches ( This is a simplified model aimed at obtaining an initial comparison of copper leaching patterns and copper recoveries under two different ISR bioleaching process schemes, indirect bioleaching (IBL) and in situ mining through leaching (ISM). Accordingly, only the kinetics of two main reactions were considered: ferric leaching of a copper sulfide ore mainly composed by chalcopyrite (Eq. 1) and bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron (Eq. 3). The kinetic expressions for these two reactions are described in the next section. The effect of direct action by bacteria attached to copper sulfides was neglected as in copper ores most of the copper sulfides are imbedded in the silicate matrix far from the reach of microorganisms ( Simulations were conducted for bioleaching of a buried 20 m height ore bed with 50 × 50 m surface area, composed by copper sulfide ore particles of 5 cm average diameter. This particle size range is achievable in underground copper mining with the application of high-energy ring blasting designs ( Simulations were conducted for two irrigation rates, 1 and 5 L The leaching solution in the whole circuit is assumed to operate in the pH range 1.5–2.5, which is adequate for an efficient bacterial activity ( In process scheme 1, indirect bioleaching (IBL), the ore bed porosity is assumed to be completely filled with the leaching solution and leaching of copper sulfides occurred just with the 3 g/L of ferric contained in the incoming leaching solution produced in an external bioreactor ( In process scheme 2, in-situ mining (ISM), the ore bed porosity was sufficient for air to circulate and keep an adequate supply of oxygen and carbon dioxide across the whole ore bed column. This is a situation reached in heap bioleaching when air is blown through the base at flows over 6 L/min m To simulate the bioleaching of copper sulfide ores a mass balance model for the ore column was developed, considering ferric leaching of copper sulfides and ferric iron regeneration by biooxidation of ferrous ions. This mathematical model involves the mass balances for the irrigation solution, copper in aqueous and solid phases, ferric and ferrous ions in solution, along the height of the column and with respect to time (dynamic mass balance model). In this model, the column ore was discretized in order to solve the mass balance of each chemical component in an The mass balance results for each CVW determines the input data for the mass balance of the lower CVW. Therefore, the results of the global mass balance at the bottom of the ore column is the integration of the mass balances in each volume of the column. The mass balance equations used in the model are the following five equations: Solution: Chalcopyrite in solid phase: Copper in aqueous phase: Ferric ion in aqueous phase: Ferrous ion in aqueous phase: where The dynamic model of the ore column is given by a set of partial differential equation system to explain each vertical component variation. This model is simplified using a conventional “method of lines”, where a set of ( The kinetics of ferric leaching of a copper ore containing 0.5% Cu mainly as chalcopyrite was determined in experiments conducted with single size ore particles in batch flooded columns under iso pH and iso For using in the dynamic mass balance eq. with The rate of copper dissolution and ferric iron consumption are given by the expressions: On the other hand, the kinetics of bacterial ferrous iron oxidation is represented according to the following equation ( where The set of parameters used in this work to simulate the bioleaching process are shown in  Results in Results in Results in The additional copper obtained when passing from  In the case of Results of copper leaching rate for bioleaching of well aerated ore columns with Simulation results presented in this work show that copper leaching patterns for ISR bioleaching under the two oxygenation schemes present very different characteristics. Naturally, the differences in behavior between these both approaches will depend on the specific characteristics of the ore to be treated and need to be assessed in each case. However, the modelling exercise conducted here already outlines the great relevance that the selected scheme of oxygen supply can have on the rate of copper leaching, the degree of final recovery, the design of the leaching circuit and the relevance of selecting an ore pre-conditioning methodology. For comparative purposes simulations were conducted for both process schemes with an ore bed of similar height, 20 m. This height is within the dimension range typically found in bioleaching of copper sulfide ores in heaps or dumps ( Alternatively, to improve copper leaching rate indirect bioleaching can operate with a lower ore bed height so that Fe In indirect bioleaching the pressurized leaching solution is pumped under a saturated flow regime into the fractured ore and there is no access to oxygen for internal regeneration of ferric iron. Therefore, all the ferric iron required for copper sulfides dissolution needs to be produced in an external bioreactor. The volume of this reactor has to be designed according to the amount of ferric iron needed to extract the copper from the ore. The hydraulic retention times (HRT) for a solution with 50 mM Fe, 2.79 g/L, are between 5 and 33 h ( On the other hand, simulations shown in In the ISM approach copper bioleaching rate will be very dependable on the population of active bacteria present in the ore bed, therefore it is important to secure an efficient inoculation procedure in this case. Following the standard heap leaching plant practice, the ore incorporated into the leaching circuit will be inoculated with the microorganisms present in the raffinate recirculated from the SX plant ( In addition, as important as the presence of an adequate bacterial population the ISM scheme also requires an adequate supply of oxygen, which is the final electron acceptor in the bioleaching process. The supply of carbon dioxide contained in the air is also critical as a carbon source for bacterial growth ( Simulation results reported in this work have shown that bioleaching of a well aerated ore bed notably improves the efficiency of copper recovery with respect to the indirect bioleaching approach. However, being able to run an in-situ bioleaching operation with well aerated conditions demands formation of an ore bed with porosity sufficient to establish a trickle bed regime. This can be attained with sublevel stopping techniques in which the ore bed is made combining free-face blasting with removal of a fraction of the ore ( The following simplified cost calculation illustrates the potential economic advantage of this approach: a) bioleaching of 1000 Ton of a copper ore with 0.5% Cu present as chalcopyrite by indirect bioleaching results in 45% recovery after 3300 days ( As mentioned above in the discussion, copper recovery curves in IBL could compete with those obtained in bioleaching of a well aerated 20 m height ore bed, if ISL is simultaneously conducted in 10 ore blocks of 2 m height. This approach, however, will imply a significant additional cost associated to piping, pumping, ore bed preparation, etc., which needs to be evaluated. The economic estimation carried-out in this study has been based on the main aspects of a cash flow (main incomes determined by copper production and main operational costs determined by the mining works required). Particularly, the degradation of extractant by micro-organisms presence could reduce the solvent extraction efficiency if the extractant concentration is kept at a defined value dependent on the copper concentration in the PLS. However, the solvent extraction plants can increase the extractant concentration in the organic phase in order to avoid an efficiency decrease. This change determines an increase of the initial inventory of extractant (capex) and the organic reposition (opex). It is relevant to mention that this economic approach has not considered the capex and opex saving related to the reduction of SX, wells and pipes installations, due to the decrease of the overall raffinate solution promoted by a faster kinetic of the ISM case. On the other hand, the increase of capital and operational costs of the additional copper production in the ISM, and the possible detrimental impact of extractant degradation in solvent extraction by the presence of micro-organisms have not be included. These considerations must be taken into account in a detailed economic estimation for both options. Implementing ISR bioleaching with the in situ mining scheme requires extraction of a fraction of the ore to be able to form an ore bed with porosity adequate to operate in a trickle bed. This approach implies in practice a trade off with respect to the standard ISR practiced in uranium and copper oxides, in which none of the ore is extracted. However, the ISM approach still imply a significant reduction in the extraction cost, a drastic reduction in energy consumption due to elimination of crushing and grinding, and elimination of tailings. In this process scheme it is important to minimize the mining cost, which implies to minimize the fraction of extracted ore. This fraction will be defined by the particular relation between porosity and permeability which is highly dependent on the particle size distribution of the blasted ore and ore lithology, and needs to be investigated for each specific ore. ISM application can also help to reduce the environmental risks usually associated to ISR implementation. Operating ISR in an unsaturated regime by irrigating solutions at atmospheric pressure prevents leakage of solutions through natural rock faults or cracks produced during blasting. These phenomena is more likely to occur when leaching with highly pressurized solutions. In addition, the mining work associated to the implementation of partial sub-level stopping forms a drawbell at the base of the ore column which can help to collect leaching solutions exiting from the ore column base. These two aspects will contribute to improve solution containment, which a critical aspect for ISR to be accepted at industrial scale. It has been demonstrated that the efficiency of copper recovery and process economics when bioleaching is conducted in an ISR context is to a great extent determined by the scheme selected to reach adequate oxygen supply. The analysis and comparison of two process schemes to approach this issue was based on process modelling and can be summarized as follows: IBL: when leaching solution is pumped through the fractured mineralized rock under a saturated flow regime, it is not possible to supply oxygen directly into the ore bed. In this case, oxygen is added in an external bioreactor in which bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron generates the ferric iron required in the process. In this approach copper leaching rate tends to be controlled by the rate of ferric iron supply from the bioreactor, then bioleaching needs to be conducted in ore beds not higher than 2–3 m. This approach implies lower ore pre-conditioning cost, but its application will require large irrigation areas and a significant investment in an external bioreactor. ISM: when the leaching solution is irrigated in an ore bed with permeability adequate to operate in an unsaturated flow regime, oxygen can be directly supplied into the ore bed to generate ferric iron in situ by bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron. With this approach there is good availability of ferric iron along the whole ore bed and copper bioleaching can be efficiently conducted in 20 m heights ore beds. This approach requires a larger ore pretreatment cost related to application of sub level stopping and removal of a fraction of the ore. However, its application will require a much lower irrigation area and the investment in an external bioreactor becomes unnecessary. Further modelling and economic analysis of these alternatives should be conducted incorporating concrete data from specific mine sites where application of ISR bioleaching is an attractive alternative. None. This work was supported by