Thiosulfate ions are formed during processing of sulfide ores. They have a detrimental effect on flotation resulting in recovery and selectivity problems. In this work, removal/management of thiosulfate ions during flotation of a Cu-Pb-Zn sulfide ore was investigated and discussed in detail. Batch scale flotation tests were performed by using synthetic water samples of different chemical composition. Evaluation of froth stability, metal recovery and selectivity showed that presence of thiosulfate ions resulted in depression of the sulfide minerals. Oxidation of thiosulfate by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was applied to remove/minimize the adverse effects on flotation. H2O2 was added to process water and concentration of thiosulfate ion was decreased down to acceptable levels for flotation. H2O2 oxidized majority of thiosulfate ions to sulfate form. Increase in sulfate ion concentration influenced froth stability, but not the flotation performance which was restored after water treatment.In the processing of sulfide ores, thiosalts are produced by the oxidation of sulfide group (e.g., pyrite, FeS Thiosalts represent a delayed acid producing capacity in mill effluents. They reduce pH and increase metal and solid concentration. As a results of that thiosalt anions hinder the action of mineral collector and act as depressant (  It is clear that thiosalts influence surface characteristics of sulfide minerals and decrease flotation recovery. In this study, influence of thiosulfate ions on flotation performance of a Cu-Pb-Zn sulfide ore was investigated. In the first phase of the study, batch scale flotation tests were performed by using synthetic water samples of different chemical composition and effects of thiosalt on flotation performance was demonstrated. Mass pull, water recovery, grade and recoveries of Cu, Pb, Zn and pyrite were measured to show the effect of water constituents on flotation. In the second phase, the process water was treated by hydrogen peroxide to decrease the thiosulfate level. Thiosalts can be oxidized to sulfate by oxidants such as hydrogen peroxide. Addition of H A Cu-Pb-Zn sulfide ore from Somincor (Neves Corvo, Portugal) with a chemical composition of 0.5% Cu, 1.2% Pb, 7% Zn, 32% Fe and 43% S was used. The ore sample is a massive sulfide ore containing chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite and pyrite as the major sulfide minerals. Batch scale kinetic flotation tests were performed to investigate influence of water chemistry on flotation performance. The flotation conditions were similar to that used in plant scale operation, in which Cu-Pb bulk flotation was followed by Zn flotation ( 4.5 L Denver flotation cell was used and the same flotation conditions were applied in all of the tests:   Mass pull, water recovery, grade and recoveries of Cu, Pb, Zn and Pyrite were the measured responses for both Cu-Pb bulk flotation and Zn flotation sections. Water samples from the flotation feed, Cu-Pb rougher flotation tail and final tail were taken and analyzed for cations and anions. ICP-OES (Thermo Elemental Iris Intrepid) and Ion Chromatography (Dionex ICS-3000) were used for cation and anion analysis, respectively. SO Taguchi experimental design technique was employed to investigate effects of accumulated ions at three levels (concentrations). Concentrations were determined based on the water chemistry analysis from Somincor mine site. The details of the experimental design are given in Thiosalts occur as partially oxidized sulfoxy anions like thiosulfate (S These anions are metastable species and oxidize or disproportionate to more stable sulfate, as described by following reactions Products of these chemical reactions enter the process water and result in a reduction in water quality ( However, kinetics of oxidation of thiosalts to sulfate is slow and requires an oxidizer. Thiosalts can be oxidized to sulfate by oxidants such as hydrogen peroxide. Addition of H In this study, oxidation by hydrogen peroxide was applied to remove/minimize thiosulfate concentration in process water. Water treatment by H  Effects of process water chemistry on Cu-Pb flotation performance was statistically evaluated by using Design Expert software. Taguchi experimental design and data evaluation was used for this purpose. The parameters were fitted to the most appropriate model (linear and polynomial models) and the significance of each parameter on each response was evaluated by ANOVA analysis at 95% confidence level. The results showed that thiosulfate was the major parameter affecting flotation performance. Statistical significance of each parameter for the selected responses are shown in Based on this statistical evaluation and model fitting exercise, the optimum conditions to produce concentrate with highest Cu and Pb recoveries with the lowest Zn recovery were calculated as follows: Ca (53.26 mg/L), SO Similar statistical analyses were performed for the Zn flotation stage. The results showed that thiosulfate was the major parameter affecting flotation performance. Sulfate ion affected mainly the froth stability by increasing the total ionic concentration and hence conductivity of the process water. Statistical significance of each parameter for the selected responses are shown in The numerical solution for the highest zinc grade and recovery was: SO Dissolved ions in the process water may affect the froth stability in flotation. Froth stability increases with increasing salt concentration. Type and concentration of salt is important for the froth stability ( Water quality alterations on mine site affect flotation efficiency ( Use of recycle water has a detrimental effect in the selective flotation of sulfides from lead-zinc ore and copper-zinc-pyrite ore ( Changes in froth stability of the Zn rougher flotation stage are illustrated in Stage Zn recovery as a function of flotation time curve is shown in  In this study, nine different synthetic water samples were prepared to investigate the effects of SO The authors would like to thank to Somincor, Lundin Mining for the financial and technical support.