The relationships among microstructure, tensile and creep behaviour of the AZ91 Mg alloy produced by three different casting techniques have been investigated. All the as-cast alloys consist of primary Mg (α-Mg) and β-Mg17Al12 phases. The volume fraction of β-Mg17Al12 phase is the highest in the gravity casting (GC), intermediate in the squeeze-casting (SC) and the lowest in the high-pressure die-casting (HPDC). The best tensile properties are exhibited by the SC alloy at all the temperatures employed in the present investigation owing to the presence of negligible porosity and relatively finer grain size. Fracture surfaces of the broken tensile specimens reveal the quasi-cleavage fracture. The best and the worst creep resistance are exhibited by the SC and HPDC alloys respectively with the GC alloy exhibiting the intermediate creep resistance. The inferior creep resistance of the HPDC alloy is attributed to the presence of a higher amount of porosity that allows easy crack initiation and growth during creep tests. On the contrary, the negligible porosity and continuous network of eutectic phase contributes to the superior creep resistance of the SC alloy.Environmental concern and exhaustible reserves of fossil fuel demand for weight-saving to attain improved fuel efficiency in the automotive industry. In this regard, magnesium (Mg) alloys possessing high specific strength are the most promising structural materials for applications in aerospace and automotive industries. The production of wrought Mg alloys, in general, and especially AZ91 alloy, by plastic deformation (rolling, forging, extrusion) is challenging owing to the hexagonal close-packed (HCP) crystal structure and low stacking fault energy of Mg, and the presence of ample dendritic second phases in the microstructure resulting from the high Al content [ The different methods available for casting Mg alloys are gravity casting (GC) (sand casting, permanent mold casting), die-casting (high-pressure, low-pressure, vacuum), squeeze-casting (SC), thixomolding, semi-solid metal casting, lost foam casting and ablation casting [ The high-temperature automobile powertrain applications, such as, valve cover, transmissions and engine blocks [ The above-mentioned review evidenced that the mechanical properties of Mg alloys differ significantly with cooling rates and casting routes employed to fabricate the alloys. Although preliminary results exist on the effect of cooling rates and the role of conventional casting routes on mechanical properties of the AZ91 alloy, these results do not precisely correlate the situation prevailing in advanced casting like SC. Consequently, it is worth correlating microstructure and mechanical properties of the AZ91 alloy fabricated by three different casting techniques to ascertain the most suitable casting route for economic and large-scale production. The as-received material was the commercial AZ91 alloy ingots, and these were gravity cast. The GC alloy in the present investigation was produced by re-melting these ingots in an electrical resistance furnace. The re-melting of the ingots was carried out in order to remove any ambiguity. Melting of the alloy was carried out at 993 K. A mixture of SF The microstructures of the alloys were observed using an optical microscope (ZEISS AxioVision I10) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) (FEI Quanta 200) equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Oxford Instruments). A transmission electron microscope (TEM) (Model: JEOL JEM 2100) with EDS (Model: OXFORD INCA X-SIGHT) equipped to it was employed to take the micrographs from the as-cast as well as creep tested squeeze-cast (SC) AZ91 alloy. The specimens for TEM observation were arranged by punching several discs of 3 mm diameter followed by mechanical thinning to 1 μm thickness. Finally, the foils were subjected to ion milling (Model: Gatan Duo Mill 600). The grain size, the volume fraction of phases and precipitates, and secondary dendrite arm spacing (SDAS) were quantified with the help of image analyzer. The phases present in the alloys were identified by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (Rigaku Japan/Ultima-IV) employing CuKα (λ =1.541 Å) radiation. A scan rate of 2°/min in the scan range (2θ) of 10−90º with a step size of 0.05 was employed. The operating voltage and current of the XRD were 40 kV and 40 mA respectively. The tensile specimens were tested following the ASTM E8M-03 standard in a universal testing machine (INSTRON 5967) at ambient, 423 K and 473 K temperature. The tensile specimens of 4 mm diameter and 20 mm gauge length were tested employing a strain rate of 10  The optical micrographs of the AZ91 alloy in all three casting conditions are shown in The SEM micrographs of the AZ91 alloy in all three casting conditions are shown in The GC, SC and HPDC alloys differed much on the following grounds. The calculated average volume fraction of the grain boundary phase in the GC alloy (i.e., 17.88 ± 0.24 %) is higher than that observed in the SC (i.e., 8.16 ± 3.15 %) and HPDC (i.e., 7.59 ± 0.45 %) alloys. Thus, the fraction of β-Mg To assess the segregation tendency of Al, the concentration of Al interior of α-Mg near grain boundary was measured using EDS, and the values are 6.29 ± 1.11, 9.39 ± 0.36 and 14.62 ± 5.13 (at.%) in GC, SC and HPDC alloys. Thus, the Al concentration in the interior of α-Mg in the alloy in three different casting conditions is not the same, and it is the highest in the HPDC alloy and the lowest in the GC alloy, as expected. The rapid cooling rate associated with the HPDC process was responsible for the formation of a supersaturated solid solution of Al in α-Mg grains. Consequently, the amount of Al available for β-Mg Another notable distinction witnessed is the difference in porosity content. The density values measured by Archimedes’ principle of the GC, SC and HPDC alloys are 1.790, 1.807 and 1.722 gm/cm  The GC alloy revealed relatively low YS, UTS, and ductility due to the presence of higher volume fraction of brittle β-Mg  The characteristic creep curves of the AZ91 alloy in GC, SC and HPDC conditions tested at 70 MPa and 423 K are shown in The observed differences in creep behaviour amongst the GC, SC, and HPDC alloys are attributed to several reasons. Different cooling conditions prevailing during castings resulted in varied microstructural features leading to the variation in creep behaviour. The difference in amount and morphology of the β-Mg  A similar observation was also made by Mondal et al. [ The following conclusions are drawn from the present investigation. The AZ91 alloy in all the three casting conditions consists of α-Mg and β-Mg The best tensile properties were exhibited by the SC alloy owing to the presence of negligible porosity and finer grain size. The best and the worst creep resistance were exhibited by the SC and HPDC alloys with the GC alloy exhibiting the intermediate creep resistance. The poor creep resistance of the HPDC alloy was attributed to the higher porosity that allowed an easy crack initiation and growth during creep. The presence of negligible porosity and continuous network of eutectic phase contributed to superior creep resistance of the SC alloy. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support extended by the