One major obstacle in the mineralization of metal onto biologically derived templates is the lack of fundamental information pertaining to the relationship between metal ion loading and overall metal deposition onto the biotemplate. This study focuses on Au(III) and Pd(II) biosorption on the genetically-modified model biological template Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV1Cys). Metal ion (Au(III) or Pd(II)) loading on the TMV1Cys template was measured as a function of the equilibrium concentration of Au(III) or Pd(II) ions in solution at several temperatures. In addition, the Pd(II) loading on the TMV-wild (wild-type TMV) and TMV1Cys were compared to estimate the improvement of metal ion loading by genetic modification of the biotemplate. The gold or palladium coatings on the TMV1Cys were prepared using various metal ion loadings. Results show, for a range of metal ion loadings, a positive correlation existed between the concentration of the metal ions and the coating density of the metals deposited on the virus surface.Preparation of nanoclusters and nanowires has attracted increasing attention in the formation of nanocircuits from metals and semiconductors TMV has numerous features that make it a model template to investigate bio-mediated mineralization. TMV is a macromolecular assembly of ∼2130 identical coat-proteins and a single strand of RNA. The rod-like shape of TMV is formed by a right-handed helical assembly of coat-proteins composed of 16.3 individual coat-proteins per turn with a 23 Various metals have been deposited on the rod-like TMV and applied for the engineering devices. Recently, self assembled arrays of TMV with full-layered nickel coatings were tested as a battery electrode TMV1Cys was prepared and used to inoculate Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate(III) (Aldrich, 99.9%) and sodium tetrachloropalladate(II) (Aldrich, 98%) were used as metal ion sources. The Au(III) ion has a characteristic UV–Vis spectrometer absorption band at 313 Initially, the sorption of Au(III)s on TMV1Cys was investigated. By fixing the TMV1Cys concentration at 3.8 To describe the biosorption model, the adsorption property of the metal ions was analyzed using Langmuir isotherm. The Langmuir equation was fitted to the metal-ion uptake on the virion ( The Langmuir equation is widely utilized to describe biosorption systems if the relation of equilibrium metal-ion uptake (mol/mg) vs In this experiment, we deposited gold and palladium on the TMV1Cys at different metal-ion concentrations and temperatures to investigate how these two factors influence the final morphology of metal deposition. First, the deposits of gold and palladium were prepared by varying metal-ion concentration with fixed TMV1Cys concentration and processing temperature. Samples with concentration ratios (Co/M) of 0.5, 4.0, 6.0, and 9.5 of Au(III) to TMV1Cys (10 Second, samples having the fixed ratio of 6.0 Au(III) to TMV1Cys, and 6.7 Pd(II) to TMV1Cys (10 Experimental data for Au(III) and Pd(II) uptake on TMV1Cys at 2, 25, 50 Similar to the report by Wang et al. Previously, Lee et al. To investigate the effect of Au(III) concentration on final metal deposition morphology, samples having molar ratios of 0.5, 4.0, 6.0, and 9.5 Au(III) to TMV1Cys (10 It is reasonable to expect that the main source for initiating surface nucleation is surface-associated metal ions, and the higher amount of metal ion loading produces denser surface nucleation. As the metal ion loading was increased, the resulting metal coverage on the surface was improved. Because the reducing agent, DMAB, initially reduced the metal ions in the medium and then reduced surface-associated Au(III) ions on the virion, free Au(III)s were used to form initial clusters in the medium. Subsequently, some of these clusters aggregate with the surface nucleated clusters on the virion. To observe the improvement of the metal deposition morphology by increasing the palladium concentration in the medium, samples having ratios of 3.4, 4.5, 6.7, and 10.8 Pd(II) to TMV1Cys (10 Gold and palladium were deposited on the TMV1Cys under different temperatures to examine the temperature effects on the final morphology. Samples of 6.0 Au(III) to TMV1Cys and 6.7 Pd(II) to TMV1Cys (10 In this study, we investigated the effect of metal ion loading on the final morphology of the metal deposited TMV1Cys. First, we determined experimentally the Au(III) and Pd(II) ion uptake on TMV1Cys. In the isothermal conditions, the metal-ion uptake increased with an increase of the ion concentration until the TMV was saturated with the metal ion. The saturation of ion uptake on the TMV was enhanced with the temperature. From these results, we estimated the maximum metal-ion uptake capacity of Au(III) and Pd(II) on the TMV1Cys at various temperatures. The metal sorption on the TMV is an endothermic process. Second, deposits of gold and palladium were prepared at different metal ion loadings by changing the metal-ion concentrations and processing temperatures. With the increase of the metal ion loading, the density of the palladium deposition on the TMV1Cys was improved, whereas the gold deposition showed limited improvement of cluster type deposition. These differences were explained from the metal-ion uptake analysis that the loading of Pd(II) on the TMV1Cys was significantly varied by ion concentration and processing temperature, whereas the Au(III) was not. Furthermore, it is believed that the Au particles nucleate and aggregate in the solution while the Pd particles tend to nucleate and grow better on the surface of the TMV1Cys. The maximum loading of Pd(II) precursor ions on TMV1Cys is greater than that of TMV-wild. Therefore, the loading capacity of Pd(II) precursor ions is influenced by the additional sulfhydryl groups on the TMV surface. The overall results from the biosorption experiments suggest that metal ion loading affects the final morphology of metal deposition on the TMV1Cys. Successful strategies for controlling biotemplated inorganic mineralization should include careful experimentation and analysis of biosorption isotherms. This research is supported by the US Department of Energy (DEFG02-02-ER45975 and DEFG02-02-ER45976).