Introduction
                  Acetabular fractures in elderly patients present a therapeutic challenge, since their osteosynthesis may be hindered by comminution and poor bone quality. In certain cases, a good solution is acute total hip arthroplasty (THA) by direct anterior approach with or without minimal associated osteosynthesis. The objective of this study was to establish the indications and evaluate the clinical/functional, radiological results and complications, in the short and medium term, of acute THA using an anterior approach after acetabular fractures.
               
                  Material and methods
                  We analysed 15 patients collecting: demographic data, classification of fractures, surgical data, clinical/functional and evolutionary radiographic evaluation, together with perioperative complications.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up of the patients was 40 months with a final functional assessment of 96.5 for Harris Hip Score, and Merle D’Aubigné excellent in 93%. The radiological controls were satisfactory without prosthetic loosening. Only 2 patients presented low-grade heterotopic calcifications. Ninety-four percent of the patients presented optimal postoperative recovery, with immediate loading. There was only one death for reasons unrelated to the surgery.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Given certain acetabular fractures, acute THA using a direct anterior approach in the supine position and under scope control with a revision cup plus associated minimal osteosynthesis, if necessary, facilitates adequate fracture stabilisation with full functional recovery of the patient with immediate loading and excellent results in the short and medium term with minimal complications.In recent years there has been an increase in the rate of low energy acetabular fractures in elderly patients. This may be explained by the increase of mean age in the population (higher number of osteoporotic patients in good physical shape). In these patients these fractures pose a high therapeutic challenge for the orthopaedic surgeon, As a rule treatment strategies have been highly varied and without consensus regarding indications. Conservative treatment with bed rest until fracture consolidation (with or without traction) is sometimes used, or even with deambulation, depending on pain tolerance. Different studies have demonstrated how non surgical treatment of acetabular and femoral fractures (aetiologically and pathologically similar to acetabular fractures) increases mortality, and in cases of survival, the secondary hip pain will eventually require a total hip arthroplasty (THA) (up to 18% of the acetabular fractures in patients over 60 will require conversion to THA after 2 years). However, surgical treatment with reduction and osteosynthesis which offers favourable outcomes in young patients, Another option which has recently increased its popularity is acute THA. Different authors refer to rapid recovery in these patients. The standard approach has always been posterolateral, The objective of this study was to establish and assess the clinical and functional outcomes, postsurgical complications and radiological results, in short and medium term follow-up, of acute treatment with ASI type THA in a series of cases of elderly patients with acetabular fractures. We conducted a retrospective review of patients who presented with acetabular fractures between July 2007 and August 2016 in the Hospital La Fe, Valencia. Out of a cohort of 186 patients, 95 were excluded with acetabular fractures treated conservatively, 38 patients were excluded for having been treated with open reduction and osteosynthesis and another 38 who, after an initial conservative period, had been subsequently treated with THA. Finally, 15 patients received treatment with acute THA during their hospital stay. Initial diagnosis of the fracture was made in the emergency department area of our hospital using imaging studies (X-rays and CT). Iconographic tests, clinical files and examination were used to assess whether our criteria for treatment with acute THA were met: Patients met with some of the factors defined as poor prognosis for open reduction and internal fixation: communition, severe impaction or erosion of the joint surface, gull sign ( Fracture due to bone fragility (low energy impact, osteoporosis). American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) ≤level 3. Existence of previous osteoarthritis of the hip. Patients’ baseline characteristics were collected which included gender, age, ASA classification, production mechanism and type of fracture (Appendix Table 1). The Judet-Letournel With regard to the surgical characteristics, all patients were treated from the beginning at the same hospital, with the same surgical protocol, and by 2 surgeons who were experienced in hip operations. The approach in the majority of cases was ASI In all cases a total hip prosthesis with Pinnacle Gription impacted oversized revision cup (with tangential fixing screws on the inside and radial locking screws on its edges) and Corail cementless stem (DePuy Orthopaedics EME, Johnson & Johnson Medical Limited) were used. In 6 cases it was necessary to use additional minimal osteosynthesis (cannulated screws) as the necessary primary stability for insertion of the cup was not observed. Regarding the revision acetabulum, we would highlight that it offers the advantage of presenting multiple orifices with radial locking and tangential screws and a surface with a higher grip coefficient. This facilitates both primary reconstruction and fixation in this type of fracture, as it acts like osteosynthesis material. To offer greater stability to the cup the acetabular cavity was filled with milled autogenous bone graft from the patient's femoral head: the fracture lines, possible cavity defects and associated segmental points were filled. Regarding surgical bleeding, this was assessed by haemoglobin (Hb) and haematocrit values, both presurgically and postsurgically. There was also a need for transfusion of red blood corpuscles during the hospital stay. Patient follow-up was undertaken in the hip unit of our hospital. With clinical and functional evolution being assessed in addition to radiologic control one month after surgery and then after 3, 6 and 12 months. After this, follow-up was annual (Appendix Table 2). Functional outcome was assessed using dichotomous criteria of whether the patient required assistance from a walker/stick for deambulation and using the Harris Hip Score (HHS) and Merle D’Aubigné scales. Demographically mean age was 63 years (standard deviation [SD] of 10.9 years). With regards to gender, there was a slight predominance of men at 60%. The ASA of the patients was found in all cases within the 2–3 range. Production mechanism was low energy in 80% of patients. The most common fracture patterns according to the Judet-Letournel Regarding surgical bleeding, postsurgical Hb control values were obtained which were very similar to those present in total primary hip prosthesis surgery (with a mean Hb value of 9). Only 2 patients required a blood transfusion during the postsurgical period. After surgery, 93% of patients obtained good primary stability of fixture, and were therefore authorised from day one to stand up with total or partial weight-bearing, with the help of a walker or crutches. Mean hospital stay was 15 days (with SD of 6.11 days). It is of note that delay in waiting for operation to be programmed was what considerably increased the mean. All the patients were discharged with analgesic treatment and antithrombotic therapy with low molecular weight heparin for 30 days. Immediately following surgery only in one case (6.66%) did a complication arise. Despite the instructions to rest and for initial axial non weight-bearing (due to initial not totally satisfactory stability), the patient did walk, and had an accidental fall. They presented with a cup mediatisation, but there was no displacement of the fracture line, or apparent loosening or dislocation. Conservative treatment was administered with total non weight-bearing by the patient for a month, with no further complications and a subsequent satisfactory clinical evolution. Mean patient follow-up was 40 months, with a range of 20–130 months. The final mean HHS was 96.2 (with a SD of 4.3) ( No intraoperative or postoperative fracture, dislocation or nervous condition, vascular complication or postsurgical infection was detected. An early death occurred, due to causes unrelated to the orthopaedic disease. Regarding radiologic assessment and follow-up, there was no stem subsidence or varus or valgus displacement or any misplacement of the cup component (except the patient who presented with acetabular component medialisation). In 100% of cases the acetabular component was fixed intraoperatively in accordance with the Lewinnek safety criteria (they were fairly precise and constant about this, with the aid of intraoperative fluoroscopy). Only 2 patients of the series (13.3%) presented with grade II heterotopic calcifications, according to the Brooker Acetabular fractures with poor associated prognostic factors such as low energy fractures due to bone fragility (osteoporosis), major communition, severe impaction or erosion of the joint surface, gull sign, fracture associated with the femoral head or neck, pre-existing osteoarthritis, If they also require secondary rescue surgery for total secondary hip prosthesis we must take into account that the outcomes will not be as satisfactory as those of the conventional primary THA. As a result, at present there is a tendency to stabilise these fractures with more or less conventional minimal osteosynthesis and insert a total hip prosthesis in the conventional manner during the same operation. The direct ASI type anterior approach enables fracture stabilisation (non reduction) during this same approach with cannulated screws, the spongy stem and oversized revision prosthetic cup, which acts as an internal fixation plate of the acetabulum with abundant tangencial and radial screws. Morbidity is very low and highly acceptable postoperative stability ensues, with a postoperative evolution which, except in highly comminuted fractures, is very similar to that of the standard primary prostheses using anterior approach. The objectives of this acute THA will be to: Minimise the approach and time in surgery. Avoid complex operations with insufficient reduction and fragile osteosynthesis. Obtain adequate fracture stabilisation (non reduction) for accurate final fitting. Achieve early deambulation of the patient with immediate weight-bearing, preventing possible early complications. In order to achieve all of these objectives we used the direct ASI approach, under scope control, since this assisted us in both stabilisation and prosthetic attachment. This approach is performed through an intermuscular and internervous plane, which leads to muscle preservation with secondary improvement of stability (reducing the risk of dislocation). Furthermore, it presents a postoperative evolution with minimal pain, a reduced hospital stay and a highly satisfactory clinical evolution. Similar results already appear reflected in the literature when this approach is used for primary THA. A key aspect of this type of approach is its comfortable use of radioscopy, which is of great value both intraoperatively and for the final result of the fitting, as the patient who is in a supine position on the operating table is easily accessed (AP projections, inlet, outlet). This is crucial to ensure accurate reduction and insertion of prosthetic materials. Another major advantage of this ASI approach is the fact it allows us to have a much better view of the fracture lines and the different fragments involved, and to manage them (either directly or indirectly). Malhotra et al. The majority of studies reflected in the literature for treating this type of patients with acetabular fractures with acute THA refer to the use of a posterior approach, with numerous early complications. Rickman et al. In our series, deambulation was permitted in all but one case with weight-bearing 24–48 Rickman We found no current studies showing outcomes from acetabular fractures treated with acute THA with ASI approach. In certain cases we were forced to use minimal osteosynthesis to improve the stability of the fitting. In the majority of them, 6.5 In the evolutional follow-up, from a functional viewpoint we found there were good and excellent scores and these were similar to those published in the literature, both in the HHS and the With regard to radiographic follow-up, we only observed a medial displacement of the acetabular component in one patient, who immediately after the operation had several falls in their home, and did not heed previously given medical indications. In 2 cases heterotopic calcifications were observed (common in this type of pain) which did not interfere in the clinical perception of the patients. Tippets et al. This study suffers from some limitations, such as the fact it is retrospective and presents with a relatively low final patient number. On the one hand, this may be justified by the low incidence of these cases and on the other, by the difficulty in finding patients who meet all the inclusion criteria for this type of treatment. To conclude, early use of THA with an ASI type approach and under intraoperative scope control is a valid option for the management of certain acetabular fractures which have a poor prognosis, because it offers us the ability to improve final stability, with excellent immediate postoperative outcome due to the stability gained. This leads to early weight-bearing of the affected limb in all patients, reduced morbidity and greater simplicity. In the short and medium term follow-up clinical and functional outcome and X-rays have been satisfactory and promising, with a low rate of unremarkable complications. However, apart from appropriate and meticulous presurgical planning, we believe that previous extensive experience is required regarding both the type of approach and treatment of these pelvic-acetabular fractures. Further, more numerous multi-centre studies are needed to compare treatments in order to shed greater light on this expanding issue. Level of evidence III The authors have no conflict of interests to declare. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: