Apparent limitations in toughness and ductility of ceramic reinforced aluminium matrix composites have prompted considerations of metallic reinforcements. In the present study, the structural characteristics, mechanical and wear behaviour of stir cast Al-Mg-Si alloy-based composites reinforced with different weight percent of steel-, steel-graphite hybrid mix-, and SiC-particles were investigated. The results show that the hardness of the composites increased approximately by 11% with increase in steel particles from 4 to 8wt.%. For the same range of steel concentration, the ultimate tensile strength also increased with increase in steel wt.%. These strength values were all higher than that of 8wt.% reinforced SiC by a margin of 3.2–24%. The specific strength and fracture toughness equally followed the same trend with respect to steel concentration with strain to fracture, the exception where slight decrease (less than 4%) is observed. For these properties, the values were superior to the SiC reinforced composite and ascribed to improved grain refinement and interface bonding, and the inherent ductility of the steel particles. For the 8wt.% hybrid reinforced composite compositions containing steel and graphite, all the mechanical properties decreased slightly with increase in graphite content and trailed the composite reinforced with 8wt.% steel. However, the wear rates were lowest for the hybrid reinforcement mix of steel and graphite, followed by those containing only steel; while that reinforced with SiC had the highest wear susceptibility. Nonetheless, abrasive wear was the dominant wear mechanism observed in all the composites.Aluminium-based composites (AMCs) have been successfully utilized in many technological sectors including, automobile, aerospace, microelectronics, marine, recreational and military for the design of a wide range of components and devices The use of metallic materials as reinforcement in AMCs, is lately among the strategies deployed to enhance the low ductility and toughness observed in ceramic reinforced AMCs. The selection of metallic materials is based on the good wettability between metals compared with metal and ceramic systems The use of Ni as the sole reinforcement or in combination with ceramic particles as hybrid reinforcement, has been reported to offer the possibility of combining high strength with improved toughness and ductility, compared with the use of sole ceramic reinforcements This research intends to investigate the structural features, mechanical and wear behaviour of stir cast aluminium-based composites reinforced with steel and graphite particles. The steel particles will be processed through milling of steel chips, which can be cheaply sourced from industrial machining shops. The choice of steel machining chips as starting material is informed by its high strength compared to bulk steel material, arising from the ultra-fine/nano grain structure it is reported to possess The Al-Mg-Si alloy with chemical composition presented in The composites developed in this study were produced using double stir casting process performed in accordance with Alaneme and Aluko The experimental density of each grade of composite produced was determined by dividing the measured weight of a test sample by its measured volume using a digital weighing balance with tolerance of ±0.0001 The percent difference in densities between the experimental and theoretical densities for each composite composition, served as a basis for estimating the percent porosity of the composites, using the relation given in Eq. 2.4 A Bruce D2 phaser machine with X-ray source of cobalt K A Carl Zeiss Sigma field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) was used for detailed characterization of microstructural features of the composites. Back scattered electron (BSE) and secondary electron (SE) imaging modes, alongside energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) were used for microstructural and qualitative composition analysis of the composites. The samples for the examination were ground polished to 1 The hardness values of the composites were evaluated on a hardness testing machine using Brinell Hardness Scale. The sample preparation and testing procedures were in accordance ASTM E10-17 A universal testing machine was used to perform tensile tests and evaluate the tensile properties of the composites produced. The composites were machined to round tensile test specimen configuration with dimensions of 30 The fracture toughness values of the composites were evaluated from tensile tests performed on circumferential notch (CNT) tensile samples, following the procedures reported in details by Alaneme Three repeat tests were performed for each composite composition to ensure repeatability and reliability of the results generated. Wear test was performed on the composites produced using a Rotopol-v type wear testing machine following general wear test procedures outlined in ASTM G99 standard where Δ The composite densities and percent porosities are presented in  The X-ray diffractograms for the composites produced are presented in In summary, it is noted that difference in the compounds detected and the intensities of phases observed in the composites are influenced by the composition of the reinforcement. The macrohardness values of the composites produced are presented in Representative stress–strain curves of the composites from which the ultimate tensile strength, specific strength and strain to fracture were evaluated, are presented in The specific strength values of the composites are presented in The strain to fracture (in percent) of the composites produced is presented in The fracture toughness values of the composites produced are presented in  The structural features, mechanical properties, fracture and wear behaviour of Al-Mg-Si alloy-based composites reinforced with steel and graphite particles, were investigated in this research. From the results, the use of steel particles as replacement of conventional reinforcements such as SiC in AMCs, has great promise for applications where high specific strength, toughness and wear resistance are desired in service. Specifically, the following observations are made from the investigation:Steel particles and a number of reinforcement composition dependent Fe-rich intermetallics and compounds were present in the composites. The steel particles are well dispersed in the composites and have porosities less than 1.5%.The hardness of the composites increased approximately by 10% with increase in steel particles from 4 to 8 The authors declare no conflicts of interest.