Statement of problem. Resin bonding surface treatment methods for conventional silica-based dental ceramics are not reliable for glass infiltrated high alumina content In-Ceram ceramics. Purpose. This study developed an alternative surface treatment to improve resin bonding of glass-infiltrated aluminum oxide ceramic blasting with diamond particles and then observed the efficiency of this treatment. Material and methods. In-Ceram test specimens were prepared and divided into 2 groups. All specimens were sandblasted with Al2O3, and blasted with diamond particles and 2 adhesive resins were applied. After bonding and storage in humid conditions, shear bond strength values were measured with a universal testing machine. Surface roughness and fracture interfaces were determined with a perthometer and a SEM. Results. The highest bond strength was obtained on the samples blasted with diamond particles (group II). The differences between the 2 groups and the 2 adhesive resin cements were both statistically significant. Conclusion. Panavia-Ex cement exhibited higher bond strength than Super-Bond cement. This higher bond strength was attributed to ceramic oxide and ester bond and the mechanical properties of Panavia-Ex cement. (J Prosthet Dent 2000;83:210-5.)  To create a reliable bond between the ceramic material and adhesive resins, an increasing number of surface treatment methods are being introduced. The purpose of this study was to develop an alternative surface treatment for glass-infiltrated aluminous oxide ceramic that could be used to obtain a reliable bond between the ceramic material and 2 resin cements. Furthermore, the volume loss of ceramic surfaces and evaluation of surface structure by SEM were determined in relation to different sandblasting treatments. Glass-infiltrated aluminous oxide ceramic specimens (In-Ceram Vita Zahnfabrik) were fabricated in disks with 5 mm diameter and 3 mm thickness, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All specimens were finished on a diamond grinding wheel to 1200 grit. After cleaning the surface in an ultrasonic bath containing acetone for 10 minutes, specimens were dried, weighed, and divided into 2 groups of 20 specimens. Group 1 was sandblasted with 50 μm Al All specimens were recleaned for 10 minutes in an ultrasonic bath containing acetone to eliminate blasting particles from the sample surfaces and then were air dried. The material loss due to the surface treatments was measured with a precision scale (Chyo Balance Corp MP-300, Electronic Balance, Tokyo, Japan) accurate to 0.01 mg, and converted to volume by use of the ceramic material. Determination of volume loss depending on the blasting procedures was evaluated with the Student All specimens were embedded in autocuring acrylic resin blocks about the porcelain surface for adapting the shear bond testing machine. The Al A plastic ring, 4 mm in diameter with 15 mm height, was placed over the ceramic surface. The ring was filled with composite (Charisma, Kulzer, Wehrheim, Germany) and cured for 160 seconds. After cementation, specimens were stored in humid conditions at a temperature of 37°C for 1 week. Before testing for bond strength, all specimens were thermocycled 1000 times between 15°C and 60°C. The maximum or minimum temperature was reached approximately 10 seconds before the end of each period. Shear bond strength was measured with a universal testing machine (Instron, Losenhausen Machinenbau A.G. Düsseldorf, Germany), which was equipped with a chisel-shaped rod to deliver the shearing force at a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min (Fig. 1). Evaluation of volume loss indicated the highest level was obtained when diamond particles were used as a blasting agent compared with Al SEMs of surface structures after treatment showed that Al Mean shear bond strengths and standard deviations are listed in Table II. The In-Ceram technique relies on a 2-step firing procedure as sintering of alumina and glass infiltrating process to obtain a nonporous ceramic core material for dental restorations. The resultant high strength seems to make all ceramic restorations possible for the replacement of both anterior and posterior teeth. In previous studies, In-Ceram specimens were sandblasted with different Al In our study, although the particle size of the diamond particle was small, more roughness was obtained than sandblasting with Al In this study, higher bond strength was obtained in the diamond blasted surface than the sandblasted surface. An irregular surface has a higher surface area and more total surface energy than a smooth surface, so higher bond strength can be created. If irregularities are of a certain structure such that undercuts are present, the bond can be enhanced by the micromechanical interlocking. Sandblasting In-Ceram ceramic resulted in remarkably strong initial bonds to conventional dual-curing bis-GMA composite, but the bond strength was reduced to zero after long-term storage in isotonic artificial saliva solution and thermal cycling in water. These results differ from reported strengths of bonding to dental alloys. The bond strength decreased over time but remained at a level of several megapascals. The reason might be that sandblasting of this core ceramic produced surface irregularities without undercuts when compared with sandblasted metals. Isidor et al The Rocatec system requires additional laboratory equipment. Diamond blasting is a more practical system. In various studies, the bonding strength for composite systems to enamel vary from 13 to 20 MPa. With respect to this criterion, Lambrechts et al Bond strength of the phosphate monomer–containing composites bonded to sandblasted ceramic surfaces was substantially greater than the bond strength of conventional bis-GMA composite that contained no adhesive monomers. Kern and Thompson The high bond strength may be attributed to ceramic oxide and ester bond and the mechanical properties of Panavia-Ex cement. However, the blasting of ceramic restorations has the potential to remove significant amounts of material and could effect the strength and clinical fit of the restoration. Within the limits of this study, the following conclusions were drawn:  The highest volume loss and the surface roughness measurement values for In-Ceram specimens indicated that diamond blasting was more suitable for surface roughening when compared with Al Panavia-Ex resin cement exhibited higher bond strength than Super-Bond cement. This higher bond strength was attributed to ceramic oxide and ester bond and the mechanical properties of Panavia-Ex resin cement. Besides the satisfactory microretention of diamond blasting, the highest volume loss values suggest that the strength of In-Ceram specimens after diamond blasting should be investigated.