In a bench scale trial biological sulfate reduction was applied to convert anglesite (PbSO4) to galena (PbS). Anglesite is a main constituent in waste fractions such as lead paste from spent car batteries or residues from (in)direct leaching processes. The goal of this study was to develop a technology to decrease lead (Pb) emissions by converting PbSO4 from a waste fraction to PbS, which can be recovered using electrochemical processes. The conversion of PbSO4 to PbS is based on the biological reduction of sulfate and the consequent precipitation of PbS. First sulfate is biologically reduced to sulfide. Secondly, the Pb2+ from the PbSO4 reacts chemically with the sulfide resulting from the first reaction. A bench-scale reactor was started up using sulfate-containing influent. The reactor was seeded with biocatalyst from several full-scale reactors. PbSO4-containing residue was added batch-wise when the formation of sulfide started. The residue contained mainly PbSO4 (51.7%), sulfate (SO4
                     2−, 19.9%) and elemental sulfur (S0, 15.1%). PbS precipitates in the bioreactor due to the near-neutral pH at which the sulfate reduction process is carried out. From the electron balance and chemical analyses it was concluded that both sulfate and sulfur present in the residue were biologically reduced. The formation of PbS was confirmed by the increased Pb:O ratio in the sludge (1:0.1) relative to the Pb:O ratio in the PbSO4-containing residue (1:3.3). A potential large-scale application is proposed.Waste fractions that contain lead (Pb) can either be a potential resource or pose an environmental problem. The sources of Pb-containing wastes are numerous. For instance Pb was used in many paints and it was used for plumping ( It could be advantageous to convert PbSO The S In the S Eight electrons are transferred when sulfate is converted whereas for the conversion of sulfur two electrons are required ( Which kind of electron donor is preferred depends on the local costs and on-site availability of a suitable electron donor together with the size of the application. In general, H The biological conversion of PbSO In addition to this intended conversion there are unintentional reactions, which can interfere with the biological conversion of PbSO This acid-producing reaction results in a decrease of the pH. At low pH the sulfidogenic bacteria are inhibited, which results in a decreased sulfate and/or sulfur reduction rate. Therefore, the biological conversion of anglesite is performed with an excess of sulfides relative to the Pb When in addition to PbSO To prevent this acidification process, the growth of the sulfate reducing biomass must be enhanced by for instance stripping away H Furthermore it can be expected that high concentrations of Pb This paper describes the application of a proven technology to convert PbSO For the biological conversion of PbSO Hydrogen (H The biological sulfate reduction process was initiated before S° and/or lead was added to prevent the formation of H The H During the experiment a constant surplus of sulfide relative to Pb After the supply of PbSO To monitor the conversion of sulfate and the production of sulfide both the sulfate and sulfide concentrations were analyzed daily (Dr. Lange Cuvette test LCK 653 for sulfide, Dr. Lange Cuvette test LCK 153 for sulfate). The samples were diluted to exclude interferences. In addition the composition of the gas phase (vol% of H When the operation of the bioreactor was stopped, the sludge was collected and Tecnicas Reunidas performed elemental analyses of the sludge, including the Pb-precipitates. The sulfate and sulfide concentrations were monitored in time ( Reaction 4 did not prevail due to a constant surplus of sulfide relative to the Pb The volume percentage of H  Furthermore the fraction of Pb is slightly increased whereas the fraction of total S is slightly decreased. This small decrease of the fraction of total S was to be expected since H Sulfate was converted when the PbSO The chemical composition of the sludge from the bioreactor ( The ratio of Pb:O together with the ratio of S:O can be used as a measure for the conversion of PbSO The results demonstrate that both sulfate and sulfur reducing biomass must have been present in the bioreactor. However, the biomass was not specified any further and it is not known which species are responsible for the conversion of S° and SO When H The conversion of sulfur and sulfate was limited by the H The results of the bench scale research were used to propose a basic process scheme for a full-scale application to recover Pb with the S This research was supported by the BioMinE project (Grant number 500329), which is part of the Sixth Framework program of the European Union. We would like to thank Tecnicas Reunidas for the elemental analysis of the indirect leaching residue and the sludge from the bioreactor.