Amino-acid-based surfactants are promising collectors for the flotation of calcium-bearing minerals. In this study, N-hexadecanoylglycine (C16Gly) was used as a collector in the flotation system of fluorapatite (FA) and dolomite. Microflotation tests using single minerals implied that C16Gly could be applied as an efficient collector for FA over dolomite at pH 9 and 11. Zeta potential analyses indicated that the C16Gly anion was preferentially adsorbed onto the FA surface at pH 9.
                  Density functional theory calculations revealed that the C16Gly ion could bind to two metal atoms on the dolomite surface in a bidentate fashion. On the other hand, the C16Gly ion interacted with two calcium atoms on the FA surface to generate tridentate binding structures. In these tridentate binding models, hydrogen bonding between the NH of C16Gly and PO4 groups occurred on the FA surface. Adsorption of the C16Gly ion on the FA surface through tridentate binding was significantly favored over bidentate binding to dolomite surface. Hence, FA could be efficiently floated by C16Gly rather than dolomite.Phosphate ore is a primary resource in the phosphatic fertilizer industry ( Motivated by commercial demand, considerable effort has been devoted to improve the flotation efficiency of phosphates with fatty acid collectors. Strategies to this end include the addition of modifiers ( Apatite can be efficiently floated at room temperature ( Recent studies have reported that amino acid–based collectors with one or two carboxyl groups are significantly more selective toward calcium minerals than traditional fatty acids (  The adsorption behaviors of an amino-acid-based collector on apatite and dolomite surfaces are crucial to understanding the flotation selectivity of this type of collector. However, such detailed information is difficult to acquire by traditional experimental methods. Instead, molecular simulations are advantageous for clarifying the interactions between a collector and a calcium-bearing mineral surface at the atomic level ( With significant increases in computing power, density functional theory (DFT) has become a major tool for investigating and assessing the adsorption of ions/collectors on mineral surfaces ( In the present work, a new amino-acid-based collector, FA and dolomite samples (>99% purity) were acquired from the Geological Museum of Yunnan Province, China. The XRD patterns of the two minerals are presented in An XFGC II flotation machine with a 40-mL plexiglass cell (Jilin Province Ore Exploration Machinery Factory, China.) was employed in the microflotation study. A 2.0 g sample of pure mineral (60–80 mesh) was used in each experiment. The sample was first conditioned with the collector solution for 3 min and then floated for a further 1 min (impeller speed = 1400 rpm). After the flotation experiment, the froth and sink products were filtered, dried, and weighed, to calculate the recovery. Each experiment was repeated three times. The electrophoretic mobility of the mineral powder (<5 μm) was determined using a Nano ZSP instrument (Malvern Instruments Ltd.). The Smoluchowski equation was used to calculate the zeta potential from the electrophoretic mobility results. NaCl was used to maintain the ionic strength of the solutions (1 × 10 DFT calculations were performed using the Cambridge Sequential Total Energy Package (CASTEP) ( The Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) procedure was used during geometry optimizations ( The pH can significantly influence the flotation behavior of an amino-acid-based surfactant, especially for calcium-bearing minerals (  FA and dolomite exhibited the opposite flotation behaviors when C16Gly was used as the collector. FA was efficiently floated with C16Gly at pH 5–11, with FA recoveries in excess of 80%. In contrast, dolomite did not respond well to C16Gly; the dolomite recovery was only 35.3% at pH 6. Moreover, the recovery of dolomite was observed to decrease with increasing pH. The gap in recovery between FA and dolomite was 80% at pH 9 and 11; hence, under these pH conditions, C16Gly may show excellent selectivity in the FA–dolomite system. In a previous study, Karlkvist et al. suggested that the FA-collecting ability of C12GlyNa is inefficient at neutral or alkaline pH ( The influence of C16Gly concentration on the FA and dolomite flotation performance was further examined at pH 9. As shown in Notably, the dolomite recovery was ∼61% using 4 × 10 We further examined the flotation features of C16Gly (1 × 10 It should be mentioned that our flotation tests in fact were conducted using the single mineral of FA or dolomite. The flotation system of a run-of-mine phosphate ore is much more complex comparing with that of single-mineral. Further work needs to be carried out to examine the flotation selectivity of C16Gly for a run-of-mine ore. The zeta potentials of FA and dolomite in C16Gly solution (1 × 10 The FA zeta potential in the C16Gly solution was more negative than that in DI water at the same pH. This suggests that the anionic collector species were adsorbed on the FA surface. Furthermore, the decrease in zeta potential was very notable in the pH range 6–11, where FA was efficiently collected by C16Gly. These results indicated that the FA flotation with C16Gly mainly depended on the adsorption of the anionic collector species. Notably, the reduction in the zeta potential of FA with C16Gly was less at pH 5 than that at pH 6. However, FA recovery with C16Gly at pH 5 was slightly higher than at pH 6. This phenomenon was attributed to the species distribution of this amino-acid-based collector. For an amphoteric collector, both neutral and cationic surfactant species can exist in solution depending on the pH. Unfortunately, the C16Gly species distribution could not be calculated due to the lack of thermodynamic data. However, neutral and cationic C16Gly species are expected to be present in solution at pH 5. These species could co-adsorb onto the FA surface with C16Gly anions to generate a zeta potential that is higher than that observed at pH 6. Furthermore, the co-adsorption of nonionic and cationic collector species assists in the flotation of FA ( The presence of C16Gly in the solution also led to a decrease in the zeta potential of dolomite to a certain degree. Due to the co-adsorption of neutral and cationic collectors, the zeta potential of dolomite in the C16Gly solution at pH 6 was higher than that at pH 7. While, the zeta potentials of dolomite at pH 9 and 11 were also higher than that at pH 7. The dolomite recoveries at pH 9 and 11 were significantly less than that observed at pH 7, which was possibly due to the poor adsorption of the C16Gly anions on the dolomite surface under these pH conditions. Notably, the reductions in the dolomite zeta potentials were significantly lower than those of FA at pH 9 and 11. Moreover, the recoveries of dolomite were significantly lower than those of FA at these two pH values ( The optimized structure of the C16Gly ion, which has three oxygen atoms in its hydrophilic group, is shown in The partial density of states (PDOS) helps interpret the chemical features of a collector. PDOS data for the C16Gly ion are presented in Notably, the O 2p orbitals of the three oxygen atoms were the main contributors to the valence band (−3 eV to 0 eV) close to the Fermi level, which indicates that the oxygen atoms in the collector are more reactive than the carbon and nitrogen atoms. These results are in good agreement with the observation that the adsorption of an amino acid collector on a dolomite or FA surface depends on interactions between its oxygens and the metal atoms on the mineral surface ( Steric features on the dolomite and FA surfaces play a crucial role in the adsorption of the amino-acid-based collectors ( Here we compare the steric features of the metal ions of the dolomite and FA surfaces. Possible interacting metal ions on the mineral surfaces are numbered and presented in The steric properties of the metal ions on the FA surface are significantly different from those on the dolomite surface. This phenomenon strongly affects the ability of the collector to adsorb onto the mineral surfaces. Hence, the structures of C16Gly adsorbed on the dolomite and FA surfaces were further simulated, as discussed in the following sections. The C16Gly ion was placed at various sites on the dolomite surface to investigate the possible adsorption structures. Three bidentate binding (B1–B3) structures were eventually found on the dolomite surface ( The adsorption of C16Gly on the dolomite surface depended on interactions between the oxygen atoms in the carboxyl group and the calcium/magnesium atoms on the mineral surface. In B1structure, the O1 atom in C16Gly was bound to the Ca1 atom, while O2 was coordinated to Mg1 ( Notably, intramolecular hydrogen bonding within the C16Gly ion was not broken during the adsorption process. Furthermore, the O3 atom in the C16Gly ion was not involved in surface interactions. Hirva et al. revealed that the three oxygen atoms in the C2Gly ion interact with three metal ions on the dolomite surface to form tridentate binding structures ( The adsorption energies of the C16Gly ion on the dolomite surface ranged from −44.24 kJ/mol to −24.22 kJ/mol ( Our simulations revealed that the C16Gly ion can adsorb onto the dolomite surface to form three bound structures. In order to understand the selective adsorption behavior of C16Gly in the dolomite–FA system, we next located the binding structures and calculated the corresponding ΔE As seen in In the tridentate binding model, the C16Gly NH group donated a hydrogen bond to the surface PO  Notably, the ΔE It should be noted that bulk water was not included in this simulation study, but should be included in future studies. While the dissociation of the C16Gly molecule was considered in calculations, to close the flotation condition. Based on previous studies, such treatment could provide reasonable results for a flotation system ( Our simulation study indicated that the oxygen atoms in the carboxyl group of the C16Gly ion interacted with the metal ions on the dolomite or FA surface to form new O–Mg and O–Ca bonds. To further understand the chemistry features of these bonds, electron density difference analysis was performed for revealing the charge redistributions among the interacting atoms. We only report the results for B1 and Tri1 structures because these are the most stable structures involving C16Gly on the dolomite and FA surfaces, respectively.  Electron transfer between the atoms in the C16Gly ion and those in the PO Single-mineral flotation results suggest that C16Gly may be used as a selective collector in the FA–dolomite system at pH 9 and in the 10–40 °C temperature range. At pH 9, FA could be more efficiently floated than dolomite by C16Gly, which is a consequence of the preferential adsorption of the C16Gly anion on the FA surface. The optimal C16Gly concentration was established to be <4 × 10 The carboxyl group of the C16Gly ion interacted with two metal atoms on the dolomite surface to form ionic O–Ca and O–Mg bonds. On the other hand, the C16Gly ion adsorbed onto the FA surface to form five tridentate binding structures through the three ionic O–Ca bonds involving the carboxyl group and two calcium atoms on the FA surface. Moreover, hydrogen bonding between the NH of C16Gly and the PO The present study was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: