The roof fall hazards are the major problems in underground coal mines, which are generally unpredictable due to the associated uncertainties arising out of the complexity of geological conditions and variability in mining parameters. During the six year period, 1996–2001, 253 Indian coal miners lost their lives and 401 are seriously injured in 490 different roof fall accidents. In India, 32.7% of the total fatal injuries in coal sectors are due to roof fall in bord and pillar method of workings. This paper attempts to predict the severities of roof fall accidents based on some major contributing parameters using the binary logistic regression model. In total, 128 roof fall accidents for the last few years from five underground coal mines in India having bord and pillar method of working are analyzed for this study. The results revealed that wider gallery width is more prone to major and serious accidents than narrower gallery width. Thin seams are more amenable to major accidents in comparison to thick seams. Unsupported or partially supported roofs have higher risk for contributing major as well as serious accidents. Deep workings are more prone to major accidents as compared to shallow depth workings.Roof falls continue to be one of the greatest single hazards faced by underground coal miners. The hazardous nature of roof falls in underground coal mine operations can be illustrated from the national statistics of mine accidents. During the six year period, 1996–2001, in India, 253 coal miners lost their lives and 401 are seriously injured in 490 different roof fall accidents. 32.7% of the total fatal injuries in Indian coal sectors are due to roof fall in bord and pillar method of working; whereas only 1% of the total fatal injuries due to roof fall are occurring in longwall method of working ( The complexity of geological deposit and variability of mining parameters leads to the occurrences of unwanted roof falls. There are various studies on finding relationship between the roof falls and geological conditions, stress state and mine layout ( Accident ratio (i.e. reportable injury:serious injury:fatality) studies indicated that there are many more minor injuries experienced than serious injuries and that for the same serious injury there have been numerous property-damage accidents and there are a large number of near-miss cases too. Five underground coal mines are considered for the purpose of study and data are collected from those mines. All the mines have bord and pillar method of workings. Out of the five mines, three are located in Eastern India (relevant data collected from these mines from 1991 to 2004) and two are in Southern India (relevant data collected from these mines from 1996 to 2004). Each mine operates six days a week and three shifts a day. The roof supporting is done by systematic support rules (SSR) as specified by the Directorate General of Mines Safety. The roof supports used are mainly props, wooden cogs, and steel cogs reinforced with roof bolting and stitching. The average overall output per man-shift (OMS) for the case study mines during those period are 0.92, 0.51, 0.57, 0.93 and 0.77 tonnes for Mines 1–5, respectively. Since very few fatal incidents (11 in total) occurred during the aforementioned study period in the specified mines, the fatal and serious accidents are merged into a single category namely major accident. The roof fall accidents involving one or more reportable injuries are encoded here as minor accidents. The dependent variable for this study is the degrees of roof fall accident, and is categorized as major, serious, and minor. The variable degree of accident is important as it measures the injury severity, which is also an indirect measure of the vulnerability, briefly the cost of an accident. A more severe injury involves higher cost of operation compared to a minor injury. This is due to payment of workers’ compensation, medical treatment, downtimes, machinery breakdown, reduced production rates, and social costs. The terms like major accident, serious accident and minor accident used in the logistic regression model may be defined as mentioned below:    Based on the categories of the severity of injury, two cases A and B are considered. Cases A and B dealt with major versus minor accidents, and serious versus minor accidents, respectively. The occurrences of the roof fall accidents for both the cases (cases A and B) in different categories are presented in The logistic regression model assumes that a roof fall will have a degree of accident during the working with a probability Two binary variables for the degree of accident are generated in this model. First, the degree of accident is coded as ‘1’ ( The independent variables are width of gallery, mining height, depth of cover, seam thickness, roof support status, immediate roof, face and specific mine, which are coded as dummy variables. A description of the categories of these variables with indicator coding scheme is presented in The dichotomous nature of the dependent variable directs the logistic regression model to be used for this analysis. The logistic regression analysis presents a unique compliment to multivariate regression in its ability to utilize binary dependent variable. Following the established coding scheme ( where The In this section, the correlation between the independent variables are tested and the results obtained from the logistic regression model are explained. The correlation coefficients between the independent variables for case A and case B are presented in Though the logistic regression model assumes the independent variables are not dependent on each other, every time, it is difficult to find such a model. The Spearman’s correlations for major versus minor accidents (case A) with 128 observations are tabulated in The SPSS package is used for the logistic model runs. The relationships of degree of roof fall accidents with the contributing parameters are tabulated in The major geotechnical and location variables are included in the model. Though other parameters like rock mass rating (RMR), bolt length, method of working may have some effects, these parameters are not included in the model. It is very difficult to get the RMR value at each accident place, since its true value is rarely measured at accident places. The occupational demographic characteristics like age and experience, which may have some effect for these roof fall accidents, are not considered due to the limitations of the model. However, the mean age of the workers affected by the injury are 40.4, 39.0, 36.6, 42.3, and 42.4; and the mean experience for the injured workers are 14.4, 14.5, 11.8, 17.8 and 17.3 from Mine 1 to Mine 5, respectively. Regular safety trainings are provided to control the accidents and safety weeks are organised for the awareness of workers by the mine management. Amongst the mine categories, there are significant differences in the occurrence of severity of roof fall accidents for the cases A and B. The risk factors for the various categories of geo-mining parameters and location variables are shown in From Hence, the original model (with all the hypothesized variables) and the nested model (dropping the variables depth of cover and mine) are tested. The variable depth of cover which is correlated with three variables like gallery width, seam thickness and the mine variable, when dropped from the original model; in the nested model, the widened galleries are found to be 4.8 [95% confidence interval (CI) is 1.4–16.5] times more prone as compared to the reference category for major roof fall accidents (case A). But in the original model for the same case A, this value is 4.5 [95% CI is 1.3–5.5]. Similarly, in the original model for the unsupported roof the adjusted odds ratio is 3.3 [95% CI is 1.1–9.2], and for the nested model the value is 3.4 [95% CI is 1.2–9.5]. Similar are the cases for the mine variable and shows significance for the same variable in both the original and nested model ( The variable ‘mine’ also shows significant correlations with the variables like depth of cover, width of gallery and thickness of seam. Hence, this ‘mine’ variable is tested after dropping it from the original model. In the nested model, for case A, widened galleries are found to be 3.4 [95% CI is 1.2–9.5] times more prone compared to the reference category; whereas in the original model this is found to be 4.5 [95% CI is 1.3–5.5]. Similarly, in the original model for the unsupported roof adjusted odds ratio is 3.3 [95% CI is 1.1–9.2]; and for the nested model this variable do not have statistical significance ( Similarly, while dropping the mine variable from the original model for testing the case B, in the nested model, widened galleries are found to be 5.3 [95% CI is 1.5–19.1] times more prone to serious roof fall accidents in compared to the reference category; whereas, in the original model this is found to be 6.7 [95% CI is 1.5–30.1]. Similarly, in the original model for the unsupported roof adjusted odds ratio is 3.7 [95% CI is 1.0–13.7]; and in the nested model this variable does not have statistical significance. The detailed results and comparisons for case B are presented in Chi-square is the difference in the likelihood ratios (−2LL) for the two models (original and nested), and the degrees of freedom is the difference in degrees of freedom for the two models. The difference of this change in chi-square for the mine variable is 11.296 at 4 degrees of freedom and shows the The results show that wider gallery width (⩾4.2 This paper focused on evaluation of severities of roof fall accidents in bord and pillar method of working through the application of logistic regression model. Again, logistic regression model deals with probability function and treats each individual as a separate observation to estimate the probabilities. On the basis of the model results, the unsupported, or partially supported roofs are more prone to major accidents than the supported roofs, but the earlier study by Unsupported or partially supported roofs are more prone to major accident than the supported roofs. Deep workings (>120 Widened galleries (⩾4.2 Less thick seams (⩽4.8 A solemn attention should be paid on the support design based on the depth of super incumbent strata, restricting the gallery width to reduce the risks of roof fall.