The leaching behavior of high purity willemite in ammoniacal solution was investigated under a range of experimental conditions with the view of optimizing zinc extraction. The results showed that decreasing the initial silica concentration while increasing the temperature, total ammonia/ammonium sulfate concentration and liquid/solid ratio resulted in a greater leaching efficiency. In the leaching process, zinc and silica in willemite were found to be simultaneously dissolved in the solution, followed by the precipitation of amorphous silica. The solubility of silica in the (NH4)2SO4–NH3–H2O system was very low with a saturated concentration of 0.3g/L. In addition, the precipitation rate of dissolved silica in the leaching solution was found to be significantly slow, making the willemite difficult to leach in the (NH4)2SO4–NH3–H2O system, especially at a low liquid/solid ratio.Refined zinc has been rapidly consumed in recent years aligned with an increase in global demand driven by industrialization in China and India. Consequently, zinc oxide ores are becoming economically viable as raw materials in zinc metallurgy all over the world due to limited supplies of zinc sulfide as a feed material. Zinc oxide ores used to produce zinc usually involve in carbonate and silicate minerals including smithsonite (ZnCO  The work detailed in this paper investigates the use of an ammonia/ammonium salt solution as an effective lixiviant for the leaching of zinc oxide ores. This method avoids the above-mentioned deficiencies of both acid and alkaline method systems. It possesses several clear advantages given its low toxicity, competitive operating and setup costs and the eases of regeneration enhancing its green credentials. Furthermore, the major waste components are insoluble in an ammonia/ammonium salt system as they exhibit poor complexation chemistry with ammonia. These crucial features enable the selective extraction of the desired metals ( A willemite sample of high purity was produced by roasting a hemimorphite specimen obtained from the Lanping zinc deposit in Yunnan, China. Roasting conditions in a muffle furnace was at 1100 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns revealed that the sample prior to roasting was pure hemimorphite. After roast, willemite became the main zinc-containing phase, with a small amount of quartz as gangue minerals ( The composition and purity of the samples were determined using combined gravimetric and adsorption techniques. The chemical analysis of willemite is listed in Analytical grade of ammonia, ammonium sulfate, sodium silicate, and deionized water was used in the experiments. Prior to the leaching experiments, the willemite underwent wet-grinding and was wet-sieved to yield a particle size distribution between 96 To determine the reasons for the relative difficulty of leaching willemite, the solubility of silica in the (NH The concentrations of silica and zinc in the solutions were determined by silicon molybdenum blue spectrophotometry and EDTA titration, respectively. The mineral components of the samples were identified using a RIGAKU-TTRIII XRD X-ray diffractometer with CuKα radiation. The surface morphology of the willemite grains was examined using a JEOL JSM-6360LV instrument operating at 20 The leaching efficiencies of zinc and silica, as well as the silica concentration in solution were evaluated using various liquid/solid ratios. The leach conditions were as follows: total ammonia/ammonium sulfate concentration as 7 The samples used in this study are high purity willemite. Hence, the leaching efficiencies of zinc and silica should be comparable when they have reached a stable solubility in solution. However, the leaching efficiency of silica is always much lower than that of zinc at varying liquid/solid ratios, as depicted in Willemite samples with particle sizes of 96–109  To understand the reason for the difficult leaching of willemite, samples before and after leaching were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy–energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM–EDS) and these results are shown in Overall, the total ammonia/ammonium sulfate concentration is a significant factor in affecting the leaching characteristics of willemite and the precipitation of amorphous silica. An investigation into the influence of temperature on zinc and silica extraction was also performed. The conditions were the same as those detailed in The solubility of silica in the (NH To confirm the reason for the poor efficiency of willemite leaching in the (NH It was found that zinc leaching efficiency decreased sharply with increased initial silica concentration. This finding demonstrated that the leaching of willemite was directly related to the solubility of silica in the (NH The dissolution behavior of willemite in the (NH The financial support for this work from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at