This paper investigates the effect of high-intensity ultrasound on the breakage characteristics of particles suspended in water. A continuous sonicated flow experimental apparatus is used involving a 24kHz horn type transducer and continuous in-line particle chord length measurement. The effects of sonication power (150–350W) and temperature (10–50°C) on the breakage characteristics are investigated. Higher breakage is favored at higher sonication power. An optimum temperature in the range tested is observed to exist between 25°C and 37°C. The acoustic cavitation field is influenced by temperature through a complex interplay of vapor pressure, surface tension and viscosity leading to the optimum observed in particle breakage. The efficiency of ultrasound energy conversion to particle breakage is calculated using calorimetry and found along with the net breakage efficiency to initially increase with temperature followed by a decrease after the optimum. It is found to be independent of input ultrasonic power. The effects of contact time is also investigated.Ultrasonic cavitation is the phenomenon by which a time-varying acoustic wave when induced into a liquid medium ruptures the liquid apart during the rarefaction cycle, creating transient or stable acoustic cavities (bubbles). The transient cavitations end up in collapse, within a short span of time, resulting in shock waves, while stable cavitations resonate in the applied sound field, surviving the local pressure variations for a number of acoustic cycles. The cavitation forces induced during transient collapse of cavitating bubbles are of great importance and are known to cause many chemical and physical effects, e.g., lysis of solvent molecules resulting in formation of free radicals, augmentation of chemical reaction rates The beneficial effects of high-intensity ultrasound (HIU) on particle breakage have been exploited in the field of catalysis where the ultrasonic collision test has evolved as a standard test to characterize the breakage resistance of catalyst particles It is expected that operational conditions namely, sonication power, contact time and temperature play important roles in the particle breakage. The sonication power influences the level of cavitation in the fluid. At higher power levels, the number of cavitation events increases because larger numbers of transient cavitation bubbles are formed, hence influencing the magnitude of breakage. Contact time is the duration of exposure of the particles to the ultrasound. Particles exposed to longer durations of sonication are expected to observe increased levels of breakage. Temperature has a significant effect on the ultrasonic field; it alters the viscosity, density and vapor pressure of the medium, thereby affecting a change in the cavitation threshold Ultrasound energy conversion into specific desirable effects is very important from the industrial viewpoint Studies that discuss either the effect of temperature on particle breakage kinetics or the efficiency of ultrasound energy conversion to ultrasonic mediated particle breakage, seem to be absent from the literature. We thus take up these issues for discussion in this paper via rigorous experimental parametric investigations using aluminium oxide (Al Aluminium oxide particles were used for this study, consisting of finely hand ground and sieved particles with mean nominal size of 150 Sonication was performed using a 24 A summary of the experimental conditions is shown in Focused beam reflectance method is an in-situ method for determining the chord length (CLD) distribution of a suspension with low to high solids concentration The FBRM is a well established technique that has been used to monitor size distributions The probe was inserted in the FBRM beaker that has flow from and to the sonication vessel. Such monitoring in the in-line mode was necessary firstly because the sonication vessel cannot accommodate the FBRM probe and secondly, because it was necessary to keep the FBRM probe at a safe distance from the intense ultrasound field. As described above, the variation of mean chord length (ℓ The experiments were conducted at three different rated input power levels of 150 It is clearly evident from the cumulative distributions and MCLR data that there is breakage of particles occurring during sonication. Furthermore, it can be observed from the cumulative distribution plots that the gap between the  We further determine the variation of the rate of change of MCLR to gain some insights into breakage kinetics of particles subjected to HIU fields. The breakage rate (  The experimental setup in its continuous flow arrangement allowed the variation of the mean residence time (contact time) of the particles by varying the pump flow rate. Three different flow rates were studied; 1.0 Five different experiments were conducted each at one temperature in the range 10–50 Temperature has a significant effect on the cavitation phenomenon. The cavitation phenomenon in a liquid medium is affected by its surface tension, viscosity and vapor pressure This is consistent with the variation of cavitation erosion with temperature observed elsewhere It is well known that the amount of energy or power that is input to the system is never completely transferred to the liquid medium and that losses are inherent in the system. Here we analyze efficiency to understand this and attempt to determine optimal operational conditions for particle breakage. We first study the transfer of power or energy into the liquid medium from the ultrasonic transducer at various amplitude ratios and temperatures using calorimetry where the specific calorimetric power is given by, Furthermore, there is a linear variation of  In the previous section, we calculated the efficiency of the power transfer from the ultrasonic transducer to the thermal energy of the liquid. Now, the efficiency of ultrasound energy conversion to particle breakage ( Finally, the net efficiency (    There are many crater-like surface irregularities formed. The whole surface of the particle has “battered sponge” like irregularities. Creation of such surface morphology by HIU could be exploited in catalysis. As far as catalysis is concerned, there are two main features of catalytically active surfaces that are imperative viz., (a) irregularities and (b) additives. The steps and kinks that appear on metal surfaces seem to have an enhancing effect, especially for transition metal surfaces The ultrasound mediated particle breakage was investigated experimentally using a continuous flow sonication apparatus equipped with in-line FBRM particle size monitoring. The effects of sonication power, contact time and temperature of the bulk liquid on the particle breakage were discussed. Higher sonication power and higher contact time result in higher breakage. Breakage rate was quantified and was found to be highest in the initial period of sonication. An optimum temperature corresponding to higher breakage was found to exist in the range 25–37 The authors thank Pauline Yeo and Poernomo Gunawan for their technical assistance. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the help of Dr. Brain O’Sullivan and Assistant Professor Arvind Rajendran in reviewing the manuscript.