Due to the shortage of fresh water, sea water has been considered as a promising alternative for mineral flotation. Sodium silicate (SS) was used to eliminate the negative influence due to the application of sea water for chalcopyrite flotation and the related mechanisms were studied. Flotation results showed that the most detrimental compound in sea water was the divalent ion of Mg2+. Contact angle measurements suggested that SS increased chalcopyrite hydrophobicity in sea water and MgCl2 solution. The zeta potential of chalcopyrite became more negative while that of Mg(OH)2 was reversed from positive to negative upon the addition of SS, preventing the adsorption of hydrophilic Mg(OH)2 precipitates on chalcopyrite surface. FTIR and XPS analyses further confirmed that the presence of SS in sea water reduced the adsorption of Mg(OH)2 on chalcopyrite surface. In addition, Derjguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) calculation indicated that SS can prevent the adsorption of Mg(OH)2 on chalcopyrite surface, thereby increasing chalcopyrite recovery. Therefore, this study presents an effective method to improve chalcopyrite flotation recovery in sea water.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS However, flotation process using sea water is highly complex due to the presence of various ions ( Researchers have attempted to add various reagents to reduce the negative effects due to the application of sea water ( Sodium silicate (Na Many previous studies reported that the inhibiting effects of sea water on sulfide mineral flotation were mainly due to the presence of divalent Mg Bulk chalcopyrite samples were obtained from Daye, Hubei province, China. The chunk minerals were crushed and then ground in a three head grinding machine (RK/XPM, Wuhan Rock Grinding Equipment Manufacturing Co., Ltd, Wuhan, China), followed by wet sieving. The particles ranging from 38 to 75 μm were collected for flotation tests. Sonication was applied to remove the clinging fine particles in ethanol solution until clear supernatant was obtained. Prior to sealing in plastic tubes and transferred into a freeze for minimizing air oxidation, the obtained sample was dried at 30 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra presented in All reagents used were of analytical grade, All chalcopyrite flotation experiments were conducted using a mechanical agitation flotation machine (XFGⅡ5-35 g, Wuhan Exploration Machinery Factory, Wuhan, China). 1 g of chalcopyrite powder (38–75 μm) was placed into the 40 mL flotation cell filled with 25 mL solution. SS was then added, followed by pH adjustment at 10 using NaOH during the first 6 min. The selection of pH 10 for chalcopyrite flotation is to depress pyrite in industry and consistent with many other studies ( The pulp frothability was quantified by measuring the froth layer thickness ( The contact angles of chalcopyrite treated under different conditions were measured using a JC2000C type measuring device purchased from Shanghai Zhongchen Digital Technology Company (Shanghai, China). The sessile drop method applied in the previous published works ( Zeta potentials of chalcopyrite treated in different solutions were measured by a Malvern Zeta Sizer Nano-ZS90 (manufactured in England). The chalcopyrite particle was ground to less than 5 μm and then 0.05 g of powder was suspended in 50 mL synthetic sea water or 0.05 M MgCl The samples were prepared by adding 100 mg of chalcopyrite particles (−5 µm) into 50 mL desired solution and conditioned for 10 min. After that, the solid samples were filtered and washed three times using ultrapure water to remove the adsorbed reagents from chalcopyrite surface. Subsequently, the washed chalcopyrite particles were vacuum dried over 24 h. 1 mg of chalcopyrite sample was mixed with 100 mg of spectral grade KBr and then the mixed sample was compressed into thin slice which was then placed into the FTIR spectrometer of Nicolet-10 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). 2 g of 38–75 µm chalcopyrite particles were treated under the same conditions as those in the flotation process. The subsequent filtration, washing, and drying operations were the same as to the treatments for FTIR sample. XPS measurements were carried out using a Thermo Fisher ESCALAB 250Xi equipped with an Al Kα monochromated X-ray source. The survey scan was from 1350 to 0 eV with a pass energy of 100 eV and a step size of 1.0 eV. All the spectra were calibrated using the characteristic peak of carbon (C1 In general, Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) theory is used to quantitatively predict the interaction energy (V The Hamaker constants of chalcopyrite (A   In 0.05 M MgCl    Upon the addition of SS, the zeta potentials of chalcopyrite surface were decreased to more negative values with increased SS dosage, in all the solutions examined, indicating the adsorption of SS on chalcopyrite surface. Similar findings were reported in other studies, The zeta potentials of chalcopyrite treated in both sea water and 0.05 M MgCl In addition, the surface potential of Mg(OH)   To predict the interaction between chalcopyrite and Mg(OH) In the absence of SS, both the V Flotation experiments showed significant depressing influence towards chalcopyrite flotation at pH 10 in sea water and 0.05 M MgCl The authors acknowledged the financial support from the