Polymetallic fibers of 13Fe2Co/ZrO2 and 13Fe2Co100Zr were prepared by impregnation and an in situ electrospinning technique. The iron, cobalt and zirconium components in the 13Fe2Co100Zr catalyst are more dispersed than the impregnation one, as indicated by SEM/EDS, TEM, XRD, H2-TPR and N2 adsorption techniques. CO2 conversion increased by a factor of 2 and the selectivity to C2
                     + hydrocarbons increased 15 times on the 13Fe2Co100Zr polymetallic fibers compared with the 13Fe2Co/ZrO2 supported catalyst. The 0.18s−1 TOF (turnover frequency) of the polymetallic fibers exceeded that of the supported catalyst (0.12s−1). Potassium addition to the 13Fe2Co100Zr catalyst further improved the selectivity to C2
                     =–C4
                     =, which increased to 27.5% on a 10K13Fe2Co100Zr catalyst. The polymetallic fibers showed stable activity over the reaction period. The activity of the 13Fe2Co/ZrO2 catalyst, however, decreased rapidly due to metal sintering as observed with TEM and XRD. The in situ electrospinning technique can effectively prevent metal sintering and provide high CO2 conversion efficiency.CO Common catalyst supports are oxides, such as Al A coprecipitation method homogeneously mixes the metal and support precursors and has strengthened the metal-support interaction resulting in a somewhat improved metal dispersion Herein, Fe-Co-Zr polymetallic fibers with different Fe/Co molar ratios were prepared through in situ electrospinning, and subsequently tested for CO Fe-Co-Zr polymetallic fibers were fabricated by an in situ electrospinning method according to a previously reported procedure 10K13Fe2Co100Zr and 20K13Fe2Co100Zr catalysts were prepared by impregnating the calcined Fe-Co-Zr fibers with an aqueous solution of potassium nitrate to obtain 10 ZrO The catalytic hydrogenation of carbon dioxide was carried out in a pressurized fixed-bed flow reactor (inner diameter 8 The products were analyzed on-line using a gas chromatograph (FULI GC 97). Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and methane were analyzed using a carbon molecular sieve column equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD), while methane and C The conversion of CO XRD patterns of fresh and spent catalysts were collected on a RigakuSmartLab (9) diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) maps were obtained on a field emission scanning electron microscopy (NOVA NanoSEM 450) at an accelerating voltage of 10.0 The textural properties of the samples were determined by N H Dispersion of the oxide particles was characterized by CO titration using the same equipment. Samples were reduced in H The iron, cobalt, zirconium and potassium content of the as-prepared samples was measured by ICP-OES (PerkinElmer OPTIMA 2000DV ICP optical emission spectrometer). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted on a TGA/SDTA851e thermobalance (Mettler Toledo). The TGA data was collected in the range of 30–850 The morphologies of catalysts are shown in A standard photograph of the Fe-Co-Zr polymetallic oxide fibers is shown in To investigate the metal dispersion on the fibers, SEM/EDS characterization was carried out ( Figs. Physical properties of the 13Fe2Co/ZrO The reducibility of the two catalysts was also studied by temperature-programmed reduction (TPR), and corresponding profiles are shown in The catalysts were tested in the fixed-bed reactor, and the activities are shown in Our prior work concluded that K addition can induce olefin generation The activity decreased rapidly on the 13Fe2Co/ZrO FeCoZr polymetallic fibers, prepared by an in situ electrospinning technique, exhibited superior and stable activity for CO This work was financially supported by the