This work focuses on the successful synthesis of NaY zeolite from highly contaminated kaolinite clay, while investigating the effect of metakaolinization temperature and aging on role of potassium in zeolitization. The presence of potassium was observed to be responsible for formation of microcline, kalsite, and nepheline, which were found to depend on metakaolinization temperature and Si/Al ratio. The desirability function approach of the Response Surface Methodological (RSM) was used to optimized the favorable maximal and minimal conditions for metakaolinization and potassium based mineral removal. The intensity of microcline was employed as response, which gave optimal calcination temperature and time of 900°C and 6h, respectively. Synthesis of zeolite Y was observed to be favored at higher Na/Na+K ratio, adequate aging, low Si/Al ratio, even in the presence of some trace potassium. The optimal condition for zeolite Y formation was determined to be calcinations at 900°C at holding time of 6h, aged for 8days and synthesized at 95°C for 72h. The zeolite NaY had cubicoshape with relative diameter of 15μm, ion exchange capacity of 4.72–4.94meq/g and specific surface area of 672m2/g. Reproducibility study conducted on Elefun kaolinite clay gave a good crystalline phase of NaY type zeolite after 7days of aging. The starting materials, intermediate and final products were characterized using X-ray florescence (XRF), X-ray diffractograph (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Branner-Emmet-Teller (BET) analyses.The purity and quality of zeolite synthesized is governed by the nature of raw materials used. Various authors Despite the impurities in Kankara kaolinite clay, Ajayi et al. Panagiotopoulou et al. The size of the cation is also reported by Phair and Van Deventer  The mined kaolin was beneficiated as detailed by Ajayi et al. The extent of beneficiation could be appreciated from compositional analysis depicted in Despite the Si/Al ratio of 2.29 for the beneficiated clay, the XRD patterns in The calcination conditions for kaolin was optimized using RSM with the intensity of the microcline (potassium based phase) serving as the response. The normal plot of residuals shown in The calcination of the kaolin was done to attain metakaolin as well as establishing the temperature favorable for potassium reduction. The optimization result obtained is displayed in 3D in  The SEM morphology embedded also shows more structural destruction in The results in All the resulting products from the dealumination reactions met the required silica-alumina ratio for the successful synthesis of faujasite type zeolite. The amount of potassium left in the gangue after dealumination was observed to be lowest for DMK900, while the highest level for Na The XRD patterns in The previous attempt was not successful at producing NaY for the following reasons: (i) high potassium level (ii) highly acidic medium, resulting from the sulphatic salts from dealumniation reaction and (iii) the silica left after dealumination becomes more rigid with higher solubility From Eq. From The XRD pattern shown in The reproducibility study was conducted using Elefun kaolinite clay giving all the characteristic peaks for zeolite Y for products obtained from gels aged for 7 and 9 The SEM shown in It can be concluded that in the presence of potassium, the required structural subunits were either not formed or formed in a considerable quantity, leading to formation of other zeolite phases. In term of zeolite Y synthesis, potassium can be a structure-breaking because of its relatively large size compared to sodium (1.33