Savanna ecosystems have low primary productivity, strong seasonality, and acid soils with low phosphorus (P) content. Organic P (Po) comprises around 50% of the total soil P and is plant-available only after mineralization. Rhizosphere processes mediated by plants, microorganisms and arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) are important for plant P nutrition. We studied P transformation rates, Po-fractionation, acid phosphomonoesterase activity (APA), AM status, dehydrogenase activity (DHA), and bacterial and fungal plate counts in the rhizosphere of the native dominant grass Trachypogon plumosus. We collected samples from three acid savanna soils differing in order and P content (Entisol, Vertisol and Ultisol) at Estación Experimental La Iguana (Northeastern Venezuela) during the dry, rainy and transitional seasons over a 2-year-period. Less available Po fractions (moderately labile, moderately and highly resistant) seem to be involved in short-term P-cycling transformations as they significantly varied with season. During the rainy season plant P content (576–1160mgPkg−1 dry weight) and APA (44–200mgPNPkg−1 dry soil) were higher, while microbial number and activity (DHA) were lower. The higher P availability in the Entisol (6–9mgPkg−1 dry soil) resulted in a better plant nutritional status and inhibited APA. T. plumosus seems to be highly dependent on AM symbiosis (45–71% AM colonized root length, 0.6–8 AM spores g−1 dry soil), especially during the rainy season. Po mineralization processes, mediated by biological associations in the rhizosphere, are crucial for understanding seasonal P-cycling and fertility in acid savanna soils.Savannas are ecosystems with a low natural fertility, acid soils, a strong rain-dry seasonality and a low primary productivity (  Microbial P can represent up to 6% of the total P in savanna ecosystems ( Therefore, if Po mineralization is essential for plant P nutrition in savanna ecosystems, there should be seasonal changes in soil Po fractions, Po mineralization, microbial activity, phosphatase activity and mycorrhizal status in the rhizosphere induced by P deficiency. To study these aspects in a natural setting we selected three soil orders (Entisol, Vertisol and Ultisol) from Estación Experimental La Iguana. The soils differed in genesis, texture and total soil P content, however, they all had acid pH, low P fertility ( The aim of the work reported here was to study mineralization processes in the rhizosphere of The study was carried out at Estación Experimental La Iguana, located in Guárico State in Northeastern Venezuela (8°25′N and 65°25′W). These savannas are dominated by Samples were taken between May of 1999 and November of 2000, during the following seasons: dry, transition dry-rainy (beginning of rain), rainy, and transition rainy-dry (end of rain). We randomly selected two different sampling dates within each season for a total of eight sampling dates. At each site (Entisol, Vertisol and Ultisol), in defined 10 Air-dried rhizosphere soil was extracted with 0.5 Total P was determined on dried soil (Pt) and plants (P-plant) by strong acid digestion with a mix of concentrated H P microbial immobilization was suppressed after irradiation with γ-rays from a Values are reported as mg of P liberated per kg of dry soil in 24 Dehydrogenase activity (DHA) was determined colorimetrically as the degradation of triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) to triphenyl formazan (TPF) after 1.5 Acid phosphomonoesterase activity (APA) was determined colorimetrically as the degradation of PNP-P (p-nitrophenyl phosphate) to PNP (p-nitrophenol) after incubation of 1 Infective AM propagules were quantified using the most probable number (MPN) method (  Colony forming units (cfu) were counted after serial 10-fold dilution of fresh soil suspension and plating on tryptic soy agar (TSA) with cycloheximide for total soil bacteria ( One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) in each soil order was carried out to show any seasonal differences in all measured variables. When required, data were transformed as log( Total Po (Po-t) represented between 33 and 82% of soil Pt ( P content in Microbial activity, expressed as DHA, was higher during the dry season for the Entisol and the Ultisol, but not significantly different for the Vertisol ( Seasonal changes in P transformation rates were only observed in net P solubilization (Pns) in the Entisol (data not shown) being significantly higher during the BegRain and the rainy seasons. With the exception of Pns, which was higher in the Entisol than in the other soil orders, the Ultisol showed the highest P transformation rates, gross P mineralization (Pgm) and microbial P immobilization (Pmi). Solution P and labile organic P during incubation were lower in the Vertisol, while the Entisol accumulated the highest amount soil solution P ( The number of AM infective propagules were not significantly different among soils according to the MPN method ( All three soils are slightly acid, with low fertility and low cation exchange capacity (CEC). The Entisol has the lowest organic matter content, the lowest Pt content and the highest P availability (P-NaHCO  The higher P-plant in the Entisol ( Acid phosphomoesterase activity (APA), increases in the Entisol and the Vertisol during the rainy season when nutrient lixiviation and plant uptake are higher ( We found seasonal changes in different Po fractions ( The measurement of seasonal fluctuations in soil biological parameters, such as microbial biomass, are essential in the study of Po transformations ( DHA decreased during the rainy season ( In savanna ecosystems, as well as in other tropical ecosystems affected by a low fertility and a strong seasonality, soil microorganisms, in addition to being adapted to drought stress, may play an important role in seasonal P cycling, by immobilizing P during the dry season and liberating it during the rainy season ( Rhizosphere microorganisms can contribute also to P nutrition through the synthesis and liberation of phosphatases when P is not available ( Viable fungal and bacterial counts ( Although, the transformation rates ( Moreover, we observe that in the Entisol, where Pi-lab is higher ( Whereas AM infective potential is not significantly different among soils ( The higher AM colonization ( According to The fact that colonization is, in general, high and increases during the rainy season ( AM colonization ( In acid savanna soils the Po fractions considered as less available may be involved in seasonal P cycling. Therefore, they need to be considered when studying nutrient cycling and soil fertility. Po mineralization, as well as AM colonization, seem to be important for We thank Fondo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología and Consejo de Desarrollo Científico y Humanístico for partially financing the study. We also acknowledge Dr J. Ramos for helping with the statistical analysis and experimental design. Finally, we thank D. Hernández, P. Duque and I. Bazó for their technical assistance in the laboratory.