There is about 60,000 t of lithium mica in the German part of the deposit in the Erzgebirge mountains. Lithium can be recovered by high pressure-high temperature leaching with sulfuric acid and further hydrometallurgical processing. Another idea, developed in the EU-project FAME, was to use sulfur oxidizing microbes to produce sulfuric acid and to extract lithium at moderate temperature and pressure conditions. Experiments were carried out in 2L and 4L batch reactors at 30°C. After microbial transformation of elemental sulfur to sulfuric acid, the milled (<45µm) lithium mica was added at a pulp density of 5%. Up to 26% of lithium was extracted biologically compared to 16% by chemical leaching. The bioleaching solution contained about 1g/L aluminium, 0.8g/L iron and 0.2g/L lithium and could be further processed hydrometallurgically.Lithium has been recognized as a potentially critical raw material during recent years because of its wide-ranging uses in a number of applications, including batteries, glasses and ceramics, light alloys and as additive for greases ( Lithium consumption for batteries has increased significantly in recent years because rechargeable lithium batteries are used extensively for portable electronic devices and in electric tools, electric vehicles, and grid storage applications. Thus, rechargeable batteries are considered the largest potential growth area for lithium ( Lithium for chemical and battery applications is recovered mainly from brines in Chile, Argentina and China. Lithium minerals, with focus on spodumene and petalite, are recovered predominantly in Australia for industrial mineral uses, e.g. in ceramics and glasses ( Zinnwaldite, the lithium mineral in the Zinnwald-Cinovec deposit at the German/Czech border, can be easily concentrated from the greisen ore by crushing, milling, sieving and magnetic separation, potentially complemented by froth flotation for the fine grained fractions ( We investigated the leaching of zinnwaldite using sulfuric acid produced from acidophiles via oxidation of elemental sulfur. This idea to enhance the metal recovery by adding elemental sulfur or sulfur compounds to low grade acid consuming ores is not new ( To produce a zinnwaldite concentrate, samples from a coarse-grained lithium-containing greisen ore were taken from the Cinovec deposit, Czech Republic, and crushed to an appropriate size. From the crushed material, mica was selected by handpicking and milled with an oscillating disk mill using zirconia. The zinnwaldite concentrate size was less than 45 Shake flasks and two batch reactors were used. An uncharacterized and adapted mixed culture of mesophilic sulfur oxidizing bacteria (GEOS culture collection), originally obtained from leaching of sulfide tailings, was used as inoculum. The inoculum was suspended in 100-mL basal salts medium (DSMZ 71) in flasks. 5 A 2- and a 4-L bioreactor were filled with the aforementioned medium and sulfur. When the pH dropped to 1.7, the zinnwaldite concentrate was added in a concentration of 5% w/v. For investigation of biofilm formation, pieces of crystalline lithium mica and crystalline sulfur were also fixed in the 2 After the tests, samples of crystalline sulfur and mica were removed from the 2-L bioreactor, rinsed, and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 4 The final slurry was centrifuged. The supernatant was titrated with 15 Leaching of zinnwaldite in shake flasks using a mixed bacterial culture of sulfur oxidizing bacteria was dependent on pH. After 14 d, the final pH in the shake flasks ranged from 1.6 to 2.6. Leaching of lithium, iron and aluminium decreased with increasing pH ( When zinnwaldite was added to the 4-L reactor, the pH increased from 1.7 to 2.1, but due to continuous sulfuric acid production, the pH decreased and cell growth seemed not to be affected ( Leaching of lithium in bioreactors was slightly higher (26 and 21%) compared to chemical leaching (16%) ( The leaching solution contained 150 Only half of the soluble iron (410–920 Biofilm formation was investigated to prove whether the acidophilic microorganisms attached on the mica surface and/or accelerated lithium leaching. Mica blades had a slightly higher microbial colonisation in comparison to the control which had no colonization ( In contrast, the surface of the crystalline sulfur was densely populated and exhibited clear visible corrosion pits. The control sample had sharp sulfur crystals and areas without cells. The bioleached sample had no crystals and interspaces were filled with cells ( We do not have a clear explanation for the slightly higher extraction of lithium with microorganisms. A slightly higher metal extraction (8–18%) during bioleaching of vanadium rich spent refinery catalysts compared to chemical leaching with sulfuric acid was also reported by An economic viable lithium recovery from the leaching solution requires The separation of aluminium and iron from the leaching solution The concentration of the lithium content from 150 Typically, the pH would be increased to about 8 by adding Ca(OH) Due to the expensive precipitation and evaporation steps, the conventional processing route is likely not economic. Since lithium and potassium are the only monovalent cations in solution, membrane processes could be appealing. The solution could be concentrated by reverse osmosis. A separation by nanofiltration of mono- and polyvalent cations should be feasible. However, nanofiltration of the leaching solution using a GE DL membrane was affected by the high drop in the permate flux to only 10% of the initial value, indicating scaling of the membrane, probably caused by high SiO The study describes the leaching of lithium from lithium-containing mica using acidophilic bacteria. The lithium extraction was slightly higher compared to chemical leaching. The lithium concentration of 150 However, the lithium concentration in the leaching solution resembles the lithium concentration of brines considered for economic recovery ( The manuscript has been developed within the R&D project FAME – Flexible and mobile economic processing technologies and is co-funded under Horizon2020 by the European Commission, GA number 641650 within the call SC5-11b-2014: Flexible processing technologies. We acknowledge the University Duisburg, Prof. W. Sand and Dr. Sören Bellenberg for microscopic analyses of biofilms on the minerals surfaces and thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback.