In this study three hydrometallurgical methods are described for leaching of a eudialyte concentrate with H2SO4: (i) direct leaching, (ii) fast leaching and (iii) water leaching of dehydrated acid/concentrate mixture. It is demonstrated how to obtain a silica free solution, how parameter variations impact the properties of precipitated silica and which processes lead to losses of valuable components during leaching. Furthermore, the acid solubility of gangue minerals in the concentrate is analyzed and the resulting consequences in terms of leach solution contamination and acid consumption are discussed. The best result in terms of the average yield of value components (REEs, Zr(+Hf), Mn and Nb) of 86% is obtained by direct leaching under mild conditions (cH2SO4 = 1 mol/L; TL = 60 °C). However, released silicic acid does not precipitate and aggregates at pulp density ρPD,L = 100 kg/m3 by gelling. Fast leaching allows the efficient removal of silica at high solid-liquid ratios in the pre-treatment stage. Due to mass transfer limitations, high efficiency stirrers are crucial for achieving high yields in short reaction times. Dehydration of the acid/concentrate mixture before water leaching can be a good alternative if well-defined amount of acid is used; however, high energy input is needed.Currently, silicate raw materials play a minor role in hydrometallurgical processing ( Silicic acid released during acid digestion of silicate minerals tends to a polycondensation reaction (Eq. The saturation concentration is dependent on many factors, which include pH value, temperature and presence of other ions ( c L whereby, for example, the polycondensation reaction starts at 75 °C from SSI value ≥2,5 ( The particles formed during the polycondensation reaction can either grow as a result of so-called Ostwald ripening or aggregate. Both processes can also run parallel. In industrial operations silica precipitation is complete in approx. 5–6 h ( Due to the negative charge of Si(OH) Eudialyte is a promising silicate raw material for some critical metals ( with: N: Na, Ca, K, Sr, REEs, Ba, Mn, H M(1): Ca, Mn, REEs, Na, Sr, Fe M(2) Fe, Mn, Na, Zr, Ta, Ti, K, Ba, H M(3,4): Si, Nb, Ti, W, Na Z: Zr, Ti, Nb O′: O, OH X: H The eudialyte-group minerals (EGM) can be assigned to sodium-rich zirconosilicates with a particular ring structure consisting of nine- and three-membered SiO Eudialyte is readily soluble in mineral acids and characterized by a low melting temperature ( Peralkaline deposits and eudialyte concentrates haven't gained much industrial importance so far. The Lovozero peralkaline deposit, Kola Peninsula Russia is the only known exception, from which rare earth elements have been commercially produced ( Another example of peralkaline deposit containing eudialyte as the major mineral host is Norra Kärr, Sweden. So far numerous metallurgical studies have been performed, including scientific publications ( thermal pre-treatment of concentrate (calcination) pre-treatment of concentrate by concentrated acid and subsequent water leaching (known as fast leaching, quick leaching or Jowanda process ( thermal pre-treatment of acid/concentrate mixture and subsequent water leaching direct leaching of SiO Most of the methods are based on pre-treatment of concentrate or acid/concentrate mixture to convert the SiO In this study a eudialyte concentrate from Norra Kärr deposit was leached by three different methods: (i) direct leaching, (ii) fast leaching and (iii) water leaching of dehydrated acid/concentrate mixture. This work provides additional insides on the mechanisms of silica gel formation and shows how silica can be efficiently precipitated. In addition, the influence of parameter variation on properties of precipitated silica, its filterability and water content as well as on the yields of all valuable ore components are investigated. Furthermore, the stability of gangue minerals in the concentrate against H For all experiments, an ore concentrate from the Norra Kärr deposit, Southern Sweden was used. The concentrate was produced by high gradient magnetic separation and contains 11.4 wt% eudialyte [Na Over 65 wt% of eudialyte particles are completely liberated. Non-liberated EGM is mainly associated with Ca-catapleiite, microcline and zeolite. The d The elemental composition was determined after complete dissolution of the dried concentrate by lithium metaborate fusion (Claisse; ultra-pure) by ICP-OES (Thermo Scientific IRIS Intrepid II XDL; Na, Mg, Al, Si, K, Ca, Fe) and ICP-MS (Thermo scientific XSERIES 2, internal standards: 10 μg/L Rh and Re; REEs, Mn, Zr, Nb, Hf, Th, U) ( Direct leaching experiments were performed with aqueous H Fast leaching was conducted in 2 stages: pre-treatment of concentrate with concentrated H water dilution of the mixture In the pre-treatment stage, mineral digestion occurs as well as the conversion of the released metal ions into sulfates (Eq. After water dilution, the formed metal sulfates are transferred into the liquid phase (Eq. In the experimental studies the concentrate was mixed with a defined amount of H The leaching of dehydrated acid/concentrate mixture is similar to the fast leaching. The only difference is the thermal pre-treatment of the acid/concentrate mixture without stirring in an open vessel before water dilution. During the heating the silica is converted into anhydrous form (Eq. For experiment implementation the concentrate was first suspended with a defined amount of H The filtration rate is used to estimate the filterability of leaching residue. The determination was performed gravimetrically by measuring of the mass increase of collection chamber for the filtrate (B) over time ( Recording of mass increase was started after reaching a negative pressure of 400 mbar generated by the vacuum pump (V). The filtration rate was calculated after determining the slope of the m~t plot (Eq. ρ – density of leach solution (assumption for all experiments: ρ = 1 g/mL). F ∆m/∆t – gradient of the fitting straight line. To confirm the ready solubility of eudialyte in mineral acids, direct leaching was performed under mild conditions and low solid-liquid ratio first (T The ready solubility of EGM in mineral acids is confirmed by achieving a high average yield X In comparison, the increase in pulp density negatively impacts the leaching yields, especially of manganese and niobium ( The β-t All determined silicon concentrations are well above the SSI saturation concentration ≥ 2,5 (e.g. SSIρ During leaching of the concentrate a relatively stable colloidal solution is produced, the stability of which diminishes with increasing pulp density. Therefore, it can be concluded that both, Ostwald ripening and all aggregation processes of polysilicic acid take place very slowly. The basis for both processes is the formation of new siloxane bonds and thus the polycondensation reaction (Eq. In experiments conducted at high pulp density gelling occurred at a finite rate. This can be explained by the rise in supersaturation of the solution. As the ratio c In this section, the acid solubility of single minerals and acid consumption are analyzed. The relative mass m The determined mineralogical composition of the residue as well as the mass difference of minerals after leaching show that eudialyte (∆wt%: 84–96), nepheline (∆wt% = 100) and zeolite (∆wt%: 95–96) decompose to a high extent at any temperature ( Taking into account the determined acid solubility of the minerals, theoretical acid consumption is calculated from stoichiometric equations. Assuming that nepheline (M = 584 g/mol), zeolite (M = 3487 g/mol) and eudialyte (M = 1425 g/mol) are completely decomposed according to the Eqs. Considering their mass fraction in the concentrate, the acid consumption (n For determining the reaction parameters for silica precipitation, first acid addition and temperature of the pre-treatment step were varied. The precipitation can be recognized by the decrease in silicon concentration ( n n In additional experiments, the further value pairs were determined ( The silica precipitation can be achieved either at low temperatures and high acid additions or by increasing the temperature while simultaneously reducing the acid addition. However, under these conditions the aggregated polysilicic acid forms a voluminous, water-rich precipitate ( Additional experiments demonstrated that further increase in acid addition causes the reduction of silicon concentrations and improvement of the filter cake properties ( A further negative correlation is observed for decreasing moisture with increasing filtration rate. It may be concluded that the filterability of precipitated polysilicic acid is related to its water content. The leaching yields of the valuable components achieved in the experiments are depicted in Increasing temperature and acid addition creates an initial rise in yields of all valuable components. With the occurrence of silica precipitation, the yields especially of niobium and hafnium decrease. This can be attributed to the adsorption of the metal ions on the aggregated silica. Losses of valuable components have been also recognized by precipitation of silica from zinc processing solution ( In further experiments pulp density in the pre-treatment stage ρ The improvement in the properties of precipitated silica can be reached by reducing the amount of water in the pre-treatment stage. But, at high solid-liquid ratios the acid/concentrate mixture solidifies immediately after mixing hampering the homogenization ( The leaching yields of valuable components achieved in the corresponding experiments decrease with increasing pulp density ( This indicates the occurrence of mass transfer limitations, which are confirmed by varying the stirring speed during the pre-treatment stage ( Without mechanical energy input (obviously at a cost), the average yield of valuable components X In the following the influence of the duration of the pre-treatment stage t The duration of the pre-treatment stage has no significant influence on precipitated silica; its physical properties and solubility do not change significantly ( In summary, it can be concluded, that the properties of precipitated silica can be enhanced by varying the acid addition and pulp density. Considering the process costs the increase of solid-liquid ratio is more practicable. However, to achieve high yields in short reaction time, special stirring equipment is required, leading to higher investment costs. As discussed in the previous section, the filterability of precipitated silica depends on its water content. By heating of acid/concentrate mixture in an open vessel, it is possible to remove water completely, obviously at an operational cost. The thermal pre-treatment has a positive effect on the properties of precipitated silica if acid excess is not too high ( Equally the filter cake moisture increases significantly with acid addition. For the rising amount of adsorbed water the following explanation is proposed: During the dehydration of the acid/concentrate mixture the polysilicic acid is converted into a water-poor form (Eq. With the increase in acid excess, competitive reaction gains increasing importance. Upon renewed contact of the thermally pre-treated acid/concentrate mixture with water, the labile bonds break, the back reaction and the water absorption takes place. In order to improve the filter cake quality, the usage of a suitable amount of acid is of crucial importance. The optimal acid addition represents a value, at which the complete eudialyte decomposition takes place at a minimum of acid excess, so that as little as possible labile silica‑sulfuric acid species are formed. The plot of n At stoichiometric acid addition (n The average yield of valuable components at 10 mmol/g, which corresponds to the calculated optimal acid addition, is around 62%. Although its further increase enhances the yield of valuable components, it has no positive effect on the degree of the mineral decomposition ( The leaching yield of the valuable components as a function of the pulp density was investigated experimentally by the determined optimal acid addition of 10.5 mmol/g ( The increase in solid-liquid ratio has a different effect on the considered components. The manganese yields are almost constant in the investigated range. The yields of zirconium and hafnium steadily increase, which can be explained again by the positive effect of rising acidity of the leaching medium on the solubility of metal ions. The concentration of niobium is only slightly affected. Generally, the low yields can be explained by adsorption on the aggregated polysilicic acid, as shown in the investigations of the fast leaching (see In the presence of monovalent cations and sulfate ions rare earth elements form double salts (Eq. The solubility of the double salts is significantly lower than that of the corresponding sulfates. With the increase in concentration of monovalent cations, sulfate anions and sulfuric acid their solubility drops even significantly further ( Achieved concentrations are in agreement with values obtained by solubility studies of rare earth elements in complex solutions ( As mentioned above, the losses can be also attributed to rare earth element incorporation into gypsum structure, which formation is proven by the decrease in calcium yields ( The solubility of precipitated silica is only slightly affected by the increase in pulp density. In every case the concentrations are below 25 mg/L ( It can be concluded that by thermal pre-treatment metastable SiO Leaching of a eudialyte concentrate from Norra Kärr deposit with H The highest average yield X In order to obtain a silica free solution, two two-stage leaching processes are investigated viz.: fast leaching and water leaching of dehydrated acid/concentrate mixture. Both have advantages as well as disadvantages. The principal weakness of fast leaching is the formation of a water-rich precipitate with low filterability and occurrence of mass transfer limitations, affecting the kinetics. Therefore, to achieve high yields in short reaction time, the acid/concentrate slurry must be mixed intensely. This requires special stirring equipment. The improvement in the properties of precipitated silica can be achieved by thermal pre-treatment of the acid/concentrate mixture before leaching if a well-defined amount of acid is used. High energy input is the main drawback of this procedure, increasing operational costs. In addition, it is demonstrated that during silica precipitation losses of valuable components, especially niobium and hafnium occurred. Moreover, due to the high concentrations of released monovalent and calcium cations, rare earth elements precipitate at higher pulp densities. The formation of double sulfates and the incorporation of the metal ions into the gypsum structure are suggested as reasons. To avoid their distribution between solid and liquid phase, the leaching process should be carried out in high dilution, but this also would increase equipment and operational costs due to larger volumes having to be processed. In this study, it is shown that, as well as eudialyte, nepheline and zeolite are both digested by sulfuric acid. The separation of gangue minerals before hydrometallurgical treatment is highly recommended not only for the reduction in acid consumption, but also to lower the amounts of released monovalent cations, aluminium and silica. As an overall conclusion, it can be stated that as a source of valuable elements eudialyte is challenged due to the growing complexity of the extraction processes as discussed in this paper, which increase capital and operational costs. This study was conducted within the framework of the SE-FLECX-project founded by the BMBF (Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany; project number: 033R132A). The authors thank Sabine Gilbricht (TU Bergakademie Freiberg) for supporting by the characterization of the material, Stefanie Schubert (Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology) for chemical analysis of liquid phases and Niall O'Toole for proofreading.