Although many researchers have studied the normal and shear behavior of fractures under stresses, the over-consolidation effect on the slip/shear behavior of discontinuities has not been considered. The over-consolidation behavior of non-planar rock fractures should be considered when deposition–consolidation–erosion (or excavation) sequences occur. Plaster replicas of representative natural rock joint surfaces were prepared for this study. In this case, the surface roughness and other geometrical properties remain constant during the laboratory direct shear tests. It was observed that the shear strength within a large range of roughness, joint wall strength and normal stress values significantly increases with increasing over-consolidation ratio. According to the test results, a new model is developed as an extended form of Barton's shear failure criterion for rock joints. This model considers the effect of various paths of normal loading/unloading before shearing and over-consolidation ratio in a fracture. A new joint over-closure (JOC) parameter is also introduced as the ratio of closure in over-closed to normally closed conditions.Understanding the deformability behavior of rock joints is very important in many engineering works such as surface and underground excavations, radioactive waste disposals, dam foundations and geothermal reservoirs. Even small changes in the deformability behavior of rock joints may lead to significant changes in the safety factor of rock structures Although various aspects of normal and shear behavior of rock joints have been studied and reported, the effect of historical normal loading/unloading paths, i.e. over-consolidation effect, on the shear behavior of single rock fractures has not been considered and estimated quantitatively. The over-consolidation of rock joints can occur due to deposition–consolidation–erosion/excavation sequences In this study, a series of natural rock fracture surfaces is firstly molded with plaster material. Therefore, surface roughness and aperture values of replicas remain constant during the study of over-consolidation effect. All of the prepared samples undergo normal loading/unloading stress with different over-consolidation ratios and then experience shearing and dilation process. Finally, based on the Barton's shear failure criterion, a new model is developed in which the over-consolidation effect is also considered. In soil mechanics, the deposition–consolidation–erosion (or excavation) cycle makes over-consolidated clays which show a different deformability behavior It should be noted that the over-consolidation is associated with water presence and drainage in soil mechanics. However, the concept of over-consolidation herein depends only on the history of “effective” stresses and can be studied for the presence of water pressure as well as dry conditions of joint surfaces. Barton's slope excavation modeling tests carried out in a horizontally and vertically loaded rock mass model indicated that the over-consolidation ratio for a set of steeply dipping joints lying beneath the excavated slopes ranged from approximately 4 to 8 when the value of In this section, sample preparation and mechanical tests for laboratory study of over-consolidation effect on the shear behavior of rock fractures are described. To avoid the effect of individual difference in the geometrical and morphological properties of fractures (e.g. roughness and aperture) on the normal/shearing process with different over-consolidation ratios, several plaster replicas have been prepared from natural rock joints. Natural rock joints were taken from Gol-e-Gohar iron ore mine, Sirjan, Iran. Three representative natural joint surfaces with relatively low, medium and high roughness values were firstly selected as parent joint models and silicon molds of all natural joints were prepared. For each joint, a number of fracture replicas were produced using a high strength plaster material with the commercial name of Crystacal D which mostly consists of CaSO  Laboratory studies of the over-consolidation effect on the shear behavior of plaster models of joints were carried out under constant normal loading (CNL) condition at rock mechanics laboratory of Gol-e-Gohar iron ore mine. Test equipment includes a shear box comprising two wedge-type sample holders with the size of 135×175×170 Each sample was first subjected to gradual normal loading up to the proposed over-consolidation normal stress ( Shear load was applied to the upper part of the sample at a constant rate of about 0.5 In order to check reproducibility of test results, control the accuracy of sample preparation and shear tests and also obtain the precise values of joint roughness coefficient ( A set of plaster replicas of joints with different Both normal and shear behavior of joint plaster replicas with different values of  Normal stress–normal deformation curves are non-linear ( Results of direct shear tests with different over-consolidation ratios on the joint plaster samples are presented in When Three surfaces of similar joint plaster replicas after shearing process under different over-consolidation ratios are shown in A new shear failure criterion for a joint with over-consolidation conditions is developed based on the Barton's criterion. Barton suggested that the shear strength criterion for a rock joint is a function of normal stress ( In this model, the Barton noted that the sum of the expression in the brackets (i.e. arctan (  It should be noted that during the over-consolidation process, an irreversible normal closure ( The new If the joint over-closure increases, dilation and roughness angles ( The terms As can be seen in If we ignore the effect of The effect of over-consolidation/over-closure on the shear behavior of joints are examined and a new shear failure criterion based on the Barton's criterion is proposed. From the mechanical point of view, during the over-consolidation process, some extra normal closure occurs mostly at the asperity tips. When Another important mechanism of the over-consolidation effect on the shear behavior is considered in the “better matedness” of joint surfaces. The matedness of joint surfaces improves the shear strength and affects the shear behavior. Presence of very small shear displacements recorded during the over-consolidation process is one evidence that supports this idea. On the other hand, the local stiffness is increased especially at the tip of asperities due to the normal loading/unloading. This phenomenon can also affect the shear behavior of the joint after the over-consolidation process. Consequently, If the effect of over-closure is considered as If Eqs. As it was explained in It should be noted that the maximum value of Compared with the over-consolidation concept, the over-closure is a more comprehensive concept in the shear deformation behavior of rock joints under cyclic normal loading before shearing process. Imagine the case where one cyclic normal loading/unloading is applied and then the normal stress sets at the second loading cycle and shearing starts (see In order to study the effect of over-consolidation on the shear behavior of single rock fractures, a set of mechanical direct shear tests was carried out on the plaster joint replicas of natural joints. A number of laboratory tests were performed with different over-consolidation ratios and within a wide range of joint surface roughness, joint compressive strength and normal stress values. The results show that as the over-consolidation ratio increases, the shear strength, dilation angle, shear stiffness, slope of post peak curve and damaged area of asperities are also increased significantly. This phenomenon is somehow similar to some extra surface roughness. The The developed model can be used extensively in stability analysis of rock slopes and underground openings when unloading condition occurs and also in the hydro-mechanical and dynamic modeling in the fractured rock masses. Although the new developed joint shear failure model with over-consolidation is still an initial simple model, it shows a good correlation within test parameters and plaster properties. However, the mechanism of over-closure effect on the shear behavior of single rock joints is still unknown and complicated. To study its various aspects, more accurate investigations are required. Moreover, the micro-morphology changes of joints during over-consolidated shear tests should be monitored. This research work mainly focuses on the effect of over-consolidation on the joints shear behavior in the CNL condition at the laboratory scale. The obtained results in CNL condition cannot be generalized and used directly in direct shear test under CNS condition. A set of similar experiments should be performed at the field scale. Then, scale effect on the results can be also estimated which is highly recommended for future researches. It seems that investigating the effect of historical normal loading/unloading paths on the shear behavior of rock joints is an important issue in rock mechanics and rock engineering problems which is not widely studied and still needs more precise and detailed laboratory and theoretical investigations. Such studies require adequate understanding of both the normal and shear behavior of rock joints. We would like to thank