A TACUB jig was applied to separate waste plastics [polystyrene (PS), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET)] used in copy machine. The effect of water pulsation including amplitude and frequency on the separation performance was investigated for the feeds containing three plastics. Good results were obtained under suitable conditions. Grades of 99.8% PS, 99.3% ABS, and 98.6% PET were recovered as the products in the top, middle and bottom layers, respectively.
                  Based on these results, a processing pilot plant for recycling of plastics from scrapped copy machines was constructed. Two cells of a TACUB jig were used in the plant to separate the plastics containing PS, ABS and PET, where PET was recovered from the first cell as bottom layer product, and ABS and PS from the second cell as bottom and top layer products, respectively. A monitor and control system of the jig operation was developed. High recoveries of PET, ABS, and PS with high grades were achieved, and the Newton's efficiency of the first cell was 0.99.Innovations and modifications in office machines are frequent and result a large number of scrapped copy machines and computers due to replacement. These scrapped machines contain valuable materials, which should be recycled and reused. In conventional treatment plants of scrapped copy machines, only printed wiring boards, photosensitive drum and a part of plastics are handpicked to recycle. However, most of the other materials are shredded to discard as landfills. Our investigation on typical copy machines shows that the main components are about 50 wt.% iron and 20–25 wt.% plastics. Because iron and plastics have different magnetic properties and specific gravities, they are effectively separated by magnetic and gravity separation. However, mechanical separation of different plastics with similar physical properties is not so easy and opens up an important area for technology development in planning and constructing an automatic recycling process for scrapped copy machines. Jig separation is one of the oldest methods of gravity concentration. Even today it is the widespread technology in coal preparation because of its high separation precision, cost-effectiveness and high throughput rate ( In the present paper, the performance of jig as a plastic separator and the outline of this plant were described. The three plastics, polystyrene (PS), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET), were hand-picked from copy machines and cut, then ground and sieved to obtain 3.5–10.0 mm fraction. These were washed with water containing a small amount of hand soap for removing surface contamination. The specific gravities of PS, ABS and PET were found to be 1.06, 1.18 and 1.71, respectively. Zinc chloride was used to produce the dense media by dissolving in water. Jig separation experiments were carried out using the TACUB jig, the size of separation chamber is 40 cm width, 74 cm length and 44 cm height, shown in The plastics of equal weight were mixed together to prepare the feed mixtures, then 360 g of ternary mixture was put to form a bed in the cell. The cell was set and held for a predetermined time in the separation chamber of the jig, which was operating under a desired water pulsation. The mixture of plastic particles in the bed was stratified as a result of periodic dilation of the bed through the action of pulsating currents of water. After the experiment, the stratified particles at different bed heights in the cell were recovered by sliding the front plate and the products of five layers were obtained. The third layer from top is named middle layer. Using dense media, the products were separated into individual plastic groups, then dried and weighed to calculate the product grades. The major operating variables that affect the stratification in a jig are amplitude and frequency of pulsation, waveform, bed thickness and feed quality. Because the waveform of water in the jig used is fixed to be a sine curve, the effects of the variables except waveform on plastic separation were investigated.   Under conditions of pulsation able to dilate the bed, the PS grade of top layer is not influenced by amplitude and frequency. However, the ABS grade of middle layer and PET grade of bottom layer are affected by them. A jig operation condition is determined depending upon the purpose of the jig separation in a plant. As shown in A processing plant for scrapped office machines to recycle metals and plastics was constructed in Sapporo, Japan based on the results mentioned above. The outline of the plant is shown in  The three plastics, PS, ABS and PET were hand-picked from copy machines and cut into 10 cm-square pieces, then ground to less than 7 mm using the second shredder shown in Batch tests and continuous tests were conducted to investigate the effects of ragging and float level on the separation performance of a TACUB jig, respectively. In the batch tests, the binary mixture of PS and ABS was fed and the jig was operated under a desired condition for 30 min. After the experiments, the stratified particles at different bed heights were recovered as the products of top, middle and bottom layers. For the continuous tests, the ternary mixture of PS, ABS and PET was fed and the jig was operated, then the products were obtained at a steady state condition. Using dense media, the products were separated into individual plastic groups, then dried and weighed to calculate the product grades. The jig has two screens at the bottom of separation chambers and coarse aggregates (5–20 mm) as ragging were put between the screens to generate stable water pulsations. Two ragging types were compared; the aggregates were almost all fixed in type H12 and movable in type H13, because the 5–10 mm aggregate filled about 100% (bulk vol.%) of the interspace volume for the type H12 and more coarse aggregate (5–20 mm) filled 63% for the type H13. Pulsation amplitude also affected the separation of PS/ABS mixture as shown in Continuous tests were carried out at a pulsation frequency of 40 cycles/min, amplitude of 3 cm, feed rate of 60 kg/h, water flow rate of 80 L/min, and ragging type H13. Because water flow rate has an effect on the movement of particles in the separation chambers, separation performance of the jig would be affected by it. Continuous jig tests were performed at various water flow rates (20–60 L/min) and 13 cm float level, where other conditions of pulsation and feed were the same as in As mentioned above, in this pilot plant high grades of plastic products could be recovered from the plastics mixture. Now a large commercial recycling plant using the TACUB jig is being built in Japan for processing scrapped office and home appliances, and automobile shredder residue. In the present study, mechanical separation experiments on plastics [polystyrene (PS), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET)] used in copy machines were carried out using a TACUB jig. The effects of water pulsation including amplitude and frequency on the separation performance were investigated for the feeds containing three plastics. Good results were obtained under suitable conditions and grades of 99.8% PS, 99.3% ABS, and 98.6% PET were recovered as the products in the upper, middle and bottom layers, respectively. Based on the results a pilot plant for recycling scrapped office machines was constructed. Two cells of a TACUB jig were devised to separate the plastics containing PS, ABS and PET, where PET was recovered from the first cell as bottom product, and ABS and PS from the second cell as bottom and top layer products, respectively. High recoveries of PET, ABS, and PS with high grades were achieved, and the Newton's efficiencies of the first and second cells were above 0.99 and 0.95 at an optimum condition, respectively. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science and the Arai Science and Technology Foundation, and would like to thank Dr. M. Otani of Hokkaido Industrial Research Institute and Mr. M. Miyamoto of Nihon Resources Technology for their help.