Objective
                  To update the recommendations on osteoporosis (OP) of the Spanish Society of Rheumatology (SER) based on the best possible evidence.
               
                  Methods
                  A panel of nine expert rheumatologists in OP was created, previously selected by the SER through an open call. The phases of the work were: identification of the key areas for updating the previous consensus, analysis and synthesis of the scientific evidence (using the SIGN levels of evidence) and formulation of recommendations based on this evidence and consensus techniques.
               
                  Results
                  This revision of the recommendations implies an update in the diagnostic evaluation and treatment of OP. It proposes some criteria to consider the high risk of fracture and some indications to start treatment. The recommendations also address issues related to the safety of treatments and the management of special situations such as inflammatory diseases and treatment with glucocorticoids.
               
                  Conclusions
                  We present an update of SER recommendations on OP.Osteoporosis (OP) is a diffuse skeletal disorder characterised by a general reduction in bone strength leading to a higher risk of fracture due to fragility. In Spain and in other countries the rate of fragility fractures is increasing, mainly due to higher life expectancies. Recent years have witnessed advances in the diagnosis and treatment of OP but only a minority of patients with high fracture risk are being accurately assessed and treated in keeping with the recommendations of clinical practice guidelines. This document contains the updated recommendations of the Spanish Society of Rheumatology (Spanish acronym: SER) on OP from the previous ones of 2011. Qualitative synthesis of scientific evidence and consensus techniques have been used in this project which reflect the agreement by experts based on their clinical experience and scientific evidence. A series of steps were taken during the development of the recommendations document, which were:       The document includes all the formulated recommendations subdivided into the different above-mentioned areas. Management algorithms were formulated from the recommendations and these offer a summarised approach to the treatment of OP. There is a total of 28 formulated recommendations on OP ( OP is a diffuse skeletal disease characterised by a reduction in bone resistance which leads to a higher risk of fragility fractures. The concept of “bone resistance” encompasses factors relating both to bone mineral density (BMD) and the quality of the bone tissue. A fragility fracture is that brought on by a low impact trauma. A fall, standing up or being seated would be included in this concept. The most frequent and relevant fractures are those of the proximal femur, the spine and the distal forearm. OP may be defined in any of the following circumstances:  Femoral fracture due to fragility, regardless of the BMD value, in postmenopausal women and in men >50 years of age. Fracture due to fragility of the spine, proximal humerus or pelvis in postmenopausal women and in men >50 years of age, if there is a low BMD ( The conceptual definition of OP by the World Health Organisation (WHO) is solely based on the results of the BMD. An individual has OP if the In normal clinical practice this definition fails to be operative due to many fragility fractures occurring in patients with a In view of the recommendations of these groups of experts and in accordance with clinical experience, the panel of experts considered it appropriate to include postmenopausal women and men >50 years of age with fragility fracture of the femur (regardless of BMD) in the OP diagnosis, as well as spinal fracture, fracture of the humerus or the pelvis, if it was accompanied by low bone mass (AL: 89%). The main aim in OP management is fracture prevention and it is therefore essential to identify those individuals with the highest risk of presenting with them.  Several risk factors, such as age, fracture history and the use of glucocorticoids, among others contribute to the risk of fracture regardless of the BMD. Patients with a recent fracture are at a particularly high risk of suffering from a new fracture. The term “imminent fracture risk” has recently been proposed to refer to patents with a short term highs risk, such as those with a recent fracture, elderly fragile people with frequent falls or people treated with glucocorticoids at high level doses.  The combination of the BMD with clinical RF provides the best estimation of fracture risk.  The FRAX FRAX The Spanish version of the FRAX   The validity of the Spanish FRAX From the scarce evidence and low level of agreement in classifying the patient as high fracture risk based on the FRAX The panel of experts also considered as high fracture risk, but without reaching an acceptable level of agreement (AL: 55%), the combination of two or more high RF. Should the FRAX The technique of choice today for measuring BMD is the DXA dual energy X-ray absorptiometry. The DXA has a high specificity for the reduction of fracture risk, but a low sensitivity. The risk increases exponentially as the BMD descends. Different groups of experts agree that the BMD determined in the peripheral skeleton using DXA of the phalanx and heel spur and the ultrasound technique of the heel spur may be useful for prediction of fracture risk but not for diagnosing OP. Criteria for requesting a DXA vary widely nationally and internationally. The majority of international guidelines on OP recommend evaluation of BMD in postmenopausal women ≥65 years of age, regardless of other RF. According to the conclusions of a cross-sectional study the aim of which was to evaluate DNX indication criteria in postmenopausal Spanish women based on the FRAX Based on the accepted international recommendations on DXA indications, the panel of experts considers that its main applications in clinical practice are: OP diagnosis, evaluation of fracture risk, evaluation of treatment and monitorisation of response to treatment. In patients with an imminent risk of fracture performing a DXA should not impede treatment initiation. Thus patients with a high fracture risk may be treated without the need to carry out a DXA, although it seems appropriate to know the baseline BMD for evaluation of treatment effectiveness at a later date. The panel of experts agree that when the fracture risk is low no DXA should be performed and that a DNA should not be recommended to all women going through the menopause.       Based on these international studies, the panel of experts considered the use of FRAX The panel also considered measuring in BMD, regardless of age, in the population which present with RF for fragility fractures such as: previous fragility fracture, women who begin treatment with aromatase inhibitors for breast cancer, In cases of recent fracture due to fragility or treatment with high doses of glucocorticoids, studies concluded that performing a DXA should not delay initiation of treatment to prevent new fractures. Other patients who are eligible for DXA due to presenting with high OP and fragility fracture risks are those suffering from diseases associated with secondary OP, such as chronic inflammatory arthropathies, inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal malabsorption syndromes, chronic liver disease or advanced chronic kidney disease. In these cases the panel considers BMD reasonable in order to establish prevention measures and appropriate treatment for each individual patient. The To sum up, the panel of experts consider that although TBS could have several advantages in the evaluation of fracture risk, further studies are required to recommend its use in clinical practice.  Basic laboratory tests to identify secondary OPs and make the differential diagnosis with other bone disease include Different scientific societies Additional tests will be carried out if there is suspicion of an associated condition: PTH (primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism). TSH (hyperthyroidism). Immunoelectrophoresis (myeloma). Antitransglutaminase antibodies (celiac disease). Urinary cortisol (Cushing's). Serum tryptase (mastocytosis). Sexual hormone study (young people). Genetic study (imperfect osteogenesis, hypophosphatase and others).  The reductions of the greatest magnitude in markers of bone turnover (MBT) are significantly associated to more marked reductions in the non vertebral fracture risk, The majority of GPC recommend the consideration of the use of MBT in the initial evaluation and in follow-up, as an additional test. In the initial evaluation, the high levels may predict a faster loss of bone mass and a higher risk of fracture. But their main indication is in follow-up, since they can contribute to assessing treatment adherence and efficacy, and also contribute to monitoring the duration of therapeutic holidays. The two main serum references of MBT which are recommended to use by the IOF and the  Chest and lumbar spine X-rays (focused on T7 and L3, respectively) are the method of choice for diagnosis of a vertebral fracture. A side projection is usually sufficient, thus minimising the radiation the patient receives. The panel of experts has thus considered that the presence of vertebral fractures should be assessed in the evaluation of the patient with OP or with a high risk of fracture when kyphosis or significant loss of height is present and there are clinical features of vertebral fracture. Some DXA teams also use the  Several studies have concluded that the first step to the prevention of OP and the avoidance of fractures is to maintain healthy life habits. Studies show that the adoption of fall prevention measures, in which exercise programmes and actions on environmental safety and minimisation of the use of drugs such as hypnotics, diuretics, antihypertensives and others which impair balance, also contribute both to primary and secondary fragility fracture prevention. In contrast, exercises which require great effort or are abrupt and those which involve repeated flexion or twisting of the trunk and abdominals are ill-advised. Regarding specific measures for the patient who has kyphosis, studies have proven the effectiveness of exercise, and training in muscular strength and balance. The effectiveness of hip protectors in the prevention of fractures is inconclusive, and adherence to their use is very low.        Studies coincide in the need to ensure an adequate provision of calcium as an essential feature in any OP treatment programme. In primary prevention a daily intake of calcium of 1000–1200 Some foods are rich in calcium, such as milk products (milk, cheese, and yoghurt) tinned oily fish, beans and almonds. A list of foods and an online calculator are available in the IOF website. With regard to the possible side effects of calcium supplements, constipation and dyspeptic upsets are the most notable. An increased risk of nephrolithiasis was demonstrated (RR 1.17) in the Regarding vitamin D, in OP patients, the conclusion reached by the experts is to maintain minimum serum concentrations of 25-hydroxy cholecalciferol (calcidiol) of 30 Current scientific evidence enables us to state that neither the increase of dietary calcium nor the isolated intake of calcium supplements is able to protect against the presence of fractures. The efficacy of calcium and vitamin D supplements in the non institutionalised population >65 years of age (residents in the community) is questionable, as evidenced by the high number required to treat (NNT) to prevent fracture in this low risk population group There are contradictory data on the efficacy of vitamin D in the prevention of falls. Some results indicate that vitamin supplements, with and without calcium, would be effective in the prevention of falls,         The drugs used for the treatment of OP have been shown to be more effective in patients with a high risk of fracture and in those with an existing fracture or with a The NOF recommendations and those of other expert groups support the use of FRAX The panel thus considers that treatment is indicated in patients with fragility fracture, OP from DXA Regarding patients with fragility fractures, the NOF recommends treating all hip and vertebra fractures, whilst the other fractures would be treated depending on the results of the DXA and the risk of new fractures calculated using the FRAX Regarding the evaluation of treatment based on the DXA outcome with a Prophylaxis and treatment of OP induced by glucocorticoids are dealt with in a separate section. Several international guidelines, including those on oncology, advise that treatment be indicated for OP in women who receive aromatase inhibitors and have a          The final aim of OP treatment is the prevention of fractures. In the main studies conducted with drugs in patients who only had osteopenia without prevalent fracture (primary prevention) no fracture reduction occurred in primary outcome. In primary fracture prevention in patients with OP, the drugs which demonstrated a reduction of vertebral fracture were: alendronic acid, zoledronic acid, raloxifene, bazedoxifene and denosumab, whilst denosumab also reduced non vertebral fracture and hip fracture in this group. In patients with OP and vertebral fracture, alendronic acid, risedronic acid and zoledronic acid reduced new vertebral, non vertebral and hip fractures, whilst teriparatide reduced vertebral and non vertebral fractures and denosumab reduced vertebral fractures. For their part, ibandronic acid, raloxifene and bazedoxifene reduced vertebral fractures in patients with previous fracutre.  In patients with at least two moderate vertebral fractures or at least one severe fracture teriparatide was significantly more effective than risedronic acid for reducing new morphometric and clinical vertebral fractures after 24 months of treatment. There were no significant differences in the rate of new non vertebral fractures. Strontium renalate has not been included in these recommendations because its production has been suspended, nor calcitonin, because of the limitation its technical record has in treatment indication and duration. However, therapy with oestrogens reduces vertebral and hip fractures, but is currently not used due to its poor risk/benefit profile and because safer treatments exist. The following aspects have to be taken into consideration when integrating trial outcomes into clinical practice: (1) the patient profile included is a postmenopausal woman with a high baseline risk due to age and the presence of previous fractures; (2) the populations of the trials are different to one another, and therefore may not be directly compared; (3) the studies were conducted with calcium and/or vitamin D supplements and (4) real treatment adherence is lower than that reported in the trials. Moreover, treatment should be individualised according to the circumstances of each patient. Another aspect to take into account is the cost/effectiveness ratio of treatment. The studies undertaken in other countries fix the threshold of FRAX The panel of experts therefore consider that when choosing treatment to prevent fractures the efficacy and safety of the drugs, cost-effectiveness ratio, BMD figures, and presence of previous features (location, number and time passed since fracture) and oral administration route limitations should be contemplated. Other factors which also were to be taken into account were previous treatments and adherence to them, co morbidities and patient preferences. Thus, in patients with several fractures, oral intolerance, dementia, malabsorption and poor adherence, parenteral therapy could be considered. The risk of long-term complications in OP treatments Although there are currently no outcomes on fracture reduction with sequential treatment, The administration of teriparatide after an antiresorptive drug is also effective, although its anabolic effect may slow down (less change in bone markers and lower increase of BMD), Little information exists on the use of one antiresorptive drug followed by another, especially if the first was administered for years. A review of 11 prospective studies of patients previously treated with alendronic acid or risedronic acid showed that the change to ranelate from strontium or denosumab achieved an additional increase in BMD. There are studies which show greater efficacy in combined therapy (bone formation and antiresorptive) compared with monotherapy. The combination of zoledronic acid and teriparatide has been associated with a higher increase in femoral BMD one year after treatment compared with teriparatide in monotherapy. OP is a chronic disease, and treatment must therefore be maintained indefinitely or at least for several years. However, there is no recommended maximum treatment for each drug used. The antiresorptive drugs (selective oestrogen receptor modulators, SERM, BP and denosumab) generally reduce fracture risk from 12 to 18 In the case of BP, its efficacy, in terms of BMD and fracture risk reduction is maintained for at least 3 years of treatment. Denosumab produces a progressive increase of BMD for at least 10 years of treatment, maintaining its ant fracture efficacy over time. Although data exist on efficacy and safety of SERM (raloxifene and bazedoxifene) up to 8 years, maximum duration of the treatment is conditioned by the risk of complications such as thromboembolism, which is more frequent in patients over 70. Regarding patients who receive glucocorticoids, aromatase inhibitors or androgen deprivation therapy, the panel of experts consider that antiresorptive treatment should be maintained at least whilst the patient receives the inductor drug of OP (see “Osteoporosis by glucocorticoids”). Teriparatide has been shown to reduce the risk of fracture after 6–12    OP treatment implies that the patient will receive medication for years, although in some cases it is possible to have interruptions. The so-called “therapeutic holidays” are a temporary suspension of treatment with BP to reduce the presence of adverse effects, because they accumulate in the bone tissue and maintain their effect even years after having been suspended. Although the decision to discontinue treatment with BP must be individualised, the consensus of experts advise reassessing treatment in patients with low fracture risk and who have not presented with incident fractures after 5 years of treatment with oral BP or 3 years with zoledronic acid. The majority of international guidelines advise not to suspend treatment with BP in high fracture risk patients, like those with previous fragility fractures, a low According to different scientific societies and groups of experts, the concept of treatment suspension should not be applied to other drugs such as denosumab, since its removal may lead to an increase in bone remodelling, with a decrease in BMD and an increase in fracture risk, including multiple fractures after its suspension.  Low OP treatment adherence is a frequent problem, after 12 months of treatment less than half of the patients stick to the therapy they were prescribed. The efficacy of different measures has been studied to improve adherence, such as telephone calls or meetings with patients, but none of them appear to have been truly effective. MBT could help with follow-up and adherence. The IOF and OP treatment monitorisation includes the analytical determinations and the DXA, as well as asking the patient about new fractures. Several studies conclude that the bone remodelling markers could be useful for early monitoring of compliance and response to treatment, There are no controlled, good quality studies on the frequency with which measurement of the BMD should be repeated during treatment. Several authors propose using a treat to target strategy in OP where the objectives would be to reach a certain value of the Determination of TBS provides information on the changes which treatment may produce on bone microarchitecture, The definition of therapeutic failure in the treatment of OP is complex and there are no established criteria. Experts agree that it is advisable to ensure that treatment adherence is correct, confirm an adequate supply of calcium and vitamin D and rule out secondary OP causes. With regard to treatment failure, after one year of treatment with any antiosteoporotic drug, a group of international experts suggest the following criteria of assessment for treatment changes Two or more fragility fractures during treatment. One fragility fracture together with one of the following factors: Significant loss of BMD (>5% in lumbar spine or >4% in proximal femur). Absence of significant changes in the MBT (reduction of PINP or CTX >25% with antiresorptive treatment, or increase >25% with bone turnover treatment after 6 months). Absence of significant changes in the MBT together with a significant loss of BMD. In general the drugs approved for OP treatment are safe and present with good tolerability. Treatment with BP does not increase cardiovascular risk. No association has been demonstrated between the development of auricular fibrillation and treatment with oral BP. In one study an increased risk of auricular fibrillation was observed with the use of intravenous zoledronic acid. Denosumab, in the guideline approved for the treatment of OP, is a drug which is generally well tolerated. A higher rate of infections has been observed, and in particular cutaneous Adverse reactions to teriparatide are generally not serious. Muscle pain, cramps and dizziness are frequent. Treatment with teriparatide may raise calcaemia and calciuria, and it is therefore advisable to determine the levels of calcium in the blood and urine prior to initiating treatment. In recent years complications have appeared which are associated with prolonged treatment with antiresorptives (BP and denosumab) and which have generated uncertainty about safety. The relative importance of these rare adverse effects (osteonecrosis of the jawbones and atypical femur fracture) in the treatment of OP is a highly controversial issue. The fear of patients in suffering these complications may be an impediment for adherence and therapeutic compliance, although the benefit–risk balance of maintaining treatment is highly favourable for high fracture risk patients. A brief analysis will now be made of both complications, based on the systematic reviews carried out to complete this document.   Osteonecrosis of the jawbones has been associated with the prolonged use of BP or denosumab, although its rate in patients with OP is very low (between 1/10,000 and 1/100,000). According to the outcomes of a previous review, published in 2013, available evidence on BP is scarce and of low quality. Several medical associations have published recommendations to reduce the risk of this complication. In general, guidelines include correct dental hygiene in their proposals and dental check-up if poor dental health is observed. If any invasive dental procedures has been indicated (dental extraction or implant) it is recommended that treatment initiation be postponed until the surgical wound has completely healed. There is some controversy regarding the which approach to take in patients who are already taking BP or denosumab. The majority of guidelines advise not to suspend antiresorptive treatment in non oncological patients. In 2011, the During OP treatment, invasive dental procedures may be made only after careful consideration of their necessity. In the case of denosumab, and whenever possible, surgery must be avoided in periods close to drug administation.  Atypical fracture of the femur is a potential complication from prolonged treatment with BP or denosumab, although real incidence is very low. According to the definition proposed by the Apart from prolonged treatment with antiresorptives, the atypical fracture of the femur has also been associated with several comorbidities or with taking medication such as proton pump inhibitors or glucocorticoids. According to the results of a previous 2011 review, the rate of atypical fracture of the femur was very low and it could not be confirmed that there was a significant increase in the risk of atypical fracture of the femur in patients with Op treated with BP. Since then several poor quality studies have been published which show that the rate of atypical fracture of the femur as very low. Two of the 3 published meta-analyses, A recent systematic review Regarding the RCT, The rate of atypical femur fracture represents 0.3% of the total of femur fractures or 5% of the total of subtrochanteric/diaphyseal fractures. Women represent 80% of all diaphyseal fractures and 95% of the atypical fractures of the femur, with a relative risk which is higher in men. The outcome of recent review studies and meta-analyses suggest a favourable benefit/risk ratio to maintain treatment up until 10 years with antiresorptives. Regarding denosumab, the systematic review results on the risk of atypical femur fracture are very limited due to the scarcity of high quality studies. The studies included were one RCT, According to observational studies, long-term treatment with denosumab (between 7 and 10 years) is associated with a nil Although cases of atypical femur fracture have been described in patients treated with denosumab, the panel of experts decided not to make a specific recommendation on the risk of atypical femur fracture with denosumab due to low evidence and the need for further studies with a higher number of cases and longer time period. To reduce the clinical impact of atypical femur fracture, in patients under prolonged treatment with BP or denosumab attention must be paid to the presence of pain in the thighs. In these cases it is recommended that X-rays be performed to detect stress fractures or cortical thickening and for early determination of atypical femur fracture. It may also be useful to use magnetic resonance or a bone scan to confirm diagnosis. Treatment of an atypical femur fracture is surgical. When this complication arises, studies conclude that antiresorptive treatment should be withdrawn, the pain treated, an adequate provision of calcium and vitamin D ensured and a drug with a different mechanism of action be indicated.  Patients with fragility fracture have a significant increase in the risk of further fractures. However, it is normal that fewer than 25% of them start treatment for OP after a fracture. In keeping with the EULAR The FLS model, or Fracture Unit appears to be the most effective In patients with fragility fracture the panel of experts concludes that it would be useful to assess fracture risk factors and falls and identify secondary OP. They advise the carrying out of DXA and assessment of the presence of vertebral fractures.  Acute vertebral fracture may lead to serious pain and disability, lasting for several months. Ortheses (rigid or semi-rigid brace) are useful for acute episode in combination with analgesic treatment, as they help to immobilise the fracture, reduce load and improve spinal alignment in patients who can tolerate them. The type of orthesis will depend on fracture location. Prolonged use is not advisable. It has not been demonstrated that the rate of new fractures will decrease. In patients with persistent and highly intense pain (visual analogue scale [VAS] ≥7), after 4–6 weeks of treatment as described above, some studies concluded that facet infiltrations could be considered or radiofrequency ablation of the lumbar medial branch, In which cases would vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty be indicated?  Systematic reviews of the clinical efficacy of vertebroplasty in patients with fractures due to OP, with pain which is refractory to analgesic treatment, conclude that in open trials vertebroplasty has better results than an optimum analgesic treatment in improving quality of life and reducing pain and disability. Systematic reviews of the clinical efficacy of kyphoplasty conclude that in open studies it has better outcomes than conservative treatment in improving quality of life and reducing pain and disability, but the evidence of its clinical efficacy is not consistent as there are no available double blind studies to compare with placebo. Reduction in pain associated with kyphoplasty analysed through VAS, compared with conservative treatment, was −1.82 after 30 days, −1.45 after 3 months and −1.48 after 6 months, but −.84 and −.69 after 12 and 24 months, respectively.           OP induced by glucocorticoids is the most frequent cause of secondary OP, and is associated with the presence of fractures in up to 30%–50% of cases. ACR recommendations consider that in patients who receive or are going to receive treatment with glucocorticoids the fracture risk must be assessed (preferably using FRAX In patients with an intermittent corticoid regime and who have an accumulated dose of prednisone >5 Premenopausal women or men <50 years of age are at a lower fracture risk. There are also fewer data on efficacy and safety or OP treatments for this population group and treatment indications appear to be more restrictive. The pharmacological treatment of choice is oral BP (risedronic acid and alendronic acid) or intravenous zoledronic acid since they stabilise or increase the BMD and reduce the risk of vertebral fractures in comparison with control groups. In women with established OP, teriparatide has been demonstrated to be more effective than risedronic acid in reducing vertebral fractures and clinical fractures, regardless of having received previous treatment with BP. In patients who start or have already received glucocorticoids, the administration of denosumab for 12 months has shown an increase in BMD which is significantly higher than with risedronic acid, According to the recommendations of the International Groups, the treatment of choice should be maintained for as long as treatment with glucocorticoids lasts and for at least 6 months after suspending the glucocorticoid, unless fractures exist, in which case it would be continued.  Patients with rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus and ankylosing spondylitis are at greater risk of  It has been observed in different studies that OP in the male is underdiagnosed. With regard to non pharmacological prevention measures, the same may be considered as for OP in women. For hormonal treatment, there are no data on fracture reduction efficacy with testosterone treatment, and the experts therefore only indicate treatment in males with symptomatic hypogonadism and also advising it should be combined with another antiosteoporotic treatment.  According to the different scientific societies and expert groups, in the premenopausal woman a DXA should be carried out when there are fragility fractures and/or risk factors associated with the loss of bone mass. Considering that over 50% of premenopausal women with OP present with a secondary OP The therapeutic approach in the premenopausal woman includes optimum calcium and vitamin D intake, regular physical exercise, suspending tobacco consumption, limiting alcohol consumption and treating the underlying cause. For premenopausal OP experts, the specific antiosteoporotic drugs (BP, teriparatide, denosumab) will be considered in patients with fragility fracture or for certain secondary causes such as treatment with glucocorticoids. Some experts suggests that in fertile women anti conceptive measures should be prescribed if any antiosteoporotic treatment is initiated. In patients with chronic renal disease (CRD) certain differential aspects should be taken into consideration with postmenopausal OP: (1) DXA does not discriminate the type of underlying bone disease and (2) renal osteodystrophy should be excluded, particularly dynamic bone disease (very low osteodystrophy with remodelling) in chronic dialysis patients, since this contraindicates the use of antiresorptives. PTH levels <120 With regard to a deficiency of vitamin D in the CRD, in states 3–5D, the experts consider the use of therapeutic strategies similar to those accepted for the general population to be appropriate. Regarding antifracture treatments for stage 1–2 patients and filtered >35 The technical specifications of the drugs indicates that BP, teriparatide and raloxifene are not recommended when filtration is <30 According to the experts, patient management with chronic liver disease includes evaluation of factors which lead to bone loss and the increase in fracture risk such as malnutrition, vitamin D deficit, intensity of cholestasis, glucocorticoids and hypogonadism. The pharmacological studies of reduction in patients with liver disease are limited, with no contraindications existing for the use of BP, which increase BMD. Studies conclude that management of patients with celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and bariatric surgery should consider malabsorption and malnutrition (evaluate calcium and vitamin D supplements), as well as the use of glucocorticoids. In inflammatory bowel disease the BP reduce the risk of vertebral fracture. According to the data sheet, oral BP are contraindicated in patients with esophageal anomalies and other factors which may delay emptying, such as stenos is and acalasia. The panel of experts consider that when oral antiresorptive therapy is contraindicated, it is regarded as ineffective due to serious malabsorption is not tolerated, and parenteral route treatment may be considered. Two new drugs for OP treatment: romosozumab and abaloparatide are currently in an advanced phase of clinical development. Romosozumab is a humanised IgG2 monoclonal antibody which links and blocks sclerostin. It is administered monthly subcutaneously for a year, followed by denosumab or alendronic acid for a further year and has shown a significant reduction in the incidence of new vertebral and non vertebral fractures. Abaloparatide is a synthetic peptide which activate the type 1 receptor of the PTH, approved by the FDA in 2017 and rejected by the EMA in 2018. In daily subcutaneous administration it obtained a significant reaction in the rate of vertebral and non vertebral fractures compared with placebo, with no differences to teriparatide. As mentioned in the introduction, the aim of this document was to provide an update on the new advances in the different aspects of OP relating to clinical practice: diagnosis, evaluation, treatment and follow-up. The document is based on a critical review of the previous consenus, The new definition of OP is incorporated into the diagnostic assessment of this document, and which encompasses patients with fragility fractures and low bone mass, the concept of imminent risk of fracture and the utility of TBS. With regard to treatment, the effectiveness of each drug for the prevention of fractures together with several selection criteria such as cost-effectiveness, the existence of multiple fractures or the limitations for oral use are presented. The panel members assessed the possibility of including an extensive treatment decision algorithm no agreement was reached on this. The SER reviewers for their part have updated osteonecrosis of the jawbone and atypical femur fracture guidelines. Special situations were maintained in keeping with the 2011 recommendations, adding OP of inflammatory rheumatisms and a few precautions which should be taken into account in patients with kidney disease and gastrointestinal and hepatic problems. Finally, a section on the new treatments (romosozumab and abaloparatide) was produced. We would like to highlight from these recommendations that fracture risk and treatment indication were the issues most debated among panel members. The use of the FRAX To conclude, we may say that the recommendations of this document are a draft consultation framework for OP management. They are general regulations which require individualisation in each case and this is the role we must accept as professionals. Antonio Naranjo Hernández received financing from Amgen, Lilly and FAES for attendance to courses/congresses, fees from Amgen for congress presentations and grants from FHOEMO-Amgen and Lilly to contract staff and provide IT teams to the service. María Pilar Aguado Acín received financing from Lilly for attendance to congresses; fees from Alexion, Faes, Lilly and de Rubió for presentations and financing for educational programmes in the Rheumatology Unit. Luis Arboleya Rodríguez received financing from Janssen-Cilag, Lácer and Lilly for attendance at congresses and received fees from Pfizer and Lilly for congress presentations. Enrique Casado Burgos received financing from Amgen, Lilly, FAES, Gebro, ItalDrug and Rubió for attendance to courses/congresses and fees for presentations. Santos Castañeda Sanz received financing from Amgen for attendance to courses/congresses; fees from Lilly for congress presentations; and financial aid from Amgen for consultation for pharmaceutical companies or other technologies and for educational programmes or courses. Jodi Fitter Arrested received financing from Novartis, Roche, MSD, Amgen, Lilly, Maharani, UCB and Pfizer for attendance to courses/congresses; fees from Amgen-Ferrier, Roche, Maharani and Amgen for congress presentations and received financing from UCB to participate in a research study. Labia Gofer Sale received financing from Lilly for attendance to congresses; fees from Lilly, Amgen and FAES Farman e for congress presentations; and financing from Alexion for research projects. Carmen Gomez Vaquero received financing from Abby, Amgen, Bristol, Lilly, Maharani, MSD, Pfizer, Procter Gamble, Roche, Sandoz, Servicer, UCB for attendance to courses/congresses; fees from Abbie, Amgen, Lilly, MSD, Pierre Fabré, Roche and UCB for congress presentations; financing from Lilly for educational programmes or courses; financing from Novartis, Amgen and Lilly for participating in a research study; financial aid from Nycomed Pharma for consultation for pharmaceutical companies or other technologies; and received financing from Lilly for educational programmes or courses for the unit. Núria Guañabens Gay received financing from Amgen y Lilly for attendance to courses/congresses, for congress presentations and for educational programmes or courses; financing from Amgen to participate in a research study and financial aid from Lilly, Amgen, UCB y Alexion as consultation for pharmaceutical companies. The group of experts of this study wish to express their gratitude to Mercedes Guerra Rodríguez, the SER documentalist for her collaboration in search strategies and to Dr. Hye Sang Park for her collaboration in the RS report reviews. They also wish to thank Dr. Federico Diaz González, director of the SER Research Unit, for his participation in the final manuscript review and for contributing to maintaining the independence of this document. 