The catalytic performances of lanthanum strontium manganite (La0.8Sr0.2)Mn0.98O3, in catalytic wet oxidation (CWO) of a phenol solution under milder conditions of temperature (398–498K) and pressure (
                        
                           
                              P
                              
                                 
                                    o
                                    2
                                 
                              
                           
                           =
                           4
                            
                           bar
                        
                     ), in a batch reactor, have been investigated. Aim of this study is the evaluation of the effect of temperature, catalyst loading, phenol concentration and stirrer speed on phenol conversion. Experimental data obtained from the different test conditions are best-fitted to evaluate the effective reaction order and apparent activation energy.The contamination of aqueous streams by organic compounds is a problem of great interest today since the growing demand of quality water resources. As summarized in a recent review There are different strategies for the remediation of water contaminated with these compounds. Adsorption on activated carbon is a widely used and effective technique for the removal of a broad range of organic compounds including phenols The conventional biological treatment is widely applied for the handling of residual wastewaters. The main disadvantage of biological treatment is the incapability of treatment for highly polluted and toxic waste streams in industrial wastewaters. Biological treatment is neither suitable for chemical oxygen demands (COD) above 10 The wet oxidation (WO) process, in particular the catalytic one (CWO), is considered to be an attractive method for treatment of wastewaters with concentrations of organic loads of about 10–100 Recently, interest has been devoted to Mn-based catalysts. Hamoudi et al. investigated on ceria-supported MnO However, it must be taken into consideration that phenol may be not totally directly oxidized to CO A main drawback of CWO with most impregnated transition metal oxide catalysts is their leaching, which results in solid catalyst deactivation as well as in water contamination by the metal ions. As pointed out by Pintar and Levec Perovskite-type oxides (ABO Aim of this work is to investigate on the activity of (La The catalyst was a commercial (Praxair) perovskite-like (La X-ray powder diffraction pattern of the sample was carried out with a X-Pert Philips diffractometer using a Co Kα radiation. The microscopic analysis by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out in a Jeol SM-840 instrument that allowed to obtain information about the morphology. Catalytic activity test were conducted in a stirred batch reactor (“4563 Mini reactor”, produced by the Parr Instrument Company, IL, USA). It consists of a moveable cylindrical stainless steel 0.6 The reactor was loaded with 0.5 The solutions were analyzed by HPLC (Shimadzu 10 A VP system equipped with a diode array detector). The column employed was a Pinnacle II C18 with a length of 250 The physical properties supplied by the manufacturer (Praxair) are: X-ray powder diffraction pattern of the sample, reported in SEM micrograph of the fresh sample, reported in  The selectivity to cyclic intermediates is always very low (never exceeding 2% in total). In the first hour of treatment the main cyclic intermediate is The selectivities to hydroquinone and These data show that our catalyst is very active in converting the toxic cyclic intermediates cathecol, hydroquinone and The kinetic analysis of the reaction was performed by evaluating the effects of phenol concentration and catalyst loading, temperature and stirring speed. The experimental data displays (with a satisfying best-fit) a first-order-like kinetics with respect to phenol concentration, confirming some literature findings where  At a constant initial phenol concentration the effect of the catalyst loading on phenol conversion was studied by varying the catalyst concentration at 448 The behaviour of phenol oxidation rate at catalyst concentrations lower than 2.5 The apparent activation energies estimated from the slopes of the straight lines in Arrhenius plots and calculated by means of the least squares technique, in case of catalyst loading of 2 In a stirred batch reactor, the mixture is stirred vigorously in order to slurry the catalyst uniformly throughout the liquid. In order to observe the effect of the stirrer speed on the phenol oxidation rate, experiments were carried out at different stirring speeds ( To exploit if intraparticle diffusion is the controlling mechanism for mass transfer in the catalyst particles, and Fick's law applies, it is necessary to plot the effectiveness factor Since the encouraging preliminary results collected a further deep characterization of the physical properties of LSM is opportune to better understand the exact mechanism of CWO at the surface. The catalytic activity of perovskite-like oxides in oxidation reactions is strictly related to the nonstoichiometric character of the surface, therefore a determination of parameters like oxygen storage capacity (OSC) and/or oxygen mobility is very important, the group of Duprez and coworkers intensely worked on this topic In order to have reliable data it is fundamental to realize in situ measurements of OSC and/or oxygen mobility taking into consideration every aspect, like the presence of water for instance, that could have an influence on this measurements. Since the complexity of this subject we preferred to discuss the catalytic activity results separately from the catalyst physical characterization which is matter of our next research project on this topic. This study exploited the applicability of lanthanum strontium manganite for catalytic wet oxidation of phenol. This material appears quite interesting due to its significant activity at low oxygen pressure, with a very small formation of toxic products hydroquinone, The authors wish to thank the MIUR for the financial support.