Hypereutectic Al-30wt.% Si alloy was subjected to friction stir processing (FSP) to modify the cast microstructure. FSP reduces the size of undesirable coarse silicon particles, eliminates porosities, and homogenizes and refines the cast microstructure. This paper demonstrates the effect of two pass overlap friction stir processing on microstructural refinement of Al–30Si alloy, which delineates significant reduction in size and aspect ratio of silicon particles from average 200 to 2µm and 4.93 to 1.75µm respectively. The stir zone of two pass overlap FSP exhibits relatively homogeneous Si particle distribution. Increase in frequency of silicon particles less than 1µm was also observed in two pass FSP stir zones. Hardness in stir zones was measured to be 75Hv after first pass and the same changed to 85Hv respectively after second pass. Further uniform microhardness was observed in the FSP stir zone which was not the case in as-cast Al–30Si microstructure.Hypereutectic high silicon containing aluminium alloys are used for applications in electronic, automotive and defence industries due to their low density, high thermal conductivity, good wear resistance and low coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) Friction stir processing (FSP) is a new emerging solid state processing technique based on friction stir welding principle for microstructural refinement Permanent mould cast plates of dimension 130 The samples after friction stir processing were mechanically polished with 0.5 Microhardness measurements were done at room temperature using 100   The stirring action of the tool during FSP resulted in breakup of coarse primary silicon particles, thereby causing extensive refinement of both the flake type coarse primary silicon as well as the needle type eutectic silicon. It is difficult to distinguish eutectic silicon and primary silicon in the stir zone after one pass and two passes of FSP. The stirring action also eliminated casting porosities and uniformly distributed the fine primary and eutectic silicon particles throughout the stir zone. The size and shape of the silicon particles and average hardness values of the base metal, TMAZ and stir zone of the Al–30Si FSP alloy are listed in  Average microhardness values measured are also given in Friction stir processing of hypereutectic Al–30Si alloy resulted in significant break up of coarse primary and eutectic silicon particles and their uniform redistribution in the microstructure. Double pass FSP with 100% overlapping on the top of the first pass itself has a pronounced effect on size, shape and distribution of Si particles. We are grateful to Dr. J. Narayana Das, Director, NMRL Ambernath, for his continued support and encouragement during this research work.