Maintenance of urban road pavements is shown as critical in city management. Mobile Laser Scanning is well-established for achieving geo-reference point clouds and imagery depicting the reality in an accurate and productive manner and intense efforts have been made to implement automatic methods for extracting geometric and semantic useful information. This work shows a method based on evaluating roughness descriptors from mobile LiDAR data to automatically segment and classifies asphalt and stone pavements. The method includes segmentation of 1m slices from the road, extraction of profiles, evaluation of roughness parameters, and K-means clustering. Among the evaluated roughness descriptors, only arithmetic average of absolute values (between 2.5·10−3
                     m to 4·10−3
                     m for stone and 10−3 to 2·10−3
                     m for asphalt) and root mean squared (between 3·10−3
                     m to 5·10−3
                     m for stone and 10−3
                     m to 2·10−3
                     m for asphalt) show robust classification. The methodology is tested in three real case studies.Maintenance of urban road pavements is shown as critical in urban management The use of imaging and scanning techniques for inspecting constructive materials of pavement roads has emerged as an attractive and viable option over the current manual procedures Laser scanners are well-established in the remote sensing community for acquiring geometry and imagery depicting the reality in an accurate manner. In comparison with traditional Terrestrial Laser Scanners (TLS), Mobile Laser Scanners (MLS) combines LiDAR sensors and cameras with position and navigation systems allowing the collection of high-quality geo-reference point clouds in a productive manner. Benefits from the use of mobile LiDAR over aerial and conventional ground survey instruments include cost savings (they gathers all required data point measurements in one strip), time savings (up to 1 Although a few years ago LiDAR data were not usual, at present it is becoming more common the fact that municipalities own mobile LiDAR databases from their streets. The main problem with these databases comes from the high volume of information and its complex processing and management. For example, a Spanish city as Avila, with 58,000 residents has approximately 250 In the recent years, intense efforts have been made to implement automatic methods for extracting geometric and semantic useful information of construction materials from LiDAR data. Major literature is about detecting geometrical defects such as cracks or determining geometrical properties of construction materials with the aim of classifying them. Guan et al. In terms of extracting semantic information of construction materials from LiDAR data, González-Jorge et al. Despite the progress shown in the algorithmic developed for the automatic management of mobile LiDAR datasets, there are still some areas of improvement. One of them lies in the use of mobile LiDAR data for the automatic classification of the roadway type. For example, in historic cities, it is common the existence of road sections in which both asphalt and stone are alternatively used. It is important that this information is reflected in the information management systems as maintenance needs are different. In the present work, different road roughness descriptors are presented to automatically determine the roadway type using geometric data from mobile LiDAR system and without other complementary information from LiDAR intensity of RGB imaging. The manuscript is structured as follows. Section The area of study is focused in three roads in the city of Ourense (NW Spain). These roads show a change between asphalt and stone pavement, which is very common in this city forcing to customize the maintenance for each type of pavement. The mobile LiDAR system used for surveying the roads used as case studies in this work is the Optech Lynx Mobile Mapper ( The processing of the Lynx data to obtain a point cloud is done after the survey. The POSPac MMS software is used to process the positioning and navigation data to create an accurate trajectory. This software uses data from a base station located in Ourense city and provided by the National Geographic Institute (IGN) to correct the positioning data from the global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) and obtain accurate positioning. In addition, the data are combined with those provided from the inertial measurement system (INS) using Kalman filtering to calculate the best estimated trajectory (SBET). Finally, DASHMap software combines the SBET with the LiDAR data to provide the 3D geo-referenced point cloud. The visualization of the point cloud is performed using Cloud Compare software (  The first step of the proposed methodology consists on segmenting the point cloud in order to select regions belonging to road pavements. The mobile LiDAR system provides a 3D point cloud dataset from the area around the vehicle ( Roughness is a feature of surface texture that can be quantified by the deviations in the direction of the normal vector of the surface from its ideal form. Roughness is typically considered to be the high-frequency, short-wavelength component of a surface and its determination is crucial in different fields from mechanical engineering or tribology to topography There are many different roughness parameters in use All the roughness parameters are smoothed using a moving average to increase the robustness of the clustering method ( Once roughness is evaluated for road slices, a K-means clustering algorithm is implemented for grouping those points with similar roughness values ( The K-means method allows the user to define various parameters, including the desired number of cluster and the maximum number of the iterations allowed in the program. K-means method defines The present work aims to distinguish between two types of common roadway in historic cities, asphalt and stone pavements, so two classes are sought. Once the one meter width profiles of the road are submitted to roughness estimation and clustering, they are classified as asphalt or paving stone assuming that asphalt pavement has lower roughness values than stone pavement. Final step is to extend the classification up to the edge of the road ( Each complete profile provided by the mobile LiDAR is represented in a 2D space and the PCA is performed using the altitude of each point and deflection angle. These two variables allow to easily detecting peaks denoting the transversal limits of the road when PCA analysis is performed into the local neighborhood (10 points). This information, combined with the roughness clustering, allows segmenting the road from the complete point cloud and differentiating between asphalt (red) and stone (green) areas. Non classified points appear in gray (i.e. trees, buildings) (  Roughness values    A method to the automatic classification of asphalt and paver roads from mobile LiDAR data is developed. The method is tested in three different real case studies with road changes between asphalt and stone. It starts by the segmentation of 1 Once each 1 This research work shows promising to provide semantics to mobile LiDAR data for managing and improving urban maintenance. Future trends could be focused on the combination of roughness descriptors with other data, such as LiDAR intensity or RGB imaging, to differentiate between more types of roads and to detect defects on the pavements. The current procedure cannot classify different type of asphalts. Authors want to give thanks to the Xunta de Galicia (CN2012/269; R2014/032) and Spanish Government (Grant No: TIN2013-46801-C4-4-R; ENE2013-48015-C3-1-R; FPU: AP2010-2969).