Clinical studies and animal experiments have shown that the serum protein fetuin-A is a highly effective inhibitor of soft tissue calcification. This inhibition mechanism was elucidated on the basis of an in vitro fetuin-A-mineral model system. In a previous study, we found that in a two-stage process ∼100-nm sized calciprotein particles (CPPs) were formed whose final stage was stabilized by a compact outer fetuin-A monolayer against further growth. Quantitative small-angle neutron scattering data analysis revealed that even at a fetuin-A concentration close to the stability limit, only approximately one-half of the mineral ions and only 5% of the fetuin-A were contained in the CPPs. To uncover the interplay of the remaining supersaturated mineral ion fraction and of the 95% non-CPP fetuin-A, we explored the fetuin-A monomer fraction in solution by contrast variation small-angle neutron scattering. Our results suggest that the mineral ions coalesce to subnanometer-sized clusters, reminiscent of Posner clusters, which are stabilized by fetuin-A monomers. Hence, our experiments revealed a second mechanism of long-term mineral ion stabilization by the fetuin-A that is complementary to the formation of CPPs.According to a popular paradigm in biomineralization, mineral growth is governed by matching topologies at the protein-mineral interface. This effect may result in particular mineral morphologies or pronounced growth inhibition. Soluble inhibitors in the extracellular space either work by crystal poisoning like pyrophosphates which occupy phosphate positions in the lattice and thus interfere with a regular crystal growth ( Despite the enormous progress in biomineralization research over the last decade, some basic principles of calcification inhibition and serum protein guided mineralization remained enigmatic. In previous investigations, a transiently stable colloidal fetuin-A-mineral composite has been identified, denoted as calciprotein particle (CPP) or fetuin-mineral complex. Using a broad range from biochemical to physical methods like small-angle scattering of neutrons (SANS) and x-rays (SAXS), dynamic light scattering, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), two CPP populations have been detected time-dependently reflecting a two-step aging process ( Quantitative SANS analysis revealed that CPPs contained only 3–5% of the total (2.5 mg/mL, ∼47 This result prompted two observations: If the long-term inhibition of mineral deposition was based solely on CPP formation, ∼2.4 The remaining non-CPP mineral ion fraction (roughly 50%) would be still far beyond the solubility limit (a supersaturation of After these considerations, we concluded that an additional mechanism to inhibit calcium-phosphate deposition must exist. This prompted the present SANS study focusing on the fraction of monomeric fetuin-A (95%) at high Further clarification of the mechanisms of BF-mediated mineralization inhibition may help to develop diagnostics and therapeutic regimens against ectopic calcification in renal disease patients. Moreover, it may provide new strategies for the application of biomineralization in bionanotechnology. The methods of protein purification and sample preparation have been described previously ( Five samples S0–S4 were freshly prepared according to the parameters in The supersaturation The solubility product Probing with neutrons is a popular technique in materials science because of the inherent wave property, neutral charge, and interaction with the atomic nuclei. Neutrons deeply penetrate the material, and their element-dependent scattering, determined by the scattering length, even allows a discrimination of isotopes. The latter property is relevant for this article, because the coherent scattering-length densities of an aqueous solution can be adjusted over a large range by H All neutron scattering experiments were performed at the KWS2 diffractometer of the FRM II research reactor located in Garching near Munich, Germany ( A separation of coherent, i.e., We determined the intensity of the scattered neutrons as a function of the wave vector The scattering at For ellipsoidal particles, Ultrafiltration was employed to assess the concentrations of non-CPP fetuin-A molecules and of ionized calcium. After incubation at room temperature for 1 h (i.e., while primary CPP exists) or overnight (secondary CPP), the samples were ultrafiltrated by centrifugal force. The 3-kDa molecular mass cutoff (MMCO) unit (Millipore, Billerica, MA) was centrifuged at 12,000 The filtrates were diluted fourfold (no differences were observed between dilutions in water and 1% HCl) to match the calcium concentration to the range of the calibration curve. Next, 500  While previous investigation by SANS contrast variation explored the CPPs scattering at low In To assess the calcium ion binding capacity of BF, two BF-containing (2.5 mg/mL) samples were compared. Sample S1 was calcium-free whereas S2 contained 10 mM CaCl Samples identical to S3 have been investigated previously by SANS, albeit at lower The averaged intensity turned out to be the most reliable parameter, inasmuch as it was insensitive to scattering from other components and no data fitting was involved. The corresponding minima of the samples S3 and S4 during the first and second CPP stage (marked by the We scrutinized the validity of our SANS results by subjecting the samples to another quantitative analysis. Ultrafiltration proved to be a convenient method for the separation of colloidal protein-mineral aggregates ( During the first CPP stage, the 300-kDa MMCO filtrate contained 78 ± 11% of the initial 1 mg/mL BF and 63 ± 8% when the initial BF concentration was 0.35 mg/mL. In both cases, the filtrate contained roughly 65% of the initial calcium ions. Unlike the 3-kDa MMCO filtrates (see below), the 300-kDa MMCO filtrates were stable for hours despite nominal supersaturation. Irrespective of the initial BF concentration (samples S3 and S4), the 3-kDa MMCO filtrates showed a comparably high calcium concentration like the 300-kDa filtrates, but no BF as expected. Within a few minutes, increasing turbidity in the 3-kDa filtrate indicated the formation of mineral aggregates and subsequent sedimentation. The transformation to secondary CPPs had no major affect on the filterable BF fraction, whereas generally a reduction of calcium ions by roughly 50% was detected in all samples, indicating an increase in the CPP mineral fraction. The parameters derived from contrast variation SANS with respect to the BF monomers are compiled in The calcium-binding capacity of BF was assessed by comparing the scattering minima of the Ca The parameters describing the calcium-phosphate binding capacity of the BF monomers in sample S3 and S4 are compiled in Row 4 represents the CPM volume fraction evaluated from Sample S4 (0.5 mg/mL BF) with a CPM mineral volume fraction of ∼40% ( In summary, we have refined and extended the concept of BF-mediated inhibition of calcium-phosphate mineral deposition that has been attributed previously to CPP formation. This first-time quantitative analysis of the role of BF monomer suggests that BF monomers also participate in the inhibition of mineral deposition by sequestering calcium-phosphate entities similar or identical to Posner clusters. Fetuin-A is an essential inhibitor of pathological calcification in vertebrates. Numerous investigations by us and others on the principles of fetuin-A-mediated mineral stabilization using various in vitro and in vivo model systems and analytical methods have been published ( Contrast variation SANS analysis indicated that the exceptional stability of the secondary CPPs is due to a compact BF monolayer covering the mineral core ( To this end, we extended the contrast variation SANS studies into the high Because we did not have any information about the mineral polymorph, one crucial parameter to determine the total amount of mineral in the CPMs was missing. However, because we knew that ∼95% of the total BF remains monomeric ( Hence, we suggest that Posner clusters are the mineral entities which are stabilized by BF molecules. Recent investigations support these results. Calcium-phosphate nucleation and growth within the first second was studied by stopped-flow synchrotron SAXS ( Ultrafiltration experiments support our SANS results ( Molecular modeling and activity tests of fetuin-A deletion mutants suggested that the inhibition of calcium-phosphate deposition is chiefly mediated by the dense array of acidic residues on the In recent works, Price and co-workers ( The ultracentrifugation experiment (see the This study was supported by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) within the priority program “Principles of Biomineralization”. A. Heiss thanks Prof. J. Mayer (GFE, Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule, Aachen University) for supporting the project. Four figures and three tables are available at 