Purpose
                  To present the radiologic and clinical results of posteromedial fractures treated with arthroscopy-assisted reduction and buttress plate and cannulated screw fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-five patients with posteromedial tibial plateau fractures treated by the described technique were included in this study. According to the Schatzker classification, there were 5 type IV fractures (20%), 2 type V fractures (8%), and 18 type VI fractures (72%). The mean age at operation was 46 years (range, 21 to 79 years). The mean follow-up period was 86 months (range, 60 to 108 months). Clinical and radiologic outcomes were scored by the Rasmussen system. Subjective data were collected to assess swelling, difficulty climbing stairs, joint stability, ability to work and participate in sports, and overall patient satisfaction with recovery. Secondary osteoarthritis was diagnosed when radiographs showed a narrowed joint space in the injured knee at follow-up in comparison with the films taken at the time of injury.
               
                  Results
                  The mean postoperative Rasmussen clinical score was 25.9 (range, 18 to 29), and the mean radiologic score was 15.8 (range, 10 to 18). All 25 fractures achieved successful union, and 92% had good or excellent clinical and radiologic results. The 3 fracture types did not significantly differ in Rasmussen scores or rates of satisfactory results (P > .05). Secondary osteoarthritis was noted in 6 injured knees (24%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Arthroscopy-assisted reduction with buttress plate and cannulated screw fixation can restore posteromedial tibial plateau fractures of the knee with well-documented radiographic healing, good clinical outcomes, and low complication rates.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic case series.Bicondylar tibial plateau fractures commonly result from high-energy trauma with significant comminution, as well as severe soft-tissue injury. The advantages of arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation (ARIF) for tibial plateau fractures are direct visualization of intra-articular fractures, accurate fracture reduction, reduced morbidity in comparison with arthrotomy, simplified diagnosis and treatment of meniscal and ligamentous injuries, and thorough joint lavage and removal of loose fragments. Good early- to medium-term results of arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis of tibial plateau fractures have been reported previously. From June 2002 to May 2006, 127 consecutive patients with closed tibial plateau fractures and associated intra-articular soft-tissue injuries underwent arthroscopy-assisted surgery at our hospital. In this retrospective study we included 25 consecutive patients (15 men [60%] and 10 women [40%]) who presented with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures with comminuted posteromedial fragments. All patients signed informed consent forms for institutional review board approval (No. 97-2552B) before their surgery and underwent the same treatment protocol of arthroscopy-assisted surgery with buttress plate and cannulated screw fixation of posteromedial tibial plateau fractures without extensive soft-tissue stripping. The mean age at surgery was 46 years (range, 21 to 79 years), with a mean follow-up period of 86 months (range, 60 to 108 months). Fractures were classified from type IV to type VI by the Schatzker classification with comminuted posterior fragments confirmed by CT scan. The patients were placed supine on the operating table and given general endotracheal anesthesia. A pneumatic tourniquet was applied to the thigh without a leg holder. Standard anterolateral and anteromedial portals were used. Gravity inflow was used to minimize fluid extravasation. The joint was inspected and the hematoma and any loose particles were removed while evaluation of the capsule, ligament, and intra-articular damage was completed. The incisions were placed directly medial to the fractured side, starting from approximately 1 cm proximal to the articular surface and extending approximately 8 cm from the distal end. The tibial metaphysis was exposed, with care taken to avoid submeniscal arthrotomy and to minimize periosteal stripping. The fragments of the posteromedial tibial plateau fractures were clearly observed through the arthroscope through the anteromedial portal ( In the case of a bicondylar fracture (types V and VI), the 2 incisions were made as far apart as possible and similar procedures were performed for reduction. Interfragmentary screw fixation was sometimes required to stabilize large fragments. Intraoperative radiographs were routinely taken for all types of fractures to reconfirm adequate reduction before wound closure. Associated intra-articular pathologic features were noted and treated in the appropriate sequence after fracture fixation. Cold therapy and continuous passive motion were instituted immediately after surgery. The patients were mobilized but limited to non–weight bearing with crutches. Weight bearing was delayed until radiologic evidence of fracture healing was obtained, which generally occurred at approximately 3 months after the operation. The clinical status and radiologic status were evaluated according to the Rasmussen system ( Radiographic examinations, including bipedal examinations and examinations of both knees, were performed preoperatively and postoperatively at 1 month, 2 months, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and then annually. Long-leg standing films (standing scanograms to measure tibiofemoral angle) were performed annually postoperatively. Union was defined as the presence of bridging callus on 2 radiographic views. Each radiograph was evaluated by 5 observers (visiting orthopaedic staff) in a blinded fashion to assess interobserver and intraobserver variance. The observers classified the fracture type and measured articular depression in 25 patients, and statistical analysis by the κ method was used to determine the interobserver variance in the diagnosis of secondary osteoarthritis, fracture type, and articular depression. Intraobserver reliability was evaluated with a single-measure 1-way random intraclass correlation coefficient with corresponding 95% confidence intervals. An a priori power analysis was conducted to ensure that certain conditions were met to correctly reject the null hypothesis, which stated that there is no relation between the variables of interest. Statistical analysis was conducted by an independent statistical expert blinded to the surgical outcomes. Statistical analysis was conducted with the Fisher test for discrete variables ( The data of the surgical patients are shown in Of the patients, 11 (44%) had excellent results, 12 (48%) had good results (2 type IV, 1 type V, and 9 type VI), and 2 (8%) had fair results (1 type IV and 1 type VI) (  Of the 25 patients in this series, 23 (92%) had associated knee injuries. In these 23 patients, rupture or detachment of the meniscus was noted in 16 knees (64%). There were 4 medial meniscus injuries (16%) and 11 lateral meniscus injuries (44%), and 1 knee (4%) had both medial and lateral meniscal pathology. Among these knees, 13 menisci (42%) were repaired and 3 partial meniscectomies (12%)—but no total meniscectomies—were performed. ACL injuries were noted in 17 knees (68%), with 4 partial tears (16%), 1 complete tear (4%), and 12 ACL avulsion fractures (48%). All of the ACL partial tears were debrided and all complete tears left alone for further reconstruction. The 12 ACL avulsion fractures (48%) were treated with pullout suture fixation to the anterior tibial cortex. There were 4 medial collateral ligament partial tears (16%) and 1 lateral collateral ligament (LCL) partial tear (4%), and all were repaired in the acute stage simultaneously. There was 1 patient (4%) with combined ligament injuries—posterior cruciate ligament avulsion fracture and LCL partial rupture—in whom the posterior cruciate ligament remnant was treated by pullout to the anterior cortex for fixation and LCL repair and double buttress plates were applied. All patients had bone grafts with synthetic calcium composite biomaterial. Minor wound dehiscence over the incision lines was noted in 1 patient (4%) with a Schatzker type VI fracture. The wound was healed successfully by wound care with antibiotic therapy. Another patient with a Schatzker type VI fracture had severe medial tibial plateau traumatic cartilage wear preoperatively that turned out to be moderate osteoarthritis with pain and stiffness (range of motion, 10° to 90°). Condylar joint surface depression was noted in 3 patients (12%) without functional instability. Paresthesias over the lateral calf of the lower leg were found in 5 patients (20%). No patient had complications such as compartment syndrome or deep venous thrombosis as evaluated by clinical symptoms or signs at final follow-up. No complications directly associated with arthroscopy were noted in any of the 25 patients (100%). The principal findings of our study showed that arthroscopy-assisted reduction with buttress plate and cannulated screw fixation can restore posteromedial tibial plateau fractures of the knee with well-documented radiographic healing, good clinical outcomes, and low complication rates. Arthroscopy provides real-time and direct visualization of fracture reduction and can avoid over- or under-reduction that is possible because of inaccuracies of real-time radiographic examinations. The technique of arthroscopy-assisted reduction and internal fixation may represent a viable alternative to traditional open surgery and may reduce morbidity associated with fracture repair. As ARIF gains more popularity in treating tibial plateau fractures, related intra-articular soft-tissue injuries such as meniscal and ligamentous injuries will become better known. Abdel-Hamid et al. Another major concern regarding traditional open reduction has been the soft-tissue condition and risk of wound infection, which can reach as high as 50%. The unique features of this study are as follows: (1) All arthroscopic surgical techniques were performed by a single surgeon using the same fracture fixation method and material in all patients, and all patients underwent the same rehabilitation program; and (2) all 25 patients were available for complete follow-up and outcome assessment. The acknowledged limitations of this study are as follows: there was no control group, the sample size was limited, the timing of imaging differed among patients, no postoperative CT scan was obtained at follow-up, the observers were not fully blinded at all points, the operative time and cost were not compared with those in the ORIF group, and the observation period was short. Further studies with larger patient populations and long-term follow-up are still needed. Arthroscopy-assisted reduction with buttress plate and cannulated screw fixation can restore posteromedial tibial plateau fractures of the knee with well-documented radiographic healing, good clinical outcomes, and low complication rates.