In this study mine waters obtained from coal mining operations in South Africa were used as a substitute for pure water during the synthesis of zeolites from South African coal fly ash. Procedures that had been optimized to produce single phase zeolite Na-P1 and X using pure water were employed independently. The use of circumneutral mine water resulted in similar quality zeolite Na-P1 and X whereas the use of acidic mine drainage led to the formation of a single phase hydroxysodalite zeolite. Since these two wastes (fly ash and mine waters) are found in close proximity to each other, this study demonstrates that they can be used to ameliorate each other and at the same time produce saleable zeolitic products that can be used to offset their costs of disposal and treatment.Coal combustion is heavily relied upon during the production of electricity in many countries worldwide. In South Africa, almost 90% of electricity is derived from coal combustion ( During the coal mining operation, the type of mine water generated, either acidic or circumneutral, is dependent on the geology of the bedrock in the coal mine ( Many researchers have investigated different ways of recycling fly ash and an excellent review was presented by The motivation for this work was inspired by the need for complete industrial waste re-use. Having no doubt that the reliance on coal for energy production will continue with further prospects of increase in future due to the increasing demand for industrial and domestic energy, the volume of generated waste will continues to grow in direct proportion to the increased consumption. It should be recognized that creative and innovative ways are required to deals with the ever increasing quantities of wastes to reduce their environmental burden associated with disposal and also cut down the high cost of treatment. More importantly, research that treats these wastes as valuable resources should be encouraged. In this regard, the use of these two wastes in zeolite synthesis will not only offer a potentially capital savings option for disposal of these wastes but will also be advantageous to the coal mines and power stations since it will enable constructive use of the large volumes of waste that they generate. The generated zeolitic products can be sold because zeolites are industrially important materials since they have a wide range of applications such as in catalysis ( Coal fly ash was obtained from a power plant located in the Mpumalanga province of South Africa and was stored in sealed containers before use to preserve its compositional integrity. The two types of mine waters (acid and circumneutral) were collected from coal mines located in Mpumalanga province in South Africa. Their pH was measured using a HANNA HI 991301 portable pH/EC/TDS/temperature meter. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the feedstock (fly ash) and zeolitic products was performed using a Philips X-ray diffractometer. The phase identification was conducted by searching and matching the obtained spectra with the powder diffraction file data base with the help of JCPDS (Joint committee of powder diffraction standards) files for inorganic compounds. Multielement analysis was conducted using Philips PW 1480 X-ray spectrometer. Hitachi X-650 scanning electron microanalyser was used for morphological analysis and the samples were mounted on aluminum pegs and coated with a thin film of gold to make them conductive. The concentrations of ionic species in the mine water were measured by the use of a Varian Radial inductively coupled plasma atomic emission (ICP-AES). The synthesis conditions for producing zeolite Na-P1 and X were initially identified and optimized using pure water before substitution of mine water was carried out. The procedure applied for each zeolite type is as follows; The optimization experiments for a two-step synthesis procedure for zeolite Na-P1 using pure water were conducted and reported earlier ( The as-received fly ash was fused with sodium hydroxide in the ratio of 1:1.2 at 550 In both cases, after hydrothermal treatment, the liquid phase was separated from the synthesis product and thoroughly washed using ultra-pure water by filtration until a filtrate pH of 9–10 was obtained and dried overnight at 90 The elemental composition (major and trace elements) of the as-received fly ash is presented in  The average elemental composition of the mine waters used in this study is reported in  Morphological analysis of the synthesized product ( The comparative XRD analysis of the synthesis products obtained when zeolite X was targeted using pure water, circumneutral mine water or acid mine drainage mine water, is presented in The comparative chemical analyses of the synthesis products obtained when the different solvents (pure water, circumneutral and acid mine water) were used when zeolite Na-P1 and X were targeted are presented in The results in this study have shown that different zeolites can be prepared using fly ash and mine waters. The type of zeolite formed was found to be dependent of the type of mine water used. From an environmental and economic point of view, the process developed in this study can not only reduce the environmental burden associated with these wastes but could also offer extra income generated from the sale of the synthesized zeolites. These findings are also expected to trigger research on the synthesis of zeolite from mine waters and fly ash using the waste heat generated in the coal power plants. Further studies will also shed more light on whether disposal of fly ash zeolites, rather than raw fly ash, would provide a safer option for disposing these two wastes after determining their leachability of toxic elements. It will also be of interest to investigate the potential for recyclability of the resulting post-synthesis supernatant back to the synthesis process. The authors would like to acknowledge National Research Foundation (NRF), Eskom and University of the Western Cape for support and for providing the funds to make this study possible.