A hybrid nanocomposite based on the intercalation of carbonate anion has been synthesized through co-precipitation technique. Powder X-ray diffraction patterns (PXRD) showed pure layered double hydroxide (LDH) phases having crystallite size around 20 and 13nm in ‘a’ and ‘c’ crystallographic directions, respectively. Fourier transform infrared and Raman spectroscopy measurements exhibit shifting of bands with increase of divalent metal ion concentration and it further suggests the presence of carbonate anions. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) exhibit the three stages of thermal degradation, which is characteristic behaviour of layered double hydroxide. CHN and energy dispersive X-ray analysis support the PXRD and spectroscopy results. The nature of charge observed through Zeta potential analyzer is positive. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) exhibits the characteristic LDH platelet morphology with the platelets stacked one above the other.Layered double hydroxide (LDH) also known as hydrotalcite-like compounds have attracted attention due to their layered structure and their high anion exchange behaviour, which make them useful for technical applications, such as precursors to magnetic materials, catalysis, separation technology and medicine Several papers have been published on LDH containing intercalated anions Magnesium nitrate hexahydrate was obtained from Fluka with 99% purity. Aluminum nitrate nonahydrate (98%), sodium carbonate (99%) and sodium hydroxide were obtained from Thomas Baker (chemicals) limited. LDHs having carbonate anion as interlayer with Mg and Al as the octahedral cations (designed MgAl–CO Powder X-ray diffraction data were recorded on a Phillips PW 3040/60 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation ( X-ray diffraction patterns presented in The infrared spectra ( To gain complimentary information on the various bands in the IR spectra, the Raman spectra of the LDH with different Mg/Al molar ratios are recorded and given in DSC of the LDH with molar ratio 2:1 is shown in Details of the CHN analysis data are given in EDX analysis ( TEM photographs shown in Magnesium nitrate hexahydrate and aluminum nitrate nonahydrate were used as precursors of divalent and trivalent cations to successfully prepare Mg–Al layered double hydroxides by conventional co-precipitation technique. The synthesis parameters need to be carefully controlled taking into account the reactivity of these precursors in the alkaline pH range, generally involved for the precipitation of LDH materials. Hydrotalcite like structure is confirmed by XRD analysis. FT-IR, Raman spectroscopy and TG-DSC analysis give strong evidence of layered structure of LDH and carbonate ions in the interlayer space. TEM studies indicate that LDHs has layer by layer stacking morphology. We are thankful to the DST, Govt. of India for the support.