In this work, molecular dynamics simulation was used to examine the effect of solution pH on the adsorption behavior and self-aggregation of dodecylamine hydrochloride (DDA) on the muscovite (0 0 1) surface. The properties of surfactants are assessed in terms of density profiles in the direction perpendicular to the muscovite surface. Results show that although DDA can adsorb at muscovite at all pH we discussed, the self-aggregation of DDA varies significantly at different pH values. At pH 10, a compact hydrophobic monolayer forms on the muscovite surface. At pH 3, hemi-micelle aggregated structure forms with several DDA cations far away from muscovite surface. At pH 12, it has been confirmed that adsorption of DDA neutral molecules occurs with only a few DDA molecules adsorbing on muscovite directly and acting as a bridge linking the rest DDA molecules, which exists nearby muscovite surface irregularly. Density profiles revealed that at pH 10, DDA cations play a dominant role in the interaction between DDA surfactants and muscovite. While DDA molecules have difficulty in forming a hydrogen bond with the oxygen atom on the muscovite surfaces, and they co-adsorb onto muscovite through the electrostatic interactions with muscovite and hydrophobic force with DDA cations. Therefore, the hydrophobization of muscovite in the presence of DDA are higher at pH 10 than that at pH 3 and pH 12. Our results indicate that molecular dynamics simulation can be a power tool in charactering adsorption behavior of surfactants onto mineral surfaces at different pH values.Froth flotation is frequently used as an effective method to separate mineral particles on the basis of their wetting properties Muscovite (KAl The understanding of the adsorption properties of collectors on mineral particles at different pH is of particular importance when one considers separation processes. Pugh et al. studied the surface chemical nature of the flotation of mica in dodecylamine collector using equilibrium film thickness measurement. They found a tightly packed organized collector monolayer at pH 8 which gave the maximum hydrophobicity to the mica surface This paper focused on the adsorption state of dodecylamine on muscovite as a function of pH using molecular dynamics simulation. The density profiles of DDA and water on muscovite surface were determined for better understanding the interaction between the surfactants and muscovite surface. The paper is organized as follows: first, we describe the simulation algorithms and details in Sections The monoclinic C2/c2 (2M1 polytype) atomic structure of muscovite is constructed based on the study of Heinz et al. Based on the theory of flotation solution chemistry, DDA exists in ionized format (C Following the construction of the unit cell, a supercell mode of muscovite (5 MD simulations were conducted using Materials Studio 6.0. The simulations were used the phyllosilicate force field embedded in the polymer-consistent force field (PCFF_phyllosilicates) for muscovite and DDA, and simple point charge (SPC) model for water Equilibrium simulation snapshots of DDA cations adsorbed at the muscovite (0 0 1) surface at pH 3 are shown in   As a function of the positions along one axis of the periodic repeat unit, the equilibrium density profile can provide a quantitative evaluation of the properties of simulation systems From Based on the above analysis, the compact degree of DDA arranging on muscovite surface weakens in the following order: pH 10 The more details of the distribution of nitrogen atom at pH 10 when the head groups are partial protonated were analyzed in a direction normal to muscovite surface ( Water adsorption on mineral surfaces plays a process-determining role in flotation industry. The more hydrophobization of a mineral surface, the better floatability it performs. The density profiles of water molecules provide the basis for the understanding the hydrophobicity of muscovite surface modified by DDA surfactants at different pH ( As depicted in Molecular dynamics simulations provide significant insight into the structure, dynamics, and interactions of DDA molecules at muscovite/aqueous interface. At pH 10, a tight hydrophobic monolayer containing DDA cation and DDA molecule forms. At pH 3, a less tightly packed structure forms with several DDA cations far away from muscovite surface, making muscovite less hydrophobic than that at pH 10. At higher pH 12, most of DDA molecules move away from the muscovite surface and organize themselves irregularly. Results of density profiles show that the nitrogen atoms in DDA cation are much closer to the muscovite surface, suggesting that DDA cation adsorbs onto muscovite surface much strongly than DDA molecule. While DDA molecule has difficulty in forming a hydrogen bond with the oxygen atom on the muscovite surfaces, and they co-adsorb onto muscovite through the hydrogen-bond interaction and hydrophobic association with DDA ions. DDA can affect the second and third layer of water from the interface significantly. The peaks of these two kind of layers decrease in the order of at pH 10 Our study was funded by the