Experimental data was used to create a base-case model of a bank of flotation cells at a South African platinum mine on a physics-based froth zone simulator, FrothSim. FrothSim models the three phases (solid, liquid and gas) in flotation froths and models entrainment and drainage of water and unattached solids, allowing the upgrading effect of a froth to be simulated. Using distributed first order rate constants, the correct overflow rates for each of the selectively floated minerals down the bank were accurately simulated. The entrained minerals and water rates were correctly predicted by the froth physics.
                  The rate constants and froth parameters were used unchanged in predictions at different air-rate profiles down the bank. This was carried out with the two aims of increasing the grade at the head of the bank, where the concentrate goes direct to the final concentrate of the plant, and increasing the cumulative recovery at the end of the bank.
                  Once an optimum air-profile had been determined using the simulations, this profile was tested in a froth experimental sampling campaign and confirmed the predicted improvement in flotation performance along the bank.In recent years there has been much work carried out developing models of the flotation process. One of these models, developed by The programme of  There have been several experimental studies recently ( Previously, Simulations of flotation banks have shown limited success, to date, in achieving the same response to gas distribution management seen experimentally, due to previous models not incorporating the froth’s behaviour and the entrainment effects at the different gas distribution profiles. To achieve the experimental effect on a simulation, the model used should simulate the froth zone of a flotation cell and be able to make predictions of mineral grades. In the work presented here, The gas in flotation froths is held within bubbles. A number of researchers ( It is this approach that is used in the By solving the froth flow and coalescence equations, the froth structure is determined. The liquid in the froth is held in the Plateau borders, the channels between bubbles. The model used for the motion of the slurry from the froth is based upon the foam drainage equation of Particles are divided into solids classes; each with individual particle sizes, mineral densities and rate constants. If size by size assay results were available, each size class, of each mineral can be simulated. All the solids form two categories; attached and unattached. The attached solids enter the froth attached to bubbles, while the unattached solids are either entrained into the froth with the liquid or lost from the bubble films due to film failure in the froth or surface bursting. The attached solids enter the froth on the bubble films and follow the bubble motion, described by the Laplace equation, throughout the froth. The amount of solids attached to the bubbles is a function of bubble-particle collision and attachment in the pulp, which is modelled using first order rate constants ( The unattached solids generally follow the motion of the liquid, but also move relative to the liquid by one of three mechanisms; geometric dispersion, Plateau border dispersion and hindered settling ( The solids concentration in the liquid affects the rheology of the fluid and, as such, the liquid and solid equations are solved together in an iterative process to yield the final result in In order to create a model of a bank of flotation cells, experimental data from the bank of cells is required. The Froth and Foam Research Group carried out a sampling campaign on the primary rougher bank at the Waterval UG2 concentrator in South Africa. A number of experiments at different air-rate profiles were performed; the ‘As-found’ condition from this initial campaign was chosen to be the basis for the development of a model of this bank. During the experiments, samples were taken from the feed, concentrate and pulp in each cell to be assayed for solids content and mineral composition. The feed rate to the bank was obtained from plant data. The concentrate flow rates were measured several times over the course of an experiment and averaged. Pulp and froth measurements were also carried out to determine the pulp bubble size and the air recovery, or fraction of air entering the cell that overflows the weir. Values for the air rates to each cell and cell froth levels were taken from online plant data and confirmed experimentally. The feed to the concentrator was UG2 ore. For the model, the minerals included were chalcopyrite, pentlandite, pyrrhotite and chromite, with the rest of the feed stream classed as non-sulphide gangue (NSG). The flow rates of the minerals were calculated using the assay data, assuming all the copper present was from the chalcopyrite, all the nickel was from the pentlandite and all the chromium from the chromite. The sulphur was present in the chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite, with 36% of the total sulphur being from the pyrrhotite. This meant that, as the mineral composition of all streams was known, a simulation could be set up and calibrated. In The remaining properties to be entered into A nominal particle size for all solids was estimated as that which gave approximately the experimental recovery for NSG. The recoveries of both NSG and chromite were adjusted to match the experimental values, by using a rate constant. The addition of a rate constant was due to evidence of both species in the experimental froth surface samples, suggesting some attachment to bubble films. This meant there were two classes for NSG and chromite in the model, one recovered via true flotation and one by pure entrainment; the ratio of floated recovery to entrained recovery for NSG was of the order of 0.3. An initial value for the rate constants was found by estimating the froth recovery, These rate constants can then be separated into fast floating and slow floating fractions by carrying out a calculation around the entire bank of cells; this yields a fast floating fraction and rate constant for each mineral, With all the data entered into The water recovered to each concentrate was also compared with the experimental values. If the results showed a difference greater than 1% of the experimental value, the outlet bubble size was altered according to Eq. The updating of fast and slow floating mineral rate constants, fast floating fractions and the outlet bubble size from each cell continues until the simulated recovery of each mineral from each cell in the bank matches the experimental recoveries. At this point, the base case has been calibrated. The results of this calibration are shown in A sensitivity analysis was performed upon the mineral rate constants. If a 10% variation is introduced into the rate constant for an individual mineral, it results in a variation of less than 3% in the grade and recovery of that mineral for cell 1. This variation decreases to below 2% in the cumulative grades and recoveries of that mineral in the remaining cells. For the floatable minerals, altering the rate constant of one of them separately, does not affect either the recovery or the grade of the other floatable minerals or the entrained minerals. However, introducing a 10% change into the rate constant for either chromite or NSG does affect the grade of the other minerals in the model; a 5–6% variation in the grades of the floated minerals. This effect is due to the fact that chromite and NSG form a much larger portion of the streams than any of the floatable minerals, chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite. Therefore, when making overall performance predictions the model as a whole is most sensitive to the estimate of chromite and NSG recovery by flotation and entrainment. In order to make use of the base case to predict flotation performance after changes in the air-rate profile are made, however, models to predict the variation of air recovery and concentrate flow rate with changing air rate are required. To make predictions two froth parameters will change as the air rate changes, these are the air recovery and the overflowing bubble size. The air recovery is a key parameter as it determines the amount of attached minerals recovered to the concentrate. Using existing experimental data collected at several concentrators, an empirical model based on the air lost through the top surface of the froth has been developed, enabling the calculation of the air recovery. The experimental results of the air lost through the froth surface are compared to the predicted values in A good correlation between the predicted and experimental values is obtained, shown by the fit of the points around the line of equality in The overflowing bubble size for use as an input froth parameter in The These two models combined with the base case allows predictions of flotation performance at different air-rate profiles. In order to confirm that the air recovery and concentrate flow rate models yield results comparable to those obtained experimentally, they were incorporated into the base case simulation. The experimental results can therefore be compared with the results of the simulation carried out with the experimentally obtained air recoveries and concentrate flow rates, the ‘fitted’ model, and the results of the simulation using the predictions of air recovery and concentrate flow rate, the ‘predicted’ model. The results are shown in It can be seen in The studies of The base case was used to predict the flotation performance of the bank at different air profiles, with the goal of finding a profile that results in an increase in the upgrade ratio from cell 1 and also an increased cumulative recovery from the flotation bank. This was then validated experimentally on a further sampling campaign at the Waterval concentrator. The three different air profiles simulated and used on this further campaign are shown in  The Stepped Profile was a simple reversal of the Standard Profile to attempt to increase the grade at the head of the bank. The Sawtooth Profile was developed by trial and error on the simulator, varying the air rate into the first cell to increase the upgrade ratio, without significantly losing recovery, and to follow this down the bank with an increasing profile, from cells 2 to 4, so as to increase the cumulative recovery. Similar profiles were developed by experimentation by As the second campaign was carried out approximately six months after the base case experiment, the results are presented showing the upgrade ratio between the concentrate and the feed, rather than the absolute grades, to allow direct comparison between the predicted and experimental results. The upgrade ratios have all been standardised using the predicted upgrade ratio of the appropriate species in cell 1 under the Standard Profile to yield relative upgrade ratios.  On the predicted curves for chalcopyrite, As the model is a good representation of the plant it is expected that the same profiles and trends in upgrade ratio and recovery for the three air profiles will be observed experimentally. All the curves have the same relative positions as in the predictions, Between cells 2 and 3, the grade–recovery curves for the Stepped and Sawtooth Profiles cross over each other, as predicted. In cell 3 the Sawtooth Profile has the highest cumulative recovery and the Standard Profile the lowest. For the final cell, cell 4, the experimental recoveries are similar to the predicted, with the Sawtooth Profile yielding the highest cumulative recovery at the end of the bank in both the predicted and experimental results. While the predicted recoveries match those obtained experimentally, suggesting no error in the rate constants for the floated minerals, the predicted upgrade ratios are significantly lower than those obtained experimentally, especially for the Stepped and Sawtooth profiles, approximately half in the first cell. This suggests that the recovery of the entrained gangue species has been over predicted in the first cell; as previously mentioned an error in gangue recovery results in an error in grade for all minerals modelled.  The predicted curves for chromite,  By comparing the predicted curves,  These results suggest that the largest single source of error in the prediction simulations came from the simplified prediction of the concentrate flow rate, using Eq. In summary, the predicted curves, In this work, the froth zone simulator, Simulations were subsequently carried out to predict the performance for different air-rate profiles, and a further experimental sampling campaign was carried out to verify the predictions. The same trends were observed in cumulative upgrade ratio and recovery in both the experimental and predicted results for the three air profiles tested, for both attached minerals, like chalcopyrite, and unattached, primarily entrained species, such as chromite. The highest upgrade ratio, in cell 1, was predicted with a Stepped Profile and also achieved with this profile experimentally. The highest cumulative recovery was predicted with the Sawtooth Profile and this was also obtained experimentally. Therefore using the Sawtooth Profile on the bank improves the performance as desired yielding a higher upgrade ratio in cell 1 and a higher cumulative recovery at the end of the bank, compared to the Standard Profile. The results of this work show that