This study has evaluated the comminution energy reduction efficiency of a multi-stage milling method and established a mathematical model for estimating the specific energy consumption as a function of moisture content and particle size change. A Bliss hammer mill was employed to grind the feedstock targeting at two final screen sizes of 0.84 and 0.69 mm. For the target screen size of 0.84 mm, the single-stage, two-stage, and three-stage milling process were employed. Whereas, the single-stage, two-stage, and four-stage milling process were employed for the 0.69-mm target screen size. Four moisture content levels were employed, i.e. 6 %, 12 %, 18 %, and 28 %. While the final particle sizes and distributions were similar independent of the intermediate stages, the results showed that the single-stage milling consumed 43 % more energy than the three-stage grinding process. Also, multi-stage milling runs more stable in grinding high-moisture content materials. In addition, a mathematical model based on Bond’s comminution law was established to predict the specific energy consumption with the moisture content and the particle sizes before and after grinding.Bond’s comminution law constant, kWh-mm Kick’s comminution law constant, kWh/kg Von Rittinger’s comminution law constant, kWh-mm/kg Energy consumption of milling the feedstock size into the product size, kWh/kg Moisture content, % specific Energy consumption, kWh/kg Feedstock size before milling, mm Product size after milling, mm Fossil fuels, currently the primary source for liquid transportation fuels, bring about many environmental issues. Forest havestoing residuals are a potential resource for producing biofuels to provide an alternative to fossile fuels. For any route to convert woody biomass to ready-to-use fuels, size reduction is a necessary preprocessing process. However, the process of breaking down forest residuals is energy intensive because woody cell walls and structures are very tough ( The energy consumption of a milling process mainly depends on material, moisture content, mill type, and particle size change between the feed and the milled product. Many studies showed that the specific energy consumption increased along with an increase of moisture content ( It has been noted that the energy consumption is influenced by both the initial size and final particle size ( The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of the multi-stage milling method on the specific energy consumption of comminuting feedstock with various moisture contents and correlate the energy consumption with particle sizes. Specifically, the wood chips were subject to a series of multi-stage grinding and the wood particles were characterized; the Von Rittinger’s, Kirk’s, and Bond’s laws were used to describe the relationship between energy consumption and particle size change. The best fitted mathematic model was selected to predict the energy consumption under various moisture content and targeting particle sizes. The Douglas-fir forest harvest residuals were produced from a roadside slash pile in southwest Oregon, USA. The slash pile was comminuted using an on-site horizontal grinder into a product passing through a 102 × 102 mm The moisture content of the forest residuals was determined according to The routes of the multi-stage milling are listed in A Fluke 1735 Power Logger (Fluke Corporation, Everett, WA) was used to measure the electrical energy consumption of the milling process of a hammer mill (Bliss Eliminator Fine Grind Hammer mill, EMF-24115-TFA, 45 kW, Bliss Industries Inc. Ponca City, OK, USA)). The total energy consumption, a sum of idle energy and net energy, was derived from the recorded active power and milling time. The idle energy can be calculated through the baseline power of the hammer mill under a run without a charge and milling time. The net energy was calculated by subtracting the idle energy from the total energy ( A previous study found that the total specific energy consumption (SEC) was minimized when the mill was operated at its rated power( The baseline idle power and rated power were found to be 12 kW and 42 kW for the Bliss hammer mill. Whereas, the net energy can be obtained by subtracting idle energy from total energy from each actual run. After milling, the resulting particles were sieved with a Ro-Tap Shaker (The W. S. Tyler Company, Cleveland, Ohio, USA) for 20 min to analyze the size distribution, geometric mean diameter (X Three comminution laws were used to describe the relationship between energy consumption and particle size change. Von Rittinger’s law, Kick’s law, and Bond’s law were used to analyze the relationship as shown in Eqs.    The three comminution laws were employed to describe the relationship among the energy consumption, particle size, and the moisture content of the feedstock. The experimental data were fitted with the Von Rittinger’s, Kick’s and Bond’s laws as expressed by Eq. (3),(4), and (5), respectively ( With these equations, one can roughly estimate the net and total energy consumption in the range of investigated moisture content and particle size change. These predictors of Eqs The multiple-stage milling process substantially decreased the specific energy consumption of hammer milling process for producing fine particles at low moisture content. It also provides advantages in grinding the materials with high moisture content compared to single-stage milling. Bond’s law was found to better correlate the specific energy consumption with particle size change. Also, the constant in the Bond’s law has a good linear relationship with moisture content. Therefore, the developed Bond’s law equations are recommended to be used to estimate the total specific energy consumption under various moisture content and particle size change. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The study was supported by the