Partial coalescence of the fat emulsion and its control by manipulation of the oil/water interface continues to be an active area of ice cream research and understanding at both the basic and applied levels have greatly improved. Interactions between all the discrete phases are increasingly being studied in more complex systems, leading to an appreciation of such things as the effect of air bubble size distribution on ice recrystallization. The importance of protein polysaccharide phase separation in the freeze-concentrated unfrozen phase and its effect on ice recrystallization has also been recognised.Ice cream and related aerated frozen desserts are complex-colloidal systems comprised of, in their frozen state: ice crystals; air bubbles; partially-coalesced fat globules and aggregates; all in discrete phases surrounded by an unfrozen continuous matrix of sugars, proteins, salts, polysaccharides and water ( The optimal formation of fat structure in ice cream is responsible for many desirable properties including dryness and shape retention after scraped surface freezing and slowness of meltdown and smooth eating textural properties after hardening From the work of Koxholt et al. The composition of the fat interface and its role in partial coalescence also continues to receive considerable research attention. Bolliger et al. Ice cream is conventionally removed from a scraped surface freezer at about −5 °C. However, further freezing under low shear conditions in a twin-screw extruder makes extrusion at temperatures as low as −12 to −15 °C possible Ice cream and related products are generally aerated and characterised as frozen foams. The gas phase volume varies greatly from a high of greater than 50% to a low of 10–15%. Air is distributed in the form of numerous small air bubbles of size range 20–50 μm. Whilst a great deal is known about protein surfactant interactions at the fat interface, as discussed previously, it seems that far less work has been done on the air interface. More work has been done on non-frozen systems, as reviewed in 1999 The scraped surface freezer is responsible for ice crystal formation, but also for air comminution into a fine distribution of bubbles, which are thought to be correlated with enhanced sensory perception of smoothness. Koxholt et al. Ice crystals form another discrete phase in ice cream and it is well recognised that formulations and manufacturing and handling procedures that lead to numerous small, discrete ice crystals also lead to enhanced smoothness in texture. Ice crystal formation in ice cream is generally by secondary nucleation in the scraped surface freezer As the premix becomes freeze-concentrated, components that are either dissolved or dispersed in water are increasingly brought together as temperature decreases and water is removed from solution and this also can cause numerous physical and chemical changes to serum-phase components. Two of the important hydrocolloid components in the serum include the polysaccharides and the casein micelles, caseins and whey proteins from the milk sources. Protein functionality in ice cream has recently been reviewed In the highly concentrated state, it has been shown by Goff and co-workers that some polysaccharides used as ice cream stabilisers can form a weak gel that is formed and strengthened by temperature fluctuations causing partial or complete freeze–thaw cycles The complexity and practicality of colloidal structure in ice cream and related products continues to be a source of research interest, as evidenced by the fact that nearly half of the references cited in this paper are from the year 2000 and later and all have been published since 1997. Although the importance of fat partial coalescence in ice cream has long been recognised