 In 1992, R. D. Crozier advocated that those who work on reagent scheme development must understand surface chemistry. This may be true for those dedicated to fundamental research using pure minerals, but not for those who are involved in applied research. Surface chemistry has been and will remain an important part of the flotation process, but even if we understand the surface chemistry of pure minerals, the same minerals in natural settings can be vastly different. What does this means in terms of reagent scheme development and development of new reagents? It means that we have to learn how to interpret the interactive effects of flotation reagents in a plant setting in order to develop or improve reagent schemes for given plant feeds. Would knowledge of flotation fundamentals help us solve these problems? Yes, to some degree, when we are dealing with a relatively simple ore. The real test arises when a particular reagent does not do what it is “supposed” to do; for example, if cyanide does not depress sphalerite or a particular collector is not as selective as described in the manufacturer's book, then one would say “the ore did not read the book.” A huge database exists on operating flotation plants, treating large quantities of sulfide ores such as porphyry copper ores and single or multiple base metal ores. When the matrix of the ore becomes complex by introduction of predominantly iron sulfides, these databases become statistics on production but not on treatment schemes. This text is a condensed form of the fundamental knowledge of chemical reagents commonly used in flotation and is addressed to the researchers and plant metallurgists who employ these reagents. Flotation reagents are not only collectors and frothers, but include equally large groups of modifiers, regulators, depressants and activators. This latter group of flotation reagents is often neglected in basic research studies. It is not the intention of this text to prescribe recipes for particular ores, but is an attempt in some way to summarize the experience of many years of laboratory and plant studies of different reagent schemes.  Confusion, however, arises from the fact those flotation properties of a given mineral often change when present in different ore matrices. This can be best illustrated by examining the flotation behavior of chalcopyrite found in porphyry ores, massive sulfide ores and mixed ores. Chalcopyrite from porphyry copper ore floats readily with any thiol collector with usually high recovery. However, the flotation property of chalcopyrite from a massive sulfide ore is vastly different and the floatability depends on the type of collector used, pH and modifier/depressant type. The floatability of chalcopyrite is further reduced in the presence of pyrrhotite. Since all components in the ore have a pronounced effect on the flotation properties of a particular mineral, it is not possible to apply only basic research to develop a treatment process. The main purpose of applied research is to combine the fundamental knowledge of the chemical and physical aspects of flotation with the experience gained from plant operations to interpret the responses of an ore to conditions applied in the laboratory or the plant.