Crushing and grinding are the most energy intensive part of the mineral recovery process. A major part of rock size reduction occurs in tumbling mills. Empirical models for the power draw of tumbling mills do not consider the effect of lifters. Discrete element modelling was used to investigate the effect of lifter condition on the power draw of tumbling mill. Results obtained with PFC3D code show that lifter condition will have a significant influence on the power draw and on the mode of energy consumption in the mill. Relatively high lifters will consume less power than low lifters, under otherwise identical conditions. The fraction of the power that will be consumed as friction will increase as the height of the lifters decreases. This will result in less power being used for high intensity comminution caused by the impacts. The fraction of the power that will be used to overcome frictional resistance is determined by the material’s coefficient of friction. Based on the modelled results, it appears that the effective coefficient of friction for in situ mill is close to 0.1.Lifters are an essential element in the tumbling action of a grinding mill, whose purpose is to prevent slippage of the mill charge. Such slippage consumes energy without substantial breakage, and the mill may not lift the charge sufficiently high to promote impact breakage. Hence, the size, shape and number of lifters will have a strong impact on the tumbling action of the media ( Empirical models for the power draws of the tumbling mills do not consider the effect of lifters ( The computing power of modern desktop computers presents an opportunity to use a discrete element modelling (DEM) for mill modelling (  PFC3D code models the behaviour of particles, which may be enclosed within a finite volume by the non-deformable walls. The code keeps a record of individual particles and updates any contact with other particles or walls. Each calculation step includes application of the laws of motion to a particle, a force–displacement law to each contact, and constant updating of wall position ( The PFC3D modelling is based on the assumption that the individual particles (balls) are treated as stiff bodies. At contacts, rigid particles can overlap. The magnitude of the overlap is related to the contact force. Overlaps are small relative to the size of the particles. Individual particles can also be bonded to form clusters to mimic rock shape and strength. During contact, the behaviour of a material is simulated using a linear contact model. The contact force vector between two balls or ball and wall is composed of a normal and shear components. The normal contact force vector is calculated using the formula: The incremental shear force is calculated using the formula: PFC3D also includes a slip model. The slip model is defined by the friction coefficient at the contact, where the active relevant friction coefficient is taken to be the minimum friction coefficient of the two contacting entities. Each contact is checked for slip conditions, by calculating the maximum allowable shear contact force: The energy state of the entire set of particles can be examined by recording various forms of energy. Frictional work is defined as the total cumulative energy dissipated by frictional sliding at all contacts. Intensity of deformation can be assessed using strain energy, which is defined as the total strain energy stored at all contacts assuming a linear contact-stiffness model. The PFC3D model of the mill is composed of a number of walls which represent liner and lifters as well as balls which represents mill charge. The power of the mill is calculated for each instant of time by summing products of moments that are applied to the mill liner and lifters and rotational velocity of the mill. A critical aspect of DEM is selection of material parameters. Parameters such as material stiffness, coefficient of friction, and damping ratio may affect not just the value of the power draw but also computational time. Considering that realistic full 3D modelling of the tumbling mills may require many thousands of particles, the ability to produce a modelling result within a reasonable time is of large practical significance. Strain energy at contact can be defined as: The contact stiffness is computed assuming that the stiffness’s of two contacting entities (ball and wall) act in series: In the case of perpendicular impact, shear component can be ignored. Contact force is described with formula: By combining these equations, for the case of normal impact, the strain energy can be described with the formula: Considering that normal displacement at contact is inversely proportional to the contact stiffness, it is likely that an increase of stiffness of the ball will not have a dramatic influence on the amount of strain energy. Within a mill, all energies eventually need to come from the external power source. Consequently, induced strain energy is directly proportional to the power. In order to preserve the accuracy of the computation, sampling time was chosen to always be 20% of the minimum stable critical time step for the particular modelling case. Previous work ( The effect of the lifter height is computed in terms of energy distribution that occurs within the mill. Some fraction of the power required to rotate the mill will be consumed in friction between balls and between balls and the mill shell. We postulate that the fraction of the input power that will be consumed in friction will increase with a decrease of the lifter height. With increases in power consumption as frictional energy, the influence of rock abrasion will increase. This will result in less energy being consumed in high-energy impact breakage. Consequently, the overall rate of size reduction within the mill will decrease, although the product may become finer. Influence of the lifter height on the power draw of the mill and amount of power that will be consumed in the form of frictional energy has been investigated. Frictional forces will be developed at contacts of balls and balls and mill liner. Frictional energy is converted into frictional power by dividing accumulated energy by time. Within the PFC3D code, frictional work dissipated by frictional sliding at all contacts (ball/ball or ball/wall) is defined as: Power ( The modelled mill was 5 m diameter, with 20 lifters with height of 0.2, 0.1 and 0.05 m. The width of the lifters remained constant (0.1 m). Angular rotational velocity of the mill was kept constant, at 70% (or 1.38 rad/s) of its critical speed. Relatively low values of mill fill factor of 5% and 10% were used in order to reduce the number of balls, which makes it possible to complete modelling within a reasonable time using a standard desktop personal computer. The properties of balls are given in The heights of the lifters were chosen to equal 2, 1 or 0.5 ball diameters, or high, medium and low lifters. Low lifters correspond to the case where due to severe wear and tear, lifters were reduced to 25% of their initial height. The pattern of ball motion and their velocity vectors for three types of lifters for constant speed and fill factor is shown in High lifters are able to more efficiently lift a larger numbers of balls. This reduces the thickness of the mill charge in the base of the mill. Due to the slightly longer contact time with the mill shell, balls detach later from the mill. After free fall, they tend to intercept the mill shell at a higher position. Clearly, the number of balls that are involved in tumbling action per unit of time is larger with high lifters. The highly variable net-power draw time history is shown in Beside net-power, frictional power was modelled. Frictional power is defined as the ratio of cumulative frictional energy at all contacts within the mill divided by cumulative time. Frictional energy is only a fraction of the net-power consumed by the mill ( The results show that frictional power is also influenced by the size of the lifters. As lifters height decrease, the amount of power which is consumed to overcome friction increases. For constant coefficient of friction (0.3), and fill factor (5%), the influence of the lifter height on the net-power draw and frictional power draw are given in the The ratio of the frictional-power to net-power clearly increases with decrease in lifter height. The modelled ratios are much higher than 20%. This could be due to a relatively high coefficient of friction (0.3) used in this modelling, or due to the low filling factor. In the case of the real mills, the presence of the slurry will act as a lubricant, reducing the effective coefficient of friction. The influence of a low coefficient of friction (0.1) on the power draws is presented in Another contributing factor to the relatively high values of the frictional power is low fill factor (5%). Empirical models are developed with typical fill factors in the range of 35–45%. An increased fill factor will reduce the relative amount of power required to overcome frictional resistance within the charge, and at the contacts of balls and mill shell. Results show that when the fill factor is increased from 5% to 10%, the fraction of power consumed as friction decreases from 0.4 to 0.34 for the case of high lifters. A similar trend is also observed for the case of medium high and small lifters ( DEM results obtained with the PFC3D code show that the lifter condition will have a significant influence on the power draw and on the mode of energy consumption with the mill. Mill with relatively high lifters will consume less power than mill with low lifters, under otherwise identical conditions. The fraction of the power that will be consumed as friction will increase as the height of the lifters decreases. This means that less power is available for high intensity comminution caused by impacts. The fraction of the power that must be used to overcome frictional resistance is determined by the material’s coefficient of friction. Based on the modelled results, it appears that effective coefficient of friction for real mill is close to 0.1. Slurry acts as a lubricant, reducing the coefficient of friction of dry feed or steel balls. When higher value for coefficient of friction is used in modelling (0.3), the fraction of net-power consumed for friction is much higher than that which empirical models suggests (0.2). The author wishes to thank Dr. Robert Morrison for the useful discussions and helpful comments.