The mineralogical composition and the resulting behavior upon firing of samples from the intercalated clay seams of the Achlada lignite-bearing sequence (west Macedonia, N. Greece) were examined. The resulting data sets were interpreted in order to evaluate the possible use of the studied clays in the production of structural ceramics. The mineralogical composition of the studied clays was accomplished by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermo-gravimetric (TG), differential thermo-gravimetric (DTG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) and Fourier Transform-Infrared (FT-IR) spectrometry. The clay minerals prevail in all samples, with illite being the dominant phase and kaolinite and chlorite comprising the rest of the clay components. No smectite was found that would negatively affect the produced ceramics. Other mineral phases identified were mainly quartz and feldspars and subordinated siderite. The classification of the clays using appropriate ternary diagrams suggests their possible use in the production of red-stoneware products in ceramic industry. Casting molds were fired at various high temperatures (up to 1300°C). The mineralogical composition was examined by comparative XRD and FT-IR studies. The results suggested that the formation of both vitrified mass and new crystalline phases, such as Al–Si-spinels and hematite (alpha/a-Fe2O3), starts at ~1000°C. The presence of vitrified mass becomes stronger with increasing firing temperature (~1100°C), enclosing as the neo-formed phases as the residues of quartz and feldspars. At ~1200°C mullite [3Al2O3∗2SiO2] began to form which contributes to the resistance of the ceramic product.After the end of the Alpine orogenesis and during the Early Miocene, a period of intense tectonic faulting begins in NW Macedonia. The activity of major and profound faults of NW–SE direction resulted in the formation of the Florina–Ptolemais–Servia (FPS) graben ( The basement and the borders of the depression belong to the Pelagonian geotectonic zone, whereas the presented basins are flanked by mountain ranges that are primarily composed of Palaeozoic schists, Upper Carboniferous granites, and Mesozoic limestones ( The Neogene sediments that fill the Florina basin unconformably overlay the basement rocks and include three lithostratigraphic units: (i) the lowest consists of conglomerates, in which thickness fluctuates from 1 Quaternary sedimentation is represented by limnic and terrestrial sediments such as sandy clays, clay marls, sandy marls, lignites, lateral fans and alluvial deposits ( The tectonic activity of NE–SW and NW–SE directed faults resulted in the subsidence of the Neogene sediments into the SW ( Nowadays, the total area of Florina basin is under exploitation due to the abundance of lignite deposits, which contribute to the national economy. Clays, which are part of the local lignite-bearing sequence, are also exploited along with lignites, but they are not yet evaluated for their economic potential. The research focuses on the mineralogical and chemical compositions of the clays from the Achlada lignite deposits. The transformations of mineralogical phases, during firing of casting molds, at certain temperatures, including formation of new crystalline phases and vitrified mass are also evaluated. During firing, the clays were thoroughly transformed given that minerals in the clay bodies undergo chemical and structural modifications. Both the neo-formed phases and the vitrified mass characterize the final ceramic products and also affect strongly their properties, such as the maintenance of their form ( The inorganic seams that are included in lignite-bearing sequences have always been regarded as non-usable materials (waste materials) and therefore, as a negative factor during lignite exploitation. These materials also create an additional problem in the environmental rehabilitation of the open lignite mine that they occur. The aim of the present study is to evaluate the possible industrial use of clays from the Achlada lignite deposits (Florina basin, NW Greece) as raw material in the ceramic industry. This is an original research of particular economic interest, since it is the first thorough mineralogical study in Greece concerning the industrial use of the inorganic seams (waste materials), which occur in a lignite-bearing sequence. The examined clay samples were collected along the studied succession from bottom to top ( Mineralogical and chemical analyses as well as firing procedure were conducted on the studied samples in order to identify: (i) the mineralogical composition of the bulk samples, (ii) the transformation of the mineralogical phases during firing of the samples and (iii) the neo-formed mineral phases resulting from firing. Both the bulk samples and the casting molds, which were fired successively at various temperatures (550 X-ray power diffraction analyses were performed using a Bruker D-8 Focus diffractometer, with Ni-filtered CuKα FT-IR measurements were carried out using a Fourier Transform Infra Red spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer GX-1). The FT-IR spectra, ranging in wavenumber from 4000 TG/DTG/DTA was performed simultaneously using a Mettler Toledo 851 instrument. The samples were heated from 20 The chemical analyses were carried out by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry. For ICP-MS, microwave high pressure/temperature decomposition of samples (230 The X-ray diffraction analyses revealed that the examined samples from the intercalations of the Achlada lignite-bearing sequence are rich in clay minerals. Major nonclay minerals found are quartz and feldspars (mainly albite). Siderite was also found, as it was expected, since it is a common mineral in the lignite-bearing sequences. The clay minerals identified in all the studied samples are illite, kaolinite and chlorite ( In general, montmorillonite [(Na,Ca) Since the reflection observed at ~ The thermal study of the same samples ( In the same diagram (  The ~ The stretching and bending vibrations at ~ The abundance of clay minerals in combination with the absence of swelling minerals in the examined samples suggests further study of these particular clays, as raw materials in the traditional products of the ceramic industry. The kind of produced ceramic is also strongly related with the chemical composition of raw material, since during firing the content in earth alkali oxides (CaO, MgO), alkali oxides (K Based on both chemical ( SiO Fe Quartz Plotting the results of chemical analyses on the ternary diagrams ( The semi-quantitative analyses of the presented mineral phases were based on X-ray diffraction in combination with chemical analysis (where necessary). Since no other potassium (K) and sodium (Na) phases were identified from the X-ray diffraction analysis, the percentage (%) of illite and albite were defined based on the K In a detailed study by During firing of the studied clays up to 1300 Casting molds which originated from the studied clays were fired at high temperatures: 700 After heating up to 900 At 1100 After firing at ~ Other variables which affect mullite formation include kaolinite content and behavior during firing, possible occurrence of melted phases, and impurities like Fe The kaolinite transforms to metakaolinite by removal of the hydroxyl groups above a temperature of 400 Mullite is a strong candidate for structural applications under thermal and mechanical load due to its property profile that combines high thermal and chemical stability with relatively low thermal expansion and high creep resistance ( The mineralogical composition of the inorganic intercalations from the Neogene Achlada lignite deposits (Florina basin, NW Greece) comprises mainly the clay minerals: illite, kaolinite and chlorite. No smectite was found that would negatively affect the properties of the produced ceramics. Other mineral phases identified are mainly quartz and feldspars whereas in some samples siderite is also present. By plotting both the mineralogical and chemical compositions of the studied raw materials into appropriate ternary diagrams, it is suggested that the studied clays are initially suitable for the manufacture of red-stoneware products in ceramic industry. The comparative mineralogical study, using both the XRD and the FT-IR methods of analyses, suggests that the formation of new crystalline phases such as Al–Si-spinel and hematite (a-Fe The formation of new crystalline phases, which act as cohesive framework for the maintenance of ceramics' shape, as well as the formation of vitrified mass, which is necessary for the fulfillment of pores, are crucial for the properties of the final product and affect, in particular, its resistance. The authors would like to thank Dr. C. Volzone for the editorial handling of the present study. The careful and constructive reviews of the two anonymous reviewers are also highly appreciated. Many thanks are given to Stefanos Papadakis for his generous support during the laboratorial experimental procedure of this study, to the mining engineers Th. Balis and O. Grammenopoulos of the Achlada lignite mine for their support during sampling as well as the technician D. Sutor of Core Laboratories LP for the proofreading of this article.