The influence of cathodic current density, the concentration of Co2+ ions in the electrolyte, and additional substances (saccharin and sodium lauryl sulfate) on the composition and morphology of Co–Ni alloys were investigated. Research was carried out in a Watts-type bath in the presence of boric acid, as a buffer substance. The circulation speed of the electrolyte was 40 dm3 h−1. Cathodic polarisation curves were determined for parent metals and the Co–Ni alloy. It was established that the presence of additives shifts the cathodic potential of alloy deposition towards more negative values. An increase in the cobalt content in the alloy was observed with decreasing of the cathodic current density and increasing of the Co2+ ions concentration in the bath. Results obtained confirmed the anomalous character of deposition of the Co–Ni alloy. The cathodic current efficiency is dependent mainly on the current density applied, but the direction of changes has not been precisely determined, for it depends on the composition of the electrolyte. Using diffractional X-ray and micro X-ray analyses, it was determined that single-phase deposits with an fcc lattice for the whole investigated range of current density and electrolyte composition were obtained. In the presence of additives there were obtained fine-grained, bright alloys which adhered well to the substrate.Electrolytic nickel–cobalt alloys are characterised by high strength (even at elevated temperatures) The cathodic co-deposition of nickel and cobalt is carried out using chloride The composition of the alloy, and therefore some of its properties (brightness, plasticity, etc.) may be regulated by appropriately choosing the bath composition and parameters of electrolysis. The present paper shows the results of laboratory research centred on the deposition of Ni–Co alloys using chloride–sulfate solutions. The objective was to determine the way in which the composition of alloys, cathodic current efficiency and macroscopic properties of deposits are dependent upon the concentration of cobalt and nickel ions, current density and the presence of additional substances. Using data given in literature The cathodic polarisation curves for the deposition of Ni–Co alloy were determined in solutions with compositions given in Electrolytes with a pH of 4.4 were applied. This value was achieved through the addition of sodium hydroxide. The solutions were prepared using analytical grade reagents (supplied by POCh, Poland) and twice-distilled water. The concentration of Co Rectangular 5×6 cm plates made from stainless steel or titanium (99.9%) were used as substrates for the cathode. Prior to each measurement, these were cleaned using abrasive paper of various gradations (in the following order: 280, 400, 600, 800) and subsequently washed in distilled water and alcohol. The substrates were isolated on one side for determining the polarisation curves. Separate rectangular 5×6 cm nickel and cobalt anodes were used. The nickel anodes (99.9%) were rolled plates, while the cobalt anodes (99.0%) were cast plates. In order to remove the oxidised layer from the surface of the electrodes, the anodes were immersed in a mixture of concentrated acids: HNO The co-deposition of cobalt and nickel was carried out using two nickel anodes and two cobalt ones. One anode made of the appropriate element was applied for defining the cathodic polarisation curves of individual metals. The alloy deposition was conducted in a cuboid vessel made of rigid PVC. The volume of electrolyte was 3 dm Within the electrolyser, the electrodes were hung vertically and in parallel with respect to each other. The anodes were placed symmetrically on both sides of the centrally located cathode. The cathode potential was measured with respect to a saturated calomel electrode and the result thus obtained converted with respect to the normal hydrogen electrode. Measurements of potential were carried out using a Luggin capillary, placed at the surface of the electrode in such a way as not to disturb the distribution of the force lines of the electric field. The pH of the bath was monitored with a combined electrode connected with a pH-meter (Radelkis). In order to eliminate the influence of the electric field on the readings of the apparatus, the electrode was placed in a glass housing that did not, however, prevent the free flow of electrolyte. The constant pH value of the bath, which displayed a tendency to alkalify as a result of the cathodic evolution of hydrogen, was maintained by the periodic addition of a few drops of a mixture of diluted HCl and H The flow of electrolyte was kept at a constant and stable level using a peristaltic pump with a circulation speed corresponding to an approximately 13-times exchange of the volume of the solution within 1 h. The electrolyte was pumped from the direction of the anodes in the direction of the cathode. In order to precisely determine the charge flowing through the circuit, independent copper coulometers were used, these being series-connected with the electrodes. The measurement circuit is given in The polarisation curves for the deposition of nickel, cobalt and their alloy were determined using the galvanostatic method, at a temperature of 21±1°C. The cathodic polarisation curves were registered after a metallic layer had appeared on the substrate. These layers were obtained carrying on the cathodic process for 1 h at a current density of 0.4 A dm The deposition of Co–Ni alloys was conducted over a period of 10 to 20 h under galvanostatic conditions, at a temperature of 21±1°C. The influence of current density on the composition of the cathodic deposit was examined in electrolytes having compositions presented in The cathodic current efficiencies were calculated on the basis of the mass of deposit and coulometric data. Various current densities were used for nickel and cobalt anodes for each measurement. Nickel anodes were dissolved by passing 75% of total electric current through them; the remainder dissolved the cobalt anodes. Phase identification of deposits was performed using an X-ray diffractometer (DRON 3) and filtered radiation CuKα. Deposited alloys underwent X-ray microanalysis, while cobalt and nickel were analysed quantitatively at points on the surface 900 nm distant from each other. This enabled graphs of changes in concentration for both elements along selected lines to be plotted. An analysis of the surface distribution of alloy constituents was also carried out. Due to the possibility of CoKβ and NiKα spectral lines overlapping, CoKα and NiKβ radiation was used for measurements. Measurements were carried out with a Philips XL 30 electron scanning microscope with an EDS analyser ISIS model. In order to investigate the microstructure of deposits, a scanning analysis and measurements using the Atomic Force Microscopy method were executed, the latter applying a Nanoscope E apparatus. In the course of electrolysis, changes in the composition of the electrolyte were examined. Samples of the solution were taken at hourly intervals. Cathodic deposits were dissolved in HNO  The occurrence of polarisation is connected with the inhibition of one of the intermediate stages of the electrode process. The dependence of the cathode potential on current density in the case of activation polarisation is given by Tafel's equation:  The cobalt electrode potential determined empirically at Data given in During the co-deposition of the metals, there was observed a certain decreasing of the rate of the cathodic reduction of Ni The sum of polarisation curves determined empirically for the parent metals makes it possible to draw the predicted polarisation curve for the alloy (  The determination of the experimental alloy polarisation curve and of the partial curves for its constituents enables one to precisely define the cathodic current density (at fixed bath composition, temperature, circulation) at which it is possible to obtain a material having a desired composition. The influence of current density and the composition of electrolyte on the composition of deposit were studied. The dependence of the alloy composition on the cathodic current density is presented in The observed direction of changes in the composition of the alloy under the influence of alterations of current density is in good agreement with results obtained by other researchers The dependence of the composition of Co–Ni alloys on the concentration of Co  Research carried out indicates that an increase in the concentration of Co The phase composition of alloys was studied applying X-ray diffraction analysis. It follows therefrom that peaks solely related to a solid solution with the face-centred cubic structure are present. This is in agreement with the phase diagram for the Co–Ni system within the researched range of alloy compositions There exists no possibility of precisely determining the parameter of the lattice — and therefrom the composition of the alloy — on the basis of diffraction patterns obtained. It is a well-known fact that solid Co–Ni solutions of decidedly different compositions have very similar lattice parameters  The distribution of both metals on an 8·10 The alloys underwent scanning electron microscope analysis. Spherical growths are clearly visible on the surfaces of alloys obtained in baths that did not contain additional substances. The presence of saccharin brought about a strong levelling of the surface. This is especially visible in Moreover, scanning analysis shows that irrespective of the place at which the investigations were carried out (in areas taken about 1 mm from the edge and in the middle of the cathode), the composition (local analysis) and morphology of alloys are identical. A significant influence of the additional components of the electrolyte on the macroscopic properties of Co–Ni alloys was observed. Deposition was carried out in a solution containing solely simple cobalt and nickel salts ( The alloy obtained in the electrolyte without additives was grey, mat, cracked, and separated itself from the both types of the cathode substrate. The addition of saccharin lowered the internal stresses of the deposit During the 10–20 h deposition of Co–Ni alloys there were observed no changes in the concentration of cobalt and nickel ions in the electrolyte within the scope of sensitivity of the method applied. This was facilitated by the considerable volume of the solution, the application of great speeds of the solution flow, and also by the appropriate choice of rate of nickel and cobalt anodes dissolution (metal ions should be added to the electrolyte in the same ratio as they are consumed in cathodic reduction). The maintenance of a constant composition of the bath leads to the deposition of alloys having a uniform composition throughout their whole volume. From research carried out and data given in literature it appears that the composition of Co–Ni alloys may be controlled through the selection of the following parameters. (1) Cathodic current density — an increase in this parameter brings about a decrease in the cobalt content of deposited material in solutions of simple salts. (2) Concentration of cobalt ions — an increase in the concentration of Co (3) The addition of saccharin and sodium lauryl sulfate to solutions of simple salts is conducive to the deposition of an alloy having an increased nickel content. The following dependence of the cathodic current efficiency on parameters of electrolysis was observed: Current density — when this parameter increases, the direction of change cannot be uniquely determined, this is because it is dependent on the composition of the bath. Concentration of cobalt ions — an increase in their concentration exerts a slight influence on the efficiency of the cathodic process. The presence of saccharin and sodium lauryl sulfate brings about the deposition of an alloy with the current efficiency of 99.7% at the current densities to 2 A dm The macroscopic properties of alloys are to a significant extent dependent upon the composition of the electrolyte (the presence of substances reducing internal stresses of the deposit and of the surfactant). Further research will center on obtaining a composite with Co–Ni matrix strengthened by dispersive particles.  Research was financed by the Polish Committee for Scientific Research under grant No. 7 T08 018 12.