Purpose
                  Treatment of scaphoid nonunion with a segmental defect presents a challenging clinical problem. Various techniques have been proposed, often involving structural grafting with vascularized and nonvascularized bone. The authors hypothesize that satisfactory clinical and radiographic outcomes are possible with a relatively simplified technique of volar plate fixation with autogenous, purely cancellous graft.
               
                  Methods
                  The authors performed a retrospective review of 34 patients with scaphoid nonunions with segmental defects, treated with plate fixation and purely cancellous bone grafting. Cases with avascular necrosis were excluded. Surgical management included a volar incision, reduction, bone grafting from the ipsilateral distal radius and/or olecranon, and application of a volar locking plate. Postoperative outcome measures included time to union based on computed tomography, return to work and sports, patient-reported pain and disability scores, grip strength, and range of motion.
               
                  Results
                  Thirty-four patients with an average age of 31 years (range, 16–55 years) were treated with volar plate fixation and cancellous grafting, an average of 34 months after initial injury. Twenty-six patients (76%) were treated for nonunion at the scaphoid waist, 7 (21%) at the proximal pole, and 1 (3%) at the distal pole. Mean final follow-up was 18.7 months (range, 12–34 months). When union was defined by computed tomography evidence of healing, 2 (6%) scaphoids healed by 6 weeks after surgery, 28 (82%) healed by 12 weeks, and 100% healed by 18 weeks. Mean Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score improved from 27.1 ± 7.3 before surgery to 11.8 ± 5.8 after surgery. Grip strength, corrected for hand dominance, improved from 77.5% of the nonsurgical side before surgery to 90.5% after surgery. All employed patients returned to work, although 3 (9%) did not return to full capacity.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The combination of scaphoid plate fixation and pure cancellous bone grafting for scaphoid nonunion with segmental defects yields reliable union rates and good patient outcomes. Autogenous cancellous grafting may be an alternative to more technically demanding or morbid grafting procedures for the treatment of scaphoid nonunion.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IV.