The task of characterizing a highly fractured rock mass correctly is often complex due to errors produced by the “scale effect” in the majority of laboratory tests. Furthermore, current methods of in situ characterization pose logistical, technical, or even economic problems, while geomechanical classifications are not precise enough for this kind of ground. This makes the stability analysis of jointed rock mass slopes a complex undertaking that is generally far from reliable.
                  This paper proposes a new method of in situ analysis to characterize this type of highly fractured rock mass accurately, applied here to the case of the large-scale slopes of an open-cast coal mine. The method is based on carrying out a novel in situ penetration test to obtain the strength properties of the ground as a whole. The results are calibrated by means of numeric simulation. Further, back analysis of the current slopes in the mine was carried out using classical methods to test the reliability of the results obtained using this technique.Knowledge of the rock mass strength and deformation behaviours is required for the design of many engineering and mining structures in or on rock, such as foundations, slopes, tunnels, underground caverns, drifts, and stopes mining. A better understanding of the strength behaviour of the rock mass, including the peak and residual strengths, will facilitate the cost-effective design of such structures Determination of the global mechanical properties of a jointed rock mass remains one of the most difficult tasks in rock mechanics. Many researchers have developed constitutive models to describe the strength and deformation behaviours of jointed rock masses The main purpose of this work is to develop an analytical methodology to find out the properties of intensely jointed rock masses and enhance the security of open pits in poor quality rock masses. In the in situ determination of the cohesion and friction angle of rock mass, direct shear tests on joints Geomechanical classifications are another widely used method to characterize rock masses In order to solve the outlined disadvantages, a tool and a methodology for carrying out in situ tests to characterize intensely fractured rock masses have been developed. The methodology has some advantages over the conventional assays: the information obtained for the characterization of the rock mass is of high quality, and the cost is lower since the realization of the methodology only requires the excavation of a trench. The open-cast coal mine analysed here is located at the north of the province of León, between Pola de Gordón and Ciñera. The development of coal mining works entails designing the expansion of the mine in the near future. This expansion will include the redesign and enlargement of the current slopes. To carry out this design appropriately, it is very important to know the strength properties of the rock mass. To this end a new in situ test methodology has been applied The mine under study is located in a synclinorium whose axis extends 15 Stratigraphically the coalfield is divided into seven distinct formations (Training San Francisco, Pastora, Gravel, Roguera, San Jose, Welcome, and Matallana). The set reaches a thickness of 1500 Besides being highly fractured, these materials are also affected by subsidence resulting from underground coal mining works, situated below the open-cast mine under study, which have been carried out in the past and which persist at the present time. It has been measured a maximun subsidence in the area of study of 9 Sporadic points suffering sliding and/or incipient fissures have been located throughout the mine under study. These areas shall be studied to determine the reliability of the results of the in situ characterization tests performed. A test device was developed to characterize in situ the materials in this open-cast mine in a way that is both reliable and simple. The device is based on the application of a load to the ground by means of a hydraulic cylinder, thereby allowing penetration tests to be performed. The stress displacement curve of the tested ground may be obtained from these tests. This curve may then be used to determine diverse material parameters. By the use of the simple penetration tests, the stress displacement curve of the ground can be obtained, the strength of each material can be established, and the possible residual strength can be analysed. The device is equipped with automatic pressure and displacement sensors to obtain the corresponding curves ( Penetration tests are pressure–displacement tests that consist in applying pressure to the ground by means of hydraulic cylinder and then measuring the penetration (displacement) produced as a result of the applied pressure. Before carrying out the test, a trench of approximately 1.5 The failure of the ground translates as an abrupt decrease in the applied pressure and in the penetration of the ball-and-socket joint and/or the piston rod into the ground. Usually, numerous cracks also appear and propagate rapidly, leading to collapse of the trench walls. The equipment contains a hydraulic device which provides a pressure of up to 25 The pressure and displacement sensors provide an electrical signal. This signal is automatically recorded on a data acquisition module. The frequency with which the data are captured is regulated by means of the computer application employed. The data measured in situ are subsequently transferred to a laptop to be treated and interpreted off-site. This type of in situ test allows the pressure–displacement curve of the ground to be obtained at a real working scale, with a data capture interval of 2   As can be appreciated, both tests present a similar failure pressure of around 1.2 This type of graph corresponds to the characteristics of the alternating layers of shale and sandstone tested. The low strength obtained in this test is due to the fact that the strata were very thin and the joints were very open. In the case of test Z4E2, carried out on coal (see Once the tests were completed the results were proved through numeric simulation. To this end a model representing the effect of penetration into the ground was developed with FLAC3D software To simplify the calibration model a tridimensional mesh was created, which represented a quarter of the trench in which the assays were performed due to the symmetry about the Finally, the curve from the model was compared to the real one. By connecting each test with the corresponding lithology test, a range of material properties is yielded. Once the strength parameters have been obtained, the reliability and accuracy of these results must be verified before applying them to the study of the design and future stability of the mine. To do so, a 2D stability analysis of the current slopes of the mine was carried out using the computer program SLOPE Profile 1 is located at the eastern slope of the mine under study and cuts through an area basically composed of shales in which sliding has occurred, affecting the intermediate berms. The water table in this area was measured by means of a borehole when the slide took place and, although it was found to be quite high (around 15 By introducing into the model generated for this profile a cohesion of 51 Profile 2 is situated in the south slope of the mine, an area which is currently reaching its stability limit, as can be seen in  Profile 3, drawn along the north-east slope of the mine, represents the geometry of the area in which the formation of small slidings has been detected in carbonaceous materials with an overburden of filling material (see With In view of the calibration results obtained in the different profiles (1 and 3), it may be stated that the strength properties obtained in each case coincide with either the mean or the minimum properties obtained in the penetration tests for each material in the mine (see Equipment and a test methodology that allow determining at real scale the strength parameters in intensely fractured rock mass have been developed. It is a quick and easy test. It requires only a mechanical loader as auxiliary machinery to dig trenches where tests are done. This methodology can be used in all exploitation phases of the mine. So an appropriate and rigorous monitoring of slope stability can be realized without incurring excessive discomfort with regard to the advancement of the works or cost. The results of the tests allow safe slopes to be designed in future expansions of the mine. The back-analysis results confirm that the strength properties match those obtained in the penetration tests. The back-analysis performed on sandstones presents results close to the minimum cohesion obtained in penetration tests because the calibrated materials present alternation of shales. The properties obtained by such different methods are very similar. Therefore, it is possible to say that the results are quite accurate and remarkably close to the real properties of the materials.