The elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm with the modified jumping gene operator (NSGA-II-mJG) is used to optimize the performance of froth flotation circuits. Four example optimization problems (Mehrotra and Kapur, 1974; Green, 1984; Dey et al., 1989) [Mehrotra, S.P., Kapur, P.C., 1974. Optimal–sub-optimal synthesis and design of flotation circuits. Sep. Sci. 9, 167–184; Green, J.C.A., 1984. The optimization of flotation networks. Int. J. Miner. Process. 13, 83–103; Dey, A.K., Kapur, P.C., Mehrotra, S.P., 1989. A search strategy for optimization of flotation circuits. Int. J. Miner. Process. 26, 73-93.] of varying complexity are solved using single-objective functions. In one example, the overall recovery of the concentrate stream is maximized for a desired grade of the concentrate and a fixed total cell volume. The interconnecting cell linkage parameters (fraction flow rates) and the mean cell residence times are the decision variables. In all these cases, the optimal solutions obtained using NSGA-II-mJG are superior to those obtained by earlier techniques (which converged to local optimal solutions). Thereafter, a few two-objective optimization problems are solved. In these, the performance of the circuit is optimized, and simultaneously, the number of connecting streams is minimized so as to give simple circuits. Pareto optimal sets of equally good (non-dominating) solutions are obtained. This is probably the first study involving the multi-objective optimization of flotation circuits with one aim being to simplify them.The design of industrial flotation circuits/networks has been based mostly on empirical rules of thumb, the success of which depends largely on the experience of the plant operator/process engineer. It is, therefore, not surprising that more often than not, these circuits give only sub-optimal performance. A few traditional algorithms have been used for optimizing flotation circuits. However, improved techniques for optimization have now become available which are more precise and robust, and converge to solutions that are superior to those obtained using the earlier techniques. These can help in establishing design methodologies that are sound and can give improved results. This study presents work along these lines. The flotation kinetics has been described in terms of a first-order rate process in most commonly used approaches for the analysis of flotation circuits ( Modified complex method ( Random search method ( Linear programming method ( Enumeration and combinatory procedures ( Direct search method of Luss and Jaakola ( Potential theory of Markov chains ( Method of decomposition ( There are several drawbacks associated with the above techniques. The modified complex method ( Over the last several years, the AI-based genetic algorithm (GA: Because of its probabilistic nature, GA does not require initial guesses of the decision variables and needs only their lower and upper bounds. GA works only with the GA can solve single-objective, multi-objective as well as multi-modal optimization problems quite well. GA can handle a number of decision variables and constraints efficiently. The details of GA have been discussed in the literature ( An important feature of the optimization of froth flotation circuits (and other similar optimization problems involving networks or circuits) is that the optimal configuration may involve some decision variables to lie In this study, NSGA-II-mJG ( Froth flotation circuits consist of several interconnected cells, each associated with three streams: (i) a feed stream, (ii) a concentrate stream, and (iii) a tailings stream. The operation of any cell is usually described using highly simplified macroscopic (lumped-parameter) models ( The flotation cells are perfectly mixed continuous stirred tank reactors The mean residence time of the solid particles in the cells is independent of the particle size and density The operation is described in terms of a few ‘species.’ Each species comprises of fine particles of different compositions and spatial distributions of components, but associated with the same flotation rate constant, The model equations are described in the literature ( Two important variables that characterize the performance of a cell are the overall recovery ( Here, Instead of the above performance criteria, one can define an alternate set in terms of the collection and loss of the most valuable mineral (e.g., nickel in a mixture of nickel, copper and gangue materials). The recovery ( The loss ( An economic criterion can also be used to characterize the performance of flotation circuits. Several can be defined, one being that suggested by In Eq. A commonly used constraint in earlier optimization studies is the total volume (∑  We first solve four simple, single-objective optimization problems. These are described in The These represent the fact that for any stream being split, the sum of the flows after the split is the same as that before the split. Problem 1 is the same as the problem discussed by In Problem 3, Problem 4 (see The equality constraints on The penalty functions become zero when the equality constraints are satisfied exactly. If the constraints are not satisfied, the penalties take on large values (compared to the value of the objective function), proportional to the square of the constraint-violation. For the constraints on Several preliminary tests ( The CPU time required for solving this problem using the binary-coded NSGA-II-mJG is approximately 4.5 h on a Pentium IV (1.7 GHz, 256 MB RAM) computer for 100,000 generations. The optimal results are given in Column 2 of  The global optimal circuit obtained with NSGA-II-mJG is difficult to use in practice because of the presence of streams having very low values of the linkage parameters (small streams), or, having streams with mass fractions close to (but not equal to) unity. Simplified flotation circuits eliminating these practical problems can also be generated using NSGA-II-mJG. The code is modified (during mapping) to ensure that linkage parameters lying between 0 and 0.2 are made as zero, while those between 0.8 and 1 are made as unity. This is followed by normalization, etc., as discussed before. The best values of the computational parameters are again obtained. These are given in Column 3 of It may be added here that a two-objective optimization problem for two-cells and two-species (maximizing The NSGA-II-mJG code is now used to solve the more complex three-species, four-cell single-objective optimization Problem 2. The best values of the computational parameters are listed in  The best values of the computational parameters for this problem are given in Column 2 of Again, a two-objective optimization problem (3A, in This problem has been solved earlier ( Another two-objective optimization problem solved is one with the solids hold-up maximized, while maximizing The AI-based NSGA-II-mJG is a powerful technique for obtaining global optimal solutions for froth flotation circuits. Several example single- and two-objective optimization problems have been solved, and improved solutions are obtained as compared to those from earlier studies. Use of NSGA-II-mJG gives Pareto sets of optimal circuits ranging from the simplest to the ones having large numbers of connecting streams. mass flow rate of the profit function defined in Eq. density of the solids, kg m percent solids loading in the tailings objective function enhancement factor of the overall percent grade of the concentrate stream penalty parameters defined in Eqs. (12), (13) specific flotation rate constant of the total number of binaries in a chromosome number of binaries characterizing each decision variable amount of nickel loss through the tailings product stream, as a percentage of that in the feed number of cells in the circuit overall percent recovery of the concentrate stream mass flow rate of total solids in the fresh feed, kg min number of species in the feed number of decision variables maximum number of generations number of chromosomes in the population number of non-linking streams (with fraction flow crossover probability jumping probability for the mJG operator mutation probability 11..1 probability penalty functions price of feed ore, units increase in price of concentrate for every 1% improvement in grade, units percent recovery of the valuable mineral in the concentrate (product) stream mass flow rate of the nickel (l) flow in the tailings stream from the volume of the mass fraction of the valuable mineral in the mass fraction of the as defined in Eq. fraction of concentrate outlet stream from cell fraction of tailings outlet stream from cell fraction of fresh feed going to cell residence time in cell density of water, kg m desired value feed gangue materials lower bound middling materials upper bound valuable materials stream leaving the circuit (not recycled) Partial financial support from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, New Delhi [through grant III-5(13)/2001-ET] is gratefully acknowledged. If We consider the generalized circuit configuration (see It may be pointed out that all the Knowing the flow rates of the tailings (Eq. The binary-coded algorithms, NSGA-II and NSGA-II-JG, have been described in considerable detail in the literature, and are not described here. The overall flow chart of these two algorithms is similar to that for NSGA-II-mJG, shown in mJG Operation ( Start with box D in Choose a chromosome (sequentially) from D. Generate a random number, If Generate yet another random number, Repeat till all the chromosomes in D have been processed. Then continue the procedure in