There has been perception that flotation frothers, a type of surfactants, can disperse oily collectors in water, promoting oil attachment on mineral particles. In this study, the effect of aliphatic alcohol frothers (including MIBC, 1-hexanol and diacetone) on the dispersion of dodecane in de-ionised water and NaCl solution was studied. It turned out that these frothers actually inhibited the dispersion of dodecane in de-ionised water, but promoted the dispersion in NaCl solution. The underpinning mechanism was then investigated to decouple the effect of these frothers on the subprocesses of dodecane dispersion, emulsion formation controlled by the interfacial tension between oil and water, and emulsion stabilisation controlled by zeta potential and rheology of oil droplets. It was found that these frothers could decrease the interfacial tension of dodecane/water interface to facilitate the formation of dodecane droplets in water, but they were unable to form stable protective coatings around dodecane droplets in de-ionised water, resulting in the coalescence of dodecane droplets. In NaCl solution, the presence of Na+ can improve the strength of protective coatings formed by frother molecules around dodecane droplets and therefore the stability of dodecane emulsion.Froth flotation is the main technology applied in mineral processing plants to separate valuable minerals from gangue minerals based on their differences in surface wettability. In this process, the formation of fine air bubbles for hydrophobic particles to attach to and a stable froth bed for transferring bubble-particle aggregates are also essential for mineral flotation and they are achieved through the addition of frother ( In fact, a number of researchers have investigated the role of surfactants in dispersing oily collectors in aqueous solution, which can be used to improve the flotation yield ( Electrolytes such as NaCl often exist in process water in mineral flotation plants due to the use of sea water and underground water as well as the dissolution of minerals in ores ( The aim of this study was to understand the dispersion of dodecane with the addition of aliphatic alcohol frothers. Dodecane was chosen to represent oily collectors used in flotation as reported in literature ( Dodecane (CH Obscuration has been used as a sensitive indicator of the degree of oil dispersion, which is defined as the fraction of light lost from an analyser beam by either scattering or absorption ( A tensiometer (Sigma 700) was used to measure the static interfacial tension between dodecane and water. 50 mL dodecane was added into a vessel which contained 50 mL de-ionised water or NaCl solution, followed by the addition of MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone. The mixture was stirred at 200 rpm for 10 min to reach an equilibrium for frother molecules at the interface. During this process, dodecane and water layers were kept stratified at the low stirring speed. To measure the interfacial tension (mN/m), a platinum plate was slowly dragged out of dodecane/aqueous solution interface, ensuring that the platinum plate was under the surface of dodecane completely. Before each measurement, the platinum plate was rinsed three times with alcohol, three times with de-ionised water and then flamed to dry. The interfacial tension was calculated using Equation The dispersion was prepared by adding 0.4 mL dodecane and then the frother at different concentrations into 200 mL de-ionised water or NaCl solution with an agitation rate of 700 rpm for 30 min. The zeta potential of oil droplets in the prepared dispersion was measured by Malvern Zeta sizer at natural pH. The zeta potential was calculated from the electrophoretic mobility by Henry equation ( The interaction between oil droplets containing adsorbed surfactant layers and its effect on emulsion stability can be studied by rheology measurements ( The viscosity of dodecane dispersion was measured by a Discovery hybrid rheometer (HR-1 model, TA Instrument, USA) at 25 °C with a Peltier temperature control unit. The dispersion was prepared by adding 0.4 mL dodecane and then MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone at various concentrations into 20 mL deionised water or NaCL solution, followed by the ultrasound treatment for 5 min to reach an equilibrium. Before the viscosity measurement, the sample was allowed to equilibrate for 300 s at 25 ± 0.1 °C. A DIN concentric cylinder with a gap of 5.9 mm was used in all the measurements and a shear rate ranged from 0.001 to 0.1 s Dodecane dispersion was conducted in de-ionised water in the absence and presence of MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone. To determine the amount of suspended droplets in water, the obscuration was chosen as the indicator of dodecane dispersion. As can be seen from Following dodecane dispersion in de-ionised water, the same dispersion tests were conducted in NaCl solution and the obscuration values are shown in  The interfacial tension between oil and water plays a critical role in the formation of oil droplets by overcoming the formation of a kinetic barrier to break up the oil into small droplets. The interfacial free energy equation can be written as: The interfacial tension between dodecane and water in the absence and presence of MIBC, diacetone or 1-hexanol was measured and the results are shown in  In NaCl solution, MIBC, 1-hexanol and diacetone also decreased the interfacial tension between dodecane and water in the same trend as observed in de-ionised water, but the significant decrease occurred at the frother concentration under 10 ppm. This is attributed to the efficient adsorption of frother molecules at dodecane/water interface promoted in salt water ( In addition to the formation of oil droplets, oil dispersion is also influenced by the stability of oil droplets, governed by electrostatic and steric repulsive forces. In this study, zeta potentials of dodecane droplets were measured to understand the electrostatic repulsion between dodecane droplets while viscosities of dodecane dispersions were measured to understand the steric repulsion between dodecane droplets. In this study, the zeta potential of dodecane droplets in the absence and presence of MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone was measured in de-ionised water or NaCl solution and the results are shown in  In NaCl solution, the addition of MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone also increased the zeta potential of dodecane droplets but to a lesser extent. The zeta potential increased from −13.7 mV in the absence of frother to −10.2, −9.75 and −10.7 mV similarly at 100 ppm MIBC, 1-hexanol and diacetone, respectively. Again, this is due to the adsorption of frother molecules on dodecane droplets, which expels hydroxide ions from the interface. The lower magnitude of the zeta potential of dodecane droplets after the addition of MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone in NaCl solution would have an adverse effect on dodecane dispersion, but an opposite phenomenon on the dispersion was observed as shown in The steric repulsive force is related to the protective coatings formed by surfactant molecules around droplets, which is condensed with the lateral intermolecular forces between surfactant molecules ( In general, stable apparent viscosity at a low shear rate is supposed to predict the strength of protective coatings of oil droplets in dispersion (  However, after the addition of MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone, the apparent viscosity of dodecane dispersion increased in NaCl solution. At 1000 ppm MIBC, 1-hexanol and diacetone, the apparent viscosity increased from 2.36 Pa s to 3.48, 3.67 and 3.54 Pa s, respectively. This is due to the presence of Na The addition of NaCl reduced dodecane dispersion in water. Although NaCl decreased the interfacial tension between water and dodecane to facilitate the formation of dodecane emulsion, it promoted unstable dodecane droplets due to the reduction of electrostatic repulsion between dodecane droplets, which plays a dominant role in determining dodecane dispersion. The addition of MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone in deionised water also promoted the coalescence of dodecane droplets. Although these aliphatic alcohol frothers decreased the interfacial tension between water and dodecane to facilitate the formation of dodecane emulsion, as a kind of weak and lipophilic surfactants, they were unable to contribute to stable protective thin films around dodecane droplets, together with the decreased electrostatic repulsive force, resulting in the coalescence of dodecane droplets. However, a synergic effect of NaCl and aliphatic alcohol frothers was obtained on dodecane dispersion, in which the presence of NaCl improved the adsorption of frother molecules at the interface, increasing the steric repulsion between dodecane droplets and therefore their stability. As a result, in NaCl solution, MIBC, 1-hexanol or diacetone promoted dodecane dispersion through both the formation and stabilisation of dodecane droplets. Since aliphatic alcohol frothers did not promote dodecane dispersion in de-ionised water, it is unlikely that these frothers could enhance mineral flotation by improving collector adsorption on mineral surfaces. However, these frothers would be able to aid the dispersion of oily collectors in salt water and then improve mineral flotation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors greatly appreciate financial support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: