Griseofulvin (GF) is a poor water soluble, antifungal agent. The bioavailability of the drug and its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract can be greatly improved by particle size reduction. In this work, supercritical antisolvent precipitation with enhanced mass transfer (SAS-EM) has been proposed for the production of GF nanoparticles. SAS-EM is a modification of the currently existing supercritical antisolvent (SAS) precipitation technique and also utilizes supercritical CO2 as the antisolvent. In SAS-EM however, the solution jet is deflected by a surface vibrating at an ultrasonic frequency that atomizes the jet into small micro droplets. Further, the ultrasound field generated by the vibrating surface inside the supercritical media enhances mass transfer and prevents agglomeration due to increased mixing. GF nanoparticles of different sizes and morphologies have been obtained by varying the vibration intensity of the deflecting surface, which in turn is adjusted by changing the power supply to the attached ultrasound transducer. GF nanoparticles as low as 130 nm in size have been obtained corresponding to a power supply of 180 W. The effect of using different solvents on the size and morphology of the particles has also been studied.Griseofulvin (GF) is an orally administered, antibiotic and antifungal drug. Although this drug is widely used for the treatment of mycotic diseases of the skin, hair and nails, it has problems with safety and efficiency since its therapeutic dose is fairly close to its toxicity limit. GF has a very low solubility in water (15 μg/ml at 37 An effective method of increasing the solubility of any drug, whether readily or sparingly soluble in water, is through comminution of the drug into fine particles. Small micron size particles have higher dissolution rates due to increased surface area. Apart from that, particles smaller than 1 μm also have higher saturation solubilities and a better adhesion to the walls of the GIT, which enhances bioavailability ( A number of techniques have been developed in past for the manufacture of micronized drug particles, including spray drying ( In recent years, supercritical fluid technologies such as Rapid Expansion of Supercritical Solutions (RESS) and Supercritical Antisolvent (SAS) precipitation have emerged as attractive methods for drug particle formation. Advantages of these techniques include mild operating temperatures and the production of solvent free particles. The particles obtained by these techniques are 0.7–5.0 μm in size and have a narrow size distribution. Several researchers have attempted the precipitation of GF particles using these supercritical fluid technologies. The results obtained so far have not been promising since in most of the cases, several microns long, needle shaped crystals of GF have been obtained. ( We have proposed a new technique ( In this work, we examine the use of the SAS-EM technique for the precipitation of GF nanoparticles. The precipitation process is carried out using two different solvents. The process parameter, power supply to the ultrasound transducer and its effect on particles size, is investigated. The morphology of particles obtained from each of the experiments is also characterized. CO A schematic representation of the SAS-EM apparatus is shown in All the precipitation experiments were carried out in the batch mode and in an identical manner at 96.5 bar and at 35 First, the ultrasonic precipitation cell was filled with carbon dioxide up to desired operating pressure. The temperature inside the cell was maintained constant using a water bath. Approximately, 2.5 g of the GF solution (5 mg/ml) was then loaded into the ‘solution injection device’ ( Next was the washing step in which the residual solvent, left dissolved in supercritical CO Size analysis was carried out using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss, model DSM940). For analysis, portions of the collection plate were cut and were coated with gold/palladium using a sputter coater (Pelco, model Sc-7). SEM micrographs of different regions of the collection plate were obtained in order to get the nearest possible representation of the size distribution of all the particles. From the SEM micrographs, the volume particle size distribution, the number average and standard deviation (S.D.) of the particles were determined by measuring the diameters of about 100–200 randomly selected particles for each experiment. The purpose of size determination using the SEM micrographs was not to come up with an accurate measurement of the particle size but to prove that the SAS-EM technique can indeed be used for GF nanoparticle production. The observed morphologies of particles obtained from each of the experiments are summarized in When DCM was used as the solvent and when there was no power supply to the transducer, long needle shaped crystals of GF several millimeters in length were obtained ( As the power supply to the transducer was increased, a drastic change in the morphology of the particles was observed. A relatively small amount of long needle shaped GF crystals were obtained when the total power supply to the transducer was 120 W. The volumetric mean of the GF nanoparticles obtained in this case was 130 nm ( When THF was used as the solvent, with no power supply to the transducer, several millimeters long fibers of GF were obtained ( From the above results it is interesting to note that, with an increase in the power supply (i.e. an increased horn vibration amplitude), there is an increase in the yield of GF nanoparticles formed. Also, there is a decrease in both the size and the yield of the larger needle shaped GF crystals, as illustrated in Major factors responsible for size reduction in the SAS-EM technique are the droplet size reduction due to ultrasonic atomization and the increased mixing due to ultrasonic streaming. As soon as the GF solution is injected into the precipitation cell and onto the horn surface, the liquid spreads evenly over the surface forming a thin liquid film. Due to vibrations of the horn surface, a grid of intersecting capillary wavelets arise on the surface of this liquid film ( Another important factor that determines particle size is the mass transfer rate of the supercritical fluid into the liquid droplet. Rapid mass transfer between supercritical CO Several researchers ( Propagation of the ultrasonic waves within the supercritical fluid is accompanied by a phenomenon known as acoustic or ultrasonic streaming. This phenomenon develops in a free non-uniform acoustic field or near various obstacles due to energy loss in the sound waves. The viscous forces due to the fluid medium, tend to stabilize this streaming (  Apart from the motion of GF particles inside the precipitation cell due to ultrasonic streaming, other forces such as gravitational, mechanical, acoustic-radiation-pressure, and hydrodynamic forces also act on the particles due to the ultrasonic field. Suspended GF particles experience mechanical forces when they encounter the vibrating surface of the horn. These forces may break the larger needle shaped crystals into smaller sizes or may also propel them away from the horn surface causing them to move around in the supercritical phase. It should be noted here that the mechanical grinding effect causing size reduction is usually more efficient for harder and large size particles and much less so for soft and smaller particles. Acoustic radiation pressures is the difference between the average pressure at a surface moving with the displacement due to the sound and the pressure that would have existed in a fluid of the same mean density at rest ( GF particles, suspended in the ultrasonic field oscillate with different velocities and phases relative to one another and as a result they experience a hydrodynamic force known as Bjerknes force ( SAS-EM technique can be successfully used to precipitate GF nanoparticles as low as 130 nm in size. A conventional SAS process yields long needle shaped GF crystals several millimeters in length. Using the SAS-EM technique one can obtain a mixture of nearly spherical nanoparticles and micron size needle shaped crystals of GF. Effect of ultrasound power supply to the transducer on the size and the morphology of the particles have been examined. An increase in the yield of nearly GF nanoparticles and a decrease in the yield of long needle shaped GF crystals with increase in power supply was observed. The volume of the needle shaped GF crystals decreases with increasing power supply. Hence, narrower and shorter needle shaped crystals were obtained at higher power supply to the ultrasound transducer. Financial support from NSF (CTS-9801067) and NIH (James A. Shannon Director's award to Ram B. Gupta, 1R55RR13398-01) is appreciated. Authors are also thankful to Dr Lalit Chordia of Thar Designs, Inc (