The effect of thermal damage on the physical properties of five carbonate rocks has been investigated. The tests were conducted on two marbles and three limestones, mainly composed of calcite but with different grain sizes, porosities, structural and textural characteristics. Cubic samples prepared from these rocks were gradually heated to a specific temperature level of 100, 200, 300, 400 and 500°C, and gradually cooled down to room temperature without causing thermal shock in order to investigate the effect of heating temperature on physical properties such as microstructure, bulk density, effective porosity and P-wave velocity. Microscopic investigations from thin sections showed that damage in rocks at elevated temperatures was induced in different severity depending on grain size, porosity, structural and textural characteristics. Colour changes were also observed in porous limestones (Lymra and Travertine) due to organic material. In accordance with the degree of calcite dilation depending on heating temperature and in turn new microcrack occurrence, separation along intragrain and/or intergrain boundaries and widening of existing cracks, P-wave velocity decreased to various levels of the initial value, whereas porosity increased. Microscopic analyses and P-wave velocity measurements indicate that compaction of rock structure up to 150°C occurred and induced calcite dilation had no significant damage effect on the rock material. Compaction of rock structure led to an increase in P-wave velocity and slight decrease in porosity. Most of the damage occurred within 24h of heating time and further heating treatments brought relatively minor changes in physical properties. Damage intensity was well explained with P-wave velocity and effective porosity values depending on temperature increase.Rocks are composed of minerals, bounding matrix, and cracks and pores. The geometry and density of the cracks and pores are the main controlling parameters for the physical properties of rocks The study of changes in the physical properties of rocks as a function of thermal cracking is relevant to various engineering applications. A nuclear waste repository is essentially an excavated underground cavity composed of tunnels and openings in which radioactive waste is emplaced Researchers studied many parameters to analyse the thermal damage in rocks. Darot and Reuschle In this study, carbonate rocks were selected for the investigation of thermal damage. They are mainly monomineralic rocks and thermal cracking in these rocks is due to internal stress concentrations resulting from anisotropic thermal expansion of the calcite This study investigates the effect of thermal damage on some physical properties of five different carbonate rocks. Different heating temperatures and heating time effects were studied. Thermal treatments were applied by heating the samples to a range of peak temperatures up to 500 Five different carbonate rocks (two marbles and three limestones) were selected for testing in the laboratory to identify their physical features in natural and heat treated conditions. The names, types and origin of these rocks are given in Petrographical study was carried out according to method suggested by ISRM Five sets of samples from each rock type were prepared. Sample sets are separately subjected to temperatures, 100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 Physical properties, which are bulk density, effective porosity and ultrasonic velocity, were measured to assess the degree of thermal damage since these measurements provide a good basis for description of rock quality and thermal damage. Porosity is one of the basic physical properties of rocks. Porosity influence the internal surface area per unit material volume and this in turn, determines the transport properties and strength of the material. A comprehensive study of porosity can provide valuable information in order to determine whether a given type of rock is susceptible to thermal stress or not P-wave velocities of samples were measured at room conditions through ultrasonic pulse transmission technique. The technique is non-destructive and has the potential of detecting total material damage causing reduction in the strength of material, even where there are no visible signs of deterioration Five sample sets were prepared from each rock and each set was subjected to one of temperature levels of 100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 The grain densities of intact rocks given in Experiments showed that P-wave velocity measured through dry rocks was very sensitive to quantify the thermal damage. The ultrasonic velocity of all rocks markedly decreased with increasing temperature ( The porosity of the thermally damaged marbles (MW and AW) and less porous limestone (BB) increased with increase in temperature as seen in All rocks in this study are monomineralic rocks (almost calcite) and thermal damage is due to anisotropic expansion of calcite. Grain size, structure and texture were determining factors in severity of thermal damage for studied rocks. The nature of fracturing was directly quantified through microscopic observation by analysing the crack network in the deformed samples. For this purpose, thin sections were prepared from intact samples and thermally damaged samples at temperatures 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 FL is structurally homogeneous rock and contains no microcracks but it is highly porous ( DT contains no microcracks but heterogeneous in structure due to pores having irregular shapes and sizes. Pores aligned parallel to the planes of stratification. DT's colour changed from beige to dark grey after 400 BB is structurally heterogeneous and contains a lot of cracks ( Both AW and MW have similar compositional, textural and structural characteristics and contain not microscoply visible microcracks. MW marble has larger crystal size than AW marble ( The effect of thermal damage on the physical properties e.g. bulk density, P-wave velocity, effective porosity, of carbonate rocks was studied. Petrographical study was also carried out to investigate the reasons for the variations in physical properties. In all heating levels, most of the sample destruction occurred within 24 We thank Prof. Dr. Osman Ipek for providing us the use of facilities for thermal treatment studies carried out in Mechanical Engineering Department of Suleyman Demirel University.