Zinc exists as smithsonite and hemimorphite in the lead flotation tailings from the Dandi mineral processing plant in north western Iran. In this research, zinc-rich tailings produced in the Dandi plant were characterized mineralogically and a leaching study was carried out to assess the effect of several parameters on the kinetics of zinc dissolution. Parameters studied included: sulfuric acid concentration, reaction time, temperature and slurry density. It was found that leaching is controlled by a single rate-controlling step with an activation energy of 23.5kJ/mol. To overcome some of the filtration problems associated with polymerization of silicic acid, lime was added as a coagulant. The optimum pH, holding time and temperature required to maximize the filtration rate were determined.Currently, zinc is produced mostly from zinc sulfide ores because sulfides are easy to separate from gangue and to concentrate by conventional flotation techniques. As new sphalerite mines are becoming more difficult to find, new processes to produce zinc metal from oxidized zinc ores are being developed. Oxidized ores contain zinc in various carbonate and silicates minerals such as smithsonite (ZnCO Recently, Extensive work has been carried out on the treatment of zinc oxide ores by hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical methods. In particular, there are several processes for the treatment of zinc silicate ores. Leaching is the first step in the hydrometallurgical route and leaching kinetics is important from the economic point of view.  Willemite and hemimorphite are readily soluble in dilute sulfuric acid. Reactive silica dissolves according to the following reaction ( Monosilicic acid (Si(OH) With continued polymerization, polymers attain a range of colloidal sizes (0.001 to 0.1  The objective of this research was to study extraction of zinc from tailings produced in the Dandi plant using sulfuric acid. Mineralogical studies were carried out to identify the main phases present in the mineral and in the gangue and to identify the liberation of these phases. In the leaching experiments, the effect of acid concentration, holding time, agitation rate and solid The sample was provided by the Dandi mineral processing plant in north western Iran. The feed for the Dandi mineral processing plant is currently from the Angouran mine, a large lead–zinc mine in northwestern Iran. In the Dandi plant, low grade ore is divided in two size fractions 0–2 and 2–15 Mineralogical analysis of the sample was performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), polished sections and thin sections microscopy. The XRD analysis suggests that the major mineral phases in the tailing are smithsonite (ZnCO The XRF results showed that the sample contained 37% ZnO, 23.7% SiO The tailing was divided into homogeneous, small size fractions using the riffle separator. The samples were wet screened to produce a 38–300 μm size fraction (+ Microscopic analysis of the polished and thin sections confirmed the existence of the phases detected by XRD. This analysis provided useful information concerning the liberation of the minerals, especially quartz as a gangue mineral, which could complicate leaching of the tailing. Microscopic analysis (polished and thin sections) was used to calculate the relative amounts of the components of the tailing according to the ASTM C 295 norm. Smithsonite (56.4%) was the dominant phase but there was also 28.6% quartz ( In the leaching and kinetic experiments, sulfuric acid from Merck with a purity of 95–98% and a density of 1.82 The optimum leaching conditions were determined as follows: 100 From these initial experiments, the optimum leaching conditions were determined to be: 2 Several batch leach tests were conducted to determine the optimum conditions for extraction of zinc.  The rate of leaching increases by decreasing the solid: liquid ratio and hence the excess of acid present. Increasing the agitation speed usually increases the rate of leaching due to mineral particles remaining suspended in the liquor and a decrease in the thickness of the mass transfer boundary layer on the surface of the particles. Hence, diffusion of liquor to the surface of the particles increases ( It can be observed from thin section picture of the filter cake of the leach residue (not shown here) that most of the smithsonite grains dissolved during leaching, as well as hemimorphite. However, some undissolved quartz particles remained. The effect of temperature on the rate of zinc extraction in 2 Zinc carbonate reacts with sulfuric acid according to the following reaction Therefore, the size of the initial particle is gradually reduced as the reaction proceeds. Thus, the shrinking core model (SCM) with variable particle size can be used to describe this reaction ( The fraction of zinc reacted at any time, Based on the experimental data shown in Diffusion of the reagent or dissolved species through a solid reaction product at any time, In order to test the possibility of diffusion through a solid reaction product, e.g., silica, the right-hand side of Eq. The fraction of zinc reacted at any time, Based on the experimental data plotted in The rates of most heterogeneous, low-temperature reactions are controlled by adsorption/desorption processes that are necessary for the chemical reactions to proceed. This is especially true when the reaction produces gas. In leaching systems, it is rare to find that diffusion control plays a significant role. On the other hand, in a number of leaching systems, investigators find it difficult to distinguish between the two reaction models of surface reaction control (Eq. To confirm the dominance of a single step regime, model calculations were carried out with two and three consecutive step regimes. The standard deviation criterion and the total conversion times evaluated by model calculations confirmed the dominance of a single step regime. Thus, it is concluded that a physico-chemical desorption process consistent with the obtained activation energy [ The temperature dependence of the reaction rate constant can be calculated by the Arrhenius equation: In the adsorption process, the protons must reach the surface of ZnCO Coagulation of silica has a significant effect on the filtration rate of the slurry and has been considered to be due to several mechanisms. At instant collision of the particles, Van der Waals attraction draws two particles together and causes coagulation. However, the hydration barrier layer or the electrostatic repulsion forces between the similarly charged particles can retard coagulation (  Another mechanism is bridging by cations such as calcium ions. In this mechanism there could be a mutual matching of the positively charged calcium sites on one particle with negatively charged SiO-sites on a colliding particle and vice versa—with the calcium ions acting as the bridging units. There may be an appreciable area of inter-particle contact, with a number of Si/O Addition of electrolytes lowers the zeta potential ( At the coagulation stage, the major factors affecting coagulation of the colloidal silica and pulp filtration rate are pH, temperature and holding time. The impact of pH on the pulp filtration rate is shown in At this pH, coagulation is presumably due to dehydration of the surface of silica and bridging by calcium ions. Since the point of zero charge (pzc) of silica is ca. 2 and the silica surface is negatively charged at pH Coagulation involves a kinetic step, therefore, the rate of coagulation increases with time and temperature. The impact of holding time on the filtration rate is shown in The effect of temperature on the pulp filtration rate was also investigated and the results are shown in  A maximum zinc recovery of 98% was obtained by leaching with 2 Analysis of the experimental data indicates that leaching of zinc carbonate consists of a single rate controlling step. The rate controlling step used to describe this reaction is a physico-chemical desorption process with activation energy of ca. 23.5 For the silica coagulation stage, lime was added to raise the pH and a maximum filtration rate of ca. 4.1 The authors would like to thank University of Tehran for supporting this work (Grant No. 615/4/1051).