Low-grade magnesium hydroxide (LG-MH) is a solid by-product that undergoes an endothermic decomposition in the temperature range of 300–750°C. Due to its thermal behaviour and its lower cost relative to pure Mg(OH)2, it was studied as a non-halogenated flame retardant filler in a 28% vinyl acetate (VA) content poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate) matrix. The solid was characterized by XRF and the crystalline phases determined by XRD, composed predominantly of Mg(OH)2 and calcium and magnesium carbonates. Particle size reduction was performed by both mechanical as well as air jet milling in order to optimize the particle size distribution.
                  Composites with different filler concentrations were prepared to evaluate the mechanical properties and flame retardancy by means of limiting oxygen index tests. LOI was also determined in specimens filled with commercial flame-retardants to analyse the effectiveness of this solid.The tightening of the current regulations, and the increase in the general awareness about the risks related to materials flammability, force us to seek alternatives to ensure the benefits of numerous materials present in everyday life, that so far did not require a special consideration on these properties Because of its endothermic decomposition between 300 and 750 In this study, two milling alternatives were considered and the solid resulting with the smallest particle size was the filler used for compounding. A series of composites were prepared using an EVA matrix and different concentrations of LG-MH to evaluate the mechanical properties. LOI tests were performed to evaluate the flame behaviour and the results compared with those obtained with commercial non-halogenated flame-retardants The polymer used in this study was a poly(ethylene- Mechanical milling of the LG-MH was performed using a Retsch ring mill for 5 After the particle size reduction by air jet milling, the resulting solid was analysed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a Philips PW2400 X-ray sequential spectrophotometer to elucidate major and minor components. X-ray diffraction was performed in a Bragg–Brentano Siemens D-500 powder diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation to get information about the crystalline phases. Density was measured with a helium pycnometer and the specific surface area by the BET single point method with a Micromeritics porosimeter. A TGDTA92 Setaram device was employed to evaluate the LG-MH thermal decomposition by performing thermogravimetric (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) in air flow at a heating rate of 10 LG-MH was first dried at 100 Tensile properties were measured using a universal testing machine Galdabini sun 2500 with a constant displacement speed of 10 Limiting oxygen index LOI which corresponds to the minimum percentage of oxygen needed for the combustion of 80 It has been largely described that the presence of aggregates and/or a wide particle size distribution can result in a poor homogenization of the filler in the polymer matrix, ultimately affecting the composite mechanical properties. The LG-MH presents an extremely wide particle size distribution with an important amount of particles above 200 Magnifin (MH) and Ultracarb (U) fillers used for comparison have both particle sizes lower than 6 The diffraction pattern in The thermogravimetric analysis of the LG-MH performed in air atmosphere is shown in Due to the impurities content, LG-MH is a grey coloured solid and therefore the composites prepared with this filler also present a dark grey final colour. The samples for both mechanical testing as well as for LOI measurement were obtained from the 1 The tensile stress–strain curves of the different composites are depicted in   Taking into account that, in the range from 200 to 500  LG-MH has a chemical composition based on magnesium hydroxide and magnesium and calcium carbonates showing an endothermic decomposition between 200 and 720 From the tensile tests it is concluded that a compatibilising agent or filler surface treatment should be used to improve the mechanical properties of highly loaded composites. Flame testing of the prepared EVA matrix composites reveals that filler contents above 50 For a filler content of 60 LG-MH could be used as a low cost flame retardant filler for applications where the composite does not already include flame-retardants in its formulation. The authors would like to thank Magnesitas Navarras S.A. for supporting and financing this research project.