Calcium phosphate (CaP) ceramics are used in orthopedics and dentistry due to their excellent biocompatibility and osseointegration. Here, the electro-assisted deposition of CaP on two different self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), 2-mercaptoacetic acid (MAA) and 2-mercaptoethanol (ME), was studied both at short (up to 3min) and long (2hours) deposition periods on well-defined evaporated gold surfaces. It was found that the end group of the monolayer has a major effect on the growth of the CaP coating. The deposition was slower and less electrically efficient on MAA SAM, but surface cracking was essentially eliminated due to reduction of the crystallographic mismatch. The carboxylic acid may facilitate CaP growth by attracting Ca2+ ions to the surface, which could explain the higher amount of side reactions occurring at the beginning of the deposition.Calcium phosphate (CaP) is the major component of the bone. It represents a family of materials consisted of various phases, among others, hydroxyapatite (HAp), α- and ß-tricalcium phosphate (TCP), and octacalcium phosphate (OCP) Today, plasma spraying (PS) is the most common technology used commercially for coating implants with CaP. Since the early 1990s, however, much interest in electrodeposition of CaP has evolved due to the advantages it offers, such as non-line-of-sight coating and lower residual stresses The electrocrystallization of CaP on titanium has also been studied. Eliaz As described earlier, the course of crystal growth reactions and the properties of the electrodeposits are markedly influenced by many parameters, such as surface pretreatment, bath composition, oxygen level, pH, stirring, the applied potential (or current density), temperature, and cell geometry. In addition, defects on the surface play a major role in the nucleation and growth of electrodeposits It has been shown that surfaces modified by SAMs bearing various functional end-groups had a significant effect on the chemical precipitation and nucleation of CaP The objective of this work is to investigate CaP nucleation and growth on well-defined surfaces. Specifically, the electrodeposition of CaP was studied both on bare gold and on gold surfaces covered with 2‐mercaptoacetic acid (MAA) and 2-mercaptoethanol (ME) SAMs. We found that the presence of ME has only a minor effect on the adhesion of the deposit. On the other hand, MAA SAM affects not only the nucleation, but also the growth rate of the coating and its final surface morphology. 2-mercaptoacetic acid (MAA, 98%), 2-mercaptoethanol (ME, 98%), analytical grade sulfuric acid, calcium nitrate (99%), ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (98%), analytical grade sodium hydroxide, analytical grade hydrochloric acid, analytical grade sodium chloride, reagent grade sodium phosphate monobasic, and reagent grade calcium chloride anhydrous were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Deionized (DI) water (>18 Electrochemical deposition (ED), chronoamperometry (CA) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) were carried out with a CHI-750B potentiostat (CH Instruments Inc., TX, USA). Electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM, Advanced Wave Sensors, Valencia, Spain) was connected to a network analyzer (250 B/C, Saunders and Associates) and a potentiostat (BioLogic SP-150, France). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were recorded using an Axis Ultra spectrometer (Kratos) and Mg-Kα radiation of 1486.71 The saturation indices (SI) were calculated for the different CaP phases using PHREEQC computational program. The procedure of such calculations is described elsewhere in detail Preparation of the gold samples: evaporated samples of gold (15 Electrochemical cell: ED was carried out in a standard three-electrode cell (15 EQCM: Prior to deposition of CaP, the entire EQCM cell was placed in a 37 The electrolyte for deposition in both EQCM and ED was 0.61 CA: After cleaning, the samples were immersed in 1 CV: After cleaning, the samples were immersed in the deposition solution. The CV was carried out at a scan rate of 10 The electrochemical deposition (ED) of CaP is based on altering the pH in the vicinity of the electrode surface as a result of an applied negative potential. The pH change shifts the equilibrium into an unstable state where CaP precipitates. Therefore, the first step in this work involved calculation and characterization of the solutions used for ED. The saturation index (SI, eq.  It is known that CaP can form suspended-supersaturated solutions that are metastable Based on our previous experience, the ED of CaP can be driven by shifting the pH It should be noted that the negative potential might affect, and even cause, the reductive desorption of the SAMs. It was reported that thiols can be reduced at potentials of −1.0 We did not observe any electroreduction of the thiols, and the results were highly reproducible. Yet, to confirm that the thiols were not reduced under the experimental conditions, XPS analysis of the surface was done before and after applying a similar negative potential. It was ensured that the solution contained only phosphate and was devoid of calcium thereby preventing a precipitation. From the analysis, we found that the thiols remained on the surface. The next step in studying the electrochemical deposition of CaP on Au and SAMs-covered Au was by CA. The early stages of nucleation and growth are often examined by following the current transient as they reflect the processes occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Nevertheless, in our case the deposition is driven indirectly by potential; the latter does not cause the reduction or oxidation of the deposit precursor as in electroplating of metals  Recalling that the major contribution to the current is the reduction of water, one may suggest that the higher current must be due to an increase of the rate of water electroreduction following the consumption of OH In order to characterize the nucleation and growth of CaP, an EQCM was used to monitor the mass change and quantify the effect of SAMs on the deposition kinetics. If the film on the quartz surface is sufficiently rigid, then the Sauerbrey equation The experiments were repeated three times for the bare and modified surfaces and the results were reproducible. The currents decay to almost the same current density. More information can be extracted from the charge density transients ( In order to evaluate the ratio of deposit- to- energy invested in the system while at steady state, the slopes of both Q-t and m-t can be compared. It is evident that at steady-state the bare and OH-covered surfaces are characterized by similar deposition rate and charge transfer rate whereas the mass per charge on the MAA-covered surface is lower by half. Furthermore, when dividing Q by the Faraday constant and the accumulated mass by the molar mass (of the OCP phase, as will be shown later), a mole-per-mole graph is drawn ( For comparison, Eliaz and Eliyahu Here, more insights on the nucleation and growth were obtained by SEM ( These data suggest that the change of end group is substantial in influencing the growth of the coating. Uchida Comparing the bare and MAA-covered gold, the growth processes are apparently different. This is because nucleation and growth of a coating depends on the interfacial energy barrier, which is the difference between the free energy of the molecule in the bulk and at the surface Further knowledge about the phase content can be gained by XPS. The phase content in CaP coatings on both bare and MAA-covered gold samples was analyzed by XPS after 3 The atomic concentrations of elements obtained from high-resolution XPS measurements after 3 Further characterization of the effect of the functional groups on the deposition of CaP was accomplished by studying the morphological and structural changes of bare and SAM-coated Au samples after applying −1.36 Hence, it is evident that the presence of the thiol on the Au affects the deposition of CaP; its functional groups (either –OH or –CO The CaP delamination from the bare surface can be explained by a mismatch in the crystallographic structures of Au and CaP and the high associated residual strains. If these strains cannot be accommodated by the film, dislocations are likely to be formed at the interface. Above a critical thickness, the increasing strains will lead to cracking The thickness of the coating was measured in the ESEM on metallographic cross-sections of samples coated with CaP for 2 In light of these results, a deposition mechanism is suggested, and presented in The ED on top of MAA-covered substrates has significantly more side reactions, as seen in Moreover, EQCM data can shed more light on the steady-state growth of the MAA-covered surface. It is evident that while the initial period is similar to the other systems in growth rate, mass content and in phase, these parameters do not affect the steady-state deposition later on. Hence, the similarity and difference between the electrochemically assisted growth of CaP on bare Au and that coated with MAA and ME can be explained by assuming that although the same phase is formed, yet, the rate of its formation (whether 2D or 3D) is different and is affected by the monolayer beneath. The different rate of formation is presumably due to variations in grain size, plane orientation or real electrochemical surface area. The growth of ED CaP on two different monolayers, 2-mercaptoacetic acid (MAA) and 2-mercaptoethanol (ME), was studied both at short and long time periods on well-defined evaporated gold surfaces. It was found that the end group of the monolayer has a major effect on the growth of the CaP coating. The carboxylic end group induced a higher cathodic current while requiring a higher overpotential for the reduction of water, which is a driving force for the deposition of CaP. In the early stages of deposition, both the phase content and the mass gain are similar with or without SAMs. Nevertheless, a different growth mode is evident from different surface morphologies that are revealed by HR-SEM. While the deposition is slower and less efficient on a MAA-covered surface, mud-cracks are essentially eliminated thanks to lower crystallographic mismatch. The carboxylic acid is known to enhance the deposition of insoluble Ca-salts due to Ca This study was financially supported by a Kamin grant Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: