Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3 (NBT) thin films were grown with oxygen gas pressure in the range of 5Pa and 100Pa. NBT thin film grown at 30Pa shows improved properties when compared to films grown at other pressures. This film exhibits single phase and good crystallinity. It has the highest dielectric constant of 754 and lowest dielectric loss of 0.21 at 1kHz. It has the lowest leakage current of 2×10−6
                     A/cm2 measured at 50kV/cm electric field. The values of remnant polarization and coercive field, which were measured at room temperature, 10V and 1kHz, are 20μC/cm2 and 160kV/cm respectively. Fatigue study reveals that remnant polarization (+Pr and −Pr) decreases by 15% after 108 switching cycles.Currently, sodium bismuth titanate (Na NBT thin films of thickness around 200 Solid state reaction process was used to prepare highly dense NBT target. Sodium carbonate (Na The phase and crystal structure was examined using powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) method. Measurements were performed using a Philips X'Pert system. The X-ray source used for the measurement was CuKα radiation (  Oxygen deficient BaTiO These electrons seem to be bonded with Ti The formation of oxygen interstitials ions at higher oxygen gas pressure in the Bi The relative volume percentage of the perovskite phase has been estimated from the intensity of the major X-ray diffraction peak of the secondary and perovskite phases. In our case, peak (117) of Bi It has been verified by Chen et al.    The electrical properties of the NBT thin films have been measured by metal–insulator–metal configuration, in which the thin films are sandwiched between bottom platinum and top Au/Cr electrodes. The variation in dielectric constant of NBT thin films grown at different pressure has been shown in The variation of dielectric constant and dielectric loss of NBT thin films grown at different oxygen gas pressures measured at 1 On the other hand, the dielectric loss increases sharply with an increase in the oxygen pressure up to 50 The plot of leakage current density with variation in the electric field for the NBT thin films grown at different oxygen gas pressures is shown in NBT thin film grown at 30 NBT thin films have been grown on Pt/TiO This work is supported by a generous research grant from