As chondrocytes mature, the concentration of inorganic phosphate (Pi) increases in the extracellular milieu. It was demonstrated that the progressive accumulation of Pi started from the proliferative zone and peaked in the hypertrophic zone of growth plate. Although extracellular Pi is reported to be involved in the apoptosis and mineralization of mature chondrocytes, its role in proliferating chondrocytes remains unclear. Here we investigated this role utilizing ATDC5, an established cell model of chondrocytic differentiation. In proliferating ATDC5 cells, we found that the expression of cyclin D1 was up-regulated, and that of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was down-regulated in response to an increase in extracellular Pi within 24h. Moreover, an increase in extracellular Pi-induced activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway, and treatment with a MEK inhibitor PD98059 abolished the effects on the expression of cyclin D1 and ALP, indicating that extracellular Pi regulates the expression of these genes through the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway. Consistent with its up-regulation of cyclin D1 expression, the extracellular Pi facilitated the proliferation of ATDC5 cells. Treatment with phosphonoformic acid (PFA), an inhibitor of sodium/phosphate (Na+/Pi) cotransporters, abrogated the activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway and gene expression induced by the increase in extracellular Pi. Knocking down of the type III Na+/Pi cotransporter Pit-1 diminished the responsiveness of ATDC5 cells to the increase in extracellular Pi. Interestingly, the increased extracellular Pi induced the phosphorylation of fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2α (FRS2α), which was also cancelled by knocking down of the expression of Pit-1. In primary chondrocytes isolated from mouse rib cages as well, increased extracellular Pi induced the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and alterations in the expression of cyclin D1 and ALP, both of which were abolished by treatment with PFA. These results suggest that signaling by extracellular Pi is mediated by Pit-1 and FRS2α, and leads to activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway and increased expression of cyclin D1, which facilitates the proliferation of immature chondrocytes.In vertebrates, long bones form through endochondral bone formation, a multistep process involving the mesenchymal condensation of undifferentiated cells, the proliferation of chondrocytes, and differentiation into hypertrophic chondrocytes, followed by mineralization It is well established that inorganic phosphate (Pi) plays critical roles in the skeletal mineralization. The predominant mineral crystal phase present in bone extracellular matrix is hydroxyapatite, which contains calcium (Ca) and Pi ions and is deposited both within and between collagen fibrils In contrast to the critical roles of extracellular Pi in the mineralization process, its physiological roles in the early stages of chondrocytic differentiation including in proliferating chondrocytes have not been fully studied. Mwale et al. determined the tissue content of Pi in growth plates, and demonstrated that progressive accumulation of Pi ion started from the proliferative zone and peaked in the hypertrophic zone Based on these backgrounds, here we focused on the roles of extracellular Pi in the early stages of chondrocytic differentiation. The murine mesenchymal cell line ATDC5 is a commonly used cell model of endochondral bone formation that can reproduce the multistep chondrocytic differentiation process encompassing the stages from mesenchymal condensation to calcification ATDC5 cells were maintained in a 1:1 mixture of Dulbecco's modified Eagle's and Ham's F12 (DMEM/F12) medium (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS: Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and 1% insulin–transferrin–selenium-G supplement (ITS: Invitrogen; insulin 10 For chondrogenic induction, ATDC5 cells were inoculated into 6-well culture plates (5 Animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health. Primary chondrocytes were isolated from the ventral part of the rib cages of 4-day old ICR mice following a previous report The MEK inhibitor PD98059 and the inhibitor of phosphate transporter phosphonoformic acid (PFA) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. When used in the experiments, they were added to the medium 30 Cells were plated in 96-well culture plates at a density of 1 Total RNA (2.5 Whole cell extracts were harvested in RIPA buffer [1% Triton, 1% Na deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 150 Two-dimensional (2-D) electrophoresis was performed using the IPGphor™ Isoelectric Focusing (IEF) System (Amarsham Biosciences) and Miniprotean II 1-D Cell (Biorad) according to the manufacturers' instructions. After starvation in serum-free medium for 24 ATDC5 cells were plated in 6-well plates at a density of 2 Gene silencing was performed using the siPORT Amine transfection agent (Applied Biosystems) and ATDC5 cells transfected with siRNAs were subjected to a Pi uptake assay. Cells were trypsinized, and 4.6 Data were analyzed using the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The methods of Tukey or Student–Newman–Keuls were used as post hoc tests. To confirm the regulation of Since the increase in extracellular Pi induced the up-regulation of By hypothesizing that the extracellular Pi concentration functions as an extracellular stimulus and exerts signals into cells, we examined the effects of increased extracellular Pi on the phosphorylation status of proteins. We performed Western blotting with anti-p-Tyr antibody after 2-D electrophoresis using cytoplasmic fractions harvested from the cells incubated in the presence of 1 Treatment with PD98059 cancelled the up-regulation of cyclin D1 expression induced by the extracellular Pi in a dose-dependent manner ( Then, to explore the molecular mechanism underlying the connection between the increased extracellular Pi and the activation of Raf/MEK/ERK pathway, we examined the effects of increased extracellular Pi on the phosphorylation of FGF receptor substrate 2α (FRS2α). FRS2α functions upstream of Raf/MEK/ERK cascade in the signaling by FGFs, which plays a critical role in chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation. ATDC5 cells expressed FGFRs 1, 2 and 3 as confirmed by RT-PCR (data not shown). We treated the cells with various concentrations of extracellular Pi, and examined the effects on phosphorylation of FRS2α at Tyr196 by Western blot. As expected, treatment with 50 As the next step, we investigated whether Na We further investigated the responsiveness to extracellular Pi, using primary chondrocytes isolated from cartilage of mouse rib cages. The production of cartilaginous matrices by the isolated cells was confirmed by alcian blue staining ( Finally, we examined the effects of knockdown of Here we have provided evidence that extracellular Pi triggers signal transduction and leads to altered gene expression in the early stages of chondrocytic differentiation. It is interesting that the increase in the concentration of extracellular Pi induced an increase in the expression of The up-regulation of the cyclin D1 expression by the increased extracellular Pi suggests that signaling induced by the extracellular Pi facilitates the proliferation of early chondrocytes. Consistent with this notion, the results of MTS assays suggested that an increase in the concentration of extracellular Pi favored the proliferation of ATDC5 cells ( Recently, a series of The involvement of Na Our results suggest that chondrocytes sense and respond to the increased extracellular Pi via Pit-1. FRS2α, which functions upstream of Raf/MEK/ERK pathway in FGF signaling, is also suggested to play a role. At the moment, we do not know the precise molecular mechanisms by which cells transduce the signals triggered by extracellular Pi from Pit-1 to FGFRs and Raf/MEK/ERK pathway. However, considering that knockdown of In conclusion, proliferating chondrocytes are capable of changing the expression of selective genes such as those for cyclin D1 and ALP in response to extracellular Pi, a process which is mediated by the type III Na The following are the supplementary materials related to this article. Supplementary materials related to this article can be found online at We thank Drs. Takuo Kubota and Hiroki Kondou for discussions. 