Equal channel angular rolling, based on the equal channel angular pressing, is a severe plastic deformation process which can develop the grains below 1μm in diameter. Microstructure, mechanical properties and electrical conductivity of commercial pure copper strips processed by equal channel angular rolling were investigated. Scanning electron microscopic micrographs of the strips produced by ten passes of equal channel angular rolling process showed nano-grains ∼70–200nm in size. Also yield and tensile strengths and microhardness of samples increased with increasing the number of passes, whereas their ductility decreased. The electrical conductivity varied slightly. So via equal channel angular rolling process and by producing nano-grained pure copper, the strips can be strengthened with a little decrease in electrical conductivity but it has shortcomings of low elongation and strain hardening.According to the fast developments in electronic industries, there is a great demand for high-strength and high-conductivity materials. The alloyed copper is the most widely used material in this respect. The electrical conductivity of these materials is inherently lower than unalloyed counterpart. To resolve this problem ultra-fine grains (UFG) or nanostructure commercial pure copper, can be used. This goal can be obtained by severe plastic deformation (SPD) processes ( Recently, the method of equal channel angular rolling (ECAR) which is based on ECAP, provides repeated shear deformation on strip metals ( The ECAR device used in this study is illustrated in Commercial pure copper sheet was used in this study. The chemical composition of this material is given in To evaluate microstructure and mechanical properties variations, ECAR process was applied for pure copper strips up to 10 times. The samples were rotated around the longitudinal axis by 180° in the same direction after each consecutive rolling ( Room temperature tensile test was conducted on plate-type specimens that have been machined along the ECAR direction ( Microhardness variations were measured by Vickers hardness tester with pyramidal diamond indenter subject 25 A digital apparatus was implemented for the electrical resistance measurements via four-point-probe method. Tungsten probes were selected to generate electrical connection. As illustrated in   Induction of severe shear deformation to materials by passing them through a die with two intersected channels provides ultra-fine grains in pure copper strips and in upper passes, new nano-sized sub-grains are formed inside the ultra-fine grains. For copper with a medium stacking fault (SFE: 78 Stress–strain curves in It is well known that yield strength of metallic materials is proportional to minus square root of grain size (Hall–Petch relation). So any variation of grain size leads to a significant change in yield strength of bulky materials. Elevation in yield strength and ultimate tensile strength can be justified by strain hardening at initial stages. Large value of plastic deformation can occur in samples by ECAR process. Up to three passes, strain hardening or dislocation strengthening plays a main role in the strength increase. Also, the formation of sub-micron sub-grains or dislocation cells contribute to the strengthening. The dislocation density increases by the ECAR process. Especially in the first pass, the strain hardening plays a pivotal role in yield strength increasing as fine deformation bands formed by severe plastic deformation. From four passes, the strength increasing was most due to the evolution of the grain structure and formation of UFGs and strain hardening has less and less effect. The number of UFGs with high-angle grain boundaries increase with increasing the ECAR passes up to seven passes so the boundaries with low-angles convert to boundaries with high-angles. Increasing in misorientation angles in grain boundaries is the other reason for improved tensile properties. These high-angle boundaries and formed sub-grains can prevent dislocation movements and cause higher yield and tensile properties. Decreased elongation can be justified by strain hardening too. At higher ECAR passes, yield and tensile strengths decreased a little in specimen. These phenomena may be due to two reasons. The first one is the saturation in high-level accumulated strain in bulk material. At this stage, grains contain a large number of dislocations and it is impossible to produce new dislocation in these grains ( The Vickers microhardness of pure copper processed at different passes of the ECAR processing is presented in The rapid increase of microhardness at relatively low passes seems to be attributed to strain hardening as a result of subgrain boundaries formation rather than grain refinement ( The hardness distribution along the side surface of ECAR’ed specimens shows higher values in the contact surfaces ( The result of conductivity evaluations is shown in Equal channel angular rolling was successfully applied to fabricate nano-grained pure copper strip. The following conclusions are drawn: Nano-grained pure copper was obtained by ECAR process. The grain size was measured using SEM micrographs. And it was about 70–200 Tensile test showed that the yield strength significantly increased after the first pass followed by a gradual increase with further increase in pass up to 7-pass, while tensile strength did not experience much variation. The maximum strength has been obtained at 7-pass and further deformation declined it. Also ECAR process causes to significant reduction of elongation. A good combination of high yield strength and moderate ductility obtained in 7-pass ECAR’ed pure copper. Results showed an increase in microhardness by a factor of approximately 1.7 at the first two passes. It followed by almost constant value up to seventh pass, after all, by subsequent passing, microhardness slightly decreased. Electrical conductivity of samples decreased with increasing the number of ECAR passes. This was true as far as 7 passes, after 7 passes electrical conductivity slightly increased. In addition electrical conductivity of ECAR’ed copper is higher than that in alloyed counterpart. After ECAR process, high-strength and high-conductivity commercial pure copper can be obtained. Although the reduction in elongation limits some applications of copper.