This paper presents an investigation of segregated and well-mixed binary powder mixtures in terms of the effective mass of the powder beds, when subject to low magnitude vibration (<0.1
                        g). An experimental system, developed in Part 1 of the present series of papers, was used to measure the effective mass of powder beds. Segregated systems were produced from materials of different densities, by layering materials. Tests were performed with both segregated and well-mixed systems with changing the mixing ratio. There was a significant difference in the effective mass between segregated and well-mixed systems, indicating that the effective mass of binary powder mixtures is dependent upon the dispersion of composition and the quality of mixing. The effective mass of well-mixed systems was in agreement with Rayleigh's theory, whilst the segregated systems showed significant deviations from the theory. A simplified model based upon Rayleigh's energy method was proposed to predict effective mass for segregated systems, and compared to experimental data. Results showed a reasonable agreement between the model and experimental data. The application of this technology to mixing has been examined, and the effective mass has been measured as a function of mixing time in a number of mixing situations. The effective mass indicates not only the deviation from an ideal mix, but also the direction of segregation.Many industrial powder systems are multi-component and their properties play an important role in determining their processing performance in unit operations such as storage in hoppers and silos, flow of materials, compaction and comminution (  This paper presents an investigation of segregated and well-mixed binary powder mixtures in terms of the effective mass of the powder bed. An experimental system, developed in Part 1 of the present series of papers ( An experimental system, developed in Part 1 of the present series of papers ( A perspex test cell ( Experiments were performed in a range of binary powder mixtures comprised of glass spheres, sands, low-density polyethylene and rubber powders, whose size distributions (mass basis) are shown in Segregated systems were produced by layering materials. In a vibrating system, in which the mass is homogeneously distributed in the space, the effective mass can be approximated to one-third of the sample mass, based upon Rayleigh's energy method ( Comparisons of Rayleigh's effective mass and well-mixed data are shown in  Comparisons of segregated and well-mixed systems in terms of the effective mass were made over a range of sample mixtures, top-cap mass and mixing fractions— Cases 2< Case 4< Well-mixed sample< Case 3< Case 1 (see The trend was common and independent of sample mixtures, top-cap masses and mixing fractions. The difference between the segregated cases tends to be more significant as the volume fraction of denser phase (component A) tends to increase, indicating a significant role for the denser phase mass upon the effective mass—  A simplified model based upon Rayleigh's energy method ( In the same manner as Rayleigh's energy method, the shape of amplitude in each phase is expressed as a linear function of distance. Since the natural circular frequency Substitution of  From the force balance of each phase, Substitution of  An attempt to apply this technique using the effective mass to mixing and segregation processes is examined. Binary powder systems subject to large magnitude of vibration exhibit several complex phenomena including segregation, convection, remixing and others (e.g.  A comparison of segregated and well-mixed binary powder mixtures was made in terms of the effective mass. There was a significant difference between segregated and well-mixed systems, indicating that the effective mass of binary powder mixtures is critically dependent upon the dispersion of composition and the quality of mixing. The effective mass of well-mixed systems was in agreement with Rayleigh's theory, whilst the segregated systems showed significant deviations from the theory. A simplified model based upon Rayleigh's energy method was proposed to understand the nature of segregated systems, and compared to experimental data. Results showed a reasonable agreement between the model and experimental data. Furthermore, it is possible to monitor the quality of mixing of mixtures in terms of the effective mass.  The authors would like to thank the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council of Great Britain for funding and a collaborative research grant funded by ORS Awards.