Fluxes of CO2 from non-agricultural soil ecosystems, though globally important, are poorly characterized. Previously, we tested a dynamic closed chamber (DCC) method that was shown to accurately measure CO2 fluxes from ground surface to the atmosphere in mesocosms. In the current study, the DCC method was used to measure the CO2 efflux at a field site where conditions were similar to those used in the mesocosm tests. Fluxes measurements also were obtained using static closed chamber (SCC) and eddy covariance (EC) methods. The study site consisted of a large, flat-topped, waste pile at the Key Lake uranium mine, in northern Saskatchewan. The pile was constructed of uniform, fine to medium grain sand and was devoid of a soil zone and vegetative cover. Chamber-based measurements were used to characterize the spatial variability associated with the CO2 flux; whereas the EC method was used to characterize temporal variability. Results showed that the chamber-based (DCC and SCC) methods yielded comparable data, with a time-averaged CO2 flux of 171±54mgCO2
                     m−2
                     h−1. Spatial variability associated with the flux was relatively small and no distinct spatial pattern was observed. Fluxes measured using the EC method tended to underestimate those measured using the chamber-based methods, with a time-averaged CO2 flux (150±35mgCO2
                     m−2
                     h−1) that was about 12% lower than the average flux calculated from the chamber data. The greater temporal resolution provided by the EC method demonstrated that the CO2 flux exhibited a distinct diurnal pattern, but that long-term variations in the flux were relatively small (CV=23%). When used together, the chamber-based and EC methods provide information of a complementary nature that can greatly improve our understanding of the processes at work in unsaturated media.Although globally important, CO Chamber-based methods (both dynamic and static) are based on the principle that the gas flux from the soil surface to the atmosphere can be measured by restricting the volume of air available across the covered surface so that the net emission (or uptake) of the target gas can be measured as a change in concentration ( The EC technique measures the flux of a scalar (heat, CO Carbon dioxide effluxes from the Deilmann south waste-rock pile (DSWR) were investigated during summer 2000 and 2002. This pile was selected for study because of its overall simplicity. Specifically, (1) it is texturally uniform ( DSWR is located at the Key Lake uranium mine located in northern Saskatchewan, Canada (57°12′ latitude, 105°35′ longitude) and was constructed from overburden sand excavated during open-pit mining of the adjacent Deilmann uranium ore body ( Flux chambers used in the DCC method consist of an open-ended rim (collar) with a lid. Full details of the design, construction, and operation are presented in Twenty collars were installed on the DSWR pile between April 27 and 29, 2000 ( Carbon dioxide analyses were performed using an ADC 2250 differential infrared CO Prior to measuring a flux, the ambient CO Spatial and short-term, temporal variations in the CO Ambient fluxes of CO Once the chamber was sealed to the collar, gas samples were collected at 20-min intervals. Gas samples were collected from the enclosed headspace using a disposable, 20-cc syringe equipped with a 25-gauge, 5/8-inch needle. Gas samples were withdrawn through the sampling port (sealed with a gray butyl rubber septum) in the top of each chamber; injected into pre-evacuated (ca. 5×10 Carbon dioxide concentrations were determined using a Varian Model CP2003 Micro-GC equipped with a micro-TCD and Poraplot U column (injector temperature=110 The vertical flux density for CO A weather station (Campbell Scientific, Inc., Logan, UT) was installed approximately 5 Exploratory data analysis ( Diurnal variation in the CO At DSF1, both the magnitude of the CO Flux measurements from across the site also were obtained during the summer of 2000 ( With the exception of the July 2000 data set, differences between sampling periods were not significant—yielding a long-term average flux of 170 (±51) The efflux of CO Near-continuous measurements of the CO Flux measurements obtained using both the EC and chamber-based methods occurred on six occasions during July and August 2002 ( In a previous study using large-scale, laboratory mesocosms filled with sand ( The DCC results showed that the efflux of CO Whereas the chamber-based (DCC and SCC) methods yielded comparable data, with an overall time-averaged CO The chamber data exhibited slightly greater standard deviations than the EC data (i.e. DCC=±58 It is important to note that no single method of measuring soil-atmosphere gas exchanges can meet all research objectives. Thus, the choice of method will depend on the type of information required and the characteristics of the site being investigated. Chamber-based methods are especially useful for characterizing spatial variability as well as providing more detailed information regarding local-scale processes. Though more expensive and technically more complex, the eddy covariance method (and other micrometeorological techniques) provides a powerful tool that allows for spatial integration and near-continuous, long-term monitoring of the soil-atmosphere flux. When used together, these methods provide information of a complementary nature that can greatly improve our understanding of the processes at work. For example at the DSWR site, chamber-based methods were used to demonstrate that the CO Funding for this research was provided through an Industrial Research Council (IRC) between Cogema Resources Ltd, Cameco Corporation, and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. Technical assistance was provided by Sheldon Gibb, Pat Landine, Zane Itterman, Trevor Hamm, Ray Kirkland, and Wendy Timms. We thank S.L. Barbour for discussions on these data sets. Portions of this data were obtained as part of L.K. Kabwe's MSc research.