Forensic mining engineering tackles the application of mining engineering principles and methodologies to determine the causes of deficient performance in a given excavation or support, elaborating conclusions in the shape of expert opinions.
                  Study of real cases, as well as development of campaigns for in-mine measurement and instrumentation, constitutes an element of unquestionable interest for forensic engineers. For that reason, the present work studies support in several coalmines in which the longwall exploitation method is employed through hydraulic-prop control.
                  A methodology—based on prop-pressure measurement—is defined to analyse support in longwall workings. Subsequently, equipment designed for in situ measurement of roofwall pressures on support is put forward. Such measurements have been undertaken in a total number of twelve workings located in the coal basin of Castile-Leon (northern Spain). A detailed description of two of these workings is undertaken (Seam 24 and Seam Ancha), where pressure measurements were simultaneously performed in several prop rows and analysed according to the working’s exploitation stages.
                  Prop behaviour is also analysed when undertaking in-mine blasting labours or whenever specific prop failures take place. Average values of support pressure obtained for the mines studied are indicated as conclusions.Coal mining of strategic interest is developed in northern Spain, so it becomes necessary to maintain it for two reasons: The first reason is that currently in-force legislation provides mining exploitations with the condition of public-utility works for all cases foreseen by legal ordinance (forced expropriation, exceptional town-planning uses, urgency in procedures, etc.) and the second is the need to maintain—not only for the Spanish State but also for the EU—certain energy independence based on autochthonous resources, therefore free from exterior foreign dependence. The Spanish State currently imports 70% of the energy resources it needs and the energy policy impelled by the EU has prescribed the need to constitute a strategic reserve of autochthonous energy resources, independent from foreign circumstances, in each member state Within this context, forensic mining engineering contributes principles and methodologies to determine the causes of deficient behaviour—generally understood in terms of collapse—in either excavation or support. Its conclusions belong to technical spheres but, in many cases, are transferred into the legal field, establishing the rules for general use to follow in underground workings to diminish risks and avoid accidents It is obvious that mining labours are of special riskiness; mining activities involve a series of uncertainties and risks associated to the variability and ignorance of the properties of involved materials. It is inevitable to investigate possible causes of failure when underground failure or collapse occurs. In many cases, some form of legal proceedings will follow either to determine the causes of damage, income loss or—in some cases—loss of life, or to resolve contractual and responsibility issues and allocate costs, a process which also involves specialist engineers, usually as expert witnesses. On the other hand, the forensic engineer does not only have to study cases in which fatal accidents have occurred, but should also undertake labours of periodical inspection, thus valuing if mining exploitation has been designed according to in-force legislation. In many cases, these rules must be based on data taken from mines of similar geological characteristics. In a field, where the variability of these characteristics is so important, it turns out to be interesting to dispose of experimental data—collected and registered during the life of mining exploitations—which allow studying the conditions in which exploitation becomes unfeasible and when reasonable dangerous traces appear. In longwall workings, undertaking continuous registers of hydraulic pressure on props is ruled by no specific legislation; however, their punctual in-mine measurement is one of the most important elements for mine control. Likewise, they contribute first-order information to value the behaviour of producing mining workings in the near future. Spain counts on no legal normative to regulate types of support, slope and thickness range, and gable characteristics, which workings must use to guarantee safety. Mining companies must elaborate a research project to choose and design the support system of their workings with available means and knowledge, so that it is competent administration which must approve or refuse the project’s technical feasibility. In any case, such research project must keep up with the Spanish General Regulations of Basic Norms for Mining Safety, where complementary technical instructions—regulating particular in-mine safety aspects—are collected Within this context, the exploitation method of longwall with caving of the post-working area by means of individual hydraulic props gathers special importance Calculation of the pressure which the working roofwall is to exert on hydraulic props is essential for support design In multiple papers in situ support pressure has been measured This pressure can be measured through a clock manometer provided by the prop manufacturer itself. However, such manometers achieve low accuracy and their measurement is much time-consuming, so they may interrupt exploitation. On the other hand, this information is not continually stored, so it would turn out to be very difficult to get to know the working’s true behaviour with punctual pressure measurements. For that reason, it is necessary to design instrumentation and measurement equipment to allow continuous pressure register in a set of hydraulic props. After exhaustive analysis of the instrumentation possibilities available, we opted for designing a collection system with pressure sensors measuring and collecting hydraulic-circuit pressure in a set of 9–12 props. Logically, ‘support critical pressure’ could not be measured if working collapse in the instrumented area occurs, since it would destroy the measurement equipment and the risk of producing casualties would be run. However, close-to-caving and broken-roofwall situations—comparable to those taking place in case of partial collapse—were reported. Bering this idea in mind, it should be taken into account that the method of longwall exploitation is a method to undertake coal extraction by using support allowing controlled caving of the mined area. When such collapse is not produced naturally, it must be induced by means of explosives. Instrumentation of prop pressures has been undertaken in twelve workings in Castile-Leon (northern Spain, in seams with slopes ranging from 20° to 36° and seam thickness ranging from 1.0 In two of these workings—those of Seam 24 and Seam Ancha—systematic pressure measurements in a set of props have been performed according to exploitation stages. The choice of these two workings was undertaken taking seam characteristics in mind regarding seams thickness and slope and the kind of support used. Seam slope ranges from 28° to 35° and seam thickness (from 2 The working in Seam 24 was located in the mine of Feixolín, in the municipality of Villablino (Leon, Spain). This exploitation is owned by the company Unión Minera del Norte, SA (UMINSA). Its seam thickness ranges from 2 The working of the longwall is delimited by two rock drifts to Seam C-24 from the main crosscuts of Level 4 (1300 Regarding rock-mass geomechanic classification, the three most important criteria have been followed: RMR ( This working is exploited by means of the longwall method with pick hammers with a face advancing of 1.25 Post-working caving is not avoided and no kind of recharging is employed. Roofwall caving takes place easily, although in some occasions it is necessary to turn to the use of explosives Goma 2-ECO. Seam Ancha belongs to Grupo Monasterio, is located in Velilla del Río Carrión (Palencia) and is also owned by UMINSA. Its variable slope ranges from 24° to 37° and its thickness from 1.5 to 2.5 These props are basically composed of an outer tube and an inner one. The inner tube is extended to the required height by injecting hydraulic fluid with a setting gun. Hydraulic fluid used to set the prop is composed by water and oil (2–5%). When pressing the trigger, the hydraulic fluid coming from the pumping station activates the load valve entering the prop pressure chamber. Once the prop is set and when roofwall pressure occurs, hydraulic fluid pressure increases to reach nominal load pressure (rated pressure at safety valve). At this point, the safety valve comes into operation to expel hydraulic fluid descending the prop until pressure reaches lower values than those to which the safety valve is rated. Each time a prop bears a load superior to its nominal load rated value, the same process will apply. Enlarged base plates for soft floors have been used to suit different diameters with the aim of avoiding prop sinkage. It is meant to assure that prop pressure on the floorwall never exceeds floorwall tensile strength. This is achieved by increasing prop surface applied to the floorwall, which means using larger-diameter base plates. One of the premises of the present research work is that instrumented props, as well as the remainder props installed in the working, must work normally. This has required a sturdy construction of measurement equipments to guarantee their operation and duration under the special conditions undergone in mining labours. Prior to prop placement in mine, it was necessary to modify the fluid inner circuit (lubricating oil or water–oil emulsion) to perform the corresponding pressure measurement. In the case of Salzgitter props, access was performed from the valves provided by the manufacturer, while access was performed with a drill in their base in SUG-10 props. Apart from such connections, it was necessary to design a measurement box for real-time registration and storage of pressure variations in props (see Each measurement box counts on a power source, three pressure sensors which transform pressure into current-intensity values and an Adam-4018 module (Advantech Data Acquisition Modules) which transforms and stores these values in digital format (see The connection hose has been divided into two stretches with an intermediate valve to increase its manageability in harsh mining conditions. Such valve disposes of quick high-pressure connections with the aim of facilitating device position changes, thus hindering as less as possible the development of the mining production activity. Special polyurethane hoses—prepared for 70 With the aim of obtaining reliable pressure measurements, both props and the data acquisition system were previously assayed in lab through loading tests, which allowed calibrating pressure sensors and assuring their correct operation in mine. These loading tests were performed with the measurement system developed, but also using hydraulic hoses and valves which were subsequently used in the mine. Once the measurement system was tested in lab, we proceeded to its assemblage in the studied workings. An exhaustive analysis of support pressures was performed in the two previously-mentioned seams by means of simultaneous measurements in several props over longer periods and even using four measurement boxes. The working in Seam 24—exploited with pick hammers and explosives—is supported by two or three rows of props. Since a box connected to three props was placed in each row, pressure in six to nine props was simultaneously measured and such working was continuously instrumented for 15 Each box was not active during all coalface exploitation labours, since it progressively changes from coalface to caving positions, so it is necessary to dismantle it and assemble it again as coal exploitation advances. Once the box and the row of three props close to caving have been dismantled, they were assembled again in the working’s advancing area, thus resuming the cycle. Data stored in the box’s Adam-4018 module were periodically downloaded into a PC when the box was no longer operative or in the first morning shift in case it was operative. For adequate interpretation of the pressure data provided in each box, it has been necessary to note down in each download the working’s geometrical characteristics (thickness and slope), gable state, space between props and distances to the caving and coal-winning areas. Setting off from distances among props, the tributary area on which each set of props acted was calculated in coalface and caving areas, obtaining values ranging between 5 and 8 Inner-pressure values measured for each prop were analysed taking into account prop position in the working’s advance cycle. With that purpose, pressures of the three props placed in the same row (i.e., parallel to the face) were measured. Support pressure (MPa) withstood by each prop according to time is registered in each graph. Data download was performed once a day, in order to interfere at least as possible in mining operations. During labour days, pressure data register was performed each minute, while at weekends registers were performed every five minutes with the aim of assuring continuous register without intermediate downloads to free the module’s inner memory.   In total, we have represented the working’s operating cycle over three days (nine 8-h working shifts). The first graph shows the measurement cycle of box A1 stored in shifts 1–4 with box A1 placed at the exploitation face and box A3 placed in the caving. The following graph shows measures of box A2 and extends from shift 3 to 7. The third graph shows the period between shifts 5 and 9. This working cycle has been divided into five phases which correspond to the most representative situations from the point of view of support:      This closed the full cycle of mining in the working. Evidently, there are numerous particular situations which have not been reflected on the afore-mentioned graphs. For these, we shall carry out an analysis of concrete model situations produced in props and repeated several times in each cycle. Pressure measurements in props allowed obtaining very important information on working behaviour. Three graphs corresponding to the historical registers of box A2 over 24  In the register included in We detected other situations in which the props did not work correctly, lost fluid or were simply loaded or loosened as a result of inadequate interaction with the roofwall of the seam. Next, we shall put forward a series of model situations which, in our opinion, summarize prop functioning, eluding singular conditions derived from specific problems in the working. The first situation to be analysed is prop loading. To illustrate this situation, the three props installed at the coalface at approximately 16:30:00 were chosen. Instrumentation had been installed at the top of the working. Bearing in mind that the tributary area of the prop for a stress of around 20 When the roofwall descends, pressure on the prop’s hydraulic fluid rises. Props dispose of a safety valve to control this pressure, which disposes of a pressure value rating above which the valve opens, releasing part of the hydraulic fluid and alleviating the internal pressure of the fluid in the prop. The prop is thus shortened, permitting a slight ground deformation. A brusque drop in pressure is produced until the valve closes once more and the prop begins to work again from this moment onwards. This process is repeated reiteratively until the pressure rating is reached. This figure shows measurements obtained when instrumenting the prop over a whole weekend. It can be seen from this graph that the deficient behaviour of the other two props is the cause of the continuous opening of the safety valve. Initially, prop A3-M suffers drastic changes in pressure leading to the opening of the valve of prop A3-C, which works correctly. Finally, prop A3-M begins loading appropriately and the valve of A3-C opens much less, although it continues to do so due to the fact that prop A3-B continues to discharge and does not contribute any kind of support. The typical tasks in the coal winning cycle in a working are not always developed over a predetermined period of time. This period may vary depending on the way working shifts are organized; specific needs are fulfilled or unforeseen events in the working take place. However, coalface advance almost always takes place in the instrumented working in the morning shift. In the graph, a pressure increase in the three props under consideration can be observed, being produced by the increase in the unsupported cavity generated by coal winning. However, it is worth highlighting the fact that this increase is only very slight. This may be influenced by the fact that people working at the coalface endeavour at all times to simultaneously carry out the work of coal winning and support, so the surface of the unpropped roof is as small as possible. To do so, immediately after winning coal in an area, framesets are installed, workers are protected by installing wooden boards on the roofwall and props are installed as soon as the space allows instalment. Nonetheless, the fact that a period of highly regular behaviour was chosen should not be overlooked, since it is a situation that does not always occur during the work cycle. From the initial stages of this study, gaining knowledge on the behaviour of the working when no work is being carried out in it over a prolonged period of time was considered of special importance. Given the capacity to collect a large amount of data, it was not a problem to analyse the effect of a prolonged period with no mining activity on the working’s support system. The period considered was a weekend. Results are shown in Prop reposition and recharge becomes very important when props work incorrectly and the set of props as a whole is not capable of providing critical support pressure. Prop recharging is fundamental as a preventative measure (provided that it is done with suitable safety measures) in situations that may put working stability at risk: before weekends, before blasting, etcetera.  From the study of the graph, it can be seen that—on becoming aware that the support pressure was below 10 When blasting takes place, increase in prop pressure of around 2 On certain occasions, sinking into the footwall and accidental rock falls may lead to discharging of part of the props. This situation is represented in Initially, prop A3-B discharged slightly, while pressure on the other two increased. Then, pressure in prop A3-M dropped almost 50%, while pressure on A3-C and A3-B increased. Finally, the prop at the lower end (A3-C) discharged instantaneously; a residual pressure of 25 One of the tasks in the mining cycle at the coalface that can be clearly identified in pressure graphs is prop removal or recovery to induce caving of the working. As it can be seen in The graph shows the recovery sequence, which began when pressure was released from prop A2-B, situated at the bottom (at approximately 11.30 The systematic campaign for pressure measurement in props has allowed obtaining very interesting information on support-system behaviour. For that purpose, we have calculated two values: the average load per prop and the average support pressure (see  Critical pressure corresponds to measures in which support in bad condition has been observed and, therefore, which are close to collapse situations, although collapse have never taken place. Since workings were under production, appropriate measurements were taken to avoid collapse (prop recharging, prop-support cleaning up, reduction of separation among props and use of wooden sleepers to share efforts among gables). The values obtained for critical support pressure in instrumented workings range from 28 With the results obtained it can be concluded that Dortmund guidelines recommend an important increase of support pressure insofar as seam slope rises. It is performed in order to neutralize possible stratum displacement. However, it should be questioned that such increase has positive effects in case that (roofwall and/or footwall) gables are not much resistant. If support pressure is increased, punching phenomena—which destabilize props locally, thus achieving the opposite effect to that intended—may arise. According to measurements performed in the mines studied, supplementary pressure necessary to avoid stratum displacement would not be higher than 30 Forensic analysis in mining exploitations requires that the forensic engineer counts on real data registered in operating mines with similar geologic characteristics. This will allow the engineer elaborating more reliable technical reports in case of accident or whenever safety inspections shall be performed. In longwall workings with hydraulic props, inner pressure in props is a fundamental parameter to get to know support state. In the present work, significant values of support pressure have been obtained in the particular cases of several coalmines in Castile-Leon (northern Spain). The values for critical support pressure range between 28 On the other hand, instrumentation of support pressure in props in longwall faces constitute first-hand information to get to know the current state of an exploitation and forecast its behaviour in the near future. It is also important to analyse how these values change in each of the stages of a working cycle or how specific labours such as blasting or prop failure may affect adjacent props. We wish to thank the management and workers at the mines under study, and especially UMINSA, for their help. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Francisco Trujillo García in the preparation of the English version of the present paper.