Background
                  Several cases of delayed bone consolidation have been treated with extracorporeal shock wave therapy (ESWT) to improve bone healing and a key role of the extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycans in osteogenesis has been suggested.
               
                  Objective
                  In this study, we aimed to identify and quantify the amount of sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAG) and hyaluronic acid (HA) within rat femurs following bone drilling and treatment with shock waves.
               
                  Methods
                  To identify and quantify the sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAG) and hyaluronic acid (HA) within rat femurs following bone drilling and ESWT, 50 male Wistar rats were evaluated. The animals were divided into two groups, both of which were subjected to bone drilling. One of the groups was treated with ESWT. The rats were sacrificed on the 3rd, 7th, 14th, 21st, and 28th day. GAG presence was analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis with subsequent densitometry and ELISA.
               
                  Results and discussion
                  The content of sulfated GAGs increased significantly from the 3rd to the 28th day (p = 0.002). Chondroitin sulfate was expressed more highly than the other GAGs. HA content increased significantly at the 3rd day in animals treated with ESWT compared to the control group (p = 0.003).
               
                  Conclusion
                  ESWT stimulates of sulfated glycosaminoglycans during bone healing and enhanced early expression of HA compared to the control group.All procedures and protocols were performed according to the guidelines of the Institutional Ethics Committee of the Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil and the Ethic's committee approved this study. Seventy-five femurs from 50 male Wistar rats were evaluated. Rats were 3 months old and had an average weight of 300 g. Animals were housed in a propylene box (5 rats per box) subjected to 12 h of light/dark cycles with food and water Animals were anesthetized by an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine and xylazine at a ratio of 2:1 using 0.2 cc/100 g per animal. Animals were restrained in the prone position, the hind legs were shaved and disinfected with 70% alcohol, and a skin incision, at the thigh, with a scalpel blade no. 15 was performed. The incisions were 3 cm in length and muscle dissection was performed in order to expose the femur. An electric drill, with a 2-mm drill, was used to create a defect in the femoral diaphysis. Drilling was performed until the cortical bone on the opposite side was reached. The wound was sutured using mononylon 4–0 sutures The animals were divided into two groups. In group I (25 animals) drilling was performed bilaterally and only the left femur (Group IA, 25 femurs) was subjected to ESWT after drilling. The right femur was no subjected to ESWT after drilling (Group IB, 25 femurs). In group II (25 animals, 25 femurs) drilling only was performed in the left femur. Following the procedure, the animals received analgesics and antibiotics for 7 days. Animals were sacrificed, with a CO The paws were examined daily, and no infection or clinical sign of inflammation were detected. The femurs were removed, fixed in 4% p-formaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer pH7.2 for 48 h, and decalcified in EDTA (0.7 g/L), tartrate potassium sodium (8 mg/L), hydrochloric acid (99.2 mL/L) and sodium tartrate (0.14 g/L); for 12 h. Subsequently, the fragments were soaked in absolute ethanol. Fragments of 5 mm from each femur containing the lesion area were cut, weighted and submitted to analytical procedure. An electro-hydraulic shock wave generator EVOTRON-Vet Demineralized bone fragments (5 mm) were pulverized using liquid nitrogen. Samples were incubated with 1 mg mL Afterwards, peptides and nucleic acid fragments were removed by precipitation with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 4 °C. After centrifugation (10 min, 3500 HA was quantified by fluorometric noncompetitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-like assay that can detect 2–500 g/L of HA. The ELISA plates had a fixed probe and 100 μl/well of standard HA solutions, at various concentrations (0–500 g/L), were added. The samples were diluted (1:100) in a buffer Tris–HCl 0.05 M, with 1% bovine serum albumine and added to the ELISA plates in triplicate. The plates were incubated at 4 °C for 12 h, followed by three washes with Tris–HCl 0.05 M. Next, 100 μl of the probe (1 mg/ml) diluted (1:10.000) in the assay buffer was added. The plate was incubated for 2 h on a shaker and washed nine times with a wash buffer. Streptavidin labeled with europium diluted 1:10.000 in assay buffer was added to each well (100 μl; Sigma, Germany). Streptavidin has an affinity for the biotin-conjugated probe. The plate was incubated 30 min on a shaker and washed nine times with Tris–HCl 0.05 M. To release the europium bound to streptavidin (Sigma), an enhancement solution (280 μl/well) was added. The plates were agitated for 5 min and the europium-free plate fluorescence was read on a fluorimeter. The results were expressed in ng/ml Mean values between groups were compared using an Two-way ANOVA The electrophoretic behavior in agarose gel of the glycosaminoglycans extracted from femurs of each experimental condition showed the presence of a single band migrating as chondroitin sulfate. ESWT leads to an increase in the amounts of CS compared with the non treated femur. GAG content (ug/g tissue) in Group IA (ESWT group) and Group IB (contralateral to ESWT) progressively increased on 3rd, 14th day and 28th day ( The results revealed a significant HA expression difference (p = 0.003) at day 3 between Group IA and Group II. No differences were observed at subsequent time points ( Previous studies The present study aimed to better understand the role of ESWT on sulfated GAGs and HA during bone healing. Bone-related GAGs, including CS, heparan sulfate, and HA have become a focus of interest because of their involvement in bone formation. In our study, GAG content displayed a homogeneous behavior pattern in all three groups. Specifically, we observed an initial increase in GAG content that reached a peak maximum, followed by a fall and subsequent rise to a plateau below the previous peak. This is the classic pattern of GAG content during bone healing described in previous studies As previous studies HA is a unique among the GAGs in that no contain any sulfate and for that it quantified was done by ELISA-like assay who is able to detect low concentrations of this GAG The increased HA early expression resulting from ESWT might indicate a beneficial effect. Expression of HA, an indispensable component of ECM. Interestingly, the amount of HA decreases as the bone matures. HA is related to cell migration in healing process and tissue repair ESWT has also been shown to promote increased bone mineral density, increased bony callus, and higher calcium content In the present work, it was possible to demonstrate that ESWT in perforated rat femurs stimulated expression of sulfated glycosaminoglycans during bone healing and enhanced early expression of HA compared to the control group. Study limitations include the model used to evaluate bone healing by a bone perforation that resembles a stable fracture and may not represent the same response for unstable fractures. Although ESWT has been the focus of intensified studies, the literature lacks an optimal protocol regarding each animal and bone evaluated, so the application methodology presented here may still not be the optimal. Extracorporeal shock wave therapy stimulated regeneration and bone healing by increasing the concentration and prolonging the anabolism period of sulfated glycosaminoglycans in addition to early enhanced expression of hyaluronic acid. Comite de Ética em Pesquisa da Universidade Federal de São Paulo sob numero 0048/09. FINEP –Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos. Paulo Roberto Dias dos Santos – study design ,data collections ,writing. Joao Paulo Freire Moura – data collections. Valquiria Pereira de Medeiros – data analysis. Carlos Eduardo da Silveira Franciozi – writing. Flavio Faloppa – study design. Helena Bonciani Nader – study design. I haven't conflicts of interest. Paulo Roberto Dias dos Santos. This work was supported, in part, by a grant from the