The recycling of Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) is important due to its content of valuable and hazardous compounds. This study investigates the case of the recent technology change within television sets (TVs) and monitors, its impact on the generation of WEEE, and the implications for the recycling industry. In particular, material flow analysis for the time series of 1996–2014 for TVs and monitors by type of technology (CRT, Plasma and LCD) in physical units is combined with empirical data on product lifespans. The number of consumed TVs and monitors has grown exponentially. As a result, despite a 3-fold reduction in the weight of the products, the weight of the corresponding WEEE is also growing exponentially. Out with the old, out with the new – a peak in WEEE from both CRT and flat-screen displays is expected during 2014–2020, due to the simultaneous obsolesce of the last wave of CRT products and the short-lived flat-screen products that substituted the CRTs. The lifespans of LCD and LED TVs were found to be three times shorter than of the CRT TVs, with many TVs discarded while still functional. This is the consequence of two events – replacement of the CRT TVs in combination with lifestyle purchases of TVs, i.e. the premature replacement of flat-screen displays with new sets with extra-large screens and/or new features. The throughput of TVs and monitors consumed has been estimated annually from 2014 until 2040, by quantity and type of device, as well as by component and material type. The annual economic value of the corresponding secondary materials, by material type, has also been estimated. The point in time when the final disposal of CRT products is likely to take place has been identified and should be noted by the recycling industry. Among the important contributions of this study to the accounting and predicting of amounts and types of WEEE are the lifespan distributions, size and weight distributions, and material composition for TVs and monitors of different technology. Directions for method application in other countries are given.The increasing variety of electronic devices, their penetration in all parts of the world, and their ever decreasing lifespan has led to an exponential growth in Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) globally, with collection and recycling rates far below the desirable ( The WEEE contains over 1000 different substances, which fall into “hazardous” and “non-hazardous” categories ( Estimations of the types, quantities and material composition of the WEEE are necessary in order to support its safe end-of-life management, to develop appropriate collection and recycling facilities and to inform environmental policy. As part of this study, Elkretsen (branch organization for WEEE collection and recycling companies in Sweden) and Stena Recycling, the dominant WEEE recycling company in Sweden, were interviewed ( In this paper we investigate the particular case of trends in the consumption of TVs and PC monitors and the corresponding WEEE generation. In the last decade, the market for TVs and PC monitors experienced a technology shift and product substitution from Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) to Liquid Crystal (LCD) and Plasma displays (also known as flat-panels). The first commercial LCD TV was available on the market in 1988, and in 2007 sales of LCD televisions surpassed sales of CRT TVs worldwide for the first time ( The most common approach to predicting WEEE generation is by combining flows data with lifespan data for the products in a method named Product Flow Analysis, developed by To the best of our knowledge no other study has consolidated the necessary data and methods available to project the generation of WEEE caused by TV and monitor consumption as well as the available secondary resources. In particular, the typical lifespans, product weights, components, material composition, and economic values necessary for such projections can be useful for various stakeholders. In addition, as shown in this paper, all of these variables change over time and require ongoing evaluation. This paper has the following objectives: (i) to contribute to the consolidation of available methods for forecasting the amounts of discarded TVs and monitors by technology type; (ii) to account TV and monitor consumption in Sweden from 1996 to 2014 and forecast the material types and quantities that will be available for recycling as a result of this consumption; (iii) to identify when the final CRT disposal is likely to occur in Sweden; (iv) to project quantities of future flat-screen disposal and (v) to describe possible implications of the transitions in TV and monitor technology for waste management. For durable goods, the sale and end-of-life stages are separated in time by a lifespan ranging from a few years to decades. Time series of material flow analysis (MFA) are necessary in order to describe the behavior of the system over time (e.g.: The lifes pan is the key variable for describing the dynamics of product use, and in particular for forecasting future availability of resources for reuse, recycling or recovery. In this study, the lifespan is set to the domestic service lifespan, defined as the period of time from initial manufacture until the point in time when a product is disposed of by the final owner ( Step 1 The model applies an internationally accepted nomenclature to systematically assess the flows, the Combined Nomenclature classification (CN), used for foreign trade data. In the CN classification, each product type is assigned an 8-digit classification code, the codes can then be aggregated into a larger groups of products. In this step, CN codes for the products covered by this study were selected – televisions and monitors divided by technology type. For monitors, only devices used in automatic data processing systems were considered. During the study period, numerous changes were made to the CN codes, as a result of changes in technologies. These have also been taken into account. Step 2 In the second step, the product consumption was accounted by technology type, using the MFA indicator Domestic Material Consumption in the year Sales figures for TVs in Sweden in 1981–2013 were used to cross-check the MFA results. The sales data was also used to identify the dimensions of the sold TVs, based on the length of the diagonal of the screen in inches: small screen <25″; medium screen 25″–39″; large screen 40″–49″ and extra-large screen >49″. These figures were used to further analyze the trends in TV consumption. Step 3 To forecast the WEEE, distribution functions ( A Weibull distribution function was shown to well describe the lifespan of EEE ( Step 4 The calculated inflows and distribution functions allow the expected generation of WEEE for each year to be estimated. The future WEEE ( In this study we also present the weights of the main components/materials of TVs and Monitors (i.e. composition). The composition was obtained by dismantling and weighing the components of 189 TVs and 309 monitors, both CRT and LCD devices, with different production years ( Furthermore, this study also estimates the material composition of discarded TVs and monitors (Eq. A constant lifespan function for each product technology type for all the study years was assumed, based on empirical data. Due to the lack of WEEE data for plasma TVs, it was assumed that Plasma TVs have the same lifespan as LCD TVs. Imported products were assumed to be produced in the year when they were imported. In this study, it was assumed that all computer systems sold in Sweden include a monitor. There is a specific CN code for systems described as data-processing machines comprising at least one central processing unit, one input unit and one output unit (CN 84714900). The code description does not clarify which types of equipment are included in the systems. It is not clearly stated whether a monitor is included or not, and there is no information on monitor technology. In this particular case, when the consumption of systems was calculated using the DMC indicator, the industrial production was not considered, to avoid double accounting of monitors. The reason is that systems assembled in Sweden usually use imported monitors, as the production of monitors in Sweden is null or negligible. For this reason, the monitors would already have been accounted as individual units. The proportion of CRT and LCD monitors is estimated, using the proportion of monitors collected per technology type, and the year of production of each collected device. Eq. The domestic service lifespan distributions for the studied 1462 discarded TVs and monitors are shown in The CRT TVs average (and median) lifespan is recorded as 15 Within the same technology, the lifespans of monitors, at 4–8 The composition of different types of TVs and monitors, including for different generations of the devices, has been compiled from a WEEE database containing 1462 products. The typical composition and average weight for different generations can be seen in The composition by component for CRT devices did not change between 1994 and 2007, however the weight of the components altered slightly. The LCD technology is still under development, and both the types and weights of components are changing continuously. One example is the backlight used in LCD TVs, in which fluorescent lamps have recently been replaced with LED lights. Because of the continuing flat-screen TV product development, the dismantling and recycling processes for LCD TVs should be updated continuously. LCD monitors, on the other hand show no considerable changes in the composition between different generations. The consumption of TVs grew exponentially by on average 2.0% per year in the period 1996–2014 ( The TVs consumption, as accounted by the MFA method ( The cumulative weight of the sold TVs has decreased to levels below those in 1996, despite the exponential increase in the number of televisions sold (see According to our estimates, the number of discarded TVs will peak for all the technology types in the near future, i.e. in 2014–2020 (see The WEEE from TVs was estimated using the obtained Weibull distributions and is presented in Monitors have gained widespread use since 2004 and have since reached consumption numbers on par with those for TVs ( In 2005 and 2008, the consumption of CRT monitors seems to be negative. This effect is probably caused by the increasing sales of LCD monitors, a new technology at that time. As a result, accumulated stocks of CRTs from previous years were exported to other countries. The same effect was also registered for TVs. Nevertheless, in the last few years (after 2009) an increase in the consumption of CRT monitors occurred. This increase was due to the NACE code 3210 (manufacture of electronic valves and tubes and other electronic equipment). More than 60% of the imported CRT devices belonged to this category. It can therefore be assumed that, during this period, CRT devices were mostly used by industries, probably as intermediate products. Just like the TV WEEE, the WEEE from monitors was estimated using the obtained Weibull distributions. The results are presented in The consolidation of the methods used to estimate the future production of WEEE for TVs and monitors presented in this study leads to a discussion about the possibility of using this method in other countries as well. In the next few paragraphs a brief discussion on the data requirements and factors that need to be taken into account will be presented. To account all the flows of TVs and PC monitors in a country, 2 main data sets must be compiled: International Trade Data and Industrial Production. Both sets are available in a number of countries, and the methodology for collecting them is harmonized at least for OECD countries. Regarding the lifespan of TVs and PC monitors, as discussed, some caution should be used when selecting the appropriate value for each specific country. In any case, there are already some examples in the literature that allow for a study with sensitivity analysis for the range of possible lifespans ( When it comes to breaking down the TVs and PC monitors into components that follow different recycling routes, Finally, the prices of raw materials on a market can be used to identify the potential economic values of the materials present in the WEEE. According to the interviews with Elkretsen (the branch organization for WEEE in Sweden) and Stena Recycling (the dominant CRT and LCD recycling company in Sweden) the entire flow of correctly disposed CRT and flat-screen devices is treated, within Sweden, by private companies specialized on recycling. It is estimated that 90–95% of the collected devices are recycled, reused or utilized as an energy resource. The collected screens are manually dismantled and the parts are sorted into metals, plastics, glass, electrical (e.g. transformers) and electronic (e.g. printed While the main part of the flow is recycled as glass, plastics and metals, a small amount is recycled as components. There is an interest in more substantial recycling of components, but there are at least two obstacles: (1) many components are old, and it is not always known how long they will last; (2) no law regulating the responsibilities of the producer in relation to the reuse of a component has been implemented. Is the primary producer, the recycler or the company reusing the component responsible for its end of life management? The recovered and upgraded materials are sold on the global market, often on a spot market. This means that the deposition can change fast and that there is a lack of stability in the circulation of material. Elkretsen has suggested that TVs and monitors WEEE will still be treated in Sweden in the future. They anticipate that an over-capacity for CRT recycling may follow and believe it is possible to adapt the capacity for flat-screen recycling to the changing flows. In general, they regard studies like the one described in this article as being of high importance for planning the recycling capacity. Among the most profound consequences of the technology shift in TVs and monitors is the change in consumption patterns. On the one hand, the latest TV models are being purchased to replace existing TVs, despite the fact that these are still functional. As shown in Section Another implication with a potentially large impact on the recycling industry is the negligible share of the modern television market made up by CRT TVs. No significant sales of CRT TVs have occurred since 2006 and the disposal of CRT TVs will decrease gradually until the last sets enter the waste stream around 2034. The recycling of CRT TVs would be more effective if considerable numbers were recycled together. To accelerate collection of the last CRT TVs, a concerted collection campaign should be considered. As suggested by the lifespan distribution, over 60% of the CRT TVs were discarded 15 Lifecycle assessment studies have shown that the environmental impact of flat-screen TVs is up to three time lower than for CRT TVs of the same screen size ( The environmental impact of TVs and monitors could be reduced in the manufacturing, usage and disposal phases. In the manufacturing phase, a reduction in the use of SF6 and natural gas has been advocated, as has reducing the electricity consumption in the usage phase (Sokolof et al.). The useful lifespan of TVs and monitors could be extended by promoting the second-hand market and repairs of existing sets, and taxes on materials can be considered as a means to curb over-consumption. In the disposal phase, as many materials and elements as possible should be separated and reused instead of being landfilled or used for waste-to-energy recycling ( Consumption trends for TVs and monitors of different technologies have been investigated quantitatively for Sweden for the period between 1996 and 2014 (Objective 2). During this period, a technology transition has taken place, with flat-screen TVs dominating the market since 2007 and CRT TVs holding only 4% of the market. This phenomenon can readily be observed in the figures along with several other important unfolding trends, such as the considerably shorter lifespans of TVs and monitors; the drastically decreasing weight of devices, and consumer preferences for ever larger screens, as well as lifestyle purchases of TVs. The fact that the lifespans of flat-screen TVs are three times shorter than the lifespans of CRT TVs is likely to be a contributing factor to the lifestyle purchases of TVs. In particular, 40% of the flat-screen TVs are discarded within five years of purchase, when they are most probably still functional. Such short lifespans are expected to persist or even decrease further, as a result of the observed recent trend of preference for x-large screens, along with further developments in peripheral technologies, and the availability of new display technologies. The consumption of large screens, together with the installation of multiple TV units in many households will further aggravate the environmental impact caused by the consumption of TVs. The amounts of discarded TVs and monitors by technology type, and the available secondary resources, by quantity, type and economic value generation have been investigated (Objectives 2 and 4). As a result of the recent exponential growth in flat-screen TVs, in combination with their short lifespans, a peak in the disposal of these devices is forecasted in 2014–2020 and will require an adequate response (for example adjustment of recycling capacities) from the WEEE collectors and recycling facilities. Since 2007, the consumption of CRT TVs has made up less than 4% of the Swedish TV market. As a result, the last wave of disposed CRT products is projected to occur around 2020 (Objective 3). As low volumes of these products will be discarded over an extended period of time, a concerted campaign to collect all CRT products would be one way to make recycling more effective (Objective 5). In addition, as the development of flat-screen TVs is still on-going, the dismantling and recycling processes for LCD TVs should be updated continuously. This study contributes to the consolidation of the available methods for forecasting the amounts of discarded TVs and monitors by technology type, as well as the available secondary resources, by quantity, type and economic value (Objective 1). Both the data requirements and the methods are described in detail, including data sources in different countries and reasonable assumptions made based on findings of this and other published studies. In particular, typical lifespans, weights of products and components, material compositions, and economic values are provided for different technologies and generations of devices. Weibull distributions of lifespans, together with size and weight distributions of consumed TVs may inform WEEE estimations under conditions of data scarcity, when for example only the number of sold units is known. The authors express their gratitude to the El-kretsen (WEEE trade association in Sweden) for their contribution of the data. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 