During heterogeneous photocatalysis, high dispersion of photocatalyst is vital for efficiency of slurry type photoreactors. In this work, we have prepared fluorine doped graphene (FG24) as a highly dispersible adsorbent by sonochemical exfoliation method. Moreover, SmVO4 (SV) nanoparticles were immobilized onto the surface of FG24 to prepare SV/FG24 photocatalyst, using post synthesis method. The zeta potential and Tyndall effect experiments confirmed the formation of highly dispersed SV/FG24 photocatalyst. The thickness of both FG24 and SV/FG24 was less than 2.0 nm. The band gap of SV/FG24 was 2.28 eV. The high surface area of SV/FG24 was suitable for adsorptive removal of phenol and 2, 4-dinitrophenol (DNP). The simultaneous process of adsorption and photocatalysis was the most effective for the degradation of selected phenolic compounds. Both phenol and DNP were mineralized in 10 h under visible light. The intermediates formation during the degradation process was proved by high-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis. The photocatalytic activity of SV/FG24 was also tested for photocatalytic bacterial disinfection of Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas fluorescence, Staphylococcus aureus, and Streptococcus enterica bacteria. The selected bacteria were deactivated using SV/FG24 in 3 h under visible light. Both OH˙ and O2
                     ˙¯ radicals played an important role during both degradation and disinfection process. Due to significant recyclability, SV/FG24 could be used as cost-effective photocatalyst for wastewater treatment. Unlike conventional slurry photo-reactors, no magnetic stirring was used during photocatalytic degradation reactions. We have successfully fabricated high-dispersed photocatalyst which remained dispersed for 10 h and effectively used for photocatalytic water purification process.Water pollution is one of the major problems that World is facing in modern time. Due to the rapid industrialization and urbanization, acute shortage of clean water sources have attracted enormous attention all over the world ( To date, photocatalysis has been regarded as one of the most tempting choices for wastewater treatment ( Nowadays, graphene and its analogues have been widely used to improve the photocatalytic activity and stability of photocatalyst for wastewater treatment. Graphene is made of sp Very recently, fluorographene has been used in electrochemical cells, hydrophobic coating, and solid lubricant, due to its high thermal and chemical stability ( The graphite powder, sodium fluoride (NaF), hydrazine hydrate (NH For the synthesis of fluorine doped graphene (FG), 50 mg of each Gr and NaF were mixed in 100 mL of distilled water and sonicated for 2 h at pH 3. The reaction solution was agitated for different time intervals (8, 16, 24, and 32 h). Then, fluorine doped graphene particles were separated through centrifugation process. The separated particles were washed with distilled water, dried and labelled as FG8, FG16, FG24, and FG32 depending on the reaction time. During the synthesis of SV/FG24, 1 g of FG24 was suspended in 50 mL of water and sonicated for 30 min. Then, 20 mL of 1 mM of samarium nitrate [Sm(NO The thickness and lateral size of FG24 and SV/FG24 were estimated by atomic force microscope using Dimensional Icon system (Bruker make). The freshly prepared suspension after sonication for AFM measurements were drop-casted over a freshly cleaned silicon wafer followed by drying at room temperature. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a PHI VersaProbe II with AES using 24.63 W Al Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were performed using model Nava Nano SEM-45 (USA) system. Raman analysis was performed using FTIR-Raman spectrometer (BRUKEF RFS 27: standalone with a range of 50–4000 cm The degraded products of phenol and DNP were analyzed using high performance liquid chromatography analysis (Water HPLC, Austria). The HPLC was equipped with photodiode array detector model and manual injector. The instrument was packed with Rheodyne manual injector kit and C18 column (5 μm, 25 cm length, and 7 mm diameter). During the analysis of phenol, 10% of methanol was taken as eluent. The analysis of DNP was carried out by taking acetic acid: methanol: water in 1:39:60 ratio as eluent with flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The LC-MS studies were performed on JEOL GCMATE II GC-MS with Data system, which is a high resolution, double focusing instrument with an electrospray ionization (ESI) and C18 column (150 mm × 2 mm; injection volume 20 μl). The photocatalytic and photolytic experiments were performed in a self-developed slurry-type batch reactor having doubled walled Pyrex vessel with the dimensions of 7.5 cm × 6 cm (height × diameter) ( The antibacterial activity of FG24 and SV/FG24 nanocomposite was investigated by incubating the bacterial cells with the activated nanocomposite (activation was done with the exposure to ∼750 lux of light for 30 min using 35 W LED lamp) and counting the colony forming units (CFUs). Briefly, all the glassware were sterilized by autoclaving at 120 °C for 15 min before doing the microbiological experiments. Firstly, bacterial cells of Here, graphene was prepared using modified Hummer's method ( The atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis was used to examine the thickness of graphene sheets ( The graphitic nature of FG24 and SV/FG24 was investigated using Raman analysis ( The XPS spectra of SV/FG24 are represented in The band gap analysis of FG24, SV, and SV/FG24 was performed using UV–visible spectral analysis. The dispersibility of photocatalyst is an important parameter in slurry-type photoreactor. In order to check the dispersiblity of photocatalyst, zeta potential studies were performed and results are represented in The photocatalytic activity of SV/FG24 was evaluated for the photodecomposition of phenol and DNP in slurry-type photoreactor under visible light irradiation. Further studies were undertaken to explore the kinetics of adsorption process. The amount of phenol and DNP adsorbed onto SV/FG24, SV, and FG24 at time t (min) was calculated using Eq. Where q The pseudo first order rate is expressed by Eq. Furthermore, adsorption of aqueous phase pollutants onto the surface of catalyst is greatly influenced by reaction pH. The adsorption of both phenol and DNP was higher at initial reaction pH 4.0 ( Effect of adsorption on the photocatalytic degradation was investigated by coupling both adsorption and photocatalytic processes. The photocatalytic degradation of phenolic compounds was studied under two conditions, The degradation kinetics of phenol and DNP was explored using Eq. The –ln (C/C Mineralization of phenol and DNP was investigated for both SV/FG24/A + P and SV/FG24/A-P catalytic systems. COD and CO To understand the mechanism of photocatalytic degradation, it is vital to identify the main oxidants involved in photodegradation process. During photocatalytic advanced oxidation processes, hydroxyl (OH In order to find out intermediate products during the degradation process, HPLC profiles of degraded phenol and DNP were investigated at different time intervals. The progressive reduction in peak intensity at retention times of 5 min and 8.5 min was observed for phenol and DNP, respectively ( The reusability of photocatalyst is regarded as an important feature of a heterogeneous photocatalytic process utilised for wastewater treatment. The recycling efficiency of SV/FG24 was examined for phenol and DNP degradation for ten consecutive catalytic cycles ( The antibacterial activity of SV/FG24 and FG24 was tested for The visible light active SV/FG24 nanocomposite was successfully synthesised and effectively used as a photocatalyst for water purification. Morphological and structural analyses were elaborated using SEM, TEM, AFM, FTIR, RAMAN, TGA, and XPS techniques. The 3–5 layers nanosheets were prepared with layer thickness <2.0 nm. The zeta potential measurements and Tyndall experiment confirmed the formation of stable colloidal suspension in aqueous media. Both photocatalytic activity and adsorption behaviour of SV/FG24 were observed during phenol and DNP photodegradation. The adsorption process followed pseudo second-order kinetics. SV/FG24 showed significant antibacterial activity against The corresponding author, Pardeep Singh is thankful to Science and Engineering Research Board-DST (SERB), Department of Science and Technology ( The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at