Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is a perinatal condition associated with a low birth weight that results mainly from maternal and placental constrains. Newborns affected by this condition are more likely to develop in the long term cardiovascular diseases whose origins would be in an altered vascular structure and function defined during fetal development. Thus, this study presents the modeling and numerical simulation of systemic vessels from guinea pig fetuses affected by FGR. We aimed to characterize the biomechanical properties of the arterial wall of FGR-derived the aorta, carotid, and femoral arteries by performing ring tensile and ring opening tests and, based on these data, to simulate the biomechanical behavior of FGR vessels under physiological conditions. The material parameters were first obtained from the experimental data of the ring tensile test. Then, the residual stresses were determined from the ring opening test and taken as initial stresses in the simulation of the ring tensile test. These two coupled steps are iteratively considered in a nonlinear least-squares algorithm to obtain the final material parameters. Then, the stress distribution changes along the arterial wall under physiological pressure were quantified using the adjusted material parameters. Overall, the obtained results provide a realistic approximation of the residual stresses and the changes in the mechanical behavior under physiological conditions.Fetal growth restriction (FGR) corresponds to one of the main complications that can be present during pregnancy. Affected neonates present increased risk of mortality and morbidity ( Over the years, several tests have been developed to characterize the mechanical response of vascular tissues. Generally, inflation, uniaxial and multiaxial testing methods can be found in the study of different pathologies ( In the past, tensile tests applied to rings have been used to characterize arteries and determine the effects of exercise on the biomechanical properties of the rat aorta ( Only few articles have modeled the mechanical behavior of vessels affected by FGR, where the assumption of a thin-walled tube was taken for the simulation of the common carotid artery on FGR fetuses, using the data obtained from the inflation test and an anisotropic hyperelastic model ( Our aim in the present work consists in modeling the mechanical response of the aorta, the common carotid, and the femoral arteries for understanding the FGR-related cardiovascular diseases. For this purpose, we describe the materials, methods, and the constitutive model used in the analysis of the ring tensile and ring opening tests. Further, geometries, boundary conditions and the simulation method for these two tests are given. To this end, the residual stresses were obtained from the simulation and incorporated into the model; this is an important point in this work and a novel procedure in the understanding of the test. The modeling was performed via an isotropic constitutive model, where the initial material parameters were obtained from the ring tensile test measurements and then improved via numerical fitting considering the effect of residual stress estimated from the ring opening test. Finally, the simulation of the pressurization test under physiological pressure is subsequently carried out using the previously characterized material properties. All animal care and experimental procedures were approved by the Ethics Committees of the Faculty of Medicine of the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile (1130801) and the Universidad de Chile (protocol CBA N◦ 0694 FMUCH), and they were conducted according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No. 85–23, revised 1996). Further, these procedures were reported in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines ( Four to five-month-old virgin sows in estrus were paired with a fertile male for 2 days. After the mating period, the females were individually housed with daily monitoring of body weight, food intake, and water consumption. Pregnancy was confirmed by ultrasonography at day 20–25 ( At day 35, all pregnant sows were subjected to aseptic surgery under general anesthesia (isoflurane 2% in O At 61–63 days of gestation, the guinea pigs and their fetuses were euthanized with a maternal anesthetic overdose (Sodium Thiopentone 200 mg kg The experimental data used in this work was previously presented and details about the analyzed arteries of the control and FGR animals, together with the corresponding histological analysis can be found elsewhere ( The test is used to obtain the stress-strain relationship, and it consists in subjecting a cylindrical sample of controlled length, approximately 2 mm, to a radial elongation performed by pins. For the simplified analytical interpretation of this test, the assumptions of negligible initial bending and frictionless condition are considered. All tests were performed immediately after dissection and carried out with the sample immersed in physiological serum at 37 ± 0.5 °C. During the test, the load ( Thus, it is possible to define the elongation considering the semiperimeter of the artery and the increase in separation of the pins: Finally, the expression of the Cauchy stress in the arterial wall is computed as: For the determination of residual stress, the opening angle ( An elastic and rate-independent material response is considered for the arteries analyzed in the present work. Moreover, their behaviors are taken as incompressible due to a large amount of water present in them. To this end, hyperelastic constitutive models are used ( The measurements reported in In this context, the improvement of these parameters must be accomplished via numerical simulation in order to consider the residual stresses and the nonhomogeneous stress distribution. Hence, the resultant force in the stretching direction of the vessel was computed from the simulation, and in conjunction with Eqs. With these initial parameters, two simulations were carried out. The residual stresses determined from the analysis of the ring opening test were then incorporated into the ring tensile test simulation. This procedure is iteratively performed until a good adjustment of the material parameters is achieved ( The first step of the simulation corresponds to the closure of the rings, in order to determine the magnitude of the residual stress present in the vessel. To this end, the free-stress configuration is drawn considering a symmetric plane. The procedure used for the closure of the ring consists in displacing the surface denoted as CD using a series of local coordinate systems, rotated with respect to a global coordinate system. After achieving almost completely the closure of the ring, a horizontal displacement is imposed to the surface denoted as CD''', and simultaneously the motion of a point on the surface AB is restricted to make possible the closure of the ring ( The initial stresses computed from the closure of the ring are inserted in this simulation in order to achieve a better representation of the stress field obtained during the actual test. Therefore, an adjustment of the material parameters was made. Symmetry conditions reduce the size of the problem, hence the geometry used for the simulation of the contact problem corresponds to the upper half of the previous vessels geometry ( The geometry composed of hexahedral elements considers 15 elements in the thickness, 30 in the longitudinal, and 60 in the circumferential directions, with a greater density in the zone of contact with the pins in order to guarantee the contact between geometries during the simulation. Appropriate boundary conditions were imposed according to the symmetry planes, restricting the displacement of some surfaces. In relation to the pin, it considers 50 elements in the longitudinal and 50 in the circumferential directions. There are a total of 35,420 nodes and 33,200 elements between both geometries. Moreover, it must be noted that the problem does not consider friction in the contact between the vessel and the pin. The contact model used for the simulation considers that the contact pressure ( The simulation consists of applying a pressure on the inner surface of the vessels and it considers the closure and pressurization of the ring. The geometry itself is the same used previously in the closure of the ring and the boundary conditions on the "AB" and "CD" surfaces were fixed in the x-direction. The mesh used in our problem was composed of hexahedral elements distributed in 10 elements in the thickness, 3 in the longitudinal, and 40 in the circumferential directions. The experimental curves and simulations computed using the adjusted parameters in  An increase was seen in the opening angle of FGR subjects, aorta (+55.63%) and carotid artery (+17.65%). Conversely, a reduction of the opening angle (−25.16%) was seen in the femoral artery, shown in The opened configuration of the ring is closed and residual stresses are determined for an axial stretch λz = 1.0, then a mean blood pressure of 40 mmHg was applied on the inner face of the ring. The procedure is performed in order to obtain the behavior under a larger range of pressures, knowing that average values of 28 mmHg are found in guinea pig fetuses ( A summary of the cases under control and FGR conditions is presented in A new approach to characterize the material response was taken and a good improvement of the material parameters was obtained in the presence of residual stresses. In the long run, this new way of approaching the problems could be coupled with non-invasive pressure, geometrical and resistance determination in order to obtain parameters from healthy and pathological subjects. In general, a good correlation was achieved between the constitutive model and the experimental response of the tissue material. The presence of a nonuniform stress field across the vessels makes difficult to determine a representative stress level to compare with the experimental data, hence the resultant force was calculated from the simulation for each stretch level, and using Eqs. The stress concentrations in the inner face and the zone closest to the pins make the experimental stress lower than the actual maximum stress in the simulation. This has been reported before and depends on the diameter and thickness of the sample ( The final parameters show clear differences between healthy and pathological subjects in the aorta and femoral vessels, which are directly related to the stiffer pathological response of these vessels (  It is known that the effects of residual stresses reduce the variation of the circumferential stress across the vessel walls ( The modeled pressurization retrieved an approximation of the potential behavior under a range of normal fetal arterial pressure (0–40 mmHg). Studies in healthy and restricted fetal sheep showed no differences in the mean pressure near term ( The determination of the intima-media thickness from the pressurization test was done in conjunction with the histological data presented previously ( Limitations of this work that will be addressed in further research are: the assumption of the isotropic behavior, which was basically made because of the difficulty of characterizing the longitudinal direction; the assumption of the longitudinal stretch used in this work, which was not measured during the experiments; and the consideration of experimental tests in which the multiaxial effects are not so relevant. In particular, an anisotropic model could be used together with restricted bounds assigned to some parameters in an inverse approach, where the ill conditioned identification inherent of this technique can be improved by adding more measurements. Although a more complete instrumentation of the ring tensile test could be an option to address this, we are planning for feature works to carried out additional tests, e.g., uniaxial tensile test using longitudinal samples. The FGR was found to have a relevant effect on the mechanical behavior of the aorta and femoral arteries. This affects the arterial function, stiffening the artery and changing the residual stresses of these vessels. Moreover, a good representation of the initial geometry was achieved when closing the opened ring; that made it possible to determine residual stress in both subjects. The numerical simulation of the ring tensile test showed that there is a large difference in the stress across the wall during the test, and because of this concentration the actual rupture stress is higher than the stress obtained from the test. The pressurization of the vessels for the aorta and femoral arteries showed a stiffer behavior compared to the controls, that can be related to decreased damping capabilities. Conversely, FGR carotid arteries showed a completely different behavior, related to offsetting effects on the vascular resistance. Furthermore, we propose that this fitting procedure can be adapted to be used together with a non-invasive pressure, resistance and geometrical determinations techniques to characterize human pathologies to predict different conditions with extreme physiological loads (hypertension) and, therefore, to help physicians in clinical situations to diagnose patient outcomes. The supports provided by the National Council for Scientific and Technological Research The authors have no conflicting interests regarding this paper.