Magnesium-based alloys are among the promising materials for hydrogen storage and fuel cell applications due to their high hydrogen content. In the present work, we investigated the hydrogen release/uptake properties of the Mg–Ti–H system. Samples were prepared from the mixtures of MgH2 and TiH2 in molar ratios of 7:1 and 4:1 using a high-energy-high-pressure (HEHP) mechanical ball-milling method under 13.8MPa hydrogen pressure. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) showed that a relatively large amount of hydrogen (5.91 and 4.82wt.%, respectively, for the above two samples) was released between 126 and 313°C while temperature was increased at a heating rate of 5°Cmin−1 under an argon flow. The onset dehydrogenation temperature of these mixtures, which is 126°C, is much lower than that of MgH2 alone, which is 381°C. The activation energy of dehydrogenation was 71kJmol−1, which is much smaller than that of as-received MgH2 (153kJmol−1) or as-milled MgH2 (96kJmol−1). Furthermore, the hydrogen capacity and the dehydrogenation temperature remained largely unchanged over five dehydrogenation and rehydrogenation cycles.Hydrogen is widely regarded as the most promising alternative energy source to replace fossil fuels as a clean energy carrier. It can be produced from a variety of renewable sources and yields a non-polluting waste, i.e. water. However, one of the key obstacles to the use of hydrogen as a fuel, especially for vehicles, is the lack of practical methods to store it on board. Because hydrogen is a gas under practical conditions, it is difficult to store it compactly and safely. Hydrogen storage systems developed so far are liquid hydrogen, compressed gas cylinders and solid-state storage materials. Compared to the physical approaches such as liquefaction and compression, hydrogen storage in the solid state has merits in terms of high volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen contents and, most importantly, safety Among the many different candidate materials based on metal hydrides, magnesium and magnesium-based alloys are considered very attractive candidates as rechargeable hydrogen storage materials because of their high hydrogen capacities (theoretically up to 7.6 In the past several decades, a great deal of research efforts has been reported in the literature to improve the hydrogen storage properties of MgH One of the most notable results was reported by Hanada et al. Recently, it was reported that metastable alloys or ternary hydrides based on magnesium can be obtained using thin film deposition, which possesses unique hydrogen storage properties Mechanical ball milling is well known to change various properties of materials, as a result of the formation of special microstructure, metastable phases, and modified surface. This technique has been found to be an effective way to improve the hydrogen release and uptake kinetics of metal hydrides. Hydrogenation properties are very sensitive to these modifications, and in some cases, substantial changes of the hydrogenation behavior can be obtained after milling. For example, the formation of nanocrystalline or amorphous structure produced by milling results in dramatic changes in hydrogenation properties, especially by eliminating the need for activation and improving hydrogenation/dehydrogenation kinetics In the present work, we investigated the feasibility of synthesizing Mg–Ti–H hydride systems using a high-energy-high-pressure (HEHP) mechanical milling method. The capability of HEHP milling for synthesizing hydride particles in a reactive atmosphere allows one to obtain nanoscaled materials without any formation of oxides. The synthesized Mg–Ti–H materials showed that the release and uptake of hydrogen are reversible with reasonable kinetics at a relatively low temperature. The initial materials, magnesium hydride (MgH The hydrogen release from the mixtures was examined by the use of a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA, Shimadzu TGA50) in which 10 The identification of phases in the reactants and products before and after the TGA was carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Siemens D5000) with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation ( A scanning electron microscope (SEM, TOPCON SM-300) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) was employed to observe the morphology of the samples before and after milling and determine the particle size. The samples were protected from exposure to air by a conductive tape in the glove box during the transfer to the SEM sample chamber. For additional measurements of the particle size, a particle size analyzer (The Brookhaven Instruments ZetaPALS) which can detect the size range from 1 to 6000 A transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI Tecnai 30) with an accelerating voltage of 120 In this work, the Mg–Ti–H system was first synthesized using an HEHP milling process under 13.8 A particle size analyzer, described earlier in Section  It is also worthwhile to point out that no MgO peaks were detected in the mixture after HEHP milling. Magnesium oxide, which was reported to form during milling, causes the degradation of hydrogen capacity during the subsequent dehydrogenation and rehydrogenation cycles It has been pointed out earlier that the rate of dehydrogenation of MgH The onset temperature is more easily shown in The total weight loss amounted to 5.91 A separate TGA result (not shown here) showed additional hydrogen release above 400 In order to test the reversibility of the Mg–Ti–H system, the dehydrogenated products of reaction Non-isothermal runs described above were performed to determine the activation energy for reaction where According to the results in The effect of TiH In this work, the dehydrogenation of the Mg–Ti–H system prepared by a high-energy-high-pressure milling technique was investigated. The analyses of TGA and XRD data indicate that the 7MgH This research was supported by the financial support from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under contract number DE-FC36-05GO15069.