A greenhouse study was conducted to investigate the effects of inorganic (phosphate rock, single superphosphate and calcium magnesium phosphate) and organic amendments (peat, straw manure and pig manure) on the uptake of lead (Pb) and trace elements by Chinese Cabbage (Brassica chinensis) grown in an acidic red soil. The application of all organic amendments increased the soil pH while inorganic amendments such as single superphosphate did not. Both inorganic and organic amendments decreased the availability and uptake of Pb while the organic amendments were superior to the inorganic (phosphate) amendments in reducing the availability of the more labile (soluble and exchangeable Pb) forms of soil Pb. More Pb was taken up by roots than shoots with all soil amendments. Among the organic amendments, straw manure and pig manure caused the largest decrease in Pb availability at 456.5 and 457.3mgkg−1, respectively, when a high level of 30g organic amendments kg−1 was applied. The organic amendments greatly increased the fraction D targeted to Fe–Mn oxides bound Pb, and decreased the fraction A (water-soluble), B (exchangeable), and C (carbonate-bound), thereby decreasing the solubility and mobility of Pb in soil. The organic amendments also significantly improved the concentrations of Fe, Mn, Cu and Zn in the soil and shoots (except Fe in shoots and/or roots), which are essential for plant nutrition. The organic amendments of straw and pig manure lowered the availability and uptake of Pb but not that of other trace metals. Thus, these amendments have the potential to remediate Pb-contaminated soils in situ.Heavy metal contamination in soil originates from various anthropogenic activities, such as mining, smelting, and the disposal of industrial wastes, and has attracted considerable public attention worldwide ( Chemical immobilization, a remediation technique that decreases the concentration of dissolved contaminants by sorption or precipitation ( Trace metals, such as Zn, Fe, Mn and Cu, are essential for plant growth but are required in very small amounts. Trace metals are involved in almost all metabolic functions, such as energy metabolism, primary and secondary metabolism, cell protection, gene regulation, hormone perception, signal transduction, and reproduction ( Red soils (Ultisols) are widespread in China and the high concentration of iron (III), aluminum oxides and hydroxides, as well as the low level of pH in these soils has a major effect on the soil properties and behavior of metals in soils. Inorganic P is the most frequently used amendment to decrease soil Pb availability ( A red clay soil contained 23.3% clay, 51.4% silt and 25.3% sand from a garden in Longyou city of Zhejiang province, China (29°6′N, 119°11′E) was used. The organic matter, pH and total Pb contents were 1.4%, 4.6 and 53.0 The soil amendments were applied to soil at two levels: low level, 152.8 One cultivar of Chinese Cabbage, Soil pH was determined with a pH meter in 1:5 soil water suspensions after 0.5 All data were analyzed by using Microsoft Office 2003 and DPS 7.0. The probability value ( Because pH is one of the most important parameters to affect the availability of heavy metals, the effects of inorganic and organic amendments on the soil pH were tested. The soil pH was mostly increased by the application of inorganic amendments ( The concentrations of available Pb in the acidic red soil after application of inorganic and organic amendments are given in Different inorganic and organic amendments resulted in significant changes in the Pb speciation ( Soil pH is one of the important factors that control the availability of the different chemical forms of metals in soil ( The inorganic and organic amendments considerably increased the dry weight of the shoots of The uptake of Pb by Several factors could be responsible for this low uptake of Pb from soil. Concentration of available Pb in soil may be the main factor that controls plant uptake. The phytoavailability of trace metals (Fe, Mn, Cu and Zn) showed a different trend in both the inorganic and organic amendments compared to the control ( The uptake of trace metals by plants also significantly differed between the inorganic and organic amendments ( We used different inorganic and organic amendments to enhance the chemical immobilization process of Pb in an acidic red soil. Most inorganic and organic amendments increased the soil pH, decreased the availability and uptake of Pb in soil, and increased the contents of trace metals (Fe, Mn, Cu and Zn) in soil and plant. However, the efficiency of organic amendments in terms of adjusting the soil pH, reducing the Pb availability and uptake was greater than the inorganic amendments, despite the minimal effect of organic amendments on strong-acid extractable Pb. Of all the organic amendments, straw and pig manure significantly increased the fraction D, E and F targeted to Fe–Mn oxides bound, organic bound, and residual Pb, respectively, decreased the Pb uptake in roots and shoots, and slightly affected the uptake of Fe, Mn and Zn by plants. Therefore, we conclude that organic amendments, such as pig manure, could be good options for the remediation of Pb contaminated soil because of Pb reduction by these organic amendments and apparent lack of negative effects on trace metals (essential for plant growth) compared to inorganic amendments. This research was jointly sponsored by the Special Fund for