It is widely known that particle size reduction processes have a low energetic efficiency. In this paper, we present experimental results obtained by a new grinding machine using ultrasound to enhance the performance of a roller mill. The required energy consumption for a comminution operation appears to be significantly reduced by careful application of an ultrasonic field in the grinding zone. A lower stress on the shafts and a reduction of the required torque were also observed. The lower mechanical stress should also cause less abrasive wear on the rolls.One of the options to improve the efficiency of comminution is the application of an ultrasonic field in the stressing zone. There are well-known related applications of ultrasonics in drilling and in the destruction of kidney stones. Since the 1950s, many researchers have been exploring the fragmentation effect of ultrasonic fields in suspensions and solids under compression. In most research work, ultrasonic waves have been applied as a means to induce an accelerated fatigue cracking, due to the high frequencies involved. Most devices are composed of a vibrating surface, separated by a gap much smaller than the particle feed size. The amplitude of the vibration is approximately one order of magnitude smaller than the gap size. The process capacities that can be obtained with this design are very limited, in spite of the very low, energy consumption, levels claimed by some authors. A key point is the influence exerted by the ultrasonic field on the material properties. An experiment was made on the effect of ultrasound on the breakage of glass balls. A pneumatic press capable of applying up to Three collections, each one formed by 25 glass spheres of  The result of tests under static conditions show a mean breakage force of These results suggest that an ultrasonic field reduces the force needed to begin breakage. The main weakness of the high-pressure roll mills is precisely a very high stress imposed on the rolls, which promote rapid wear of their surface and some times even fracture. A vibrating roll could help to reduce this problem by prolonging the useful life of the hard face roll and avoiding, or at least reducing, the risk of fracture. It may also be expected that the additional energy spent on ultrasonic vibration could be compensated by the reduced energy requirements for grinding associated with a lower breakage force. In order to be efficient, the design of a grinding machine must follow some general principles. An efficient grinding device would involve the direct flow of particles to the breakage zone, slow compression loading of particles, and immediate removal of the broken fragments ( The device that best fulfils the conditions listed above is a high-pressure roll mill which could be redesigned to work under ultrasonic vibration. One requirement for the correct use of ultrasonics is a good coupling between the generator and the grinding material, which is fulfilled by the roller stress. For efficient working, it is necessary that the ultrasonic transducer operate in resonant condition. In other words, it is best that the active parts of an ultrasonic mill oscillate in one of its natural frequencies, and best of all in its first mode which is more efficient for electro-acoustic conversion. It is well known that in this condition the losses in the system decrease and the vibration amplitude is limited only by the internal losses of the system. To maintain the condition of the free vibration of the roll, that is to say to avoid as far as possible losses other than radiation to the process feed, the system is supported exclusively by its nodal lines. In addition, a special electronic circuit to maintain the frequency in best performance for the whole system was added ( An active roll, which is itself an ultrasonic transducer, is located in front of a passive roll. The vibration in extensional mode combines compression and shear action of the active roll on the mill feed. The shear of ultrasonic waves are reported to be beneficial to liberation ( An experimental programme has been performed to assess the real possibilities of the ultrasonic grinding mill. The block diagram of the experimental set-up is shown in The experimental system allows in-line measurement of the applied torque, the distance between the two rolls, and the angular speed of the rolls. In each experiment, the process variables are measured and recorded. In addition, particle size analysis of feed and products are made by sieving after sample division by the cone and quartering method. To eliminate consideration of geometrical factors all experiments are made using the same device. For the reference measurements, the machine is operated as a conventional roller mill by switching off the ultrasonic power. Afterwards, the same test is repeated with the ultrasonic system activated at different levels. The behaviour of dynamic gap as a function of the applied ultrasonic power is shown in Although very interesting, this behaviour is out of the scope of this paper and will be considered later in a special research devoted to the basic phenomena of the ultrasonic fracture process.   A special study was conducted of the particle size distribution obtained with the mill operating with and without ultrasonic energy. For this purpose, ore from the Andina Division of Codelco was ground with the machine operating as a conventional high-pressure roller mill and as an ultrasonic grinding machine. These results are given in There is now some certainty on the processing capacity limits of the machine where the linear velocity is approximately A special experiment was performed to assess the effect of the ultrasonic field on the response of the grinding surfaces to the abrasive action of the grinding material. However, for a machine made with special SAE 2020 heat-treated hard tool steel, the abrasive effect is negligible over a time scale of From the data collected, it is clear that another beneficial effect of ultrasound is that, in both the passive and active rolls, abrasive wear is less when the grinding is made under ultrasound. Also some differences between the behaviour of different quality of material are detected. The better is the material, the better is the performance even without any treatment to improve the resistance. It is to be noted that each wear tests requires the construction of a machine made with low-quality material followed by its destruction. For this reason, the wear experiments were done for only two materials. Once the improvement in the wear capabilities of the ultrasonically activated machine were established, this kind of test was abandoned because they are very expensive and time consuming. An ultrasonically assisted roll mill has been developed, in which one of the contact surfaces vibrates at ultrasonic frequency. Grinding tests performed on copper ore show a reduction in the total power required to operate the process when the ultrasonic energy is applied in the active zone. As is shown in The presence of ultrasonic field brings about a reduction in the shaft torque required compared with the same operation without ultrasonic energy. In addition, the ultrasonic-assisted operation shows less abrasive wear on the grinding surfaces. These results show that the use of ultrasonic technology is a very promising approach for improving the efficiency of the breakage in different processes. When compared with other approaches in the past, the ultrasonic roll mill does not have the limited process capacity that was characteristic in these developments. The energy consumption and torque could be even lower than the values we show in this paper. In this research, the power used was that usually employed to evaluate the overall efficiency of a breakage: ( The scale up and the optimisation of the process require more basic research in ultrasonic grinding. Further experiments must be done both from the point of view of machine design and of the fracture phenomena. This research has been supported by the project FONDEF M2-43. Ore samples were provided by Sociedad Minera Pudahuel and Andina Division of Codelco Chilè are gratefully acknowledged.