Tuberosity malpositioning commonly occurs and is associated with a decline in clinical function after prosthetic shoulder reconstruction for proximal humeral fractures. This study assesses the biomechanical effects of inferior tuberosity position on glenohumeral joint forces and humeral head position at multiple positions. Eight fresh-frozen cadaveric shoulders were tested. Hemiarthroplasty was performed with preservation of anatomic tuberosity height and with 10 mm and 20 mm of inferior tuberosity displacement. The rotator cuff, deltoid, pectoralis major, and latissimus dorsi muscles were statically loaded. Contact forces and humeral head position were recorded within a functional range of motion. Glenohumeral joint forces shifted significantly superiorly (P < .05) at 30° of abduction after both 10 mm and 20 mm of tuberosity displacement. At 60° of glenohumeral abduction, glenohumeral joint forces remained significantly altered after tuberosity displacement of 10 mm and 20 mm compared with the intact height (P < .005). This study demonstrates that, during hemiarthroplasty performed for proximal humeral fractures, malpositioning the tuberosities inferiorly results in significant superior glenohumeral joint force displacement. These findings suggest that the mechanical advantage of the shoulder abductor muscles is compromised with inferior tuberosity malpositioning and may help to explain inferior functional results seen in these patients.Shoulder hemiarthroplasty remains a common treatment for displaced 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus. Reported success with this treatment, however, has varied. Typically, pain relief is reliably achieved, yet functional outcomes depending on muscle strength and range of motion are less consistently achieved. Tuberosity malpositioning has also been shown to affect functional outcomes adversely after hemiarthroplasty for 3- and 4-part proximal humeral fractures. We used 8 fresh-frozen cadaveric shoulders from 6 cadavers in this study. There were 5 female cadavers and 1 male cadaver and a total of 5 left and 3 right shoulders. The mean age was 74 ± 17 years. All specimens had intact rotator cuffs and were free from glenohumeral degenerative joint disease or other gross pathology. Each specimen was dissected free of skin and overlying soft tissue. The rotator cuff insertions were preserved in all specimens. The capsule was incised circumferentially around the glenoid, the long head of the biceps brachii was released from the supraglenoid tubercle and superior labrum, and the coracohumeral ligament was released. The glenoid labrum and coracoacromial ligament were preserved. The muscle bellies of the deltoid, latissimus dorsi, and pectoralis major muscles were dissected free from their respective tendon insertions on the humeral shaft. A 5-mm cuff of tendon was preserved, and the length of insertion was measured with a digital caliper to determine the midpoint of the tendon insertion for subsequent muscle loading. The humerus was cut 150 mm below the inferior margin of the humeral articular surface and mounted in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe with plaster of Paris. Transfixing screws were inserted to prevent humeral rotation within the PVC pipe and were placed before the plaster of Paris was poured. In each specimen, the effective length of PVC pipe to the inferior articular margin of the humeral head measured 210 mm. The scapula was mounted in an aluminum scapular box with the anterior-posterior and superior-inferior planes of the glenoid aligned with the box and secured by use of plaster of Paris and transfixing screws. The scapular box was positioned on the load cell, which was in 30° of abduction to replicate the anatomic scapulothoracic relationship for 90° of shoulder elevation. The scapula was maintained at this position throughout testing, and all glenohumeral abduction angles were measured from this point. The effect of inferior displacement of the tuberosities that commonly occurs in prosthetic reconstruction for osteoporotic 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus was simulated by sequentially elevating the humeral head prosthesis, which resulted in inferior displacement of the greater and lesser tuberosities. Each specimen underwent testing under 3 different conditions: (1) hemiarthroplasty with anatomic tuberosity height, (2) after effective lowering of the greater and lesser tuberosities by 10 mm, and (3) after effective lowering of the greater and lesser tuberosities by 20 mm. Effective lowering of the greater and lesser tuberosities was achieved by incremental 10-mm elevations of the humeral prosthetic component with concurrent elevation of the midportions of the humeral insertions of the latissimus dorsi, pectoralis major, and deltoid muscles by 10 mm. The tendon insertions of the subscapularis on the lesser tuberosity and the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor on the greater tuberosity were maintained in their anatomic position. An 8-mm-diameter Global Shoulder humeral fracture component (DePuy Orthopaedics, Warsaw, IN) was used in each specimen. The stem was machined to accommodate 2.5-mm screws at 10-mm increments by use of a custom jig designed for in situ humeral drilling and subsequent prosthesis elevation ( Elevation of the humeral implant was accomplished by use of the custom elevation jig and subsequent repositioning of the transfixing screws to the next set of machined holes in the humeral implant ( A custom shoulder-testing system was developed to allow measurement of glenohumeral joint force and humeral head position with varying degrees of humeral abduction, rotation, and forward elevation ( Glenohumeral positions tested for each condition consisted of different positions of abduction in the scapular plane, glenohumeral rotation, and forward elevation. We tested a range of glenohumeral motion required for activities of daily living, matching previously published ranges of shoulder motion in patients undergoing hemiarthroplasty reconstruction for 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus. Pneumatic, static muscle loading was applied by pneumatic cylinders controlled through a personal computer via a custom LabView software program (National Instruments, Austin, TX). At each shoulder position tested, a 20-N preload was applied. The deltoid was then loaded with 80 N of force, whereas the supraspinatus, infraspinatus/teres minor, subscapularis, pectoralis major, and latissimus dorsi muscles were each loaded with 40 N. Each specimen, with each tuberosity displacement condition, was tested in positions simulating the expected/reported postoperative range of motion for patients undergoing shoulder hemiarthroplasty for 4-part proximal humeral fractures. A total of 6 markers for MicroScribe digitizing, 3 on the glenoid and 3 on the humerus, were placed on each specimen. Stationary markers were placed on the tip of the coracoid process, at the anterolateral acromion, and on the posterior acromion. Mobile markers were placed on the humerus. Proximal humeral markers were positioned in the proximal bicipital groove, the distal bicipital groove, and the anterior humeral metaphysis. With each elevation of the prosthesis and muscle insertions, MicroScribe measurements were obtained for the humeral head, muscle insertion points, and greater and lesser tuberosities. Lesser tuberosity height and greater tuberosity height were measured at a distance 10 mm medial and lateral to the bicipital groove, respectively. After completion of each humeral height elevation, the humeral points and prosthesis were digitized; after all phases of testing, a 3-dimensional digitized map of the glenoid was obtained. For the glenoid, the anterior, posterior, superior, and inferior points and a line along the superior-inferior axis and the glenoid boundary were digitized. The geometric center of the glenoid was defined as the bisected point along the superior-inferior axis. For the humerus, the circumference of the prosthesis and lines along the superior-inferior and anterior-posterior articular surface were digitized with the MicroScribe. From these data points, the center of the circumference was calculated. The perpendicular distances from the plane of the circumference to each point along the anterior-posterior and superior-inferior lines were calculated, and the maximum perpendicular distance from the center of the circumference to the articular surface was determined. The humeral head apex (maximum convex coordinate of the prosthetic humeral head) was then calculated as the center point of the prosthetic circumference projected to the farthest point along the humeral head surface in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the circumference ( Two trials of each dependent variable (glenohumeral joint force or position of the humeral head apex in relation to the glenoid articular surface) were recorded for each testing position and condition. The two trials were averaged together for analysis. A repeated-measures analysis of variance was used for statistical analysis, with statistical significance defined at The vertical distance from the apex, or highest point of the prosthetic humeral head, to the top of the greater tuberosity, as measured by use of the 3-dimensional digitized coordinates, was calculated to verify inferior tuberosity displacement. The mean distance from the greater tuberosity to the humeral head apex measured 7.7 ± 2.2 mm after implantation of the hemiarthroplasty at anatomic height. After effective tuberosity lowering by 10 mm, the head-to-tuberosity distance was 17.9 ± 2.2 mm, and after effective lowering by 20 mm, it was 27.5 ± 2.5 mm. Compared with the anatomic height condition, after effective tuberosity lowering of 10 and 20 mm, significant alterations in glenohumeral joint forces were apparent, most notably during glenohumeral abduction ( At 0° of glenohumeral abduction, effective tuberosity lowering of 10 mm and 20 mm had no significant effect on measured glenohumeral joint forces in the anterior-posterior direction or on compressive glenohumeral joint forces throughout the rotational range of glenohumeral motion tested (30° of internal rotation to 90° of external rotation [ At 30° of glenohumeral abduction in the scapular plane, effective tuberosity lowering of both 10 mm and 20 mm increased the mean glenohumeral joint force superiorly across the rotational range of motion tested (0° of external rotation [ At 60° of glenohumeral abduction in the scapular plane, effective tuberosity lowering of 10 mm and 20 mm altered the vertical component of the glenohumeral joint force. Specifically, the force was significantly increased superiorly at the glenohumeral articulation in relation to the anatomic reconstruction across the rotational range of motion tested (0° of external rotation [ With forward elevation of the shoulder (60° of abduction in the scapular plane combined with 50° of flexion), the forces were directed more superiorly after tuberosity displacement at all rotational ranges of glenohumeral motion tested—that is, 30°, 60°, and 90° of external rotation—but these values were not significantly different from the anatomic condition. Statistically significant changes in force were observed between the anatomic height and 20 mm of tuberosity displacement at 30° ( The humeral head apex position through the glenohumeral range of motion tested is represented in Inferior tuberosity reduction is a common technical pitfall in prosthetic reconstruction of displaced 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus. This study assesses the altered biomechanical effects resulting from inferior displacement of both the lesser and greater tuberosities by 10 mm and 20 mm compared with an anatomic reconstruction. From this report, it is evident that biomechanical alterations do occur with inferior tuberosity displacement. Specifically, glenohumeral joint forces are shifted significantly superiorly with minimal and moderate degrees of glenohumeral abduction throughout a functional rotational range of motion. These findings suggest that superior glenohumeral joint force displacement may explain reported diminished ranges of motion and inferior functional results in patients undergoing hemiarthroplasty for the treatment of 4-part fractures compared with patients undergoing prosthetic reconstruction for degenerative conditions of the glenohumeral joint. Given the observed abnormal glenohumeral joint forces, these data would also suggest that inferior tuberosity displacement of or exceeding 10 mm would cause concern regarding accelerated component loosening in glenoid resurfacing. Clinical series document inferior results in patients with radiographic evidence of inferior tuberosity displacement after hemiarthroplasty reconstruction for 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus. Nyffeler et al In the design of this study, we wanted to minimize variation in technique and isolate our examination to the assessment of inferior tuberosity displacement. For this reason, we did not create a 4-part fracture model as has been previously done, A limitation of our study is the lack of a model for obtaining active shoulder motion in the laboratory setting. We cannot accurately simulate scapulothoracic motion, and therefore, all positions are referred to as glenohumeral positions. We also used static muscle loading and applied 80 N of force to the deltoid and 40 N of force to all other muscles. In conclusion, inferior tuberosity malpositioning of 10 mm and 20 mm leads to significant alterations in glenohumeral joint forces within the expected range of motion for patients undergoing hemiarthroplasty for fractures of the proximal humerus. There was no observed difference in the position of the humeral head on the glenohumeral articulation with the exception of the forward flexed position. This difference did not reach statistical significance. However, with minimal (30°) and moderate (60°) amounts of glenohumeral abduction, glenohumeral joint forces are significantly displaced superiorly. These findings may help to explain the limited motion and diminished function observed clinically in these patients.