Firms that extract and produce multiple metals are an important component of mineral supply. The reaction of such firms to changes in their relevant output prices is tested econometrically for five metals using a panel representing more than 100 mines across the time period 1991–2005. The estimation strategy is drawn from joint production theory, namely a flexible form, dual revenue approach with seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) estimation. The results indicate that multi-product mines respond (in the short run) to higher prices of a particular metal by reducing output of that metal (indicative of low-grading behavior) and increasing and/or decreasing output of joint metal products (indicative of substitutes and complements in supply). The price responses are not readily explained by a metal's classification as a by-product or main product based on revenue.Technologies that produce multiple outputs are common across a variety of applications in economics. When the inputs for these technologies cannot be allocated to particular outputs, the process is considered joint production. There is a large body of literature on the implications of joint production for renewable resources such as fish and agricultural goods, The relationship between metal supply and joint production is intrinsic. Apart from the small amounts of copper and gold that were long-ago mined in native form, all metals mined and processed for use by society must be separated from other materials. Even recycled metals exhibit this characteristic, as many end-use products contain multiple materials ( The contemporary need for understanding the supply of jointly-produced metals comes as demand has increased sharply for geologically rare or specialized materials. For example, a smart phone today may use more than double the number of chemical elements as compared to cell phones manufactured two decades ago ( This paper addresses the question of how a multi-product extracting firm responds when the prices of produced metals change. To answer this question, I estimate average short-run own and cross-price elasticities of supply for five commonly joint-produced commodities: silver, gold, copper, lead, and zinc. These specific markets are large and diversified, in contrast to those for the minor metals, but studying the behavioral response to price changes for these major and precious metals can still be informative in studying the supply for minor metals. The empirical model, a flexible-form dual revenue function, follows the approach of joint-production literature where it has been used extensively in the study of multi-product fisheries as shown in a literature survey by This study expands and complements the existing work on metal joint production. It is the first identified study to estimate flexible functional forms for multi-product mines and includes the largest sample of firm level data to date. To place the findings of this paper in context with the existing literature, Section This section discusses how past work translates to expectations of elasticity values as they relate to the three main findings of the paper. Section Metals are produced through a process which can generally be divided into three stages: mining, milling, and refining. At the mining stage a producer chooses the quantity and quality of ore to extract from the ground. Because absolute and relative metal concentrations vary across the resource, choosing a particular place to mine allows the producer to chose the quality of extracted resource. This choice will be constrained by the geology of the deposit, the mining method, and past mining decisions. In open pit surface mines a particular slope angle must be maintained to prevent failure. In underground mines the roof overburden must be supported to prevent collapse. For both types of operations the ability to access deeper resources depends on first extracting areas closer to the surface. Once the ore is mined it is transported to the mill or placed in stockpiles for future milling. Ore stockpiles enable a mine to stabilize the quantity and quality of material entering the mill, maximizing recovery. At the milling stage a producer applies physical and chemical processes to the run-of-mine and potential stockpiled material to upgrade ore into a higher quality concentrate product. The concentrate contains one or more metals of economic value and waste. Finally, at the refining stage concentrate is separated into salable metal products. Each of these stages involves production choices which can affect the final supply of refined metal. Additionally, these decisions are not entirely independent; the recovery efficiency experienced by a mill can depend on the quality of material received from the mine. However this paper will abstract from the complications of this multi-stage process by focusing solely on the quality and quantity decision made for ore entering the mill. The short run supply elasticities estimated in this paper only reflect the supply of metal at this stage in the process. A more complete elasticity value would further include the milling and refining decisions. If one assumes that choices in the milling and refining stages are relatively fixed in the short run (a reasonable approximation if there is no existing technology for changing preferential recovery of metals), then the estimated mining stage elasticity values will approximate the final supply elasticity of refined metal. Further, this paper abstracts from the distinction between run-of-mine material and stockpiled material as the implications for metal joint production remain whether material is mined from the ore-body or “mined” from the stockpiles. The short-run relationship between a metal's price and its produced grade has been the subject of some debate over the last three decades, both in terms of optimality for profit maximization and empirical realities. A negative relationship between price and supplied metal quantity was first noted in the economics literature for the case of gold by Studies which have examined the issue of optimal grade choice in mining using optimal control models have found conflicting results, both in terms of why firms might optimize by low-grading and whether a negative relationship is optimal at all. Past empirical tests for the relationship between grade and price have utilized relatively small samples over a limited number of commodities. Generally speaking, while there have been divergent findings for the theoretical optimality for low-grading, the empirical evidence has found that producers do engage in low-grading. Unlike the literature for the own-price effect where some developed theory prescribes low-grading behavior, the existing theory around cross-price responses tends to assume (rather than prescribe) that metals act as complements in supply. In other words, past theoretical studies have assumed that rising prices of one metal will spur increased production of joint products. Empirical studies have generally found results consistent with this assumption. In What if the grade ratio is not fixed across the space of a resource deposit? If the grade of one metal in a deposit is relatively uncorrelated with the grades of other metals, there may be little cross-price response at all. A mine choosing to low-grade one metal may be able to preferentially mine a different area of the deposit with lower concentrations of that metal without substantially altering the extracted grades of other metals. Alternatively, if relative grades exhibit a negative correlation, metals may be extracted as substitutes. A mine desiring to low-grade one metal may need to extract from an area of the deposit with higher grades of their other metals. Such deposits can be formed by more complex formation events such as multiple magma intrusions, hydrothermal events, zonation, or overprinting. An example deposit with complex geology is shown in Discussion of jointly produced metals is typically framed around the concept of main product, co-product, and by-product production relationships ( For many metals, statistical elasticity estimation is not practical. Data on minor and specialty metals are particularly difficult to collect. The importance of own and cross-price responsiveness to making inferences about a metal's market dynamics has led many studies to infer what type of own and cross-price response a metal might have based on other observable characteristics. Most commonly, this classification is based on relative grades, revenues, or profits. For example, in what may be the most comprehensive recent study on the subject “Due to its low concentrations in earth's crust, cobalt usually is produced as a by-product element of other metals like copper or nickel” – “Even with very high prices for the by-products, the small size of the markets creates only a limited commercial incentive for refiners to pay strong attention to optimal by-product recovery” – “In general, coproducts with lower revenue streams … are less likely to drive production than coproducts with higher revenue.” – While the link between grade, revenue, or profit and price responsiveness is intuitive, this is the first study test the link between these characteristics of metal supply and the metal's actual supply responsiveness on the part of producers. Specifically I test whether metals with a large revenue share exhibit main product behavior, and low revenue share metals exhibit by-product behavior. It is possible to imagine a situation where these relationships would not hold. If a metal's grade is uncorrelated with the grades of other metals in the deposit, then mines can more easily optimize their production levels separately. In this case a metal might have a small revenue share but be quite price responsive. Previous studies which have empirically examined the behavior of multi-product mining firms have not utilized flexible functional form analysis I utilize a revenue function approach to estimate own and cross-price elasticities of supply. A revenue function is chosen over a profit function for several reasons. First, this analysis is output oriented, and so the responsiveness of firms to input prices is not directly of interest. Second, mining firms face a strict capacity constraint (typically the quantity of ore that can be milled in a given period). Assuming that mines seek to produce at this capacity, total input effort can be considered fixed. Additionally, if the transformation function is additively input–output separable then relative input prices have no effect on relative outputs and modeling them explicitly should have no theoretic impact on the result. Finally, a more practical consideration is the lack of public data on input costs for mining operations. The empirical specification follows In the preferred specification, prices are assumed to be exogenous due to the low level of firm concentration in the five markets included for this study. Applying Hotelling's Lemma to Eq. Eq. The data for the analysis are an annual unbalanced panel of 113 mines operating in thirty countries from the period 1991 to 2005. The data come from two sources. Mine level production data were downloaded freely from minecost.com in February 2015. The dataset has since been purchased by SNL Financial and is no longer freely available. Variables from minecost.com are tonnes of ore mined by each mine in each year and average annual grade of metal Five metal commodities: gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc are selected from a larger sample for the analysis. This sub-setting was chosen to maximize the number of metals produced from the same mines. No mines are included that produced only one product over the period. Eleven mines in the sub-sample of 113 produce all five products, while 34 produce just two. Aggregate input effort, To test the relationship between revenue and price responsiveness, the five metals in the sample are characterized based on their contribution to mine revenue on average. The average revenue shares shown in The patterns identified in This section presents the coefficient estimates of Eq. Own-price and cross-price elasticity values are calculated using Eqs. The elasticity results, presented in Own-price elasticities are represented along the main diagonal of The significant positive and negative results for the cross-price elasticities indicate a higher degree of interdependence in the supply of these metals than found by The elasticity results do not generally conform to the expectations set based on revenue share and distribution. While zinc is own price responsive, as its larger revenue share would suggest, so are low-revenue silver and lead. More surprisingly, changes in lead and silver prices are associated with changes in production of copper, gold, and zinc. These results suggest that inferring price responsiveness of metals based on revenue shares may be an incomplete framework. The results point to a potential need for modified understanding of multi-product mineral supply. Only a handful of papers have considered the case of a multi-product mine producing from a heterogeneous resource, but this situation represents a significant share of metal supply for both major and precious metals such as lead-zinc and gold-copper-molybdenum ( The estimated cross-product relationships can be defined in terms of substitute and complement relationships. For metals with negative own price elasticity, a negative cross-price elasticity indicates a complement and a positive cross-price indicates a substitute (the reverse is true when a metal has a positive own-price relationship). For example, increases in lead prices are associated with mines shifting production toward lower quantities of lead and higher quantities of zinc. This makes lead and zinc substitutes in supply. The relationships for each of the ten metal pairs in the study are summarized in As shown in The empirical model has assumed that firms are price takers and that metal prices are exogenous. It is assumed that each firm is too small to impact global prices with their grade choice or that firms do not collectively act to move prices. If this assumption is invalid and prices are endogenous (i.e. grades do contemporaneously determine prices) then coefficient estimates will be biased by system simultaneity and price responses will be overestimated. It is difficult to argue that aggregate production across all firms is inconsequential because the sample of mines includes a notable percentage of world production (around 30%) for each of the five metals. In alternative reduced-form specifications for the empirical model, a two-stage estimator is tested for the relationship between price and grade. Specifically, the effect of potentially endogenous own and cross-prices on grade is estimated for each of the five commodities, controlling for other metal grades, ore production, cumulative mine production and a mine fixed effect (see Eq. The finding that revenue may be a poor predictor of elasticity is more formally tested using an alternative model specification in Different mine types (open pit and underground) may have varying flexibility to adjust to market conditions. This hypothesis is tested by regressing metal grade on prices interacted with a mine type dummy variable. The coefficient estimates of this regression are presented in This study finds significant cross-price elasticity estimates for many of the metal-pairs assessed. While the estimates themselves may be of interest to analysts of these particular markets, more generally they should call attention to the fact that metal supply should not be considered in isolation. The geologic processes which have concentrated these materials together into economically exploitable deposits have also critically linked their supply. The complexity of these geologic processes leads to equally complex responses when economic conditions change. This paper has shown evidence for low-grading metals when prices rise and for metals behaving both as substitutes and complements in supply. The paper has also demonstrated that revenue share is not a strong indicator of how responsive a metal will be to price changes. These findings are all likely enabled by the heterogeneous nature of many mineral deposits. Producers with heterogeneous resources can re-optimize their production by mining different areas of the deposit when market conditions change. The more metals are decoupled from a fixed-proportions relationship, the easier it is for a producer to separately optimize each metal's production. As society demands larger quantities and more varieties of metals, understanding the linkages in supply between metals is key to ensuring sound materials policy and stable supply. The metals assessed in this study are distinct from the minor and specialty metals that have been subject to recent concerns. However as this paper has demonstrated the empirical behavior of mining firms exhibits interesting and complex relationships in joint metal production. It is likely that producers of minor metals behave differently than producers of the base and precious metals addressed in this study which is why direct evidence of such behavior should be welcomed. In the meantime, presumptions of behavior for minor metal producers should be thoughtfully considered. This appendix will detail several extensions that are used in order to validate results and test hypotheses. An alternative model was used in the cases where the primary model did not have necessary flexibility in order to add extensions. These alternative models are based on the empirical model in Eq. As discussed in Section After instrumenting, lead maintains a significant and negative own price-grade effect. Copper's own-price response also becomes significant (although the point estimate is not substantially different). Also, the three cross-price effects that were significant in the base case model retain their significance and signs. The magnitude of the coefficient estimates is also similar between the two models. The similarity provides some confidence that endogeneity is not introducing major bias into the results of the primary or alternative models. In this section, the finding in the primary model that a metal's revenue contribution is a poor indicator of its own and cross-price responsiveness is formally test. Utilizing the alternative model in Eq. The variable of interest in Eq. If revenue share does impact price response, main products classified as such by revenue should have large impacts on their own and other-metal supply, while by-product prices should have no effect on their own supply or the supply of other materials. This is examined using Comparing the test outcomes in The cross-price effect tests results are shown in These tests of the revenue interaction terms provides quantitative confirmation of the qualitative conclusion in Section To test the robustness of the cross-price effect, a series of placebo regressions are estimated. These regressions are estimated using the model in Eq.  