The smelting factory of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex in Iran produces about 50tons per day of copper dust containing 36% Cu, 22.2% Fe and 12.2% S. The dust is currently recycled to the smelters. This method is not desirable in terms of operation, and energy consumption. A mixed culture of mesophilic bacteria was used to examine the bioleaching of copper from the dust. The effect of various parameters such as pulp density, nutrients, temperature, and the amount of pyrite added to the bioleaching media were examined in the dust bioleaching tests. It was shown that the bacteria contributed effectively in the leaching of copper from the dust. The collected data showed that at pH 1.8 and the pulp density less than 7%, the dissolution of copper followed shrinking core kinetic model and the process was limited by diffusion of lixiviant. With the pulp density of 7%, however, the process showed to be reaction limited.Bioleaching is an efficient, simple and eco-friendly process for metal extraction from ores and concentrates as compared to other conventional processes. Bioleaching is used essentially for the recovery of gold, copper, cobalt, nickel, zinc and uranium About 50 Previous studies have shown that the copper dusts of Sarcheshmeh smelting factory mostly contain the secondary copper sulfide minerals Different types of microorganisms are capable of attacking sulfide ores and concentrates. The most common mesophilic bacteria present in sulfide leaching are the iron-and sulfur-oxidizing  Gomez et al. The purpose of this research was the assessment of bioleaching for copper extraction from the smelting furnaces dust using a mixed native culture of The substrate was a sample of smelters copper dust from the smelting factory of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex, Iran. Samples were collected on different days during the smelting process and mixed to obtain a representative sample. Previously isolated native species of All bioleaching tests were performed in 1000 One factor at a time procedure was used to investigate the effect of pulp density, nutrient medium, temperature and the amount of pyrite added to the bioleaching media on the bioleaching ( Bioleaching of copper dust was initially performed to study the feasibility of the process for the pulp densities of 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14% (w/v). The results showed, except in the flask with pulp density of 2%, no growth in the other flasks (not shown). It revealed the possibility of the bioleaching of the copper dust by these microorganisms, but it was necessary to adapt the bacteria to the higher concentrations of the dust gradually. The inoculum of each test was prepared by culturing the bacteria of previous test which adapted with lower ferrous sulfate and elemental sulfur. In this paper only the results of 2, 4 and 7% (w/v) solid–liquid ratio were presented (tests 1–3). Samples of mesophile bacteria containing Microscopic observation of bacteria in solution showed that the proportion of  A Michaelis–Menten type equation was used to relate the pulp density to the bioleaching rate. The equation has been given as: To relate the pulp density to the metal extraction, which directly depends on the bacterial activity, a kinetics study has been performed. According to the bioleaching data, various kinetic models such as chemical, liquid film and ash diffusion control were examined ( Bioleaching of the dust with a mixed culture of mesophile bacteria is governed by the bacterial oxidation (Eqs. A typical source of energy is the oxidation of a mineral such as pyrite. So, pyrite was used in order to study its potential effect on the enhancement of copper recovery. Results showed that the addition of pyrite to the pulp densities of more than 2% did not have a considerable effect on the ORP, copper concentration and recovery ( The effect of nutrient medium on the ORP, copper concentration and extraction are shown in To investigate the effect of temperature on the copper recovery, an experiment was performed at 36 In all cases, due to the presence of acid consuming compounds, especially, limestone, changes of pH were high in the early stages of the tests. As expected, increasing the pulp density increased the acid consumption, while pyrite addition did not have substantial effect on the amount of acid consumption. Therefore, pyrite did not play an important role in the acid production in the copper dust bioleaching. The acid consumption in 9K medium was the same as Norris medium and more than M medium, while the control medium consumed less acid. Therefore, when the microorganisms performed well, the acid consumption was increased and vice versa. In the bioleaching tests of copper dust samples, increasing the pulp density caused an increase in the adaptation time of the microorganisms and a decrease in the final copper recovery. Norris nutrient medium was the most suitable medium because of higher copper extraction and lower concentrations of basal salts. Pyrite addition and higher temperatures did not have a significant effect on the ORP and copper recovery. Despite the fact, that oxidation of sulfides in copper concentrate containing substantial amount of pyrite is acid producing, the process of copper dust bioleaching was acid consuming. The apparent lack of a universal mechanism to explain the bioleaching of different copper sulfide minerals in the copper dust warrants fundamental studies of biological and electrochemical mechanisms to understand optimized conditions and to develop models for bioleaching process. The bioleaching data from copper smelters dust followed the diffusion controlled shrinking core kinetic model at the temperature 32 This paper is published with the permission of National Iranian Copper Industries Company. The assistance from the staff of the R&D Division of National Iranian Copper Industries Company is gratefully acknowledged.