New chitosan-g- poly (3-sulfopropyl methacrylate), CHI-g-P(SPMA), hydrogel was prepared by free radical polymerization process and investigated as a template for biomimetic spongelike calcium phosphate mineralization in a solution mimicking physiological condition. Infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy confirmed the predominant formation of rod-like hydroxyapatite. The swelling behavior of the nanocomposite was evaluated at different pHs and different saline concentrations. Bovine serum albumin (BSA), as a model protein drug, was loaded in the CHI-g-P(SPMA)/calcium phosphate hybrid. The BSA release behavior was investigated and the results suggested CHI-g-P(SPMA)/calcium phosphate hybrid as controlled release carrier. These results suggest that next generation of polysaccharides based hybrid materials could be interesting for biomedical applications.Hybrid materials have recently attracted interest due to their potential applications in biology and biomaterials science Hydrogels have received increasing attention for inorganics, especially calcium phosphate mineralization in bulk aqueous solution. Among them, polysaccharides based hydrogels are particularly interesting for hybrid materials development due to their promising applications in biomaterials In the biomimetic mineralization process, acid function groups, such as carboxylic groups, have the ability to induce nucleation of apatite In view of the need for new sustainable and bioactive hybrid materials, acidic hydrogels are highly interesting candidates for further rationalizing calcium phosphate crystallization because they resemble the structure of noncollagenous proteins, that is, the water-soluble fraction of proteins Chitosan low molecular weight (CHI), 3-Sulfopropyl methacrylate potassium salt (SPMA), N, Ń-methylenebisacrylamide (MBA) and potassium persulphate (KPS) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The other chemicals are of analytical grade and used as received without further purification. CHI-g-P(SPMA) hydrogel was synthesized by adding 0.5 gm CHI to 25 Biomimetic calcium phosphate mineralization was carried out as described in our previous study Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was done on a Mattson 5000 FTIR spectrometer using KBr discs in the range of 4000–500 The swelling% of the synthesized CHI-g-P(SPMA) hydrogel before and after calcium phosphate mineralization was measured in distilled water, acidic, basic and in saline solutions (0.3, 0.6, 0.9 and 1.2 NaCl wt%). The swelling percent was calculated by the following equation: BSA loading process was carried out by immersing 50 The current article is the first trial toward design CHI-g-P (SPMA) hydrogel via free radical polymerization technique using SPMA as monomer, MBA as cross-linker and KPS as initiator. Biomimetic mineralization technique was used to evaluate the capability of the amino and the sulfonic groups on the surface and interior of cross-linked CHI-g-P (SPMA) hydrogel to promote the nucleation and growth of calcium phosphate. The graft co-polymerization and biomimetic calcium phosphate mineralization were proofed by FT-IR spectroscopy as shown in CHI-g-P (SPMA) hydrogel and the corresponding hybrid swollen samples were freeze dried and examined with SEM microscopy to check its internal morphology. EDXS showed that the formed hybrid contains the organic elements in the hydrogel i. e. carbon, oxygen and sulpfur. However, the presence of phosphorus, and calcium with high ratio can be assigned to the calcium phosphate mineralization. The presense of a variety of other elements such as sodium and magnesium suggests that the mineralized calcium phosphate is a substituted apatite, similar to humane bone. Moreover, the Ca/P atomic ratio is 1.54 which is close to the stoichiometric ratio of hydroxyapatite 1.67. In order to get information about the internal shape of the precipitated calcium phosphate, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed and displayed in  An important parameter to evaluate the developed materials such as drug delivery systems is the swelling behavior. The swelling property of the ionic materials is a function of the ionic strength of the medium Polysaccharides based hybrid materials have been reported as a promising candidate for drug delivery applications The current study showed that CHI-g-P(SPMA) hydrogel is an efficient template to induce spongelike hydroxyapatite formation. The biomimetic mineralization study showed that rod-like hydroxyapatite with high uniformity was formed after 7 The author acknowledges the financial support by the