The shape of an underground opening is a major factor influencing the stability of the underground excavation. Obtaining an optimized shape is significant in civil and mining engineering applications for increasing stability and reducing costs. This paper presents an updated method for finding the optimal shape of an underground excavation using the latest bi-directional evolutionary structural optimization (BESO) techniques considering material nonlinearities. Recent development in the BESO applications to underground excavation is discussed through illustrated examples. Details are given of the BESO method used to finding the optimal shape based on the global stiffness. The methodology of the stiffness based optimization techniques is described with examples of applications to underground excavation. Applications to underground void structures, such as cavern and tunnel, as well as underground solid structure such mine pillar are demonstrated. It is concluded that stiffness based optimization techniques are applicable to underground excavations and practical shape of an excavation can be generated as a result of the BESO application.In civil and mining engineering applications, the shape of an underground excavation is usually designed based on functional requirements and construction methods In practice, one of the most important considerations in the design of a large underground excavation is the shape geometry which is normally based on the functional requirements of the opening and the geological conditions at the site. For detailed design, factors such as stability, stress distributions and support requirements are the principal considerations The evolutionary structural optimization (ESO) method was firstly proposed by Xie and Steven The fundamental concept of the ESO or BESO method was that an optimal structure can be obtained by gradually removing inefficient elements from a design domain which is modeled by a finite element mesh. The inefficient elements represent the materials in the design domain that have the least contribution toward either the global stiffness or the level of support in terms of stress. The more recent BESO approach represents advancement in the optimization procedure where, in addition to removing inefficient elements, new elements of higher efficiency are added to the model at the same time, thus significantly improving the optimization efficiency. Various boundary conditions and constraints together with material behaviours can be modeled by the finite element techniques. The initial stage of the optimization procedure involves normal execution of finite element codes (ABAQUS) for a design domain, followed by examining the global stiffness of the model. A specifically designed BESO routine is used to check all elements on the boundary of the excavation to determine their effects on the global stiffness. An appropriate criterion is used for determining the level of efficiency of each element in its contribution to the global stiffness. Elements with minimum contribution to the global stiffness are recorded as inefficient elements and are subsequently removed from the finite element mesh, and the new finite element mesh is analyzed as this procedure is repeated with new elements added on the boundary. Subsequently, the updated shape of the finite mesh evolves towards optimum Recent developments in computer hardware and BESO techniques have made it possible to execute a three-dimensional finite element model using a non-linear material model, which better simulates the behaviour of soil and rock. Underground excavations are formed in natural materials either soil or rock, or combinations of the two, which are commonly non-linear and inhomogeneous. It is widely recognized that linear-elastic models are not adequate to represent the true behaviour of geotechnical materials. In this study, Mohr–Coulomb behaviour is chosen for the purpose of finite element analysis and the optimization application, because it is a well understood material model and the key strength parameters can be readily obtained from geotechnical testing. For a body under a three-dimensional stress state with a compressive stress defined as positive, the Mohr–Coulomb material yielding function can be expressed by: A stiffest design can be achieved by minimizing the compliance of the structure, as the compliance is an inverse indicator of the overall structural stiffness. For a general non-linear case, the compliance can be calculated as the area below the load-deflection curve Find To minimize Subject to: The current BESO method is a gradient-based method that uses element sensitivities in searching for the optimum. For the current stiffness optimization problem, the sensitivity Various ways exist to calculate the above derivative. The adjoin method The sensitivity is then obtained by substituting Eq. The Mohr–Coulomb material yield criterion can be directly implemented and the element sensitivity is readily obtained as the total strain energy from any commercial FEA package supporting the Mohr–Coulomb model. The material properties used in the study are: Young’s Modulus In each iteration, a sensitivity threshold The structural volume will be continuously reduced until the volume constraint is satisfied. The optimization iteration will then continue with the volume unchanged, and BESO will check a termination criterion on the objective function The BESO procedure for the example study is summarized in Based on The tangential stresses at the end of the axes are identical if the ratio of As described in Sections For demonstration purpose, a simple case of an underground excavation, where the horizontal and vertical stress ratio of For the purpose of demonstration, an even simpler case with It should be noted that the process of optimization using stiffness based rejection criterion would lead to a shape that would theoretically provide most rigid structure with the minimum amount of material. In the case of underground excavation, it would suggest a shape with the greatest underground excavation space. Validation of the BESO is given by Huang and Xie The shape of an underground excavation receives very little attention in general rock engineering practice, because the shape of opening is predominantly designed based on the functional requirements and the form of support. In fact, optimal design of shape of an underground excavation can lead to increased stability, hence saving in cost of support. Previous research The present research has applied the updated BESO techniques to a number of underground excavation cases. The first example involves a simple underground opening under different horizontal and vertical stress ratio. As illustrated in The model simulates a deep underground excavation at approximately 1000 Previous research The second example used in the BESO application is an underground pillar which is left for roof support (see The selection of an appropriate shape for an underground excavation is critically important in the design process. However, it is traditionally taken for granted that the shape of the excavation receives minimal consideration and is dependent on the excavation method. As underground excavation takes place in more challenging conditions it is expected more consideration of the role of excavation shape will be required. An optimization methodology for selecting shape and topology of underground structures is expected to be a significant contribution to this field. This paper presents application of a stiffness base BESO approach using non-linear material model to underground structure optimization. Through example applications, it is demonstrated that the bi-directional evolutionary structural optimization (BESO) techniques can be used to optimize the shape of an underground excavation, including the shape of a void (e.g. underground cavern) as well as the shape of solid structure, such as mine pillars. The BESO techniques coupled with non-linear material model can be successfully applied to geotechnical materials such as soil and rock. The stiffness based optimization process is capable of producing a shape of underground structure that is most stable, although it is arguable that stiffness and stability have direct correlation. It is clear that the BESO techniques are relatively straightforward to implement, as it involves post-processing of output from a standard finite element analysis. As demonstrated in this paper, the finite element analysis and material model are handled by a commercial FEA package ABAQUS. It is noted from the comparisons between linear-elastic models It should be also noted that the shape optimization is performed on continuum structures using FEA by modifying the boundaries to achieve an optimal structure. Geological discontinuities, such as beddings, faults and joints may be better modeled with dis-continuum approach such as DEM. Further research is recommended to use the BESO method with a numerical approach that is capable of handling rock discontinuities. The following remarks are made in relation to the BESO application to the underground excavation shape optimization: BESO techniques can be used to provide a solution to underground excavation shape optimization. It can replace the ESO to produce more efficient process for underground excavation shape optimization. The optimized shape obtained by the BESO procedure can be used as a reference design to assist more detailed shape formation in an underground structural design either as a void, such as cavern, tunnel, and mine stope; or as solid structure such as mine support pillars or columns. Nonlinear materials such as rock can be successfully modeled in the application of BESO techniques to underground excavation shape optimization. The stiffness rejection criterion used in the BESO optimization process provides theoretical basis for optimizing underground structure for maximum stability. It can be successfully applied to underground structure and produce practical shapes.