The potential use of (aminomethyl)ferrocene and 1,1′-di(aminomethyl)ferrocene as precursor for Schiff base chemistry has been tested. (Aminomethyl)ferrocene reacts with 3,3′-(3-oxapentane-1,5-diyldioxy)bis(2-hydroxybenzaldehyde) to give the [2+1] diiminic ligand 8. 8 reacts with LaCl3 and Ni(CH3COO)2 giving the corresponding complexes 9 and 10. 1,1′-Di(aminomethyl)ferrocene was prepared by conversion of 1,1′-di(formyl)ferrocene into 1,1′-di(formyl)ferrocene oxime, followed by reduction of the oxime with LiAlH4. Easy degradation of 1,1′-di(aminomethyl)ferrocene prevented its use as aminic precursor for the synthesis of Schiff base ligands. Isomerization occurred about the carbon–nitrogen double bonds of 1,1′-di(formyl)ferrocene oxime giving rise to three isomers. The X-ray analysis has shown that in the 5a complex three independent molecules having different conformation are present.In the last years an increasing interest has been devoted to the design and synthesis of organic hosts capable of recognizing a charged or neutral species, giving rise to a complex system, whose binding strength and selectivity may be influenced by appropriate chemical or physical stimulus Cyclic or acyclic compounds bearing an electrochemical response function, particularly ferrocene-containing groups, have attracted considerable attention. These systems, owing to their potential in chemistry, material science, hydrometallurgy, biology and medicine, have been successfully applied in the fields of molecular recognition and sensing, cation and/or anion transportation across membranes, molecular electronics, non-linear optics, chemical processes and catalysis, and in the synergism of the antitumoral activity of platinum and gold In these compounds the ferrocene groups are linked at the periphery of the coordination moiety or are incorporated within the coordination moiety. The permutation of the coordination size, type and number of heteroatoms and, of course, the further coordination of suitable metal ions clearly give rise to a large variety of hetero-polynuclear compounds, able to undergo sequential electron-transfer steps with the consequent possibility to have unusual properties and reactivity arising from the availability of different, but cooperatively conjugated, metal sites. Moreover, in these systems it is possible to control the chemical, physico-chemical and structural variations in the coordination sphere of the central transition metal fragment through change of the oxidation state of the remote ferrocene subunit(s). Schiff bases and related reduced analogues bearing ferrocene moieties have been widely investigated and their properties and possible applications reviewed, as they can offer an easy and valid chance to their use in the above mentioned fields For their synthesis suitable amine and formyl precursors must be prepared. A lot of macroacyclic or macrocyclic Schiff bases have been obtained by condensation of 1,1′-di(formyl)ferrocene and the appropriate amine or, alternatively, aminoferrocene and 1,1′-diaminoferrocene with formyl derivatives Unfortunately in all these Schiff bases the close proximity of the ferrocene groups to the coordinating site, can cause hydrolysis when reacted with metal ions In order to overcome this problem, maintaining the coordinating ability of the Schiff base, a solution could be to insert a methylene group between ferrocene unit and the coordinating nitrogen atom. Here we report on the synthesis of (aminomethyl)ferrocene (Aminomethyl)ferrocene ( 1,1′-Di(formyl)ferrocene ( Reduction of In the compound The oxime residues are nearly coplanar with the respective Cp ring and the small deviations from coplanarity differentiate, beside the The structure is dominated by an intermolecular net-work of hydrogen bonds of the OH⋯N type as reported in It is worthwhile noticing the organization of the molecules, compared to that found in In the pyrid-2-ylmethyl substituted Cp, Fe[C Reactions with air sensitive reagents were carried out in nitrogen-filled glove-boxes with rigorous exclusion of oxygen and moisture. Solvents were purified by standard methods    A solution of A solution of LaCl Intensity data for the compound The structure was solved by direct methods using SIR-92 Crystallographic data for the structural analysis have been deposited with the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre, CCDC No. 194 185 for compound We are grateful to A. Moresco for elemental analyses and Dr. S. Vogliardi for mass spectrometric measurements.