Flotation kinetics is an excellent tool used to evaluate flotation performance, which is controlled by several factors, such as the particle size, bubble size, and surface property. In this study, we investigated the effects of particle size and ferric hydroxo complex produced by grinding with CB and CIB media on the flotation kinetics of pyrite using Python statistical analysis software and Origin software based on five flotation kinetic models. The results showed that the pyrite particles produced when CB was used as the grinding medium exhibited better cumulative experimental recovery owing to a lower formation of ferric hydroxo complexes. In the case of grinding with CB medium, the first-order flotation kinetic model (ε = ε
                     ∞(1 − e
                     −kt
                     )) provided the best fit for the experimental data, whereas the first-order and second-order flotation kinetic model are considered the best in the case of grinding with the CIB medium depending on the experimental conditions. In addition, the particle size and the ferric hydroxo complex were found to be the determining factors of the flotation rate constant (k) and cumulative ultimate recovery (ɛ
                     
                        ∞
                     ), respectively, in both cases. The intermediate sizes of 10 to 120 μm were found to be the optimal particle sizes for achieving a higher pyrite flotation rate. Less quantity of ferric hydroxo complexes formed on the surface of the pyrite particles, resulting in a higher ɛ
                     
                        ∞
                     . The presence of ferric ions inhibited the pyrite flotation recovery and its flotation rate once the pulp pH was sufficient to cause complete precipitation of the ferric hydroxo complex.Pyrite is the most common sulfide mineral on the earth, which has been considered as the main gangue of sulfide ores. The presence of pyrite in the valuable minerals concentrates causes a decrease in the grade and an increase in sulfur and iron contamination, resulting in an increase in smelting costs. In addition, if pyrite contains potentially hazardous elements, such as arsenic, hazardous dusts and fumes will be produced during the smelting process. Pyrite is also found in coal deposits. The combustion process of coal containing a high content of pyrite causes the emission of sulfur oxides in the atmosphere, which is the major cause of acid rain. The main purpose of the processing of sulfide ores and coal is to remove the pyrite content. However, occasionally, pyrite may contain large amounts of valuable metals, such as gold; thus, it may be concentrated to gain these valuable metals [ Grinding is an essential procedure before flotation to achieve sufficient mineral liberation and particle size reduction [ The evaluation of mineral flotation behavior is based largely on a rough recovery value achieved at a defined time [ In this study, two types of grinding media, ceramic balls (CB, >90% Al Pyrite samples obtained from Jiangxi Province in China were used in this study. The samples were crushed to +0.5–1 mm and then stored in closed wide-mouth amber packers for use. Chemical composition analysis ( Two types of grinding media, i.e., CB and CIB, were supplied by Jinhua Nano-Ceramic Ball Co., Ltd., Zhejiang Province in China and by Shenzhen Jiangyun Hardware Co., Ltd., Guangdong Province in China, respectively. The spherical diameters of both grinding media were 3 mm, while the average densities of the CB and CIB media were 3.57 g/cm Sodium butyl xanthate and 2 The grinding tests were performed in a laboratory vertical mill (JM-2, Changsha, Hunan Province, China) at a stirring speed of 600 rpm. The mill barrel was made of corundum with a volume of 200 mL, and the top of the stirring rod was covered with a nylon material, which was done to avoid the introduction of excess iron ions, except for the grinding media, which affected the experiments. For each run, 30 g of pyrite samples was mixed with 30 mL of deionized water and fed into the mill and ground using a medium charge ratio of 35%. Subsequently, the ground pulp was transferred to a beaker, and the volume was increased to 360 mL by adding deionized water. Subsequently, the pulp was divided into six equal portions for the flotation tests. Flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine (Changchun, Jilin Province, China) with a 100-mL Plexiglas cell. In each test, each portion of pulp was transferred to the flotation cell, and deionized water was added to attain a certain level for flotation. The pulp in the cell was agitated for 2 min at an impeller speed of 1992 rpm. Then, the pH of the pulp was adjusted by adding NaOH or HCl for 2 min. The FeCl In this study, five flotation kinetic models adapted from refs. [ The particle size distributions under different grinding fineness of grinding products obtained by grinding using the CIB and CB media were measured using the screen sizing method. A series of screens with mesh sizes of 10, 25, 43, 74, 120, and 350 μm were used in the tests. The ferric hydroxide complexes generated on the surface of pyrite for the CIB and CB media systems were analyzed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Model No. SSX-550, Daojin Company, Japan) combined with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Model No. Inca, Oxford Company, Britain) and via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Axis Ultra DLD, Kratos Company, Britain). Particle size is known to be an important parameter for pyrite flotation separation. The influences of particle size produced by grinding with the CIB and CB media on the cumulative pyrite flotation recovery are shown in The cumulative recoveries of pyrite after 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4 min of flotation time for the two grinding media systems were fitted to the five kinetic models using Python statistical analysis software, and the To determine the optimal pyrite flotation kinetic model at different particle sizes for the two grinding media systems, the fitting data for the five kinetic models versus the experimental data plots calculated for the different flotation times were drawn and fitted using Origin (9.0) software. These results are presented in The amount of ferric ions in the pulp produced by grinding with different media is quite different, which has a considerable negative impact on pyrite flotation because of the formation of the ferric hydroxo complex. The influences of ferric ions on the cumulative pyrite flotation recovery for different grinding media systems are shown in The cumulative recoveries of pyrite after 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4 min of flotation time with the addition of FeCl  In this study, the effects of particle size and the ferric hydroxo complex produced by grinding with CB and CIB media on the flotation kinetics of pyrite using the Python statistical analysis software and Origin software based on five flotation kinetic models were investigated. The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: Grinding with CB medium exhibited better performance in terms of cumulative experimental recovery of pyrite owing to fewer ferric hydroxo complexes formed that were scattered on the pyrite surface. Particle size and the ferric hydroxo complex produced by different grinding media strongly influenced the pyrite flotation kinetics. For the CB medium grinding system, the first-order flotation kinetic model provided the best fit for the experimental data, whereas the first-order and second-order flotation kinetic model were considered the best in the case of grinding with the CIB medium, depending on the experimental conditions. The particle size and the ferric hydroxo complex seemed to be the determining factors for the The presence of ferric ions inhibited the flotation recovery and flotation rate of pyrite only when the pulp pH is sufficient to cause the complete precipitation of the ferric hydroxo complex. We would like to submit the enclosed manuscript titled “Effects of particle size and ferric hydroxo complex produced by different grinding media on the flotation kinetics of pyrite (Ms. Ref. No.: POWTEC-D-19-02055)” for publication in The authors would like to thank the