Removal of arsenic, antimony and bismuth impurities from copper electrolytes is a primary target in copper electrorefineries. The present work investigates the possibilities of carbon adsorption technology in the removal of arsenic and antimony from a real Chilean electrolyte. Various variables which affect the metal adsorption/desorption operations are studied.The production of copper from pyrometallurgical technologies leads to the production of an impure copper that is not of the purity required for most applications of the metal, thus, copper must be electrorefined. In the electrorefining process, copper and metals less noble than copper are oxidized and go into solution where they form a variety of compounds. Arsenic and antimony are included among the most undesirable elements typically found in these electrolytes. If no electrolyte was eliminated from the electrorefining circuit, the impurity elements would gradually increase in concentration to their solubility limits. However, long before these impurities reach these limits, they would create a variety of intolerable problems in the cells (i.e. contamination of the copper cathodes and passivation of the anodes) which causes a decrease in the efficiency of the electrorefining plant. Thus, the electrolytes must be treated; conventional practice for impurity control consists of withdrawing a volume of the solution from the stream to recover its copper content and isolate and recover impurities. A typical flow sheet for electrolyte treatment is shown in Various technologies have been proposed to help solve these problems; i.e. solvent extraction and ion exchange, their applications are described elsewhere Main advantages of the carbon adsorption process relied in its use in various modes: carbon-in column (CIC), carbon-in pulp (CIP) and carbon-in-leach (CIL); but since being the adsorption process is, in principle, an anion exchange phenomenon, it is restricted only to the surface of the activated carbon; thus, in comparison to ion exchange resins, the loading capacity of activated carbon is relatively small. On the other hand, solvent extraction processing seems to have more favourable kinetics and metal separation possibilities than those of activated carbon. The present investigation deals with the application of carbon adsorption in the removal of antimony and arsenic impurities from a Chilean copper electrorefining solution. Different variables of the adsorption/desorption process are discussed. All the adsorption/desorption experiments were conducted in a 0.5 L glass vessel, which was stirred mechanically (190 min Metal adsorption/desorption values were determined by monitoring metal concentrations by AAS using a Perkin-Elmer 1100B spectrophotometer, in the liquid phases as a function of time. In order to study the extent of removal of antimony and arsenic from the electrolyte solution, various experiments were conducted using different solution/carbon ratios (expressed in mL/g). The results are shown in It can be seen that the increase in the solution/carbon ratio increases the respective metal load onto the carbon (consequently, the decrease in the solution/carbon ratio increases the percentages of metals removed from the solution). According to the results obtained, it is expected that maximum carbon load will be reached in the 30-h contact range. In the case of arsenic, an increase in metal depletion from the aqueous solution will be achieved with further decreasing the solution/carbon ratio; it is expected that also the elimination of antimony will be enhanced. Antimony and arsenic loadings were compared with other values in The decrease of temperature slightly increases the load of both metals in the carbon (this would suggest an exothermic adsorption reaction) and the differences are more evident at lower solution/carbon ratios. Similarly to gold adsorption, results suggest that the driving force which governs the adsorption of both metals at shorter times is the metal concentration gradient at the solution/carbon interface, whereas at longer times, an internal transfer by intraparticle diffusion occurs Metal-loaded carbon material used for desorption experiments was prepared by contacting (24 h at 35 °C and using a solution/carbon ratio of 25) the carbon with fresh electrolyte (see The kinetics of metals desorption, using H Studying the influence of sulphuric acid concentration (150–400 g/L) on metals desorption, it was found that the percentage desorption reaches a maximum (48% for antimony and 47% for arsenic) at 200 g/L sulphuric acid and then levels off. The effect of using various solution/carbon ratios on arsenic and antimony desorption is shown in Once arsenic and antimony elution is performed and since the burning of metal-laden carbon is considered not economical, elimination of arsenic and antimony from the desorption solution can be performed in various ways, i.e. hydrolysis or precipitation as sulphides of both metals; the production of a base metal precipitate will probably require a toxic waste landfill for disposal. Antimony and arsenic adsorption onto activated carbon can be used for separating these impurities from copper electrolytes and recycling the electrolyte to the electrorefining cells (since neither copper nor sulphuric acid are loaded in the carbon). Conditions for the adsorption/desorption of antimony and arsenic are established. The extent of impurities removal can be enhanced using a greater carbon/solution ratio and/or using a countercurrent device. We thank CSIC (Spain) and USACH (Chile) for the support to carry out this work.