ZrB2-based composites were consolidated through reactive spark plasma sintering of the powder mixtures containing relatively 5 vol.% of metallic Zr particles, and graphite flakes (GF) or carbon nanotubes (CNT) as the carbon source, with the aim of ZrC in-situ synthesis in ZrB2 matrix. Microstructural and phase analyses indicated that GFs cannot result in detectable ZrC in the final microstructure. Contrarily, it was found that CNTs promote the in-situ synthesizability of zirconium carbide in the composite system. However, the sample containing graphite flakes presented better densification outcomes. The mechanism of ZrC formation in the composites, based on the carbon source, was finally discussed and illustrated.ZrB Several research works have confirmed the substantial role of reinforcements and additives in improved sintering behavior of zirconium diboride In order to manage the mentioned challenges, several efforts are currently focused on the removing of metallic additives after sintering process. For example, in-situ synthesis of the metallic carbides through sintering can be considered a potentially useful method to remove the remained metallic additives after the sintering process [ The initial components, including ZrB X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD, Co radiation with λ=1.79 Å, step size 0.02°, time per step: 0.5s), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM: Mira3, TESCAN), and energy dispersive spectroscopy (Oxford EDS 80) methods were employed for phase and microstructural analyses. The fracture surfaces of the composites were also prepared through breaking the samples via impact test instrument. The XRD spectra and density measurements of the sintered composite samples are presented in The mechanism of reactive spark plasma sintering (RSPS) in ZrB Based on the previously reported thermodynamic calculations [  All in all, the morphology of the carbon seems to be the critical parameter in ZrC synthesizability. CNTs have been reported to be more reactive with metals than the graphite flakes It is also worth to note that the formation of liquid glassy phase and dissolution of the oxidized Zr particles cause better densification in ZGF sample, the formation of ZrC phase as well as the agglomeration of CNTs may decrease the relative density of ZCNT sample, as seen in The comparative FESEM fractographs presented in The densification behavior and in-situ synthesizability of ZrC in the studied composite systems are graphically concluded in ZrB The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors would like to appreciate Mr. Siamak Nouraei (XRD analysis Lab., Materials and Energy Research Center (MERC), Iran) for his contribution in phase analysis.