Some mechanical and metallurgical properties of hollow and solid long forged products are compared. The metallurgical properties include such micro- and macro-structural characteristics as the grain size and grain flow patterns. Mechanical evaluation was performed by means of hardness testing. Some theoretical analyses were also carried out. The results indicate that the hollow or mandrel forged products possess better properties. Both the mechanical and metallurgical properties are more uniform and homogeneous through the thickness direction in such products. By contrast, in the solid forged parts, there is a gradient in the micro- and macro-structural properties from the surface to the internal areas. These non-uniformities can reduce the quality and reliability of such products and cause manufacturing problems in the processes that follow.Long hollow parts are produced by several methods; these include: hollow or mandrel forging, solid radial forging followed by drilling or machining, the welding of rolled plates, hot extrusion, and centrifugal casting. Among the above, forging is often preferred because this process can produce parts of high quality, but involves less production time and cost as well as material waste. Radial forging was first developed in Austria in 1946. It was initially used for the hot forging of small parts and the cold forging of tubes over mandrels. Current applications include: bars with round or prismatic cross sections, stepped solid shafts and axles, stepped hollow shafts, performs for turbine shafts, thick walled tubes, the necks and bottoms of solid bottles, couplings and joints, etc. During the hot forging of hollow products, the mandrel is water cooled to remove the heat absorbed from the workpiece. The purpose of the mandrel is to prevent the inner wall of the tube from collapsing and to form the diameter of the inner wall. The ingots used for solid and hollow forging should possess excellent metallurgical and workability characteristics Lahoti and Altan analyzed the deformation mechanics of radial forging by using the slab method Khare and Sikka investigated the mechanical properties of 9Cr-1Mo mandrel forged (i.e., saddle forged) steel cylinders and compared them with the properties of products manufactured by other processes, such as the welding of rolled plates In this research, some mechanical and metallurgical properties of mandrel and solid forged products are compared. The results show that the hollow forging process is preferable to solid forging for producing tubes and thick-walled cylinders in most cases. These results are in good agreement with theoretical analyses. For evaluation of the differences between the properties of hollow and solid forged products, it is essential to produce specimens made by both processes. The chemical compositions and heat treatments after forging should be similar for the two sets of specimens so as to minimize variations in the material and processing parameters. This is the approach that was followed in the present investigation. The initial ingot was forging stock cast by the electro slag refining (ESR) process. The solidified ingot macrostructure included columnar grains that lay largely along the ingot longitudinal direction. The chemical composition is presented in The ingot was of circular cross section with an initial diameter of 590 The initial ingot was again produced by ESR; however, in this case, the diameter of the cylindrical ingot was 570 The specimens cut from the solid and hollow forging were first ground and then polished. Alumina powder was used in final polishing in order to produce a smoother surface. To determine the grain flow patterns, as well as to test for segregation, macro etching was performed. The solution employed for this purpose contained 50% HCl–50% H Brinell hardness tests were performed along the thickness direction. The hardness was measured at points that were regularly spaced between the surface and the center. The specimen microstructure was evaluated by metallography, the etchant solution used for microstructural revealing is Nital 2% (2% HNO The process parameters employed in hollow and solid forging strongly affect both the microscopic and macroscopic properties, which in turn determine the principal features of the final product. Segregation and its distribution, the presence of low melting phases, and grain size and shape are examples of such factors. In what follows, the principal differences between hollow and solid forged products are also discussed. Wrought materials that are plastically deformed usually exhibit better ductilities along directions parallel to that of the plastic elongation. Through plastic deformation the segregation and any brittle phases present become oriented parallel to the elongation. Such an orientation effect is referred to as grain flow or fibering the deformation of ductile second phases (such as sulfides in steel), the displacement of brittle second phases (such as undissolved carbides, if any), the redistribution of segregated alloying elements and impurities (associated with the break-up of the dendritic structure), the redistribution of low melting phases (such as eutectics and sulfides), the deformation of second phases (such as ferrite and austenite), and the development of crystalline anisotropy (i.e., the formation of textures). In hollow and solid forged cylinders, the metal flows along three principal directions: longitudinally, radially, and tangentially. In the present case, the main direction of plastic deformation is longitudinal. For this reason, the ductility of hollow forged cylinders along the longitudinal direction is 20–25% greater than along the tangential or hoop direction The grain flow pattern of the solid forging specimen, These differences can be explained using an Forging under large In the solid forging of cylinders, the material thickness forged between the dies is considerably larger than during hollow forging. Furthermore, in order to destroy the cast structure and convert it into a wrought structure, a minimum plastic strain must be applied to the workpiece The variation in the microstructure of the forged material across the thickness of the hollow cylinder is illustrated in The variation across the thickness in the microstructure of the solid forged cylinder is illustrated in The results of the Brinell hardness testing of the hollow and solid forged products are illustrated in Solid and hollow forgings differ in many respects, some of which were described in the above sections, but other factors such as the temperature distribution during forging and residual stresses also affect the properties of these products. In the solid forging process, the material only contacts the dies through its outer surface so the central areas cool more slowly than the outer ones. This temperature gradient leads to non-uniformities in the microstructural and other temperature-dependent properties in the final product. By contrast, in hollow forged products, there is contact with both the dies and the mandrel along the outer and inner surfaces, respectively, during forging. As a result, the intervening material cools more uniformly and the metallurgical and mechanical properties that depend on the temperature gradient will be more uniform. The forged components processed by radial forging generally have high residual stresses and undergo some deflection after forging. Residual stresses in solid and hollow forged products directly affect the stability of the material as well as its fatigue life. Jang and Liou studied residual stresses in radial forged products using a 3 D non-linear finite element method The outer surface of forged products is dominated by tensile stresses, which take their maximum values near the exterior of the forged product. The inner surface of forged products is characterized by compressive residual stresses, with only small tensile stresses at the front of the workpiece. The tensile residual stress at the surface of forged products is highest along the axial direction. In hollow forged products, the compressive residual stress acts along the inner surface, a situation that can be advantageous with regard to the service life of the product. These stresses improve the fatigue resistance by decreasing the influence of sub-surface defects. By contrast, cylinders produced by solid forging must be hollowed out by drilling and therefore cannot exhibit these advantages. Some metallurgical and mechanical properties of mandrel and solid forged products were investigated and the following conclusions were drawn: The grain flow pattern in hollow forged products is more uniform leading to improved mechanical properties. In solid forged products, the grain flow pattern changes from the surface to the center; under these conditions, the cast structure is not completely broken up in the central areas. Microstructural analysis showed that the grain size distribution is uniform across the thickness of hollow forged products. Conversely, the grain size is non-uniform and changes from the surface to the center in solid forged cylinders. The Brinell hardness measurements revealed that the profiles were uniform and similar in both specimens. This can be attributed to the similar heat treatments that were carried out after forging. The hollow forging process decreases material waste, process time and cost and increases product quality.