In future, M-learning will no longer be a choice but a necessity in the modern way of learning so that students would be able to keep pace with the times and technology. M-learning has an increasingly significant role in the development of teaching methods of learning in higher education. By using mobile technology, students can easily and quickly access and use learning resources anytime and anywhere. The aim of this paper is to present the results of research in the application of new technologies in higher education with particular emphasis on M-learning as a modern innovative approach. The study was conducted using a survey among students at the Technical Faculty in Bor, University of Belgrade. The proper conclusions were drawn from the data obtained by the survey which had been analyzed by using the appropriate statistical methods in software packages SPSS v. 17 and LISREL v. 8.8.Modern technologies and globalization bring rapid changes in all aspects of human life. Every day creates new information and the general development continuously requires new knowledge and skills. There is a need for faster, timely education, which will be open and, at the same time, widely available ( Traditional way of teaching will probably never be fully replaced by other “more modern” method. However, traditional lectures will certainly be supplemented by the concepts of e-learning and some future technologies, because the essence of each lecture is the transfer of knowledge and knowledge transfer should be facilitated ( Mobile learning is defined as learning with mobile devices: the so-called smart phones, PDAs, MP3 and MP4 devices, tablet computers and other portable devices (  According to literature sources ( Using this form of e-learning distance education, m-learners use  With development of new mobile technologies, M-learning became very popular research topic. According to recent publications, the students represent the most investigated group (  The goal of such way of learning is to release teaching from time–space constraints, make it more versatile and of better quality. Number of benefits provided by mobile learning is far greater than those offered by the traditional way of education in the classroom ( Application of new information and communication technologies in the educational process involves continuous monitoring and acquisition of new knowledge and experience in these fields. IT and technical literacy is necessary for teachers who should realize this type of learning process in interaction with pupils/students. Technology is now at the stage of development that can fully meet these requirements. It remains only that education adapts itself to novelties and make use of the opportunities they provide ( Benefits of M-learning: Interaction: the student may have an interaction with professors. Portability: mobile devices are lighter than books and allow students to take notes, type text or record sound. Cooperation: enables easier cooperation among students. Students can collaborate even in remote locations. Engaging students: new generations like to use mobile devices. Practicality: Students can study whenever they have time. It can assist students with disabilities. Speed: the traditional learning materials and training take a lot of time in order to be prepared, materials for mobile learning can be prepared and be available relatively quickly. Retention of knowledge: mobile learning is a powerful learning tool that provides quick reminding and adding materials to already learned. Reduces the cost of printing literature. Enables easier data management ( The disadvantages are mainly related to the size of the screen and keys, which are relatively small, as well as the internet connection and battery life. There are a multitude of standards and operating systems which mobile devices do not support so that there are difficulties to adapt existing content for e-learning to mobile devices ( According to a joint study by OpenMarket and Forrester Consulting published at the end of 2014 ( As a contribution to mentioned data, the trend of global media development is presented in The fact is that mobile devices number by the end of 2012 reached the number of total world population ( According to the investigations of the International IT union for 2012 ( Therefore, the aim of this work was to investigate the use of mobile devices for M-learning among students at Technical Faculty in Bor, University of Belgrade. The behavioral intention for M-learning use was tested through different hypothesis, which were used further for constructing a structural model. Given that learning is a profound personal act, which is a lot easier when learning situations are relevant, reliable and engaging, this paper will examine the factors that may affect the acceptance of M-learning by students. As different types of learning require appropriate strategies, tools and resources, technology by itself does not guarantee better learning. Programs of effective mobile learning will require new digital communications’ skills, new pedagogy and new practices. Learning management system at the University of Belgrade offers a variety of online courses that can be accessed via mobile phone and tablet computers. In this regard, the aim of the research is to examine how performance expectancy, effort expectancy, lecturer’s influence, quality of service and personal innovativeness, have a strong and significant influence on the intended behavior of students in the use of mobile learning. Therefore, this study attempts to examine the effect of these structures on the intended (loyal) behavior of M-learning users. Performance expectancy is defined as the degree to which an individual believes that using the system will help him or her to attain gains in job performance ( Performance expectancy has a positive effect on the intended behavior of students. Effort expectancy is defined as the degree of ease associated with the use of the system ( Effort expectancy has a positive effect on the intended behavior of students. Lecturer’s influence comes from social influence, which is defined as the extent to which a person experiences that it is important to use new information technology because others believe that he or she should use it ( Lecturer’s influence has a positive effect on the intended behavior of students. Most definitions of quality services have concentrated on the perception of the customer and his/her satisfaction with the services offered. The concepts for evaluation of the quality of services are derived from the HCI research usability ( There is also a definition of quality of service in terms of reliability and response, content quality and safety, according to Quality of services has a positive effect on the intended behavior of students. The term personal innovativeness is considered to be the personal willingness to accept and use new information technology. People with a higher degree of personal innovativeness are more likely to develop a positive opinion on new technologies than those with lower degree ( Personal innovativeness has a positive effect on the intended behavior of students. By considering the hypotheses set, comes a conceptual model, which consists of 5 of the latent variables, and 18 observing variables, as shown in In this paper, we used the data from the research conveyed at the Technical Faculty in Bor in 2014. A survey was used for this study ( Five-point Likert scale was used for analyzing the questionnaire responses. In this way, respondents expressed their views and thus obtained baseline data on which further analysis was performed by using the software package SPSS v. 17 and LISREL v. 8.8. The survey covered stratified random sample, meaning randomly recruited 280 students from different four study programs (Mining Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering, Technological Engineering, Engineering Management) at the Technical Faculty in Bor, University in Belgrade ( 223 papers were properly filled (meaning that the respondents answered to all questions in the questionnaire). It represents 79.64% of the total number of distributed questionnaires, which can be considered as representative sample for the population in which the study was conducted. For testing the validity of the theoretical model of the intended behavior of students in the use of M-learning shown in For empirical validation of the general hypothetical model, this paper used the SEM methodology (Structural Equation Modeling) ( In order to ensure the reliability and validity of the tested model, the measurement model was defined on which CFA (Confirmatory Factor Analyses) was performed, and as a method of assessment maximum likelihood method was used. By its application, unidimensionality has been confirmed within all six groups in the considered model. CFA was used for the assessment of discriminant and convergent validity. All the factors of load indicators on their structures are statistically significant ( The bold numbers on the diagonal in Tested and confirmed validity of the theoretical model in Internal consistency of a group of statements, which are related to the concepts included in the research, was tested. For the assessment of internal consistency, Cronbach’s coefficient The obtained values of the considered fit indicators point to a satisfactory level of fitting between structural model and data, indicating that the structural coefficients can be calculated in a theoretical trajectory, defined by the model in  Results of the path analysis ( The research work was aimed to examine the intended behavior of students during the acquisition of M-learning at the Technical Faculty in Bor, University of Belgrade (Serbia). Suggested hypotheses arising from the examined constructs were tested by structural equation of modeling using the software packages SPSS v. 17 and LISREL v. 8.8. The results indicate that the suggested model adequately explains the intended behavior of students in the acquisition of M-learning and also has the ability to predict. Examined constructs such as the expected performances, effort expectancy, lecturer’s influence, quality of service, personal innovativeness are important determinants of the intended behavior of students in M-learning acquisition. According to the results of investigation, 98.5% of the students at Technical Faculty in Bor, University of Belgrade possess more than 5 The results of our study show that PE (Performance Expectancy) has the most significant influence, and that is the most important predictor of the intended behavior of students in acquisition of M-learning ( EE (Effort Expectancy) is also an important influential construct on student intention to use M-learning ( LI (Lecturer’s Influence) has a significant influence on the intended behavior of students in the use of M-learning. Recommendations and attitude of lecturers can affect the acquisition of M-learning with students a lot ( QoS (the Quality of Service) in the acceptance of M-learning by students is an important aspect of the educational process, as it affects the way of informing and understanding of student learning. Also, the use of M-learning instruments involves the use of information technology and various IT tools such as personal computers, computer networks, mobile and multimedia devices. According to researches ( PI (Personal Innovativeness) shows a significant influence on the intended behavior of students in the acquisition of M-learning, according to the research ( Some implications of presented results to student and teacher behavior could be noted. Performance expectancy and personal innovativeness have the greatest influence to intended behavior of students, strengthening their motivation and student-professor interaction trough M-learning educational practice. It is also important to encourage professors to support students’ motivation, to provide optimal levels of main types of motivational supports, and to understand that their role in students’ performance expectancy is significant. These findings sensitize to “new avenues for understanding and improving student engagement in learning activities.” ( Finally, it should be noted that, as with all empirical research, this study has also certain limitations because the data were collected using the survey in only one of many faculties at University of Belgrade. Hence, the results cannot be considered representative for the state of the education system in Serbia, but only at the Technical Faculty in Bor. Future researches will focus on the entire system, which will give the right balance of computer literacy, the possibilities of further and wider application of M-learning and the tendencies toward technological achievements of the whole educational system in Serbia. This paper describes the study of factors that affect the intended behavior of students in the acquisition of M-learning at the Technical Faculty in Bor, University of Belgrade (Serbia). Results provide valuable information about the admission and the way of introduction of technology by both students and teachers in the higher education system in Serbia today. Based on these results we can see that the expected performance and personal innovative capabilities have the most significant influence on the intended behavior of students during the acquisition of M-learning, which can lead to improved learning productivity and performance of the studies. In this case, it was found that effort expectancy is the weakest link in the chain of the studied factors, because students feel that they need to make additional efforts to master the skills of M-learning. M-learning aims to release the lectures of spatio-temporal constraints, and to make it more versatile and better quality. Number of the benefits offered by M-learning is great, so M-learning will no longer be an option but a necessity in the modern way of learning. M-learning is beginning to play an increasingly important role in the educational process. The ability to learn ‘in the move’ – anytime and anywhere, is becoming increasingly popular. It is in accordance with the trends of lifelong education, distance education and e-learning, and presents a new integral part of the global computerization of the society – a process that is already happening and that cannot be stopped ( 