Summary: Avulsion fractures of the tibial eminence have been well described in children and adults with an increased in incidence resulting from road traffic and athletic accidents. According to the literature, only surgical treatment is advocated because of the high incidence of the nonunion and instability following conservative treatment. Open reduction can cause some morbidity and, therefore, arthroscopic techniques have been developed. The limitations of the techiques are related to technical difficulty and unstable fixation. We report a simple and effective method of fixation with the following advantages: (1) use of metallic suture for stable fixation, (2) the fixation device is easily removed in the office, (3) there is no need of additional instruments, and (4) the minimal size of the fixation device avoids damage to the anterior cruciate ligament insertion. This technique has been used in a series of 10 consecutive patients treated for avulsion fractures of the tibial spine since 1991, resulting in a high rate of excellent and good results without any case of nonunion fracture or related complication.
                  Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic and Related Surgery, Vol 16, No 4 (April), 2000: pp 379–382Tibial eminence fractures have been well described in adults and children. Ten consecutive adult patients underwent arthroscopic fixation of type III tibial spine fracture at the Orthopaedic Department of the University of Siena from February 1991 to November 1994. There were 7 men and 3 women with ages ranging from 17 to 41 years (mean, 26.7 years). All patients included in this study underwent the surgical techniques described here. The patient is placed in the supine position with the knee placed in the leg holder and the standard arthroscopic portals used. The first step is hematoma debridement and exposure of the fracture site (Fig 1). All patients underwent the same rehabilitation program, which was as follows: (1) From the first to 30 days: partial weight bearing with crutches, isometric exercises, postoperative Hinged brace locked at 0°, continuous passive motion and passive flexion (0 to 30 or 40 days), patellar mobilizations, abductor/ adductor exercises, and hamstring stretching. (2) From 30 to 60 days: progression from partial to total weight bearing, active flexion, close-chain exercises, and leg press. (3) From 60 to 90 days: swimming and cycling. (4) Starting at 120 days: running and progressive return to athletic activities. Radiographs were taken 6 to 8 weeks postoperatively to evaluate the fracture union. The metallic suture was easily removed in the clinic after there was radiographic evidence of bone union. All patients have been evaluated at a minimum 1 year follow-up (range, 13 to 74 months) according to subjective and objective criteria. The objective data evaluated were: range of motion, swelling, quadriceps atrophy, and ACL stability. ACL instability was evaluated by clinical and arthromeric examination. The clinical examination consisted of Lachman, anterior drawer, and Pivot shift tests. The KT-1000 arthromeric examination was performed according to the criteria of Daniel and Stone Radiographic controls showed healing of the fractures within 6 to 8 weeks for all patients. Overall, there were 80% excellent/good results and 20% fair/poor results. Subjectively, no patients complained of residual pain or instability and all patients were able to return to the athletics of choice within 6 to 9 months. Objectively, all patients regained the full extension and the flexion ranged from 125° to 135°. All patients with excellent/good results exhibited a solid end point on the Lachman test with no positive pivot shift tests. For these patients the KT-1000 results, manual-maximum tests were inferior to 3 mm side-to-side difference. The 3 patients with fair/poor results had a positive Lachman test and they had greater than 3 mm side-to-side difference (4.5 mm, 7 mm, and 8.5 mm) recorded with the KT-1000 manual-maximum test. One of these patients complained of recurrent swelling after strenuous athletic activities. In the 3 patients who obtained the worst results, a partial ACL lesion (<50% of the fibers) was detected intraoperatively. We have introduced a reliable technique for arthroscopic fixation of tibial eminence fracture. All patients returned to their previous level of activity. In 1978, Brunelli There have been several alternative arthroscopic fixation techniques presented recently that achieve fracture fixation while avoiding the morbidity related to the open techniques.