Investigations on the MnO2-Fe2O3 system roasted in air has been reported in our previous work. This study further investigated the MnO2-Fe2O3 system roasted under CO-CO2 atmosphere. Extensive investigations were concentrated on the reduction of simplex iron oxides or manganese oxides, and little attention were paid on the reduction of MnO2-Fe2O3 system regarding to interactive reactions between them. In this work, it was found that spinel-type MnxFe3−xO4 with high magnetism formed easily under CO-CO2 atmosphere. The reduction and thermodynamic analyses of pure MnFe2O4 were also researched to better understand the reduction behaviors of MnO2-Fe2O3 system. Phase study showed that a series of Mn-Fe composite oxides, including MnxFe3−xO4 and (MnO)y(FeO)1−y, generated during the reduction of MnO2-Fe2O3 system. MnxFe3−xO4 was readily generated under CO content of 2.5–25 vol% at 1000 °C. With further increase of CO content, MnxFe3−xO4 was reduced to (MnO)y(FeO)1−y and then to MnO and metallic iron. Reduction of manganese oxides, iron oxides and manganese ferrites happened concurrently during the reduction of MnO2-Fe2O3 system. And the reduction of MnO2, Fe2O3, Fe3O4 and MnFe2O4 were compared by TG and thermodynamic analyses. In addition, the morphology evolution and magnetism change of the MnO2-Fe2O3 system reduced under different CO contents were also studied.Iron and manganese are basic alloying metals with wide industrial application. Pyrometallurgical reduction process is the uppermost technology for extracting iron and manganese from metal oxide ores Some works were carried out to determine the behavior of iron ore pellets with low content range of manganese reduced by CO gas and solid carbon On the other hand, it is reported that there are abundant ferruginous manganese ores (abbr. Fe-Mn ores) characterized as high content of iron oxides and manganese oxides all over the world The current study focused on the behavior of MnO Pure MnO The reduction roasting tests were conducted in an electrically heated horizontal furnace and the schematic diagram of roasting experiment is illustrated in After cooled, the briquettes were pre-ground in an agate mortar to particle size passing through a 200 mesh screen (<0.074 mm) for the main phase identification by XRD (RIGAKU D/Max 2500, Japan), which was operated under the conditions of radiation: Cu Kα, tube current and voltage: 250 mA, 40 kV, scanning range: 10–80° (2θ), step size: 0.02° (2θ) and scanning speed: 8°/min. The magnetism properties of the pulverous samples were determined by a vibrating sample magnetometer (PPMS Dynacool, Quantum Design, America) at ambient temperature. As for the morphology observation, the cooled briquettes were firstly heat mounted in resin and polished to mirror finish. Then, the polished sections were examined by a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, TESCAN, MIRA3 LMH/LMU) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector for spot, line and area scanning. TG analysis of samples was performed using a thermal analyzer (Netzsch STA 449 C, Germany) at the temperature range of 25–1400 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C/min in pure N  Mn  The microstructure characteristics of the MnO As shown in The morphologies of the synthetic MnFe  On the other hand, in the process of selective reduction roasting followed by magnetic separation, the microstructure of the reduced samples was extremely important for the magnetic separation because the magnetic part must be liberated from the non-magnetic part during the comminution process. When the Fe-Mn ores were treated by the direct reduction roasting followed by magnetic separation process, (FeO) The magnetization hysteresis loops of the MnO MnO Based on the phase transformation from the XRD analyses, the main reactions of MnO Thermogravimetric analysis was further used to determine the reduction sequence of the pure MnFe In summary, based on the experimental results and the thermodynamic calculations, the schematic diagram of the phase transformation of MnO The reduction behavior of MnO A series of Mn-Fe composite oxides generated during the reduction of MnO The temperatures and CO contents required for the stepwise reduction of MnO The VSM measurement showed Mn The authors wish to express their thanks to the