The effect of fines recycling back to the rod mill in a conventional full-scale grinding circuit was evaluated. For this purpose, a fraction of the hydrocyclone feed stream was diverted to the rod mill feed.
                  It was observed that operating with fines recycling allowed a decrease of 2–3% in the grinding product size, % +212μm, at similar solid feed capacity, tph, and similar circulating load in the ball mills. This represents a potential increase of about 1.0–1.5% in the overall rougher flotation recovery.
                  The effective pulp residence time in the ball mills was evaluated and was found to be 1.6–1.8min. Thus, the effective volume of slurry inside the ball mills was estimated and was equal to 32.7%.
                  The product size, % +212μm, was correlated with the main operating variables such as Bond index, feed tonnage, power consumption and circulating load. The model was adjusted to describe normal operation without fines recycling. Then, the comparison of experimental data with fines recycling and those without it, showed a decrease of 2.5% in % +212μm, for the same feed capacity tph.Slurry rheology affects the particle breakage, the mass transport and energy efficiency inside a grinding mill. The rheological effects are often interactive with each other, particularly in closed industrial grinding circuits, and sometimes may be cancelled out by each other, thus creating conflicting conclusions ( In the case of ball mills, the bypass of fine particles, which return to the mill with the circulating load, is an issue of controversy. A significant amount of work has been done in pilot plant studies and field tests to investigate the effect of returning fines back to the mill. The common concern is that fines should not be returned to the mill since these fines will (1) be subject to over grinding and (2) consume space that could be normally occupied by new mill feed. On the other hand, it is well known that the addition of fines in the rod mill feed act as a viscosity modifier, which helps the grinding efficiency ( In the present study, the effect of fines recycling to the rod mill feed was evaluated at the El Salvador concentrator. For this purpose, a small fraction of the hydrocyclone feed stream was recycled to create a fine circulating load back to the rod mill, while the ball mill circuit was operated under normal conditions. The rod mill discharge showed a 54.7 In this study, the radioactive tracer technique was used to measure the rod mill recycle, as well as the effective mean residence time in ball mills. The grinding circuit of the Salvador Division, Codelco-Chile, consists of five sections operating in parallel. Sections 1–4 are formed by 1 rod mill (3.05 In order to study the effect of fines recycling to the rod mill feed, and how this influences the rest of the grinding circuit, a 12.5 In order to optimize the amount of fine recycling, a measurement of the mass flowrate is required. In a previous work,   In order to study the hydrodynamic behavior of the ball mills during fines recycling in sections 1 and 4, the radioactive tracer technique was used to measure the residence time distribution of the liquid inside the mills. Thus, a radioactive tracer Br-82 solution, in water, was injected at the inlet of the ball mills, operating in closed loop. Then, the response time of the radioactive tracer was measured on-line using a non-invasive sensor located in the discharge of the mills sump box after the pump. The average residence time of the slurry in the sump box was around 30 the total volume of the sump box was 20 the volumetric flowrate was 1233 In order to evaluate the hydrodynamic conditions inside the ball mills, an estimate of the effective volume of slurry inside the ball mills was developed. The total mills volume was 31.2 Mass balance adjustments were developed in order to compare the operation with and without fines circulating load to the rod mill. This was made by measuring the rod mill fresh feed (stream 1 in Streams 11 and 12 have the same values of streams 9 and 10, respectively.  The main operating characteristics during sampling can be seen in On the other hand, the comparison between tests T5 and T6, both operating with fines recycle to the rod mill, in section 4, showed an increase from 23.9% to 29.5% of particles larger than 212 In order to evaluate the impact that the fines recycle to the rod mill feed has on the grinding product, a correlation was developed to describe the circuit behavior in terms of the main operating variables. The correlation was fitted to predict the operation without fines recycle and then the model was used to observe the differences between predictions without fines recycle and the actual operation using fines recycle. According to Bond’s law ( work input, kWh/ton Bond Work Index, kWh/ton product size, μm feed size, μm feed throughput, tph power draw, kW In addition, the following correlation, between % +212  circulating load in ball mill, % average circulating load in ball mills, % parameter for model fitting   The effect of fines recycling back to the rod mill in a conventional full-scale grinding circuit was evaluated. For this purpose a fraction of 34–40% of the hydrocyclone feed stream was diverted to the rod mill feed. It was observed that operating with fines recycling allows the grinding product size (%+212 A correlation was derived to describe the grinding product size (% +212 The effective pulp residence time in ball mills was evaluated as 1.8 It is also important to note that using fine particle recycling to the rod mill will require a good control system as the potential for over-grinding exists with the −12 The authors are grateful to the El Salvador Division of Codelco-Chile, for permission to present this work. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by Conicyt, project Fondecyt 1020215, and Santa Maria University, project 270322.