Flotation is a density separation process which is influenced by physico-chemical interaction between a particle and a bubble. In biotechnology, it finds application in the solid-liquid separation of biomass. The process mechanism depends on the formation of stable microorganism-bubble-complexes by collision and adsorption. The difference in density of these complexes and the surrounding liquid medium causes them to rise to the liquid surface, where a foam develops. This microorganism enriched foam can then be removed. An economical comparison of the separation technologies centrifugation, cross-flow-filtration and flotation showed, that flotation is a financially and energetically interesting alternative process step for the harvest of microorganisms. In this work separation results with a model microorganism S. cerevisiae are presented. Experiments were conducted batch-wise in a 6L-laboratory dissolved air flotation setup, where bubble generation classically results from expanding air from supersaturated medium. Goal was the optimization of the flotation rate and the energy efficiency of the flotation process by adaptation of operational parameters, such as gas- and recycle flow rate and saturation pressure. Flotation models show proportional dependency between the flotation rate and the bubble size and bubble surface area flow rate. Therefore, the effect of operational parameters, such as saturation pressure, recycle and gas flow rate, on the bubble size and surface area flow rate was analyzed. The positive effect of an increasing bubble surface area was possible with increasing gas flow rate, recycle flow rate and saturation pressure. Decreasing bubble sizes were measured for increasing recycle flow rate and saturation pressure, meanwhile the contrary was the case with an increasing gas flow rate. Evaluation of the flotation rate and flotation energy efficiency showed, increasing the recycle flow rate and the saturation pressure both improved the flotation rate, but had low effect on the energy efficiency. Increasing the gas flow rate improved both flotation rate and energy efficiency. It is the most interesting operational parameter for enhancing the process efficacy.Definition [Unit] filtration membrane area [m flotation cell area [m bubble surface area (single bubble) [m microorganism concentration at time t [m product mass concentration per liter fermentation broth [g/L] cost of electric power [€/kWh] cost of unit installation [€] bubble Sauter mean diameter [m] particle Sauter mean diameter [m] volume specific power input of a unit operation [kWh/m area related separation capacity [m flotation rate constant [min mass of product per year before separation step [kt/a] mass of product per year [kt/a] amount of substance [Mol] pressure in the saturation tank [bar(g)] flotation probability [–] adsoption probability [–] collision probability [–] desorption probabiltiy [–] compressor power [J/s] pump power [J/s] bubble number frequency distribution [–] bubble sum frequency distribution [–] ideal gas constant ( recovery flotation [–] Reynolds number [–] bubble surface area flow [h temperature [K] process hours per year [h/a] flotation duration [min] relative bubble rising velocity [m/s] bubble volume (single bubble) [m flotation batch volume [L] volume flow of fermentation broth [m superficial gas velocity [m/s] gas volume flow [NL/h] recycle volume flow [L/h] product yield of the separation unit operation [–] ratio of maintenance cost to cost for unit installation per year [a isentropic coefficient [–] flotation energy efficiency [J electrical compressor efficiency [–] pump motor efficiency [–] liquid pump efficiency [–] massratio of additive in g per ton fermentation broth [ppm] Definition Dissolved Air Flotation Induced Air Flotation Bubble Size Analyzer Downstream process Upstream process Most industrial biotechnological processes have two main process chains, the upstream process (USP) and the downstream process (DSP). During USP microorganism are fermented and used to synthesize a biotechnological product. The DSP is necessary to purify, concentrate and finish the product. Depending on the degree of purification, a combination of different purification techniques is obligatory. The first step is the harvest, where the separation of microorganisms from fermentation media takes place. The most common harvesting techniques are centrifugation and microfiltration. In comparison, with increasing particle size and process volume, centrifugation is the faster process with higher energy efficiency. When a complete separation of microorgansims is necessary for further processing a fine filtration is mandatory ( The DSP constitutes up to 90% of the total production cost ( This study aims to contribute to the exploration of flotation as an alternative biotechnological downstream processe. The first studies and analyses of flotation in biotechnology emerged during the 1950s with the organisms Factors found to be influencing microorganism flotation have been explored in several studies. A positive influence on floatability of The growing knowledge of the flotation process led to the development of the first models for particle-bubble interaction. Derjaguin and Dushkin based their model on surface interaction forces, including electrostatic and van der Waals forces ( There are currently two well established model approaches for flotation. The classical model approach describes direct flotation in terms of an exponential first-order rate process ( Direct flotation is considered to consist of three sub-processes: collision, attachment and detachment ( The flotation probability of a particle Bubble-particle adhesion will occur when the particle-bubble contact is long enough to thin and rupture the liquid film between particle and bubble. Using this criterion, one can derive the expression Considering the flotation model, it can be concluded that microbubbles and high turbulence increase the probability of flotation, especially for fine particles, which have low densities and are potentially little hydrophobic, such as microorganisms. Dissolved air flotation is known to allow for generation of gas bubbles with narrow size distributions in the range of 10 µm to max. 300 µm with Sauter mean diameters of 30–160 µm ( The objective of this work was to evaluate the potential of flotation as cost and energy efficient alternative biotechnological downstream process for microorganism separation from fermentation broth. Theoretical cost comparison between filtration, centrifugation and flotation was performed. Experimental research was performed in a laboratory dissolved air flotation device with the model microorganism yeast. Operational influences on the flotation key parameters, namely bubble size and bubble surface area flow rate as well as on the flotation rate and flotation energy efficiency were evaluated.  Bubble generation in the flotation setup is realized by mixed induced/dissolved air flotation. Flotation experiments are performed in yeast fermentation broth. Flotation energy efficiencies of varying process conditions are estimated based on the energy demand of gas and liquid flow. Bubble size measurements are necessary for flotation modeling and are realized by automated image analysis. Bubble generation in the laboratory flotation setup is based on the principle of dissolved air flotation. A recycle flow is continuously withdrawn from the bottom of the flotation cell. Under pressure it is intensely dispersed with pressurized gas in a saturator, before it is recirculated over a decompression valve into the flotation cell. When the laboratory flotation setup is operated with fermentation broth or other coalescence inhibited media, micro bubbles are not only generated by dissolved air flotation (DAF), but by mixed induced air flotation (IAF) and DAF. In the top of the saturator recycle flow and gas are intensely mixed and gas dissolution is realized via the generated gas-liquid interface. Due to low surface tension and inhibited coalescence of the complex fermentation liquid, the first dispersion resulted in the generation of stable gas bubbles. Their surface supplied large gas-liquid interface for gas dissolution. The dissolved gas volume in the recycle flow is thermodynamically limited by gas solubility. Undissolved gas remained in form of bubbles that are entrained in the recycle flow. When passing the decompression valve, the recycle flow experiences acceleration and a pressure drop to ambient pressure. Existing entrained bubbles disintegrated due to shear forces and formed bubbles by IAF. Further bubbles are generated by DAF, because the pressure drop caused supersaturation of the liquid and initiated precipitation into micro bubbles. A detailed description of the flotation setup was published by Flotation experiments were performed batch wise. A standard batch contained 6 L Yeast Malt Broth (YMB, Y3752 Sigma-Aldrich) with yeast concentration of 10 g dried cell weight per liter. Before fermentation YMB contained 5 g/L peptic digest of animal tissue, 3 g/L yeast extract, 3 g/L malt extract and 10 g/L dextrose. The yeast cell strain used is The batch flotation procedure was as follows. Yeast fermentation broth was filled into the flotation cell. The gas flow was started and controlled by automated mass flow unit. The recycle flow rate and saturation pressure were controlled manually by recycle flow pump and decompression valve. Higher pump power caused increasing saturator pressure and recycle flow rate. Tightening the decompression valve, caused increasing saturator pressure and decreasing recycle flow rate. Iterative readjustments were necessary. When flotation conditions and bubble generation were consistent, the initial sample probe was taken and the process timer started. Samples were withdrawn from the flotation cell by syringe over a sample nozzle. After flushing the syringe, 2 mL samples were taken. The concentration of yeast The exponential decrease in yeast concentration, as a function of flotation time, could be described by a first order flotation rate The latter is demonstrated by the example given in The experimental flotation rate constants The main factors for the energy demand of the flotation setup are gas compression and recycle flow pumping. Adiabatic gas compression is calculated by Eqs. The power consumption for recycle flow pumping The cumulative energy consumption of the flotation process is the sum of power for recycle flow pumping Bubble size analysis is performed with the Bubble Size Analyzer (BSA) in In flotation, the knowledge of the surface of a single bubble as well as of the total generated bubble surface is most relevant to the process. Which is why the bubble Sauter mean diameter In this section, the influence of operational parameters on the key flotation parameters bubble size and bubble surface area flow, as well as on the flotation rate and the flotation energy efficiency is evaluated. The experimentally obtained flotation rates are compared with the modeled flotation rates. The economic potential of flotation (F) as alternative harvest DPS process step to centrifugation (CF) and cross-flow-filtration (CFF), is discussed in this section. Therefore the mass specific cost of the separation techniques, which are the sum of the cost for unit installation, maintenance, separation energy and additives, were compared. The economics calculation was executed for an exemplary biotech product, an organic acid. The product was considered to be processed with an annual production For all three technologies a Lang-factor The specific cost of the harvest technologies, given in The CF unit operation was considered to consist of three subunits The maintenance expenses for flotation were considered to be 3% of the capital cost for unit installation and therewith lower as the 5% for centrifugation or filtration. It is justified by the increased need for equipment replacement due to wearout by fouling on the membranes in CF-filtration and abrasion by fast rotating parts in the centrifuges. An overview of the specific product related cost of the three technologies CF, CFF and F are demonstrated in The product specific unit installation cost of a CF were 2.1 times and of CFF 2.8 times higher as for flotation, because the equipment of a dissolved air flotation unit is less complicate. The same applied even more for the maintenance cost, because no wearout by fouling or abrasion by fast rotating parts had to be considered. The energy cost of the flotation cell were with 0.27 €/t product only 63% of the energy cost of CF or 19% of CFF respectively. Only the cost of process additives was higher in F, because the additive amount, compared to F, was only 66% in CF and 0% in CFF. As result of the economical comparison flotation is a financially and energetically interesting alternative DPS step for harvesting of microorganisms. To determine the effects of gas flow rate, recycle flow rate and saturation pressure on the bubble generation in the laboratory flotation setup, the bubble size distributions are analyzed with the Bubble Size Analyzer (BSA). For better comparability of the data, the gas flow rate is presented as gas/recycle flow ratio. The Sauter mean diameters of the size distributions are compared. The corresponding bubble surface area flow rates are calculated with Eq. In Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is known to allow for generation of smaller bubbles than dispersed or induced air flotation ( According to the Henry dissolution constants, the soluble gas volume is proportional to the saturation pressure and liquid volume ( Increasing the gas/recycle flow ratio has the contrary effect, a decrease in the ratio between DAF and IAF, and hence increasing bubble Sauter mean diameters. Larger recycle flow rates have a bubble size decreasing effect, because they positively influence DAF and IAF by allowing for higher flow velocities through the dispersion valve upstream and the decompression valve downstream the saturator. Intensified dispersion in the saturator could cause the generation of more gas/liquid interface and increase gas dissolution in the liquid. A higher flow velocity at the decompression valve could cause faster decompression, higher supersaturation along with higher shear forces. This allows for the generation of more bubble nuclei and their growth to stable micro bubbles generated by DAF. Further, higher shear forces enhance the dispersion, hence more and smaller bubbles could be generated by IAF. Higher bubble concentrations and smaller bubble Sauter mean diameters provide for a higher bubble surface area flow, due to their higher surface area to volume ratio. The influence of the process parameters recycle flow rate, gas-recycle flow ratio and saturation pressure as well as of the corresponding surface bubble area flow rate on the flotation rate are shown in Increasing flotation rates are found with increasing bubble surface area flow rate increasing recycle flow rate increasing saturation pressure and increasing gas-recycle flow ratio. The flotation model, Eq. Increasing saturation pressure caused decreasing bubble sizes and higher bubble numbers and therewith higher collision probability between particles and bubbles. Larger gas/recycle flow ratios had a negative (increasing) impact on bubble Sauter mean diameters, which reduced the probability of collision and adsorption. But even with higher bubble Sauter mean diameter, increasing bubble surface area flow rates still provided for increasing flotation rates. A recycle flow rate of 50 L/h at 2 bar(g) resulted in a very low flotation rate constant ( In For measured flotation rates below 0.2 min  For gas/recycle flow ratios above 0.12 NL/L, energy consumption was still increasing proportional to the gas and recycle flow rate, but the increase in flotation rate was less distinctive, thus the energy efficiency levels off. Flotation rate and therewith energy efficiency could approach a plateau and even decrease upon further increasing gas/recycle flow ratios. A reason could be the higher probability of bubble coalescence and foam destabilization, which would further cause particle detachment and therewith decreasing flotation probability. In this paper, the potential of flotation as an alternative downstream process step for harvesting of microorganisms in industrial biotech productions was examined. As result of the business case, flotation showed to be a financial and energetic interesting alternative technology compared to centrifugation and filtration. Further, this paper presents the experimental results of a laboratory dissolved air flotation device, which was used for experimental evaluation and optimization of the flotation kinetic of the model microorganism yeast. The effects of variations of the operational parameters gas flow rate, recycle flow rate and saturation pressure on the bubble size and flotation rate were analyzed. Increasing recycle flow rate, with constant gas/recycle flow ratio, caused intensified turbulences and allowed for the generation of smaller bubbles. Consequently, more bubble surface area flow was provided, collision and adsorption and therewith flotation probability was increased and flotation ultimately enhanced. Higher saturation pressures had a similar effect since they caused a reduction in bubble size and resulting in an increased bubble surface area flow and flotation rate. Increasing gas/recycle flow ratio caused the generation of larger bubbles, which reduced the flotation probability. But the flotation rate was accelerated anyway, since the bubble surface area flow was significantly increased. Further, it was possible to model the flotation rate constant based on the variations on the bubble size, which were caused by the operational variations. Modelled and experimentally determined flotation rate showed good agreement. The influence of recycle flow and saturation pressure on the energy efficiency of the flotation process was marginal. Additional energy input in form of higher flow velocities or higher saturation pressures allowed for faster flotation, but the energy efficiency was not improved. With higher gas/recycle flow ratios, the energy demand was only slightly higher and the flotation rate increased still linearly. This caused the flotation energy efficiency to improve proportionally with the gas/recycle flow ratio. The highest flotation rates were found for the highest gas flow rates, recycle flow rates and saturation pressures. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank Patrick Graefen for the development of the