Although aluminium and steel have been well recycled for many years, the development of new materials and new automotive designs resulting in unfavourable material associations raises the question of metal scrap quality. A new approach is required in order to integrate the limits of the shredding and dismantling processes regarding metal scrap quality into design. The purpose of this paper is to propose a new methodology to guide material choices during design. This methodology defines the minimum data and the interactions between design and end-of-life (EOL) material constants. The results such as the metal association matrix and the identification of process limits help to avoid recycling problems, which are taken into account in design requirements in order to improve metal scrap quality. This paper is based on a study concerning metal scrap quality and shredding and dismantling performances during end-of-life vehicle (ELV) treatment.New regulations concerning the treatment of end-of-life-vehicles (ELVs), the 2000/53/CE directive, and the waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) directive should lead to the use of a larger amount of recycled metals in the production of new goods and to an increase in the quality of the recycled materials ( The contribution of design to material association is important for EOL recovery and also to reduce the environmental impacts of the product ( The aim of this study is to first assess current and future metal automotive part designs and secondly examine the state of the art of shredding and sorting processes for metals. Once the material liberation limits were identified they were translated into requirements for automotive design and fields of research to improve metal scrap quality. This should make it possible to take recycling into consideration in the early stages of car design. The primary aim of this study is to define the main rules of material association, based on materials knowledge and the limits of present and future recycling processes. These requirements are presented as guidelines for metal automotive part design. The second aim is to assess the current metal recycling situation. In order to define the limits of recycling processes, documentation was used and shredding company experts, material producers and automotive industry representatives were interviewed. Data collection was focused on the type and influence of metal residuals found in scrap and particularly on material incompatibilities and the performances of metallurgical and sorting processes. Although recovered metals come from several origins, such as electrical appliances, building demolition or ELVs, the study focused on ELV treatment due to our partners. The working group was composed of: Automotive designers: Renault, PSA. Shredding companies: Galloo Recycling, CFF Recycling. Metal producers: Pechiney, Arcelor. The requirements deal with steel and aluminium and thus are available and adaptable to other industrial sectors. The study was organized into three stages. The first stage summarized all the papers dealing with metal part recycling, from scrap sorting to recovery. In order to validate hypotheses and complete the dataset relating to regulations, material evolutions, car designs and recycling processes, the different experts of the working group were interviewed. A shredding campaign was performed using referenced cars in order to analyse the shredding defects which lead to a poorer recycling quality of the metals and to react to car design. The campaign was carried out on five ELVs (Renault Clio I). Several points were precisely defined: Identification of metal contaminants that have the most influence on recycled material properties. Identification of the processes able to treat the problem of contaminants and the purification of metal scrap. Damage estimation for each metal contaminant identified. Location of materials in the vehicle and identification of their fields of application once recycled. The inventory is based on present data and deals with materials and processes under development. Therefore recovery processes at the pilot scale were identified in order to predict probable future recycling scenarios. During the second stage, the dataset was assessed and a summary was made, allowing the identification of the limits of metal recovery and future technologies. The third stage consisted in drawing up guidelines for metal part design based on the limits defined in the second stage. The guideline document contains the following: Awareness-raising concerning the profits to be gained from recycling metals (better management of energy and raw materials). Different tables dealing with material associations and their criticality. A list of certain metal automotive parts presenting recycling problems and some design requirements to facilitate their EOL treatment and recovery. The major problem encountered during metal scrap recycling is the contamination by metallic residuals ( The influence of contaminants. Shredding and sorting extraction. Metallurgical extraction. Three categories of contaminants were identified for steel recycling. The first one contains copper, tin, nickel and molybdenum which could not be extracted from scrap during metallurgical processes. Their content increases during each recycling loop, as does their criticality. The second one concerns chromium, manganese, zinc, and lead. Their metallurgical extraction is incomplete and depends on refining conditions. These metals are less critical because they are used as alloying elements and give special mechanical properties to steels. The third and last one is composed of Aluminium, Silicon and Titanium, which present no real problems since they are totally removed during refining treatment. The same problem was identified for aluminium recycling; however the contaminants are a bit different. The main one is iron which dissolves itself into aluminium during the second fusion. Copper and zinc also influence aluminium corrosion. Aluminium, like steel, is influenced by metallic residuals but it is difficult to identify real contaminants because all of them are used as alloying elements when present in low concentrations. Because of the growing number of competing materials today, more and more materials compose new vehicles: steel, pig iron, aluminium, magnesium, plastics, composite materials. Certain associations are often incompatible with recycling. The only solution to detect problems was manual sorting, but metallic parts had to be identifiable. This criterion highly reduced the number of parts collected from the shredding experiments, since hooks, welds and rivets were not accessible. Therefore only metal screws were identified and exploitable. The study was based on the shredding and dismantling of five cars of the same category (Clio). Experimental results had to be exploited with caution while awaiting a new shredding campaign to reinforce the initial observations. Many shredders are available to treat iron scrap. Output capacity depends on the driving power of the shredder, also responsible for separation efficiency and scrap size ( The shredder has two functions. The first is to compress the iron scrap to reduce the input volume. The second is to shred materials to facilitate their liberation and connection breakdown ( Ferrous metals are sorted in two successive ways. The first is an automatic operation based on magnetic properties, in which ferrous scrap is separated from non-ferrous scrap. Three main processes are available at present: the over band, the magnetic drum and the magnetic pulley ( The main problem with the automatic sorting is that light, non-ferrous materials such as cables or copper wire are often carried out by heavy ferrous parts. This contributes to contamination by metal residuals and particularly those whose content increases during recycling cycles. Sorting efficiency could be increased in two ways. The first is the number of operators. Indeed, different studies have shown that efficiency increases with the number of operators up to a maximum. The second solution is linked to the size of scrap to be hand sorted. Due to conveyor operating speed and the fact that operators are not able to work for a long time, non-ferrous metals are not fully extracted from the ferrous scrap. Some studies have shown that operator efficiency drops significantly when scrap size is less than 40 Once isolated, non-ferrous metals are sorted using eddy current separation. This system creates an electromagnetic field which is different according to material type and allows their extraction. Aluminium is isolated but the scrap is composed of a mix of different families and alloys with different chemical compositions. This fraction is mainly contaminated by steel inserts ( A flotation technique is applied to the mix of non-ferrous metals. Using density properties, it is possible to extract them using a ferro-silicon solution with a known density. Many sorting technologies are at the pilot scale at present and should be available in a few years. The magnetic fraction is easier to treat than the non-ferrous fraction because of its magnetic properties. Thus new technologies such as sink float, eddy current techniques or X-ray identification should improve non-ferrous sorting performances when they are industrialized ( Using a camera and database related to the materials used in metal car parts, it is possible to separate pig iron from steel and to extract different aluminium alloys ( Materials on a conveyor are identified using X-rays, and are sorted according to their chemical composition. It could be interesting to use this system to separate different aluminium alloys, and above all the pure ones ( The industrialization of these techniques should improve sorting performances by: Concentrating aluminium or steel scrap. Decontaminating aluminium and steel scrap. Although they are not totally efficient, these systems are already used at the pilot scale. This shredding process analysis aimed to define the criteria of material associations or part shapes which lead to critical associations for recycling. The first step was to analyse the defects observed after shredding and then propose criteria from observations or the bibliography which seem relevant for the design phase. The relevance of the study closely depends on an inventory of all scrap defects. However it was impossible to ensure a systematic sorting of all parts at the exit of the shredder process for the following reasons: The sorting operation is visual and manual, generating judgement and observation errors. Some defects were masked during the shredding process, since folding or torsions make the defects inaccessible to the eye. It is impossible to recognize the type of connection due to the modifications undergone during the shredding process: fasteners, welds and certain rivets could not be detected. Some elements of characterization of the connections are no longer accessible due to the constraints undergone. The following table (see According to the results, considerable material associations will penalize the quality of recovered materials after recycling due to the presence of contaminants. This type of defect must be subjected to a criticality evaluation for recycling in order to prioritize the design of solutions. Concerning assemblies with screws, a study was made of the resistance of screws to shredding. The diameters were measured, and the length and characteristics of each screw of the reference car were taken into account. The first results seem to show that after shredding only a small proportion of screws with a diameter larger than 8 Four major key criteria are proposed for the design of parts made mainly of aluminium or steel. One criterion tends to prevent material contamination: The choice of materials with a low degree of contaminants. Three criteria affect the increase in material liberation: The choice of materials with a large gap of material ductility. The choice of part geometry to avoid enclosure of contaminants. The choice of contaminant part size. The compatibility of metallic residuals was estimated according to their influence on the mechanical characteristics of recycled steel, shredding and sorting process extraction rates, and refining performance. Thus each residual presents a compatibility index ranging from 0 when there is no influence on recycled steel, to 4 when the influence is the strongest. The results are presented in Flat-rolled steels require high purity to ensure good surface quality. Their composition must be as precise as possible. This could explain why residuals are so influential. Mechanical steel parts, on the other hand, are heavy enough to compensate for contaminant influences. Therefore they can accept higher contents of metallic residuals without decreasing effectiveness as much. The following tables present the compatibilities of metallic residuals considered as contaminants for different aluminium alloys. Because of the higher value of aluminium scrap, compatibilities between alloys themselves were also estimated. Indeed, pure ones mixed with special ones decrease recycled characteristics such as value. Alloying elements could become contaminants, depending on the considered alloys. The next two tables (see The MX family is composed of moulding alloys while the CX family groups welding alloys. Zinc and iron seem to be the most influential metals, while silicon is the most compatible. Moreover, welding alloys are the most sensitive. They are the purest alloys used in vehicles, which explains why they are the most sensitive. Indeed, they could only be mixed with themselves to ensure optimal quality. Moulding alloys are also selective but can accept higher rates of contaminant without such a decrease in quality. Design requirements were drawn up with respect to the process limits defined, the expected material evolutions and material compatibilities. Each one presents a value calculated according to the future recycling scenarios, shredding only, dismantling and shredding or dismantling only. Across from each scenario, plus and minus signs define the relevance of a requirement. For example, the specification of metallic parts designated for dismantling is not relevant in a total shredding scenario, and in the same way, design to facilitate liberation during the shredding process is not relevant in a dismantling scenario. Each requirement card presents the title of the recommendation, the description and the profits expected when it is applied. When possible, they were illustrated with precise examples. The main purpose is to improve metal scrap quality. Some recommendations are easily applicable, while others involve political and economic choices. In this case, and according to the future recycling scenarios, all fathered costs should be estimated in order to be the most efficient. The protocol of this study was carried out in order to identify and to analyse material assemblies which are not broken up. The shredding defect analysis is carried out based on the mechanical properties of the assembled materials. In this section shredding defects and their relationships with the ductility characteristics of assembled materials are presented. Ductility assessment provides an essential characteristic to forecast whether the shredding process is able to allow material liberation with a low rate of contaminated scraps. Before analysing shredding defects, this assessment is recalled. The metal ductility (D) parameter characterizes the ability of a metal to plastically deform without breaking or fracturing, with the cohesion between the molecules remaining sufficient to hold them together. Based on Simões da Silva’s work ( Low ductility ( Medium ductility ( High ductility (  According to the model of Due to compression phenomena during the shredding, products made of ductile flat steel or aluminium could be rolled and compressed. If the shape surrounds the contaminant, the contaminant could be enclosed inside the steel or aluminium boundary (see As presented in Section From the previous section, it is possible to elaborate a shredding criticality potential indicator for metal part design based on the four proposed criteria. We propose to develop an indicator on recycling criticality for parts which will be shredded. Most of the metal parts or sub-assemblies will be shredded even if they are dismantled from products. Thus, it is relevant to propose an indicator for the shredding and sorting phase. This shredding criticality potential could be defined as follows: Actually, the research carried out does not allow us to define an exact relationship between these criteria, the exact liberation efficiency and the performance of the recycled materials. This indicator assesses trends of materials and geometry design choice on recycled material quality. The weighting of the indicators will be quantified on criteria reflecting: The efficiency of the design solution: for example, preventing the contaminant amount at the design phase is the most relevant solution. The technical and economical feasibility of the solution: existing solutions should be applied as a priority. The challenge for the company to develop a solution: solving the problem of steel contamination with copper could be an important topic for electric motor producers. However, it is possible to propose an arbitrary list of these indicators based on current knowledge in order to help designers to choose a better design for recycling. For steel parts, design indicators are proposed as shown in An electric motor (Faurecia) shown in Analysis of the scrap defect shows that the copper coil is imprisoned by the foliated steel. This is due to the ductility of the composition metals (copper and steel) and also to their association. In ELV ferrous stream recycling, copper is the most serious contaminant ( In this case, the calculation of the shredding criticality potential indicator Separate steel and copper during the shredding process. Improve the environmental indicator of the electric motor. Use an existing manufacturing method. To reach this goal, material choices were made according to design requirements. For the new armature, designers chose low ductility steel alloys (brittle metal). The final metal choice takes into account functional requirements. The motor’s breakability was checked using a crusher. The copper separation was complete, as shown in In this case, the calculation of the shredding criticality potential indicator Recycling processes, material evolutions and design evolutions were studied in order to define limits and steel and aluminium recycling anomalies. The most frequent problem encountered is the contaminant content in metal scrap. Compatibilities and criticalities based on the mechanical characteristics of recycled materials were defined. In view of the results, several design and treatment requirements were drawn up in order to improve scrap quality and widen the fields of application for recycled materials. Several parameters, such as connection break up for example, need to be more precise. Indeed, data are not always available, and new shredding operations are required to confirm results. Moreover, technical recommendations are based on technical data. Therefore, constraints such as the market economy, operating costs or industrialization costs are not taken into account, and should be calculated in order to be as efficient as possible. These tools should help to introduce goods recycling at the initial design stage and to reduce incompatible associations and recycling problems. The authors thank the companies ARCELOR, CFF, FAURECIA, GALLOO, MAS, PECHINEY and RENAULT for their contributions.