During the conventional zinc hydrometallurgical process operated in olden days prior to jarosite process, lead and silver reported in the neutral leach residue along with zinc ferrite. Lead and silver values from the zinc plant leach residue were recovered by a froth flotation process to obtain a silver-rich concentrate. This work deals with an alternative and innovative process to treat this silver-rich concentrate to produce an enriched lead–silver residue which can be consumed in lead smelter.
                  The process involves the treatment of silver concentrate generated in the flotation circuit by acid-roasting followed by moderate temperature-water leach to solubilize zinc and iron completely thereby enriching lead and silver values in the leach residue. This residue contained high levels of silica which was removed by alkali roasting with caustic followed by water wash. Silica content dissolves into solution phase thereby generating a residue rich in lead and silver values. This residue was suitable for treatment in lead smelter to produce lead and silver metal. Based on the experimental results, a conceptual flowsheet was developed.Hydrometallurgical smelters of Hindustan Zinc Limited adopt the conventional roast-leach-electrowinning route to process their zinc concentrate. In olden days, when the conventional jarosite process being used now was not available, zinc ferrite formed during roasting of concentrate were left as such, due to non-leachability of the product and filtered as a residue. However, lead and silver reported to the leach residue as sulphide/sulphate ( Three main solutions for treating such materials have been developed and all three processes are commercialized. In the two pyrometallurgical processes, this material is treated with coal at high temperature in a Waelz kiln or after mixing with fluxes to produce slag phase and then reduced with coal in an Ausmelt process to volatilize zinc and recover it as a zinc oxide fume. In hydrometallurgical process, this material is treated by hot acid leaching to leach zinc and iron from ferrites followed by precipitation of iron through various methods. While there is sufficient technical merit in these pyrometallurgical processes to operate them commercially, there are disadvantages as well. Waelz kiln and Ausmelt processing require significant energy inputs because of high operating temperatures and moisture content of the residue feed ( As an alternate, this residue is treated through a conventional froth flotation process to produce silver-rich concentrate. In most cases lead is recovered as lead sulphate which will be processed further in lead smelter. Here, silver concentrate was being produced from the leach residue by froth flotation process. The silver concentrate was further processed at a silver recovery plant. The silver losses in the lead sulphate residue were very high and hence direct recovery of silver was low. In the changing global scenario, maximum recovery of metal values is an important factor which decides the profitability of an industry. Hence attempts were made to develop a cost effective process to provide improved recovery values for silver along with lead and zinc from the silver concentrate produced by the froth flotation process ( One alternative approach that is proposed is to use transformational roasting, or roasting where a reagent is added to react with the feed material to produce a desirable mineralogical change in the material. This type of roasting has been used for many years in the treatment of vanadium and chromium ores. This type of process would, ideally use pyro and hydrometallurgical operations synergistically to achieve high metal extractions while lowering the volume and increasing the disposability of the residues produced ( This paper will discuss the proposed flowsheet for recovery of these metal values using acid roasting to remove the zinc and iron content to solution phase. This solution will then have to be treated in jarosite process to precipitate iron. The residue is then roasted with alkali. In addition to the successful removal of silicate impurities, it was also found to be effective to eliminate sulphide impurities ( Initial experiments for acid-roasting were conducted in 200 The residue was then alkali roasted by mixing with caustic soda in a mortar and pestle and this mixture was transferred to a crucible and heated to reaction temperature in a muffle furnace. After the reaction time, crucible was cooled and the contents were transferred to a beaker and leached with water at 70 Feed, residue and filtrate at each stage were analyzed for most elements by atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Solid samples were analyzed for total silica, sulphur and sulphur present as sulphate by the gravimetric method and sulphur present as sulphide was calculated by difference. Silver-rich concentrate had the following chemical composition as shown in Since the neutral leach residue was treated by froth flotation process to produce silver-rich concentrate, most of the zinc and iron content will be in the form of sulphides. This was confirmed by XRD analysis as shown in Preliminary experiments were conducted to leach the silver concentrate with dilute sulphuric acid under mild conditions with 20 Improved extraction of zinc and iron could be attained at aggressive leaching conditions in hot acid leaching. High acidity and temperature conditions were required to produce improved recovery. But even under such extreme conditions, it was not possible to completely dissolve zinc and iron values as shown in Silver concentrate was mixed with sulphuric acid of required volume to wet the entire surface. The acid quantity was so adjusted that the mixture can be easily charged to a crucible. The wet material was roasted in the muffle furnace in the presence of air purging at different temperatures for a known time period. This was followed by water wash of the residue. Results as shown in With increase in roasting temperature, it was evident that extraction of zinc and iron values was reduced. This was observed as liberated zinc and iron combine to again form zinc ferrite complex as depicted in It is important to wet the entire surface of the material uniformly with sulphuric acid for more efficient extraction. The results in  The roasted material was processed further by water leaching maintaining a solid–liquid ratio of 200 The solution containing zinc and iron sulphates can be further treated through main stream zinc circuit in jarosite section. Here, iron will precipitated as sodium/ammonium jarosite while zinc in solution will be recycled to neutral leaching. The major impurity in the residue after acid roast–water leach was silica with typical values in the range of 15–18%. This material cannot be treated in lead smelter as it will result in lead metal loss due to excess formation of slag contributed by high silica which is above the permissible limit. Alkali roasting is found to be effective to eliminate silicate impurities. Results shown in Alkali roasting process is always conducted at higher temperatures. An overview of the results for the process is indicated in The silver-rich concentrate produced earlier in the plant could not be consumed in lead smelter due to its high zinc, iron and silica content. This research work involves developing a conceptual flowsheet to treat the concentrate for removal of these impurities and thereby produce an enriched lead–silver residue. Zinc and iron are mainly present in the concentrate as sulphides and ferrites. Due to minimal presence of acid soluble content, removal of zinc and iron cannot be achieved through leaching under moderate conditions. It was decided to roast the material in sulphuric acid to liberate zinc and iron values and then leach the roasted material with water to dissolve the soluble content. The extraction of zinc and iron are 96% and 96% respectively. This solution can be recirculated to main stream zinc circuit into jarosite section to precipitate the iron and recycle the zinc to the upstream neutral leaching circuit. The acid-roasted residue contains high silica content. It is treated by alkali roasting to dissolve the silica and the free flowing mass is then repulped with water and filtered to remove the alkalinity. The resultant residue is enriched in lead and silver values and can be treated in lead smelter for metal recovery. The recoveries of lead and silver from this process are 95% and 95% respectively. A conceptual flowsheet was developed based on this research work as depicted in The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to