Calcium phosphate powders of calcium pyrophosphate α1-CPP (the metastable phase of the high-temperature polymorph α-CPP) and the polymorph β-CPP (stable in this range), of α1-CPP, β-CPP, α1-TCP (metastable polymorph of the high-temperature phase α-tricalcium phosphate) and β-tricalcium phosphate β-TCP were prepared by heating amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) precipitates with the nominal Ca/P ratio of 1:1 by nitrate synthesis. α1-CPP/β-CPP resulted from a crystallization at 530–640°C and subsequent heating to 980°C of unwashed and lyophilized ACP. α1-CPP/β-CPP/α1-TCP/β-TCP was formed by crystallization at 620–720°C, followed by heating of six-time washed and lyophilized ACP precipitates from an ultra-short synthesis. The activation energy for the crystallization of ACP to α1-CPP was determined with 165kJmol−1. The reason for the occurrence of the TCP phases (Ca/P ratio=1.5) from ACP (Ca/P ratio=1) is discussed. The powders are prospective biomaterials for bone substitution because they combine effective bioactive phases with the metastable polymorphs α1-CPP and α1-TCP.Calcium phosphates based on hydroxyapatite, Ca Calcium pyrophosphate, Ca Pyrophosphate ions CPP ceramics have been prepared by different routes A simple operation process, available ware, few (or no) special equipment, low cost along with a sufficient yield are much more desirable. The sol–gel route, which meets the majority of these requirements, was recently employed to prepare a β-CPP powder Here we report on the preparation of ACP with a Ca/P ratio of 1:1 by an easy, convenient, inexpensive, and efficient wet nitrate synthesis. Furthermore, its crystallization and phase transitions with the aim to obtain improved CPP ceramics are presented. The preparation of ACP with a Ca/P ratio of 1:1 (as in DCPA) was based on a fast precipitation modification of the classical nitrate synthesis Besides CaHPO The vessel was transferred into the freezer at −25 Powder samples were examined as prepared and after annealing in air in the range of 25–1000 Ceramics are normally prepared by sintering powder compacts at high temperatures. In order to find out whether ceramics with metastable calcium phosphate phases can be prepared, the thermal behavior of the UW and 6W powders was examined and compared. We assume that the washing procedure not only removes the by-product ammonium nitrate and possible residual reactants but also affects the Ca/P ratio of the powder The XRD and SEM patterns showed that the initial powder was X-ray amorphous and consisted of nanoparticles ( The TG curve of the UW sample showed a continuous mass loss of 25.2 The mass loss in this range of about 5 XRD patterns showed that the powders upon heating were amorphous up to 500 A fundamental result was also derived from the above data. The first exothermal peak was associated with the crystallization of ACP mainly into α The above results did not depend on the duration of synthesis: They were qualitatively the same for an ultra-short synthesis (faster than 1 The thermal evolution of 6W powder from the ultra-short synthesis differed from that of UW powder. The TG curve was entirely smooth, and the total mass loss 20.6 Results of crystallization shed some light on the changes in the 6W powder. The powder was XRD amorphous below 600 IR spectra gave more information on the changes in the powders (only those absorptions that were multiply recorded are discussed in the following). The spectrum of UW powder from the ultra-short synthesis ( Based on the above results, the formation of the TCP phases is attributed to the interaction of freshly formed Ca followed by reaction The reactions partly result in the evolution of gaseous H Taking this into account, the identification of the endothermal peak in Reactions The XRD pattern of ACP with a typical diffusion maximum (halo) ( ACP with Ca/P=1 was found to be crystalline DCPA after a 2.5 year storage under normal conditions. This observation poses a question on the suitability of biomaterials with an ACP. In this connection, studying the chemical and structural durability of fine ACP powders seems to be a timely topic. The powders developed can be considered as third generation biomaterials. They should have both higher biodegradation and bioactivity (interaction between biomaterials and tissues) over HA-based calcium phosphate ceramics  The annealing of an ACP powder with a Ca/P ratio of 1:1 normally crystallizing into a CPP (Ca/P=1) of a TCP (Ca/P=1.5) was found to result from reaction of the CPP with CaO originated from the thermal decomposition of Ca(OH) The formation of high-temperature α-CPP and α-TCP polymorphs from ACP at intermediate temperatures (530–720 The activation energy for crystallization of the metastable α Nanocrystalline powders consisting of single-phase β-CPP and its mixtures with α The authors thank the