Multistage fluidized beds are frequently used for product drying in industry. One advantage of these fluidized beds is that they can achieve a high throughput, when operated continuously. In this study, γ-Al2O3 particles were dried in a pilot-scale horizontal fluidized bed, without considering any comminution effects. For each experiment, the particle moisture content distribution and residence time distribution were determined. To take into account particle back mixing in our experiments, a one-dimensional population balance model that considers particle residence time was introduced into a fluidized bed-drying model. Experimental particle residence time distributions were reproduced using a tank-in-series model. Subsequently, the moisture content distribution was implemented, as a second dimension to the population balance in this model. These two-dimensional simulations were able to describe the experimental data, especially the spread in the residual particle moisture distribution, much more accurately than one-dimensional simulations. Using this novel two-dimensional model, the effects of different operating parameters (process gas temperature, solid feed rate, superficial air velocity) on the particle moisture content distribution were systematically studied.Area (m Archimedes number Specific heat capacity (J/(kg Heat capacity (J/K) Mass fraction of tracer (kg/kg) Specific enthalpy (J/kg) Specific enthalpy of evaporation at 0 Enthalpy (J) Enthalpy flow rate (J/s) Number of classes in respect to residence time Theoretical tank number Height (m) Exponent Mass (kg) Mass flow rate (kg/s) Residence time distribution density (s Residence time and moisture content distribution density (kg Particle number Heat flow rate (W) Reynolds number Time (s) Velocity (m/s) Normalized single-particle drying rate Moisture content (solid phase) (kg/kg) Mean moisture content (solid phase) (kg/kg) Moisture content (gas phase) (kg/kg) Spatial coordinate (gas phase) (m) Heat transfer coefficient (W/(m Mass transfer coefficient (m/s) Normalized particle moisture content Kinetic viscosity (m Normalized particle moisture content Dimensionless spatial coordinate (gas phase) Density (kg/m Standard deviation of particle moisture content distribution (kg/kg) Variance of RTD curve (s Particle residence time (s) Particle mean residence time (s) Porosity Temperature (K) Apparatus Bed Cross sectional Critical Environment Elutriation Equilibrium Experiment Gas Particle class in respect to moisture content Inflow Particle class in respect to residence time Minimum fluidization Outflow Particle Time Total Vapor Water Wet particle Wall Lower limit Benchmark Continuous stirred tank reactor Nuclear magnetic resonance Residence time distribution Tank-in-series Upper limit Particle drying plays an important role in various industries, e.g., chemical, pharmaceutical, agricultural, and food production. Compared with traditional drying techniques (oven drying, tray drying), the fluidized bed has wider scope for particle formation processes (agglomeration, granulation, and coating), in which drying has a significant influence on the final product quality. This reflects the intense hydrodynamic effects of gas–solid flow in the fluidized bed, resulting in strong mixing, as well as strong heat and mass transfer between the two phases. Fluidized bed systems can be divided into batch and continuous types, based on their operation modes. In a batch fluidized bed, individual particles are processed, with an identical operation time. This type of fluidized bed has been widely investigated for different purposes in the literature (e.g., To simulate a horizontal fluidized bed, the two empirical correlations, defined by Models based on the assumption of plug flow can certainly provide some information about the behavior of solids drying, while traveling along the horizontal direction of a fluidized bed. However, the back mixing (lateral mixing) effect is neglected in plug flow models. The lateral mixing of solids usually occurs because of gas–solid fluidization. For instance, solid mixing in a batch fluidized bed is not always uniform, yielding lateral dispersion, as investigated by Unlike the aforementioned plug flow models, we propose a horizontal fluidized bed dryer model based on back mixing theory by combining a single-particle drying model with population balances. To ensure that our model can accurately reflect back mixing effects from a macroscopic perspective, particle RTDs were first obtained from experimental data and reproduced using a tank-in-series (TIS) model. Then, a 1D population balance model based on particle residence time was used in our simulation. Ina third step, the particle moisture content distribution was measured, and introduced as the second dimension of a two-dimensional (2D) population balance model. Simulation results from both 1D and 2D models were compared with measured data. This comparison showed that the 2D model performed best. We used this 2D model for parametric studies discussed herein. Various kinetic approaches for modeling fluidized bed drying can be found in the literature (e.g., The gas flow is formally regarded as plug flow, although gas back mixing is indirectly accounted for using gas-to-particle heat and mass transfer coefficients, as proposed by The solids are perfectly mixed in the vertical direction. Therefore, one single particle can be used to represent all other particles under the same conditions, e.g., identical residence time, and physical properties. In addition, some additional assumptions, compatible with their model, are used here. These are: The bubble and suspension phases are not distinguished, but are merged as one general gas phase. There is back mixing of solids in the horizontal direction (conveying direction). Hence, a solid RTD characterizes the apparatus.  As outlined in our assumptions, particles are perfectly mixed in a vertical direction. Therefore, dispersive transport of particles is only considered in the horizontal direction of the fluidized bed. The characterization of particle transport is achieved using the RTD, which is experimentally determined. Moreover, the residence time behavior of the particles in the simulation can be modeled using a population balance model. In a 1D population balance model, the density function of the RTD, or normalized RTD, can be expressed as ( Moreover, three population balance equations for the particles are derived based on Eq. Here, all particles are treated as having identical initial moisture content at the inlet. Based on differences in particle residence time, a particle moisture content distribution is obtained at the outlet. This distribution is one of the most important criteria for judging the quality of a horizontal fluidized bed dryer. All population balance equations are based on the density function of the RTD. Thus, it is very important to implement an accurate particle RTD in the simulation. It is well known that different particle flow patterns will produce different particle RTDs. As mentioned by Here, As described in Section “One-dimensional population balance model”, the particle moisture content at the dryer inlet is taken to be identical to the 1D model. In practice, however, a distribution of solid moisture content may occur. In this study, variable particle moisture content is described by adding a second dimension to the population balance model. Thus, the density function of the 2D population balance model is given by: The individual properties of a specified particle class (e.g., particle mass Particle enthalpy is defined as: Additionally, Eq. Balances for the gas phase are derived for plug flow in a vertical direction, with back mixing accounted for using transfer coefficients. Hence, the gas phase is discretized in the direction of air flow. Moreover, the gas temperature can be obtained from the gas enthalpy equation: Because the material of the wall is non-absorbent, only the heat balance of the wall needs to be considered. It is assumed that the wall has the same temperature everywhere, giving the energy balance equation: As shown in Here, Thus, the normalized drying rate Here, Heat transfer kinetics that affects the wall can be derived from: The correlations for each of the heat transfer coefficients ( The drying and RTD experiments in this study were carried out on a pilot-scale horizontal fluidized bed (Procell 20; Glatt Ingenieurtechnik GmbH, Weimar, Germany). The geometry of the process chamber is cuboid, with a height of 0.4 As defined in Section “Drying kinetics”, the normalized drying curve, The normalized drying curve for 1.8 Four experiments were conducted. Two were performed without internal baffles (No. 1 and No. 2), while two had three internal baffles in place (No. 3 and No. 4). Moreover, three different outlet weir heights (35, 95, and 120 As stated by Moreover, the theoretical tank number ( To measure the particle moisture content distribution, we used the methods outlined in The particle mean residence time, standard deviation (square root of the variance of the RTD) and theoretical tank number were calculated according to Eqs. As stated in Section “Experiments”, samples from the drying experiments were analyzed using NMR. All particle moisture content distributions are shown in The standard deviation of the moisture content distribution is calculated, using: Statistical values for our experiments are listed in The TIS model presented in Section “Tank-in-series model” was validated using experimental RTD measurements. After validating the TIS model, all differential equations presented in Section “One-dimensional population balance model” were solved numerically to simulate the drying process in the 1Dmodel. Eqs. As the 1D model has evident limitations, 2D simulations were carried out as well. As described in Section “Two-dimensional population balance model for the solid phase”, a second dimension, based on the moisture content of the particles, was implemented into our balance model. By means of discretization, the well-mixed solids were divided into several classes, according to the moisture content distribution and the RTD. Thus, particles with identical moisture content and residence time belong to a given class. In a specified class, the single particle moisture content In the 2D simulation, both RTD ( A number of parametric studies were carried out using our 2D model, following its validation. The drying process of particles in a horizontal fluidized bed can be influenced by many factors, of which, process gas temperature (  The influence of particle mass flow rate on the outlet moisture content distribution is shown in Simulation results for varied superficial gas velocity are presented in In our parametric studies, simulations with high (upper limit) and low (lower limit) drying performance were carried out. Their respective simulation parameters are listed in Particle drying and RTD experiments in a horizontal fluidized bed were carried out to evaluate the accuracy of different simulation models. We found that particle mean residence time and the standard deviation of the RTD curve both increased with increasing outlet weir height. However, the effect of the outlet weir height was not fundamentally altered by adding limited numbers of internal baffles. These results are consistent with various other studies, and we conclude that the effects of internal baffles and outlet weir height on the particle RTDs are similar for both dry and wet particles. Different methods were explored for modeling the horizontal fluidized bed dryer. We found that a tank-in-series model with a non-integer theoretical tank number was able to reproduce RTD curves obtained in our experiments. In addition, a fluidized bed-drying model was presented, based on the drying kinetics of a single particle. Considering the distribution of particle residence time in the real process, a 1Dpopulation balance model was incorporated into the drying model. In this case, the particle RTD was implemented using a TIS model. Thus, different particle moisture content distributions at the outlet of the dryer could be obtained as a function of residence time for various particle classes. Our simulation results showed that the spread in particle moisture content distribution differs significantly from our measured data, even though particle mean moisture content is quite accurately modeled. The error in the 1Dmodel reflects the fact that this model does not consider the experimentally-observed distribution of particle moisture content in the feed material. Thus, a 2D population balance model, in which moisture content and residence time are specified for each particle class, was derived. Outlet particle moisture content distributions obtained with this 2D model agreed well with our measured data, offering a significant improvement of predictive ability compared with the 1D model. After validating the accuracy of this 2D model, parametric studies were carried out to explore the effects of process gas temperature, particle feed rate and gas velocity. Respective results show that the particles were much drier and had narrower moisture content distributions, as a result of increasing the gas temperature, decreasing the particle feed rate or increasing the gas velocity. The effects of changing gas temperature and particle feed rate on particle drying processes were greater than for superficial gas velocity. Particle RTD was kept constant during our parametric study. Unlike common plug flow models, the model developed in this study can only simulate particle moisture content distribution at the outlet, because it uses RTDs obtained from experiments on a given apparatus. To gain further insight into the change in the moisture content distribution of particles moving along a fluidized bed, experiments able to measure interior particle RTD would be required. Additionally, this study assumed that all the particles were perfectly mixed in the vertical direction; in reality, the fluidized bed operation could be non-homogeneous, especially in a horizontal fluidized bed, and this could influence the particle moisture content distribution at the outlet. Thus, future research should focus on investigating particle fluidization by means of computational fluid dynamics, which could open the way to evolve our 2D population balance model into a 3D model. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Fluidized bed height can be calculated from: The Reynolds number is defined as The exponent Archimedes number is defined as The Reynolds number at minimum fluidization velocity can be obtained, according to The Reynolds number at elutriation point is obtained, as proposed by As mentioned in Section “Model validation”, residence time distribution (RTD) curves obtained using the tank-in-series (TIS) model must be discretized in the simulation. Therefore, the continuous coordinate of residence time must be divided into finite classes. In this case, the quality of the RTD curve produced is highly dependent on the number of classes ( On this basis, 50 classes of residence time were selected as a reasonable compromise between accuracy and computational effort. Because Experiment No. 1 has the longest mean residence time, the same number of residence time classes was used for all other experiments.