In this paper activation of a typical bentonite in the presence of sodium carbonate was studied by a modified kinetic model. Activation process was carried out at different concentrations of sodium carbonate, ranging 3.0–4.5wt.%. The effects of sodium carbonate concentration, particle size distribution of natural bentonite, activation time and temperature on specific surface area were investigated. It was found that the activation rate significantly depends on sodium carbonate concentration and it was maximized in presence of 4.5wt.% of alkali solution. Also, the specific surface of bentonite was greatly affected by particle size distribution of starting raw material. The kinetic calculation results indicated that the concentration of alkali solution and particle size of starting bentonite negligibly change the activation energy. The mathematical calculations showed that there is an optimum activation time to achieve the maximum specific surface area in each condition. The validity of proposed model to estimate the optimum activation time was substantiated by comparing computational results with experimental data.Sodium bentonite is widely used in chemical and oil industries such as catalyst beds, drilling mud and ceramic body compositions, due to their high specific surface area The most commercial used process for producing Na-bentonite with high specific surface area is activation by sodium carbonate in industrial scale. The theoretical formula for montmorillonite is Na Activation of bentonite by alkali and acid solutions is almost important step in industrial scale. This process is carried out in a continuous stirred tank reactor at low temperature 50–120 Recently, many investigations have been reported about the cation exchange capacity and specific surface area of bentonites Babaki et al. developed a kinetic model based on activation temperature and time to estimate the specific surface area of Ca-bentonite in the presence of sulfuric acid The rate constant can be calculated in each specific surface area ratio. Extensive literatures are available about the variation of cation exchange capacity and specific surface area that can be useful to understand the structural changes in bentonite during activation process The raw material selected in this work is a natural bentonite that is widely used by Iranian companies for manufacturing active clay to use in drilling mud. In order to identify the chemical composition of bentonite XRF (Bruker Axs S4 Explorer) test was performed and the result is reported in The used bentonite contains montmorillonite and bidellite as the main phases. Quartz, kaolinite and illite were identified at low amounts. The raw material was milled by laboratory dry jar mill and the obtained powder was screened by 140, 270 and 400 mesh sieves, corresponding to less than 106, 53 and 38 Methylene blue, MB, powder (Merck 6045, Germany) has been used to determine the specific surface area of clay minerals for several decades. Though, the other methods were presented to measure the specific surface area with high accuracy but it is necessary to immediately determine specific surface area in this study. Therefore, MB test was select as rapid method to measure the specific surface area after activation process. The chemical formula of MB is C Specific surface area–time curves presented in As the activation progresses the specific surface area increases rapidly, reaching a maximum value and decreases again in the presence of 4.5 The effect of particle size distribution on specific surface area is illustrated in The initial increase of specific surface area, when fine particle of bentonite is used, may be attributed to the existence of high contact surface area. The number of available surface sites for leaving Mg The specific surface area ratio was plotted versus activation time in logarithmic scale for each activated suspension at different conditions. Experimental specific surface area values which were determined by methylene blue were compared to well understand the effects of operating parameters on activation process. However, the variation in kinetic parameters were analyzed to obtain the time and temperature dependency. To calculate the constant parameters of Eq. (1), specific surface area ratio, It should be noted that, specific surface area rises due to pore development and is accelerated as Na In the activation of bentonite by alkali solution under the isothermal condition, the reaction rate is sensitive to soda concentration and the activation rate increases with increment in contact sites between Na Diffusion of Na Dissolution of Ca Diffusion of ions from the surface of particles. Although, neither the diffusion rate of Na It is also interesting to note that, the value of activation energy remains approximately constant if different particle sizes of bentonite are used in activation process. The value of frequency factor continuously increases as the bentonite particle size is reduced. The values of kinetic parameters obviously show that the same mechanism governs on activation process. In the other words, the change in particle size does not influence the reaction mechanism. However, the increase in contact surface area of bentonite particles is sufficient to increase the activation rate. The particle size distribution plays a beneficial role in improvement of active sites generated in bentonite matrix. This is evident that the value of frequency factor which represents the amount of active sites, increases as bentonite particle size is reduced. Also, the increment in soda concentration ensures a higher number of active sites, being much higher with increment in specific surface are of starting material and is prone to develop the micropores compare to that for activation in the presence of low concentration of soda. The simulation results and experimental data obtained at different activation conditions were also compared in The above equation was obtained by taking into account Arrhenius equation in Eq. (1). For calculating specific surface area the average value of To compare the experimental data with theoretical results, the standard deviation percentage, The purpose of this study is to make prediction for optimum activation time to achieve maximum specific surface area in each temperature, when different particle size ranges of bentonite are activated in the presence different concentrations of sodium carbonate. Babaki et al. showed that the following equation can be used to relate the optimum activation time to temperature The behavior of specific surface area during the alkali activation of typical bentonite was investigated. A significant increase of the specific surface area was observed versus the temperature and the duration of the activation in the presence soda. The specific surface area of activated bentonite measured by methylene blue test reaches to 869