The role of residence time distribution (RTD) in the accuracy of milling simulation is well appreciated in literature. Accordingly, the development of models that can accurately predict the RTD at various mill operating conditions would be of considerable benefit to the milling industry. In this paper, a 3-parameter RTD model has been derived using the concept of serial stirred mixers with a dead zone. The model parameters were optimized by minimizing the error between experimental tracer response data and model predictions using a MATLAB algorithm. Based on the optimum values of the model parameters, the mean residence time of slurry was evaluated and the effects of ball load volume and slurry concentration examined. The results revealed that the mean residence time of slurry inside the mill is affected to a larger extent by slurry concentration than the ball load volume. An empirical correlation was developed to predict the mean residence time as a function of slurry concentration, ball load volume and slurry feed rate. Over the range of conditions investigated, the mean residence time was observed to vary linearly with slurry concentration and ball load volume but inversely with feed flow rate. Lastly, a test case of the simulated mill product size distribution using the predicted RTD is presented displaying a close match with experimental data.In recent years, mineral processing industry has witnessed increased installation of large diameter mills in order to benefit from economies of scale. However, to fully utilize the available mill capacity and maintain energy efficiency for these large devices, closer and more effective control is needed. Satisfaction of this need would result in stability of the entire mineral processing circuit, thereby reducing the overall cost in mineral extraction. On that account, it is expected that mill control and performance optimization strategies will be the major focus of the comminution industry in the future.  The concept of residence time distribution (RTD) was first proposed by MacMullin and Weber in 1935 ( The first and second moment of the RTD function around the origin give the mean residence time ( The shape of RTD curves depends on the combined effect of the flow behaviour and mixing performance inside the process equipment, which is usually related to the RTD function parameters i.e. mean residence time and variance. This information is important for diagnostics as well as control purposes especially in multivariate processes such as wet ball milling. Studies by The methods used by previous researchers ( Residence time distribution functions for ball mills can be adequately described by perfectly mixed segments ( The dynamics for the dead zone can be described by the Dirac plug flow function The Laplace transform of the residence time distribution function From Eqs. The inverse Laplace transform of The overall mean residence time is sum of the individual residence times for the mixers and the dead time, estimated by fitting the model to experimental data. The model parameters are estimated by least-square criterion, by minimizing Eq. The overflow ball mill utilized in the sampling survey has an inside diameter of 7.312 The literature (  Solids feed rate to the mill was measured at the densifier cyclone underflow as depicted in The salt concentration in the discharge stream, corrected for the base (zero-salt) concentration of slurry was determined from the conductivity measurements through a simple offline calibration procedure. This involved preparation of several slurry samples to different concentrations by dissolving a known mount of NaCl (between 0.3 and 1.5  Premised on the observed trends in the data presented in A close inspection of the standardized regression coefficients in Eq. Using The values of the empirical coefficients were determined from regression analysis. Note that Eq. Presented in Majority of the milling simulators implicitly consider the mill as a fully mixed reactor with a single residence time in order to simplify the computational process. However, this general assumption may introduce a small error in computation of holdup weight using mass-size balance equations and consequently incorrect prediction of mill product size distribution, a key indicator of mill performance. To ascertain whether the use of RTD model proposed here would bring about worthwhile improvement in the accuracy of prediction of mill product size distribution, with particular attention to the effects of ball load volume and slurry concentration, a comparison of the experimental and simulated product size distribution data was undertaken. The population balance modeling software developed at the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa was used to estimate selection and breakage ( In which, the transport matrix, In order to allow for comparison of results, the optimum values of breakage and selection parameters utilized in the simulations for all the test cases were unvaried except The residence time distribution (RTD) of slurry in a large ball mill has been studied under different conditions of slurry concentration, ball load volume and feed rate based on tracer response data. Trends in the results revealed that mean residence time increases as slurry concentration is increased but decreases with increase in feed flow rate. The effect of ball load volume could not be clearly delineated owing to the nature of experimental design. The experimental RTD data was modeled using three perfect mixers (two small and one large) in series with dead time and the model adequately described the experimental data. The estimated model parameters compared well with those obtained by empirical correlations. The mean residence time (Τ) correlated linearly with slurry concentration and ball load volume but inversely with feed flow rate. The correlation equation fitted fairly well to the experimental values of Τ with mean relative error of 1.7% and 98% of variance explained. Slurry concentration showed a greater influence than ball load volume on mean residence time as indicated by the values of the standardized correlation coefficients. Also the effect of RTD on the prediction accuracy of mill product size distribution was clearly evident in the results. The milling simulation model in which material transport was described by RTD yielded a closer agreement of the simulated product size distribution with experimental than the model involving a single residence time. This observation underscores the importance of correct representation of material transport in milling process models. Further, on the basis of these results, it is admissible that the RTD model proposed here can reliably account for the combined effects of ball load volume and slurry concentration on the mill RTD and subsequently the grinding behaviour. For now the model is only valid for the mill investigated but with availability of data, it can be reproduced elsewhere. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of Anglo-Platinum for this research work and for availing their plant for experimental work. We extend our gratitude to Pratish Keshav, Senior Process metallurgist and the entire staff of Metallurgical laboratory (Metlab) for their invaluable assistance during the plant surveys.