The effect of carrier surface properties on drug particle detachment from carrier crystals during inhalation with a special test inhaler with basic air classifier has been studied for mixtures containing 0.4% budesonide. Carrier crystals were retained in the classifier during inhalation and subsequently examined for the amount of residual drug (carrier residue: CR). Carrier surface roughness and impurity were varied within the range of their appearance in standard grades of lactose (Pharmatose 80, 100, 110, 150 and 200M) by making special sieve fractions. It was found that roughness and impurity, both per unit calculated surface area (CSA), tend to increase with increasing mean fraction diameter for the carrier. Drug re-distribution experiments with two different carrier sieve fractions with distinct mean diameters showed that the amount of drug per CSA (drug load) in the state of equilibrium is highest for the coarsest fraction. This seems to confirm that surface carrier irregularities are places where drug particles preferentially accumulate. However, a substantial increase in surface roughness and impurity appears to be necessary to cause only a minor increase in CR at an inspiratory flow rate of 30l/min through a classifier. At 60l/min, CR is practically independent of the carrier surface properties. From the difference in CR between 30 and 60l/min, it has been concluded that particularly the highest adhesive forces (for the largest drug particles) in the mixture are increased when coarser carrier fractions (with higher rugosity) are used. Not only increased surface roughness and impurities may be responsible for an increase in the adhesive forces between drug and carrier particles when coarser carrier fractions are used, but also bulk properties may play a role. With increasing mean carrier diameter, inertial and frictional forces during mixing are increased too, resulting in higher press-on forces with which the drug particles are attached to carrier crystals and to each other.The choice of type and size fraction of carrier excipient in adhesive mixtures for inhalation is often primarily made to fulfill the basic requirements of homogeneous drug dilution and accurate dose metering. Additionally, the excipient has to be chemically inert in combination with the drug, physically stable and acceptable from toxicological viewpoint. This reduces the freedom of choice for another relevant aspect: the drug-to-carrier interaction forces must be controlled. They have to be strong enough to guarantee good mixture stability during handling, but weak enough to enable the separation forces during inhalation to detach a substantial fraction of the drug dose from the carrier crystals. This requires that the size distributions of the interaction forces (during mixing) and separation forces (during inhalation) are balanced properly ( Different size fractions of alpha lactose monohydrate have been investigated regarding the powder flow from perforated capsules ( The effect of carrier surface rugosity in different degrees of coarseness in adhesive mixtures with relatively high carrier payloads has been investigated by  All previously mentioned variables in the interaction between drug and carrier particles result in a wide size distribution for the adhesive forces ( Our aim is to optimize the balance between adhesion and removal forces in respect of mixture homogeneity and stability on the one hand, and fine particle resuspension during inhalation on the other, using air classifier technology. For that, the relevance of carrier surface and bulk properties to the interaction between drug and carrier particles in adhesive mixtures has to be known, in relation to the separation performance of a classifier on these mixtures. In this part of the study, the effect of carrier surface rugosity and degree of impurity of standard alpha-lactose monohydrate (Pharmatose) grades on carrier interaction with budesonide is investigated. In the next part, the effect of carrier bulk properties on drug detachment and detachment rate from the carrier in a basic air classifier will be studied, as well as the influence of the mixing time on that. This provides the necessary information for design and optimisation of an air classsifier family for a marketed dry powder inhaler, which will be reported in the final parts of this series. Results will be explained using a previously described Force Distribution Concept (FDC) ( Budesonide was supplied as a free sample by Sofotec (Germany) in a size distribution 10% <0.54 Particle size analysis: size distributions of all carrier fractions and quantities of adhering fine lactose particles within these fractions have been measured with laser diffraction analysis (Sympatec HELOS/BF-MAGIC) using a 100 Scanning electron microscopy was carried out using a JEOL JSM 6301-F microscope (JEOL, Japan). Powder samples were sprinkled on double-sided sticky tape on metal disks and subsequently coated with 150 Specific carrier surface area ( UV-absorptions of 5% aqueous lactose solutions were measured with a Philips PU 8720 UV-VIS spectrophotometer (Philips, The Netherlands) at 280 Moisture sorption and desorption isotherms at 25 Expression of the results: specific surface area from nitrogen adsorption (referred to as BET), the extinction at 280 Adhesive mixtures with 0.4% budesonide and different lactose carrier size fractions were prepared in a batch size of 25 Carrier fractions (45–63; 63–90; 90–125; 125–180 and 180–250 The special test inhaler (CII) with basic air classifier used for the CR experiments has been described previously (  Drug re-distribution experiments were undertaken because of some confusing previous work. Although this may not seem so, the results in    The observed effect of carrier surface properties on CR at 30 A second explanation is that the highest adhesive forces in the mixture, mainly applied to the largest drug particles, increase more strongly with increasing mean carrier diameter than the lowest adhesive forces by which primarily the smallest drug particles are attached. This also could have two reasons ( Correlations between CR for budesonide and SRI, respectively E-280/CSA are shown in In summary, the results presented in CR experiments with adhesive mixtures containing 0.4% budesonide have shown that the carrier surface properties within the range of variation obtained from standard lactose grades, are of lower relevance to the performance of adhesive mixtures in a basic air classifier, particularly at higher flow rates through the classifier. A quite dramatic change in carrier surface texture appeared to be necessary to obtain only a moderate change in CR, and clear correlations between CR and SRI or CR and E-280/CSA have not been obtained. A moderate increase in CR with increasing mean carrier diameter (at 30 The authors are grateful to Mrs. J. Beekhuis for carefully screening the manuscript.