The distributions of temperature and heat fluxes in a periodically laminated layer with a vertically located cylindrical hole are obtained approximately within the homogenized model with microlocal parameters. The method of solution is based on the Weber–Orr integral transforms. The effects of geometrical and mechanical parameters of the composite structure on the thermal fields are discussed and presented in graphical form.periodic sectionally linear function; thicknesses of the subsequent layers; thickness of fundamental unit; thickness of the infinite layer; coefficients of heat conductivities of the subsequent layers of composite; effective modulus in homogenized model with microlocal parameters; number of periodically repeated fundamental unit; heat flux vector; radius of hole; dimensionless thicknesses of the subsequent layers; dimensionless thickness of fundamental unit; microlocal parameter; saturation coefficient of fundamental unit by the first kind of material; macrotemperature in homogenized model with microlocal parameters; intensity of temperature; kind of sublayer, the first kind or the second kind of the subsequent layers; Periodically layered composite materials can be made by man (laminated composites) or can be found in nature (varved clays, sandstone-slates, sandstone-shales, thin-layered limenstones). Determination of a temperature, heat flux distributions in laminated composites is very important in some problems of civil engineering, mechanical engineering. The knowledge of thermal fields in the nonhomogeneous bodies with holes is used in mining engineering, engineering geology, and geophysics. This paper deals with the stationary heat conduction problems for a periodically laminated layer with vertically located cylindrical hole. The classical descriptions of the problems are connected with partial differential equations on discontinuous or rapidly oscillating coefficients. In the case of large number of repeated layers being components of composite the compliance of continuity conditions on interfaces leads to complicated problems for direct analytical and numerical approaches. For these reasons, structures of this kind are usually analyzed by using some approximated models. One of them is the homogenized model with microlocal parameters In the presented paper axially symmetric stationary problems of heat conduction in a periodically laminated layer with vertically located cylindrical hole is considered. The body is assumed to be composed of periodically repeated two-layered fundamental lamina. The perfect thermal contact between the layers is taken into account. The cylindrical hole is located perpendicular to the boundary planes and two cases of boundary conditions on the lateral surface of the hole are considered: (1 Consider a rigid, periodically stratified layer of the thickness Because of the complicated geometry and complex boundary conditions exact solutions of the heat conduction problems cannot be obtained. Therefore, the homogenized model with microlocal parameters The governing equations of the homogenized model with microlocal parameters for the stationary axially symmetric case take the form By using the algebraic Eq. The heat flux vector From Eq. Bearing in mind relations (1) the boundary conditions of Problem (a) and Problem (b) can be written in the form: Problem (a) Problem (b) Now we solve the boundary value problems for periodically stratified layer described by Eq. Introduce the following notations The inverse transforms take the form The important relations from the point of view of the considered problems are the following expressions From the boundary conditions (11) and (14) and Eqs. Solving Eq. Problem (a) The temperature field in the periodically stratified layer satisfied of Problem (a) can be expressed by: By using the relation The Eqs. Problem (b) The temperature distribution in the nonhomogeneous layer with cylindrical thermally isolated hole can be expressed in the form By using Eqs. The Eqs. As a special case the distributions of temperature and heat fluxes in the laminated layer with cylindrical hole caused by a constant temperature Problem (a) Substituting (29) into (23) and using (15) as well as the following relations For the considered case the solution of Problem (a) is given by Eqs. Using (32) and (31) from Eqs. The integrals in Eqs. The dimensionless temperature The dimensionless radial heat fluxes  Problem (b) Let the boundary temperature The numerical results for the distributions of temperature and heat fluxes in the stratified layer with cylindrical hole are presented in the form of graphs.  The dimensionless component of heat flux normal to the layering It can be observed that the values of heat flux The dimensionless radial component of heat flux The obtained analytical results for temperature and heat flux distributions in the periodically stratified layer with cylindrical hole allow on the numerical analysis of influence of the composite structure on the thermal fields. The numerical calculation carried out showed that geometrical structure of layering and thermal properties of the composite constituents have an essential influence on the radial heat fluxes for both considered problems.