The surface of a synthetic biopolymer scaffold was tailored by a mineralization with calcium phosphate for use as a functional bone tissue engineering matrix. Poly(ε-caprolactone) scaffold with a defined pore configuration constructed by a robocasting method was treated in a series of solutions involving steps of surface activation and calcium phosphate induction. The scaffold surface was completely covered with calcium phosphate nanocrystallites that had typical characteristics of bone mineral-like carbonate apatite. The scaffold with mineralized-surface demonstrated to support more favorable bone cell responses, including initial cell adhesion and proliferation and to allow higher loading of protein than the untreated-scaffold. The results suggest the developed scaffold has the potential for use as a bone regenerative matrix.Scaffolds with three-dimensional (3D) pore structure have played vital roles in the biomedical field, such as tissue reconstruction and cell engineering. The interconnected pore space of the scaffolds allows the supply of nutrients and cells and aids their population and tissue-specific development In addition to the pore structure, the surface of scaffolds should be considered because it is the first ligand of materials that allows tissue cells to recognize the anchorage site and further them to spread and multiply In this study, we attempted to improve the surface properties of PCL scaffold targeting bone tissue, which was ultimately useful as a degradable and bioactive 3D matrix for bone regeneration. For this purpose, the surface was tailored with a bone mineral-like apatite. The scaffold was first produced to retain a well-controlled pore dimension using a robocasting method, after which it was treated with a series of solutions to induce surface mineralization. The efficacy of the surface-mineralized 3D scaffold was investigated in terms of the bone cell adhesion and proliferation as well as the loading of biological protein. PCL (MW For the mineralization of the scaffold, the surface was activated by dipping in 1 Tissue cell responses to the mineralized PCL scaffold were investigated in terms of the adhesion and proliferation of bone-associated cells (MC3T3-E1, ATCC). Prior to cell tests, samples were sterilized with 70% ethanol for 10 The protein adsorption test onto the scaffolds mineralized or not was performed using cytochrome C as the model protein. Protein solution was prepared in 10 The 3D polymeric scaffold used for the surface mineralization was produced using the robocasting method. This method is a rapid prototyping tool that has the potential to construct 3D pore geometry tuned to the defect size and shape with the assistance of computerized design and operation, as fully described in the The surface of the robocasting PCL scaffold was shown to be highly hydrophobic, making it difficult for water spreading and tissue cell adhesion No obvious change was observed on the surface of the scaffold after the NaOH treatment, while the alternative soaking process resulted in the formation of some aggregates of CaP. These aggregates should play a role in enhancing the mineralization process in the following step of 1.5SBF incubation. A special care needs to eliminate excess calcium-medium prior to dipping the scaffold into the phosphate-medium and vice versa because this helps produce homogeneous CaP nucleation and prevent the formation of uneven CaP formation such as clusters. As shown in The bone-mineral like nanocrystalline phase produced on the scaffold surface is considered to provide favorable substrate conditions for the cell adhesion and growth, a required initial stage for bone tissue engineering. The Another merit of the mineralized scaffold was found in the significant improvement of the loading capacity of the biological proteins. The utilization of biological proteins with specific functions such as growth factors in concert with the bone scaffolds is considered potential strategy to improve the regeneration ability of the defective bone The surface of the PCL biopolymer scaffold constructed using a robocasting method was mineralized with carbonate apatite nanocrystallites by a series of solution-based treatments. Tissue cells actively adhered and proliferated on the surface-mineralized scaffold, which was in direct contrast with the poor cell affinity of the untreated PCL scaffold. Moreover, the surface mineralization facilitated the scaffold to hold significantly enhanced protein loading capacity. The study demonstrates the surface-mineralized polymer scaffolds are potentially useful in bone tissue engineering. This work was supported by Priority Research Centers Program (grant#: