Competitive adsorption between the protein of a dry-heated soy protein isolate (SPI)–dextran mixture and Tween 40, glycerol monosteareate (GMS) or bovine serum albumin (BSA) in oil–water (o/w) emulsions was studied at various protein/surfactant or BSA weight ratios. Soy protein molecules of the mixture were displaced to some extent from the interface, as a result of competitive adsorption with the small-molecule surfactant or BSA. Complete displacement at weight ratios as high as 2 was not observed and, additionally, a significant proportion of the conjugate remained at the interface conferring stability to the system against creaming, with the exception of GMS. In this case, soy protein displacement is believed to lead to enhancement of protein–protein interactions, bridging flocculation, creaming of oil-droplet flocks and serum separation.Polysaccharide–protein hybrid formation, as a result of dry-heating of biopolymer mixture, has been the objective of several research papers, published in the last years, in an attempt to obtain novel ingredients with improved emulsifying properties ( The possibility of conjugate formation between soy protein and dextran has been investigated by Soy proteins in the form of flour, concentrate or isolate are extensively used as ingredients in a number of food products to extend or replace the functionality of proteins of animal origin. In products appearing in the form of emulsion, soy proteins may have to compete for interfacial space with other surface-active ingredients present in the system, such as other proteins and small-molecule surfactants. The composition of the adsorbed layer, around the oil droplets of the emulsion, is expected to be determined by competitive adsorption between soy proteins, on one hand, and other proteins or emulsifiers on the other. Studies on competitive adsorption of milk proteins and low molecular weight surface-active agents have indicated that displacement of protein may take place, the result depending on the nature of the surfactant–protein interactions at the interface and in the bulk continuous phase ( If Maillard-type soy protein–dextran conjugates are expected to act as emulsion stabilizers against creaming, their molecules have to adsorb in appreciable concentrations at the droplet surface, irrespective of the presence of other surface-active agents in the system. It is then of utmost importance that competitive adsorption does not result in the removal of the conjugate from the interface or, in other words, to use suitable heated soy protein–dextran/emulsifier ratios in order to secure that even if the conjugate is displaced from the interface, displacement is not so extensive to result in emulsion destabilization. In this work two food grade emulsifiers: Tween 40 and glycerol monostearate, a water-soluble and an oil-soluble material, respectively, were used to conduct competitive adsorption studies with a dry-heated SPI–dextran mixture at corn oil–water interfaces. Additionally a well-characterized protein, BSA, was also investigated in the place of the emulsifiers for the same effect. Dextran of a medium molecular weight (144 kDa) and BSA (>99%) were obtained from Sigma. Tween 40 (polyoxyethylene sorbitan monopalmitate) was purchased from Fluka. Glycerol monostearate (GMS) was provided by KAO-Atlas Chemicals, with composition: 93% (w/w) monoglycerides, 5% diglycerides, 1% f.a (f.a. glyceride composition: lauric, myristic, palmitic, stearic, and arachidic, with stearic being the main component). Soybeans were provided by the Cotton Research Institute (Thessaloniki) and commercially available refined corn oil was obtained from the local market. The soybeans were comminuted and the resulting flour was treated with petroleum ether to remove fat. The defatted flour was then dispersed in distilled water and adjustment of pH to 9, while stirring for 2 h, effected protein extraction. The protein of the extract was recovered by acid (pH 4.5) precipitation, washed with distilled water; its pH was adjusted to 7 and freeze-dried. The protein content of the resulting isolate, as determined by the Kjeldahl method ( A mixture of SPI–dextran of a weight ratio of 1/1 was prepared by mixing solutions of the two biopolymers, followed by freeze-drying and comminution of the dried sample. The resulting powder was then incubated at 60 °C in a desiccator, in the presence of saturated KBr solution, for a period of 1 week ( The dry-heated protein–dextran samples, along with the appropriate amount of Tween 40 or BSA, were first dispersed in distilled water of pH 8.5 by vigorous and continuous agitation for 1 h with the aid of a mechanical stirrer. Following sodium azide addition (0.01%), the pH was decreased to the value of 6.5 or 3.8. Oil-in-water (o/w) emulsions were then prepared by adding 5 ml of oil in 45 ml of protein–polysaccharide–Tween 40 or protein–polysaccharide–BSA solution (0.5% w/v in soy protein), under continuous agitation and the crude emulsion samples were homogenized for 1 min using an Ultra-Turrax T25 homogenizer equipped with a S25KG-25F dispersing tool operated at 25,000 rpm. For the preparation of emulsions containing GMS in place of Tween or BSA, the appropriate amount of emulsifier was first dissolved in the oil at 50 °C followed by addition of the oil to the continuous phase at 50 °C. This temperature was maintained during crude emulsion preparation and homogenization to facilitate dispersion of oil into the continuous phase. A Malvern Mastersizer 2000 was employed to determine the oil droplet size distribution. Corn oil refractive index: 1.4673 and Absorption: 0.002. Water refractive index: 1.33. The mean surface–volume diameter, The surface protein load, The protein adsorbed per unit area was calculated using the equation SDS–PAGE was also applied to assess the protein composition. The analysis was performed according to Each experiment was conducted three times and the data were statistically treated using the One-way ANOVA program. Significant differences between means were identified by the LSD procedure. When protein molecules adsorb at emulsion o/w interfaces, in the presence of water-soluble or oil-soluble emulsifiers, the final surface protein load is lower compared to that obtained when the protein adsorbs on its own, due to competition for surface space with the more surface-active emulsifiers. In fact, above a critical surfactant concentration, complete displacement of protein molecules may take place, a result depending on the nature of the surfactant and the extend of interactions with the protein both in the emulsion continuous phase and at the interface ( Soy proteins comprise of a mixture of globular molecules made up of subunits exhibiting relatively high surface hydrophobicity ( The same trend regarding soy protein adsorption was observed for GMS-containing emulsions in place of Tween 20, although the surface protein load reached lower values ( The effect of Tween, GMS or BSA addition on the stability of emulsions against creaming at pH 6.5 and 3.8, is presented in In presence of GMS the low stability against creaming at pH 6.5 could be partly attributed to soy protein–dextran conjugate desorption. According to the results presented in As Competitive adsorption in emulsions between protein of a dry-heated SPI–dextran mixture and low-molecule surfactants or BSA, resulted in a decrease in the amount of soy protein adsorbed at oil droplet surfaces. At realistic surfactant–soy protein weight ratios, a significant amount of protein–dextran conjugate remained at the interface and conferred creaming stabilization to the system; with the exception of GMS. In this case although part of the protein–polysaccharide hybrid was not displaced, the emulsions exhibited very rapid serum separation, possibly due to protein–protein interaction forces and floc formation in the emulsion continuous phase.