Currently, there is massive generation of persistent organic pollutants, which are hazardous substances, owing to the exponential industrial growth and the associated waste production. Consequently, green and reliable strategies for decontaminating wastewater and generating value-added products are needed to realize the global demand of sustainability. In this study, an efficient sustainable circular process for water remediation with nearly zero residue production is developed using iron-rich cyanobacteria ashes. These cyanobacteria ashes are obtained from the combustion of Arthrospira platensis var lonar and are used as Fenton-like photocatalysts in different assisted photo-Fenton reactions (processes enhanced by light). The use of these iron-rich cyanobacteria ashes is particularly effective for the sono-enhanced photo-Fenton processes for water remediation (mineralization > 94.9%), with an outstanding reusability. At the end of the effective lifetime of the photocatalyst, the remaining ashes can be subsequently reused as a supplement during the growth of new cyanobacteria, thus closing the circular process. The proposed approach is a green and sustainable process integrating both carbon dioxide fixation and clean-water production aimed at attaining sustainable development.The research on biomass is growing exponentially because it is a green, sustainable, and virtually unlimited source of carbon to produce fuels, power, heat, and value-added chemicals to address the issue of the depletion of fossil fuel resources and the increasing environmental concerns ( In this context, cyanobacteria cultivation can significantly contribute to the development of a self-sustainable process for biomass production that has promising applications in the energy–water–food–pharmaceutics nexus ( The produced ashes not only from the combustion of biomass pellets but also from numerous other processes involving combustion, can be converted into abundant raw materials for other applications. Such ashes have been promoted as complementary raw materials for asphalt technologies, hydrogen production, hydraulic cement, ceramic building materials, and water remediation ( Herein, we report the development of a green, sustainable, and environmentally friendly closed process (  Raw-cyanobacterial and iron-rich cyanobacterial ash photocatalysts were obtained after the combustion of cyanobacterial biomass in a Heraeus M110 Muffel oven (temperature of 900 °C). To obtain iron-rich ashes, cyanobacteria were immersed in a 40 ppm iron (II) chloride (>99.0%, Sigma-Aldrich) solution (pH = 9) for 90 min under magnetic stirring (200 rpm) prior to combustion. After combustion, soluble alkaline substances and other impurities such as fibers were removed from the cyanobacterial ashes by washing repeatedly with Milli-Q water for 2 h under magnetic stirring (200 rpm) until the pH of the supernatant was equal to 7. Wash supernatants were added to the cyanobacteria tank to supplement the cultivation media. After washing, the cyanobacteria ashes were dried at 103 °C until the weight no longer changed. The morphology and elemental composition of the cyanobacterial ashes were characterized using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4800) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy detector. For FE-SEM observation 100 μL of a suspension of cyanobacterial ashes (0.1 g L Methylene blue (MB) (Sigma-Aldrich, > 97%) was selected as a model of a persistent organic pollutant. In order to analyze the potential of cyanobacterial ashes as photo-Fenton-like heterogeneous photocatalysts a single pollutant solution was selected. Note that this process is extensible to other organic pollutants. Prior to initiating pollutant degradation, the adsorption capacity of the cyanobacterial ashes was investigated in dark conditions. Cyanobacterial ashes (5 mg of ashes) — both iron rich and non-iron rich — were added to 50 mL The degradation and mineralization of MB was investigated in the presence and absence of cyanobacterial ashes in darkness, under artificial UV irradiation or solar irradiation (photocatalysis) and/or with ultrasonic irradiation (sono-catalysis), to determine the photolytic, Fenton, sono-catalytic, UV-Fenton, visible-Fenton, UV-sono-photo-Fenton, and solar-sono-photo-Fenton activities. Prior to the MB degradation assays, the organic pollutant solutions containing cyanobacterial ashes were kept in the darkroom at 25 °C for 60 min to establish adsorption-desorption equilibrium, and the solution pH was adjusted to the desired value (pH = 3) using diluted sulfuric acid. Next, the Fenton or photo-Fenton process was initiated by adding H The photo-Fenton experiments used either an 8 W mercury lamp with a wavelength of 365 nm (light intensity of 1.4 W m   After the photocatalysts lifetime, cyanobacteria ashes were recycled as a supplement for Zarrouk’s cyanobacteria media in the cultivation medium of During the recycling experiments, the cultivation tank was set at 30.0 ± 0.4 °C and subjected to natural sunlight irradiation, intermittent mechanical agitation at 80 rpm in two 30- and 15-min on-off cycles, followed by air bubbling in two 15- and 60-min on-off cycles.    In this study, the cyanobacteria ashes obtained during the thermochemical conversion of cyanobacterial biomass into energy are used for the efficient mineralization of persistent organic pollutants and following recycling for the effective integration of cyanobacteria cultivation. This is a green circular process ( According to ISO 17225–6:2014 standard for non-woody pellets, cyanobacteria biomass can be considered as a commercial biofuel for the fabrication of non-woody pellets provided the following requirements are met: ash content <10 wt %, moisture content <15 wt %, and calorific power >14,5 MJ kg The potential of cyanobacterial ashes as heterogeneous Fenton-like photocatalysts was explored in this study. Raw- and iron-rich- cyanobacterial ashes were fabricated by the calcination of cyanobacterial biomass in the presence of oxygen. The iron-rich cyanobacteria biomass was easily obtained after dipping the biomass for 90 min in an alkaline solution (pH = 9) containing 40 ppm iron (II) chloride. Prior to the synthesis of the iron-rich cyanobacterial ashes, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy was conducted to identify the main functional groups of the Once the cyanobacteria were calcined, the presence of iron bioaccumulation was readily notable by the naked eye based on the color of the obtained ashes ( The observed morphology of the cyanobacterial ashes presented that they consisted of non-spherical, irregularly-shaped microparticles ranging in size from approximately 1 to 50 μm. Further, they were composed of various aggregates (e.g., rods, geometric sheets) ( The chemical compositions of the cyanobacterial ashes ( Prior to the use of the cyanobacterial ashes as Fenton-like catalysts, their adsorption capacities (under dark conditions) were evaluated to establish the adsorption-desorption equilibrium time sustainable. The results ( The aim of this process was the decontamination of wastewater by the total mineralization of persistent organic pollutants (in this case MB), which included total conversion into carbon dioxide, water, and inorganic species. This was achieved by catalysis of Fenton process by raw-cyanobacterial ash and iron-rich cyanobacterial ash-based photocatalysts under UV and sunlight irradiation assisted by sonication. The mineralization process is based on the classical Fenton reaction as follows: Note that hydroxyl radicals (HO  Under silent conditions (non-sonification conditions), after 100 min of UV (UV-photo-Fenton) and natural sunlight (solar-photo-Fenton) irradiation, 96.1% and 90.3% degradation is realized with the raw-cyanobacterial ashes and slightly higher degradation of 99.0% and 94.7% is attained by the iron-rich cyanobacterial ashes, respectively. Note that after 20 min, the photodegradation of MB by the raw-cyanobacterial ashes is significantly lower, dropping to 68.8% and 60.5% under UV (UV-photo-Fenton) and natural sunlight (solar-photo-Fenton) irradiation, respectively. Concurrently, when the iron-rich cyanobacterial ashes were used, after 20 min, comparatively higher degradation was achieved (89.4% and 68.7% under UV and natural sunlight irradiation, respectively). As expected, the same trend was observed from the mineralization values, which are determined at a particular time that is slightly prior to the occurrence degradation, owing to the complexity of the mineralization process. Comparing the performances of the two ash types, the consistently higher efficiencies of the iron-rich ashes are explained by their higher iron content, which enhances the generation of hydroxyl radicals and consequently promotes the oxidation of the pollutants (here MB). The high values obtained with the iron-rich ashes under sunlight irradiation confirm the suitability of their potential use for decontamination, evidencing that the use of a zero-cost light source is preferable over the cost and energy consumption of a UV-generating lamp. Under sonication, the effect of the The mineralization attained with the bare sono-catalysis and bare-Fenton processes are significantly lower than that realized by the photo- or sonophoto- Fenton processes, which illustrates their effectiveness, particularly of the sonophoto-Fenton processes, for the mineralization of persistent organic pollutants. Additionally, the iron-rich cyanobacterial ashes result in higher degradation and mineralization than the raw-cyanobacterial ashes, confirming that iron content synergistically increases the efficiencies of Fenton-based processes. The stability and reusability of the cyanobacterial ashes were evaluated by reusing the catalyst over five consecutive MB degradation cycles ( Attending to reduce the production of residues after the effective lifetime of the ashes used in catalytic purposes the application of these inactive-cyanobacterial ashes is proposed as a tool to close the cycle. The proposed cultivation of Finally, to analyze the quality of the cyanobacterial biomass produced using these three different cultivation media, the contents of glycogen, chlorophyll-a, and carotenoids were determined. The glycogen, chlorophyll-a, and carotenoids contents in the cyanobacteria cultivated in Zarrouk’s medium were approximately 21 wt %, 8 wt %, and 0.1 wt %, respectively. Those in the cyanobacteria cultivated in the raw-cyanobacterial ash-based medium and iron-rich cyanobacterial ash-based medium were 70 wt %, 3.5 wt % and 0.4 wt %, respectively. Note that the chemical composition of cyanobacteria strongly depends on the culture media composition. However, the higher glycogen content, which is generally obtained in a nitrate-deficient Zarrouk’s medium, can be beneficial for other applications of microalgae, such as bioethanol production ( Thus, with this step closing the cycle, a zero residue process was successfully developed for the simultaneous elimination of persistent organic pollutants in wastewater and production of microalgae biomass. In this study, tests were performed to explore the use of the residues generated during the combustion of cyanobacteria pellets as catalysts in different assisted Fenton processes. Two types of ashes with different iron contents were evaluated, demonstrating that in all the cases a higher iron content favored degradation and mineralization. The iron-rich cyanobacteria ashes exhibited outstanding photocatalytic activity for persistent organic pollutants (e.g., MB) mineralization under sunlight irradiation and sonication, with an extended effective lifetime leading to an efficient strategy for water remediation. Combining radiation and sonication enhanced the Fenton process, particularly using the iron-rich ashes, under which conditions the mineralization reached values similar to those of degradation near 100%, making it evident that a quasi-complete remediation process of the wastewater occurred. The ashes maintained their efficiency during consecutive cycles without losing their capability. The experiments using the more efficient iron-rich microalgae ashes as photocatalysts demonstrated a long activity period and high reusability. In addition, the carbon dioxide released during the mineralization and with the remaining ash residue could be exploited for cultivation of fresh cyanobacteria, closing the circular process. In summary, a green circular closed process using iron-rich microalgae ashes from  The work leading to these results has received funding from Metrohm foundation, the TEC2017-85059-C3-2-R projects (co-financed by the