Metal catalysts are widely used in the petrochemical processing industry such as in the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) process to produce hydrocarbons from synthesis gas (syngas). The deactivated cobalt-containing catalyst from the FT-reaction is subsequently discarded as a spent catalyst. Due to the high cost of the precursor metal salts coupled with the toxicity of cobalt, the disposal of spent FT catalyst is uneconomic and environmentally unacceptable. This paper describes the selective recovery of alumina, high value cobalt and platinum from the spent catalyst as an alternative to disposal.
                  For the purpose of the selective dissolution of high value metals such as Co and Pt, the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst was investigated using different lixiviants such as sodium hydroxide, nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid and aqua-regia. The effects of concentration of sodium hydroxide, temperature, pressure and time on the extraction efficiencies of metal species from spent FT catalyst during the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst were investigated.
                  It was found that the selective dissolution of aluminium species with sodium hydroxide solution under leaching conditions from the spent cobalt-containing catalyst was effective. Approximately 89% of the aluminium species present in the calcined spent catalyst was selectively dissolved in sodium hydroxide solution (6.25M) when using elevated pressure (about 9bar) and temperature (170°C) during two consecutive leaching steps. As expected, platinum species still remain insoluble in the sodium hydroxide solution. During the leaching step, both aluminium and cobalt species dissolved simultaneously in the mineral acids such as HCl, H2SO4 and HNO3 to form metal salts in the leach liquor. In conclusion, almost all of Al, Co and Pt species present in the original spent catalyst were respectively dissolved in the aqueous phase during the sodium hydroxide–nitric acid–aqua regia leaching process.Metal catalysts are widely used in the petrochemical processing industry such as in the Fischer–Tropsch process to produce hydrocarbons from synthesis gas (syngas). The Fischer–Tropsch process can be catalysed using Fe or other transition metals, including cobalt. The catalysts utilised in this process can either be supported or unsupported. The range of supports generally used includes SiO An alternative option involving the recovery of these metals from spent FT catalyst has been considered. Several methods have previously been developed to selectively recover metals from spent catalysts. For purposes of establishing a recycling process for the catalyst, leaching is considered as the process of dissolving high value metals with a solution of acid or base from calcined ores, residues, scrap or spent catalysts. In this investigation, alkaline and acid hydrothermal leaching processes were used to selectively dissolve high value metals from calcined spent catalyst. The effects of lixiviant type, concentration, in case of sodium hydroxide, temperature and pressure as well as the leaching period on the extraction efficiencies of metal species present in the calcined spent catalyst were studied. Flocculation is subsequently used to separate the suspended solids from the leach liquor. The metal extraction efficiencies obtained during leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with different lixiviants were carefully compared. A comparative study of the metal extraction efficiencies obtained using these different lixiviants was undertaken in order to determine which lixiviant is suitable for the selective dissolution of the metal oxides from the calcined spent catalyst. In this study the spent catalyst was calcined at elevated temperature of 800 A 420 A further leaching step was used to solubilise the remaining aluminium species from the calcined spent catalyst in order to further improve the extraction efficiency of aluminium species. Fresh sodium hydroxide solution (6.25 In a separate experiment, the calcined spent catalyst (about 25 In order to confirm the preliminary results obtained after leaching the spent catalyst with sodium hydroxide solution, 30 In order to determine the effect of temperature, pressure and leaching time on solubilisation of the aluminium, cobalt and platinum species, test work was conducted on the calcined spent catalyst using sodium hydroxide solution (6.25 Following the flocculation of the slurry, both solid and liquid samples were prepared and subsequently submitted for Co, Pt and Al analyses. In an attempt to determine the effect of leaching time on the solubilisation of metal species from the calcined spent catalyst, the optimal leaching temperature (approximately 190 A 128 The resulting slurry produced during the leaching of the calcined spent cobalt-based catalyst with sodium hydroxide solution (ca 6.25 A 2 The modified polyacrylamide (0.25% flocculant) was heated to 90 Alternatively a 2000 The residue produced from the nitric acid leaching was first calcined at 700 In order to test whether cobalt could be selectively dissolved from the spent catalyst with no substantial dissolution of aluminium species, the calcined spent cobalt catalyst was leached with hydrochloric acid solution (about 4.1 A 322.5 A 260 The results obtained during the selective leaching of metal species from the calcined spent catalyst with both basic and acidic lixiviants and flocculation of the slurry from the leaching step are presented and discussed in this section. The results given in From the results obtained from the direct sodium hydroxide leaching presented in The results are presented graphically in From the results given in For the hydrochloric acid leaching step, hydrochloric acid solution (ca 4.1 The ICP analysis of the residues produced during the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with 4.1 For the nitric acid leaching step, a solution of nitric acid of ca 8.73 The analysis of the leached residue shows that the residue produced during the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with 8.73 ICP analysis of the leached residue indicates that the residue produced when leaching the calcined spent catalyst with 2.04 The XRF analysis of the leached residue produced during the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with 6.25 The results for the residues produced from the leaching steps presented in From the leaching results present in The results obtained for residues and filtrates produced when flocculating the leach liquors obtained from the various leaching steps are discussed in this section. An important observation made is that the slurry obtained during the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with sodium hydroxide solution using different concentrations at a relatively high pressure and temperature was filtered only with difficulty. This may possibly be attributed to the formation of metal hydroxide precipitate containing ultrafine particles during the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst at a high pH value (around pH 13). To further improve the filtration rate or the filterability of this slurry at ambient temperature suitable flocculants (HX200, HX300 and HX400) currently produced by Cytec Industries, can be used to flocculate the suspended ultra-fine materials prior to the filtration step ( The experimental procedure described earlier in this paper was used to flocculate the suspended solid particles from the cobalt nitrate slurry. It was observed that heavy flocs were readily formed during the flocculation of the suspended ultra-fine solids with ZN92V Zetafloc produced by Zetachem. The flocs produced in this manner settled rapidly and eventually the decantation method was applied in order to separate the flocs from cobalt nitrate solution. Visual observations also indicated that the flocs were sticky and that they survived throughout the flocculation period. The analysis of the residue obtained from the leaching of nitric acid residue with an aqua-regia solution is given in The leaching results for the leached residues and leach liquor obtained during the optimisation of the leaching parameters have shown that leaching temperature, pressure and the concentration of sodium hydroxide have significant effects on the extraction efficiencies of the aluminium species and cobalt. Approximately 89% of the aluminium species present in the calcined spent catalyst was selectively dissolved in sodium hydroxide solution when using an elevated pressure (about 9 During the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with inorganic acids such as hydrochloric acid and nitric acid, aluminium and cobalt species present in the original calcined spent catalyst were simultaneously dissolved in hydrochloric acid (4.1 Both aluminium and cobalt species dissolved simultaneously in the mineral acids such as HCl, H The nitric acid leaching method was used to selectively dissolve cobalt species, which are environmentally toxic from the basic leached spent catalyst prior to its disposal. It can be concluded that almost all of the cobalt species remaining in the leached spent catalyst were successfully dissolved in nitric acid solution during the leaching step. The results also indicate that some of the platinum species present in the leached spent catalyst still remain undissolved in nitric acid solution. In conclusion, 99.97% Al, 99.7% Co and 37.5% Pt group metal present in the original spent catalyst respectively were dissolved in the aqueous phase during the sodium hydroxide-nitric acid leaching process. A sample of slurry emanating from the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with sodium hydroxide was filtered only with difficulty. This could be ascribed to the presence of ultrafine solid particles dispersed in the leach liquor. The entire series of modified anionic polyacrylamide flocculants evaluated in this study can be efficiently used to flocculate the suspended ultra-fine solids from the leach liquor produced from the leaching of the calcined spent catalyst with sodium hydroxide. ZN92V Zetafloc was found to be a suitable flocculant for the suspended material present in the acidic cobalt nitrate-containing solution. It can be concluded that almost all of the platinum species present in the nitric acid insoluble residue was dissolved in aqua-regia (3HCl:1HNO The authors would like to thank the management of Sasol Technology Research and Development for their financial support and permission to conduct these studies. The assistance provided by the personnel of Sasol Infrachem Laboratories, Sasol Technology’s Syngas and Coal Technologies Group, Sasol Technology’s Analytical Technology Group, Mintek and Setpoint laboratories is acknowledged.