In the present work, the Gibbs–Thomson coefficient, solid–liquid and solid–solid interfacial energies and grain boundary energy of a solid Al solution in the Al–Cu–Si eutectic system were determined from the observed grain boundary groove shapes by measuring the thermal conductivity of the solid and liquid phases and temperature gradient. Some thermodynamic properties such as the enthalpy of fusion, entropy of fusion, the change of specific heat from liquid to solid and the electrical conductivity of solid phases at their melting temperature were also evaluated by using the measured values of relevant data for Al–Cu, Al–Si, Al–Mg, Al–Ni, Al–Ti, Al–Cu–Ag, Al–Cu–Si binary and ternary alloys.Aluminum alloys have many advantages that include high thermal and electrical conductivities, low density, high specific strength, ease of casting, high strength to weight ratio and reasonable corrosion resistance. By using appropriate heat treatment techniques One of the most important aluminum based alloys is Al–Cu–Si. Because of its low melting temperature and good fluidity, the Al–Cu–Si eutectic alloy has been used in the application of braze welding. Although a lot of research has been carried out on the Al–Cu–Si non-eutectic alloy in the literature The composition of the alloy was chosen as Al-26.82 wt.% Cu-5.27 wt.% Si In order to obtain the grain boundary groove shapes (GBGS) in metallic alloy systems, a radial heat flow apparatus was firstly designed by Gündüz and Hunt The microstructure of the alloy was observed through optical microscope and SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) in different areas of the samples. The specimen was prepared for microscopic observation using standard metallographic techniques. In order to obtain a good image an etchant (2.5 ml nitric acid, 1.5 ml hydrochloric acid, 1 ml hydrofluoric acid in 95 ml water) was used for 15 s. The optical microscope and SEM photographs of the microstructure of the Al–Cu–Si alloy are shown in EDX composition analysis was used to determine the three phases of the Al–Cu–Si alloy. The EDX result is illustrated in In order to determine the Gibbs–Thomson coefficient (Γ) from the numerical method firstly constructed by Gündüz and Hunt The GBGS for the Al solid solution in equilibrium with the Al–Cu–Si liquid (Al-26.82 wt.% Cu-5.27 wt.% Si) were observed and a typical GBGS was shown in For the first time, the GBGSs for a solid Al solution in equilibrium with solid CuAl The entropy change per unit volume for an alloy is given by Refs. From Equations The experimental error in the determination of ΔS In the present work, it was not possible to determine the value of the entropy of fusion per unit volume for the solid phase in the ternary eutectic system from Eq. If the value of Some physical properties for the solid Al solution in equilibrium with Al-26.82 wt.%Cu-5.27 wt.%Si liquid are given in To determine the enthalpy of fusion we have to know the entropy of fusion per unit volume and it can be expressed as Enthalpies of fusion (ΔH At constant pressure the specific heat is expressed as Therefore the variation of enthalpy (H) with temperature (T) can be obtained from the knowledge of the variation of specific heat with temperature. A phase change from a low-to a high-temperature phase is always endothermic, and hence the ΔH For liquid state, For solid state, Subtracting Eqs. At the melting temperature (T The enthalpies of fusion (ΔH The solid–liquid interfacial energy (σ In order to obtain σ If the grains are the same on both sides of the groove, the grain boundary energy can be stated by The value of the grain boundary energy between the solid Al solution and the Al–Cu–Si liquid and between the solid Al solution and solid CuAl The anisotropy of the interfacial energy is crucial for phase transformations. However the exact determination of this value is very difficult and there are a limited number of studies in the literature. Since the anisotropy of interfacial energy for solid Al solution is unknown, the interfacial energy between the Al solid solution and Al–Cu–Si liquid was supposed to be isotropic in this study. The values of Γ, σ Investigations of the thermal and electrical properties of aluminum rich alloys are important for many technological applications. Thermal and electrical conductivity play a crucial role in testing the performance and stability of alloys. In the literature, there is not much information about the thermal and electrical properties of Al rich alloys. Thus, determining the thermal and electrical properties for Al rich alloys could be of great use to researchers and engineers. The determination of thermal and electrical conductivity values were achieved in two steps. Firstly the variations in the thermal conductivity of the solid phases with temperature were measured for different compositions of Al rich alloys. Secondly the variations in electrical conductivity with temperature were calculated via the Wiedemann-Franz law and Smith-Palmer equation for the same materials. The thermal conductivity of solid Al phase has measured by using the radial heat flow apparatus and the details of procedure can be learn in Refs. Since both the electrical and heat transportation of the metal depend on free electrons, the ratio of thermal conductivity (K) to electrical conductivity (σ) is proportional to the temperature of the metal. This fact is discovered by the Wiedemann−Franz law, A modified form of the Lorenz equation, known as the Smith-Palmer equation, can be used to estimate the thermal conductivity The values of thermal conductivity for Al–Cu As can be seen from Some of the thermophysical properties and the microstructure of aluminum based binary or ternary alloys were investigated. The results obtained in this work can be summarized as follows: The microstructure of the Al-26.82 wt.% Cu-5.27 wt.% Si alloy was observed through SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) in different areas of the samples. The three eutectic phases (α-Al, Si, CuAl The GBGSs between the solid Al solution and the Al–Cu–Si liquid and between the solid Al solution and the solid CuAl The entropy of fusion (ΔS The electrical conductivities for the solid Al solution phases at their melting temperatures were calculated from the Wiedemann-Franz law and Smith-Palmer equation by using the measured values of K and L. The calculated electrical conductivity values are compatible with each other and with experimentally measured previous works. This project was supported by