Aim
                  The purpose of this paper was to review the literature on the treatment of intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly in order to evaluate the place for total elbow replacement (TER) in the light of our experience over the past 15 years.
               
                  Methods
                  A review of the records of 11 consecutive patients over the age of 60 years who underwent primary TER for comminuted fractures of the distal humerus between 1997 and 2011 were reviewed and the surviving patients were interviewed. The Scopus database was used to perform a pragmatic review of the literature published between the mid-1990s and the present-day.
               
                  Results
                  At the time of the most recent follow-up 3.5 years following surgery (range: 2–6 years) 7 patients assessed with the Mayo elbow performance index were classified as excellent, 4 were classified as good. There were no complications requiring further procedures encountered. Five surviving patients remain satisfied with the function of their TER. The number of papers recommending TER for treatment of these fractures continues to increase with time.
               
                  Conclusions
                  TER is now the treatment of choice for unreconstructable fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly. This option should therefore be available at the time of surgery for all distal humeral fractures in this patient population. A surgical approach other than olecranon osteotomy, which would preclude TER is therefore required.A treatment principle recognised for many years for displaced intra-articular fractures of distal humerus is that the best outcome of treatment is likely to be achieved by anatomical reduction of the involved joint surfaces, firm fixation of the fracture fragments and early mobilisation. It has also been equally well-recognised that it is often impossible to achieve these requirements in comminuted fractures involving osteoporotic bone of the distal humerus in the elderly population. The definition of ‘elderly’ has inevitably altered with time as a result of increasing life expectancy and the increased expectations of individuals beyond retirement age. The long established conservative ‘bag of bones’ treatment for these fractures originally described in the 1930s by Eastwood had subsequently been shown to provide generally poor and unpredictable results and became increasingly unacceptable Consequently, in the mid-1990s, we began to receive referral of ‘elderly’ patients (<60 years of age) with comminuted fractures of the distal humerus for consideration for elbow arthroplasty as an alternative to open reduction and internal fixation. We had begun to use the Kudo TER (Biomet, Bridgend, UK) in the late 1980s in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Instrumentation for TER at that time was rather basic and component orientation was largely a matter of clinical judgement. We carried out an anatomical study that demonstrated that the posterior cortex of the humerus defined the transverse axis of elbow flexion/extension This development then comprised the IBP (Instrumented Bone Preserving) elbow system (Biomet, Bridgend, UK), which we began to use both as unlinked and linked components (IBP reconstruction TER) for fracture treatment ( The purpose of this study therefore is to review the literature on the treatment of intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly in order to evaluate the place for total elbow joint replacement (TER) in light of our own experience over the past 15 years. The case notes and X-rays of 11 consecutive patients over the age of 60 years who underwent TER for the treatment of comminuted fractures of the distal humerus between 1997 and 2011 were reviewed. The surviving patients were also interviewed by telephone. Each elbow was exposed using a posterior surgical approach we had developed for TER based on studies of the vascular supply to the distal triceps muscle, and which has been designated the ‘Newcastle approach’ Post-operatively the operated arm was supported in a removable posterior splint, which was retained for four weeks. During this time, active flexion and passive extension exercises were performed with physiotherapy supervision. At the end of four weeks the posterior splint was discarded and each patient was allowed to begin active exercises within the limits of post-operative symptoms. We used the Scopus database to perform a pragmatic review of the literature published between the mid-1990s and the present-day using the search terms elbow arthroplasty and treatment of distal humeral fractures. Our patient study group comprised of 11 patients (9 females). The mean age at the time of surgery was 76 years (range: 64–91). All the fractures were comminuted intra-articular fractures corresponding to type C intra-articular fractures of the AO radiological classification ( None of the fractures was open. IBP components were inserted in 7 patients (4 IBP unlinked, 3 IBP linked ‘Reconstruction’ TER's). Discovery TER (linked) components (Biomet, Warsaw USA) were inserted in 4 patients. All the surgical wounds healed primarily. Three patients reported transient ulnar nerve symptoms post operatively. The average length of follow up from the date of surgery to the most recent outpatient attendance was 3.5 years (Range: 2–6 years). At the time of their most recent follow-up (mean 2 years) the results of 7 patients assessed by the Mayo Elbow Performance index were classified as ‘excellent’ (>90/100 points). Four patients were classified as ‘good’ (75–89 points). At the time of final review 6 patients had died of unrelated causes. The surviving 5 patients remained satisfied with the function of their TER. None have required further procedures to date. Examination of the radiographs made at the time of the most recent follow-up demonstrated no radiological evidence of component wear or loosening. The degree of comminution of these fractures seen at surgery was usually greater than the preoperative X-ray had suggested. Most of the fracture fragments were found to be detached with little or no soft tissue attachment ( Having excluded publications discussing other aspects of elbow surgery cited in the data base in response to our search terms, we identified 24 publications in which outcome data was reported from clinical studies specific to the treatment of distal humeral fractures in the elderly. These subdivided into 15 reporting TER Although there is continuing debate about the place for primary TER in the treatment of comminuted fractures of the distal humerus, there is universal agreement that the treatment of distal humeral fractures remains a challenging problem Distal humeral fractures currently represent only 2% of all adult elbow fractures, and 5% of fractures in individuals older than 60 years old It is however becoming increasingly recognised that as our population ages the numbers of patients requiring treatment will inevitably increase and the need therefore to identify the most appropriate treatment will become more acute Cobb and Morrey in 1997 carried out a retrospective review of 20 patients (mean age 72 years) who had undergone primary TER for the treatment of acute fractures of the distal humerus between 1982 and 1992 and found that all these patients had either an excellent or good result on the basis of the Mayo elbow performance score Retrospective reviews in 2000 of 7 patients (mean age 81.7 years) and 2002 of 19 patients (mean age 73 years) who underwent primary TER for fractures of the distal humerus then reported similar good and excellent results with a relatively low incidence of complications A retrospective review of a larger patient study group followed for longer was published in 2005 in which 48 patients (49 fractures), average age 67 years, underwent TER for the primary treatment for fracture of the distal humerus Since then there has been an increasing number of publications advocating TER as the primary treatment for comminuted fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly. Whereas in the decade prior to 2005, during which TER began to be used as the primary treatment for comminuted fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly, there were only 4 publications reporting the results All of these publications reported overall good results and a relatively low incidence of complications with one exception Although infection complicating any joint arthroplasty is of course a serious concern there is now evidence that TER can be used safely and successfully for the primary treatment of open fractures in the elderly. A recent review of 7 patients (mean age 74 years) who had undergone primary TER for open intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus (2 Grade 1, 5 Grade 2) reported overall good results There appears to be an increasing interest in the use of hemi arthroplasty for distal humeral fractures, particularly in younger patients, although the potential for articular cartilage wear in the trochlear notch of the ulna, which would then necessitate revision to a TER, has been identified in laboratory testing Experience with the unlinked IBP system in acute distal humeral fractures has been reported by others who reviewed a group of 9 patients (mean age 73 years) followed up for a mean of 3.5 years Although our experience of treating fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly with TER began with the use of unlinked IBP components, which provided early satisfactory results, we were concerned about the potential for dislocation. We considered that the need for further surgical procedures would be particularly serious in a population of frail elderly patients with significant comorbidities. We later therefore opted to use linked components in this patient group and we would have similar concerns about achieving stability with a humeral hemi arthroplasty in the elderly population. Numerous surgical approaches have been described for the management of distal humeral fractures. We would agree with Nauth et al., that irrespective of the approach used the ulnar nerve must always be isolated, mobilised and protected throughout the procedure Nauth et al. point to the fact that in any event it is critical to avoid the use of an olecranon osteotomy for the surgical approach to fractures of the distal humerus if TER is being considered as this approach compromises the insertion of an ulna component We consider that it is a prerequisite in treating distal humeral fractures, which may prove unsuitable for ORIF to use the type of surgical approach we describe here and avoid olecranon osteotomy. The treatment of elbow arthritis by TER was introduced in the late 1960s/early 1970s and the place for TER particularly in the older patient with severe degenerative change has now become firmly established. TER has also been used to treat fractures of the distal humerus since the early 1980s, 30 years ago, but the literature indicates that this is still considered by some to be controversial. We think that one reason for the persisting controversy is that most of the published studies, ours included, are retrospective and involve relatively small numbers of patients. McKee et al. however conducted a multicentre, prospective, randomised, controlled trial involving 42 elderly patients with displaced intra-articular distal humeral fractures, comparing ORIF with TER Wang et al. carried out an extensive literature search (1946–2012) in order to assess the evidence for ORIF versus TER in the treatment of distal humeral fractures in adults The question therefore arises, is it likely that, given the relative infrequency of this injury and the large number of variables, will or even could this type of ideal trial ever be performed? We are aware of no similar trial having been carried out on any other joint arthroplasty system for any other specific indication. We think therefore that the answer is, probably not. Consequently we believe that in order to decide the place for TER in the treatment of fractures of the distal humerus in 2015, it is important to think in terms of their pathology and reported clinical experience rather than statistical significance. Our literature review indicates that opinions based on clinical experience have gradually changed over the last 10–15 years, from that expressed by Ray et al., ‘total elbow arthroplasty has been suggested as a last-ditch effort to salvage functional use for such difficult fractures in the elderly’, to that expressed by Argintar et al., ‘total elbow arthroplasty is the current gold standard for treatment for unreconstructable distal humeral fractures’ Our observation of the pathological anatomy of the distal humeral fractures we treated by TER confirmed that most of the surface area of each fracture fragment was covered by articular cartilage. Most of the fragments had either no soft tissue attachment or extremely tenuous soft tissue attachment and were therefore likely to be devoid of a blood supply ( We consider therefore that AO type C intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus are biologically equivalent to the Neer 4-part fracture of the proximal humerus We believe therefore that TER is the most appropriate primary treatment for AO type C intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly. We would not of course recommend TER as the primary treatment for all of the other types of fracture configuration, which occur in the distal humerus of the elderly. We think it is however self evident that if any fracture of the distal humerus in the elderly proves to be ‘unreconstructable’ then clearly, the only alternatives are either TER or possibly hemi arthroplasty. No one would disagree that primary surgical procedures in general provide better results and fewer complications than revision procedures. It is perhaps not therefore surprising that patient satisfaction has been found to be far less following a failed ORIF revised to a TER than for a primary TER for acute fractures of the distal humerus In order therefore to provide the optimum treatment for an elderly patient with a potentially disabling comminuted fracture of the distal humerus we consider it is now essential to have replacement arthroplasty available as an option at the time of surgery.  TER is the treatment of choice for unreconstructable fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly. Comminuted intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus (AO type C) are biologically equivalent to Neer 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus and should therefore be treated by replacement arthroplasty. A surgical approach to the elbow, other than olecranon osteotomy, is recommended for the surgical treatment of distal humeral fractures as an olecranon osteotomy complicates the insertion of a TER if this is then required. The early functional outcome of TER for fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly is better than ORIF. The radiological outcome of TER in terms of component wear and implant loosening appears to be similar to TER in arthritis and equally capable therefore of providing satisfactory medium to long-term results. No conflict of interest to declare.