The adsorption of sulphate on magnetite was studied in-situ using ATR-FTIR spectroscopy. Synthetic magnetite particles were deposited on a ZnSe internal reflection element and the spectra of sulphate adsorbed at pH 4–8.5 were recorded. Two different ionic strengths were used viz. 0.01 M and 0.1 M NaCl. The spectra of adsorbed sulphate on magnetite coated ZnSe were compared with the spectra of sulphate solutions at the same pH values and in contact with uncoated ZnSe. The spectrum of adsorbed sulphate at pH 4 showed three maxima at 979, 1044, and 1115 cm−1 indicating a monodentate adsorption in which the Td symmetry of 
                        
                           SO
                           4
                           
                              2
                              −
                           
                        
                      is lowered to C3v. At pH 6.5, sulphate adsorbed as an outer-sphere complex with two weak bands appearing at 1102 and 980 cm−1. Moreover, spectra of the adsorbed sulphate at pH 4 were recorded as a function of time and sulphate concentration. The equilibrium absorbance at different concentrations fitted a Langmuir type adsorption isotherm. The Langmuir affinity constant K at pH 4 was determined from the slope and intercept of the Langmuir plot to be 
                        K
                        =
                        1.2344
                        ×
                        
                           10
                           4
                        
                        
                            M
                           
                              −
                              1
                           
                        
                      and the Gibbs free energy of adsorption 
                        Δ
                        
                           G
                           ads
                           0
                        
                      was estimated from this value to be −33.3 kJ/mol. Kinetic analysis indicated that adsorption at pH 4 is fast, whilst the desorption kinetic at the same pH is very slow. In addition, the effect of Ca ions on sulphate adsorption was also studied. It was shown that Ca ions increased the sulphate adsorption on magnetite at pH 8.5.Surface and interfacial chemistry of minerals in water is a base for many research efforts because of its importance in a variety of applications such as water management, soil chemistry, and mineral processing. There have been a variety of methods developed to study surfaces of particulate solids in water as dispersion medium. One of the methods that have become increasingly popular is infrared spectroscopy, which gives information on chemical bonds and structure of molecules. However, application of infrared spectroscopy to aqueous systems requires a modified technique due to the strong absorption of water, which can mask the spectrum of interest if not properly subtracted. If subtraction of water is needed, it is usually suitable only at an absorbance less than one. The solution to this problem is attenuated total reflection (ATR) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIRS). In ATR the penetration depth of the evanescent wave into the rarer medium can be made sufficiently short to avoid the strong absorption of water. Thus, the The ATR spectroscopy technique has been applied to study adsorption of sulphate, carbonate and phosphate on the surface of iron oxides Sulphate is widely found in soils and water and it has profound effect in environmental systems and technical applications, e.g., it can alter the surface chemistry and crystal growth of iron oxides In mineral processing ions in the process water may affect the pelletization of the mineral slurry and possibly imply weaker green pellets. In this work, we studied adsorption of sulphate on magnetite, in order to shed light on the thermodynamic and kinetic behaviour of sulphate adsorption on magnetite. There is no Sodium hydroxide, ammonium hydroxide (25%), FeCl The synthesis of magnetite was carried out by coprecipitation of Fe (II) and (III) Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), chemical analysis and Far-Mid infra-red spectroscopy confirmed the magnetite structure and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images showed spherical particle with a mean diameter of ∼10 nm. Great care was taken to avoid oxidation of magnetite by deoxygenation and argon bubbling in all stages of the synthesis, film deposition and adsorption measurement, however, partial surface oxidation could occur. Nevertheless, the surface oxidation is a matter of fact for all other magnetite sources. Two methods for deposition of particles on ATR crystals were applied in this work. The first method is similar to the method previously described by other authors The second method was the dip-coating technique in which a substrate (ATR crystal) is immersed in a colloidal suspension of particles and withdrawn with a well-defined withdrawal velocity. Again, suspension specifications i.e. concentration, viscosity, and surface tension are the determining factors for the thickness of the layer in addition to withdrawal speed. The principle of this technique is based on drying a wet layer formed upon withdrawing the substrate and gelation of the layer by solvent evaporation. The dip coating was performed using a Nima dip coater (Nima Technology Ltd., the Science Park, Coventry, England) with two beakers containing a 5 mg/ml suspension of magnetite at pH 4 in beaker 1 and a 50% methanol/water mixture in beaker 2 to rinse away the particles not adhering to the substrate. The dipping speed (immersing and raising) was set at 60 mm/min and the total number of cycles at 20. Each cycle comprised the following sequence; immersing the substrate (ZnSe crystal) in beaker 1, waiting in the bottom for 30 s, raising it out of the beaker, waiting 120 s at the top, and then this procedure was repeated with beaker 2. Finally it was repeatedly rinsed with ethanol and Milli-Q water. Both methods produced smooth layers of particles which were stable against circulation of the sample solution at all experimental conditions applied in this work. The IR spectra were recorded on a Bruker IFS 113V equipped with an MCT detector cooled by liquid nitrogen. All spectra were collected in the range 800–4000 cm A sketch of the experimental setup is shown in The cell was connected to a 250 ml reservoir containing 150 ml solution via Viton tubings and the solutions were circulated by a Watson Mallow, Bredel pump (Spiram-Sarco engineering group, England) at a rate of 5 ml/min (10 ml/min for some of the kinetic experiments). All experiments were conducted at room temperature and under argon flow. The pH value was probed during the experiment using a glass electrode and adjusted using 0.1 M NaOH or HCl solutions. Data acquisition as well as data processing and analysis were carried out by OPUS software. The electrolyte solution (0.01 M NaCl at pH 4) was continuously circulated through the cell with a flow rate of 5 ml/min for 30 min before the single beam background spectrum was recorded for 15 min (4086 scans). The experiments were carried out under argon atmosphere and the pH was controlled during the experiment as described above. Afterwards, a known volume of stock sulphate solution was added to the electrolyte solution to acquire the desired spectra. The sample spectra were recorded every 10 min until no significant increase in intensity in the 900–1250 cm In kinetic measurements, first a background spectrum of the magnetite layer in ionic medium was collected in the same way as described for the isotherm measurements. The cell was then emptied and a sulphate solution at a given concentration and ionic medium (0.01 M NaCl at pH 4) was pumped through the cell. The time zero was set to the time when the solution entered the cell. The sample spectra were recorded at certain time intervals with the intervals measured from the middle of successive scanning times. All the kinetic experiments were carried out using a new magnetite film. The possible effect of the flow rate on adsorption rate was examined by using two flow rates viz. 5 and 10 ml/min. Desorption of sulphate was evaluated by rinsing the adsorbed sulphate with Milli-Q water at the same pH and flow rate as the sample solution, but the effluent was collected as waste instead of being circulated back into the system. To evaluate the effect of Ca The IR spectra of sulphate adsorbed from aqueous solutions of different sulphate concentrations at pH 4 are shown in Sulphate as adsorbed and the free ions exhibit different peak positions. This is easily explained by molecular symmetry. The symmetry of dissolved sulphate ions (SO When sulphate ions are adsorbed on magnetite particles, three maxima at 1115, 1044 and 979 cm The band at 979 cm Since the symmetry is lowered upon coordination of sulphate ions to magnetite, the It is also clear that the spectra in In addition, there is another difference in the recorded spectral intensity of sulphate adsorbed on the magnetite coated IRE and sulphate detected using an uncoated IRE, namely the absorbance increment observed by increasing the sulphate concentration. Increasing sulphate concentration (up to 10 mM was tested here) causes a linear enhancement in absorbance for the uncoated crystal, whilst a magnetite coated crystal exhibited a dramatic initial increase in absorbance. Eventually the absorbance approaches an equilibrium plateau value in the latter case. The adsorption of sulphate on magnetite evidently shows a saturation behaviour, which will be further explored in Section Adsorption of sulphate on magnetite at pH 6.5 (0.01 M NaCl as ionic medium) is shown in Similar results were obtained by Hug Probably the most often used adsorption model is the Langmuir isotherm which has also been used to describe anion adsorption on iron oxides From sulphate adsorption onto magnetite at pH 4, the band area between 900 cm From this plot, the Langmuir affinity constant can be estimated to be Application of As evident from the curves in The desorption kinetics is very slow and when the adsorbed sulphate was rinsed with Milli-Q water at the same pH and flow rate, only a negligible decrease in absorption intensity was observed during 30 min of desorption (see The rate of sulphate ion adsorption onto magnetite seems to be governed by a number of factors of which the bulk concentration of sulphate is the most important one at least at a fixed temperature. It was observed that NaCl concentration had an effect on the adsorption kinetics. The higher the NaCl concentration, the slower was the initial adsorption rate. This is probably due to a screening of the predominantly positively charged magnetite surface at pH 4 from the negatively charged sulphate. However, the NaCl concentration had no effect on the position and number of the infrared absorption bands. Similar to our result ( Sun et al. It is therefore suggested that the The effect of Ca ions on sulphate adsorption on magnetite was investigated at acidic and alkaline pH (pH 4 and 8.5) and in the concentration range It has been observed by others that there is a correlation between calcium and sulphate adsorption in soils containing Fe and Al hydrous oxides The spectroscopic study carried out here, showed similar band shape for the sulphate adsorption both when Ca ions were added to the reaction solution and when only Na ions constituted the ionic medium, indicating an outer-sphere sulphate adsorption. It also showed that Ca increased the adsorption of sulphate at alkaline pH. In the concentration range of Ca Adsorption of sulphate on magnetite was studied using Regarding the adsorption kinetics, the experimental data indicated a pseudo first order reaction with a rate constant increasing with concentration. This implies that the kinetics of adsorption in porous layers is very complicated and needs further studies. It was also shown that the Ca ions slightly increased the adsorption of sulphate at pH 8.5 probably caused by an increase of the surface charge. The Hjalmar Lundbom Research Centre (HLRC) is greatly acknowledged for the financial support. The online version of this article contains additional supporting material. Please visit 