Chrome ore properties play a critical role in various pelletisation subprocesses (grinding, filtering, pelletisation and sintering) and slight variation in ore properties significantly affect the whole pelletisation process. Three ore samples (sample-A, B and C) were collected from different working faces of a chromite ore mine. Experiments were carried out to find out the difference in grinding (Inherent ore granulometry, ore hardness, ore grindability and friability), pelletisation (green pellet strength, balling time and pellet size) and sintering (pellet strength and porosity) characteristics of these ore samples. Chemical analysis and microscopic studies of the ore samples and pellets were also carried out to identify the cause of difference in pelletisation characteristics of ore samples. These differences were mainly caused by ore genesis process, degree of weathering and mining method. Results of the study show that the ores collected from different working faces of a mine show the significant difference to unstabilize the process with degraded product quality. It was found that blending could be a suitable option to tailor the desired grade feed for steady process efficiency and product quality with proper natural resource utilization.Ferrochrom is produced in submerged arc furnace (SAF) by carbothermic smelting reduction process. Chromite ore fines (0–25 mm) are commonly used to produce sintered pellets to use in ferrochrome production process. In the chrome ore pelletisation process chromite ore along with 4–5% coke is milled in the wet ball mill and filtered ore cake is mixed with bentonite and used for production of green pellets. The vertical shaft furnace is used for sintering (drying, preheating, sintering and cooling) of green pellets at the temperature ~ Physical properties of ores, especially hardness, friability and grindability play a vital role in grinding to achieve the desired fineness for pelletisation process ( Objective of the study to investigate the effect of variation in chromite ore properties on the pelletisation process. Samples were collected from three different working faces of a chromite mine and these samples were compared in context of various pelletisation subprocesses. Experiments were carried out to know the pelletisation characteristics of the ores to tailor a suitable ore feed, which can stabilize the plant productivity and pellet quality. Experimental studies were carried out to identify the suitability of these ores for grinding, filtering, pelletisation and sintering process. The experimental work plan is shown in Three most occurring ores were selected from the working site of chromite mines for the studies. The ore samples were classified in three categories named A, B and C based on the physical description given in Ore grinding is required to convert the 0–25 mm ore into finer size. The filter cake should contain > Friability of ores can be determined by brittleness tests. The test apparatus used by H.T. Ozkahraman to test the friability of limestone was used with modified parameters (Drop weight: 14 kg, size: 0–15 mm, sample weight: 500 g, no. drop: 15; test-sieve: 74 µm) for investigated chromite ore samples ( Grindability tests were carried out in a ball mill (Ø Where: Bond work index (kWht Test-sieve mesh size (µm); Weight of the test-sieve fresh undersize per mill revolution (g min Test-sieve mesh size passing 80% of the feed before grinding (µm) and Test-sieve size passing 80% of the last-cycle sieve undersize product (µm). The ore samples of 0–25 mm were grounded and fine material was prepared with 60%, of < A mixture of fine chrome ore (880 g with 60%, < Chemical analysis of the ore samples is shown in In the size analysis of samples, as shown in The specific gravity and hardness of the ore also play a vital role in grinding and for the investigated ore classes specific gravity vary between 3.28 and 4.15 and sample ‘A’ shows maximum specific gravity. Hardness of the ores was found between 4 and 6.5 on Mohs hardness scale and sample ‘A’ shows maximum hardness. In the microscopic analysis ( Fine grinding needs huge energy as well as higher media consumption and it depends on the characteristics of the ore. Comparative analysis of grinding properties are shown in the The pellet diameter and green strength of pellets prepared by the mixture of ore fines, bentonite and water was measured. In the Sintered pellet strength varies between 53 to 83 kg/pellet. ‘A’ type ores shows maximum pellet strength and ‘B’ type ores show highest porosity with lowest sintered pellet strength. ‘C’ type ore pellets have lowest porosity as well as moderate strength. During the sintering, bentonite and other silicate present in chromite ore reacts at high temperature and form a liquid phase. The properties of liquid phase depend on its composition (SiO Physical and chemical composition of the ores control the grinding, filtering, pelletisation and sintering characteristics and to optimize the process performance it is necessary to prepare a ore blend which contain the minimum amount of all the digestive ingredients for all the subprocess. The objective of grinding operation is to produce desired size(> The performance of pelletisation process and quality of produced pellets depend on ore characteristics and small variation in ore characteristics drastically affect the plant productivity as well as quality of pellets. Chemical as well as physical properties of ores depend on ore genesis process, degree of ore body weathering and mining methods. Three chromite ore samples were studied and found that the size distribution, friability, grindability, and hardness of the ores control the fineness and power consumption in grinding process. Softer and fine-grained ores with optimum quantity of silica and chromite content (A type) can improve grinding operation. The chemical composition of the ore play decisive role in pelletisation and sintering operation. High-grade ores (B type) with low SiO