Ammonium paratungstate was prepared from tungsten alloy swarf employing anodic dissolution in sodium hydroxide using a packed bed configuration followed by chemical conversion into ammonium tungstate through tungstic acid. The alkaline tungstate solution was dialysed to recover sodium hydroxide, which could be recycled to the electrolytic dissolution. The influence of anodic current density and other parameters on dissolution/recovery was studied and discussed. It was observed that a current density of 600 mA/100 g scrap could be applied when the concentration of NaOH was maintained around 2.5 M. The energy consumption for anodic dissolution was 2.14 kWh/kg W with more than 90% recovery achieved. XRD studies indicated that the exhausted scrap contained an alloy of nickel and iron with a very low percentage of tungsten. APT sample prepared through anodic dissolution in NaOH was characterized.Tungsten is one of the most highly refractory metals and finds extensive applications such as incandescent lamp filaments, heating elements in high temperature furnaces, electronic heaters, X-ray emission tubes, TIG welding electrodes etc. The metal is structurally useful because of its very high strength to weight ratio above 1370 °C. Tungsten in the form of alloys and carbides is largely employed in tool industry and also in defence. Ammonium paratungstate (APT) is the intermediate product for the preparation of either tungsten or tungsten carbide or tungsten based materials. APT is a highly crystalline, colourless and water insoluble compound with chemical formula (NH The conventional route to APT is to digest the ore or oxidized scrap in concentrated alkali under high temperature. It is then subjected to chemical methods for the removal of impurities like iron, silica, magnesium and finally tungstic acid is prepared through the formation of calcium tungstate. The compound thus prepared is dissolved in ammonia to form ammonium tungstate. The solution is evaporated and APT is crystallized under optimized conditions ( In the present study, an attempt has been made to prepare APT from tungsten alloy employing anodic dissolution followed by electrodialysis, molybdenum removal, tungstic acid precipitation, dissolution in ammonia and crystallization. The APT was characterised and compared with that of the commercial one. The alloy used was made by mixing W, Mo, Fe and Ni powders heating at about 1300 °C in the presence of hydrogen and finally annealed in vacuum at around 1000 °C. The resultant alloy was composed of tungsten particles cemented within an alloy matrix of nickel and iron. Tungsten alloy scrap in the form of turnings was employed for all the experiments. The scrap was cleaned to remove all dirt, oil etc. and then used. The composition of the fresh scrap was W–88%, Ni–7.5%, Fe–4%, Mo–0.3%, while that of once leached scrap was around 74.6%. For anodic potential measurements the electrolytic cell set up consisted of a perforated PVC anode basket (dia 5 cm) packed with the scrap with a graphite rod as the current lead and a stainless steel (SS) sheet cathode of size 5 cm The longer duration experiments were carried out in a similar set up, but larger in size. A cylindrical PVC tank (20 cm dia For continuous runs, fresh sodium hydroxide was fed from an overhead tank and the outlet containing sodium tungstate and sodium hydroxide was collected. The flow rate was adjusted so as to maintain 100 g/L Na Sodium hydroxide was regenerated employing a two compartment cell separated by Nafion (400 series) cation exchange membrane with SS cathode and catalytic oxides coated titanium anode. Cleaned tungsten alloy scrap with an exposed geometrical surface area of 0.3 cm The sodium tungstate solution was subjected to molybdenum removal step employing sodium hydrogen sulphide as described elsewhere ( All the chemicals employed in small scale experiments were of analytical grade. The measurements were carried out at ambient temperature.  In case of sodium hydroxide electrolyte, the following three anodic reactions are likely to happen ( At very low concentration, the predominant reaction is oxygen evolution according to the anodic reaction (1). At a concentration above 60 g/L, reactions The relationship between current density and anode potential in different alkaline electrolytes employing either fresh or partly leached scrap keeping other electrolytic parameters constant is depicted in In general, it could be understood that the anodic reaction depends on the free concentration of sodium hydroxide as well as the composition of the scrap. Fresh scrap (∼ 90% W) exhibits a linear increase in 100 g/L sodium hydroxide electrolyte with minimum rise of overpotential with increase in current density (curve 1), while the partly leached scrap (∼ 70–75% W) exhibited the same trend with a slightly higher slope (curve 5). The addition of NaCl (10 g/L) in the electrolyte increases the slope and above 400 mA/100 g current density the curve deviates from the straight line (curve 2). The slopes of the other two (curves 3 and 4) are still higher when the electrolyte contained 100 g/L Na It appears that when free sodium hydroxide is 100 g/L the dissolution occurs with ease. When free alkali is reduced the dissolution is retarded. Regarding the influence of chloride, the curve deviates from the straight line above a specific current density, may be due to shift in flade potential to the negative side. The formation of hypochlorite ion, is also a probable anodic reaction according to From the graph it could be inferred that one can safely apply a current density of 600 mA/100 g, when fresh scrap is employed.  The reason for the shift in the slope in case of curve 2 of The typical results of experiments are presented in It is evident that extraction of tungsten is possible with a current efficiency > The table also indicates the decrease in bulk density with repeated processing. When fresh scrap is subjected to anodic dissolution (I time), the composition is reduced to ∼ 70% W with steep fall in bulk density from 2.8 to 1.00 g/cc. When the scrap is further subjected to anodic dissolution (II and III time), the composition reached a value of ∼ 20% W with bulk density ∼ 0.50. Further dissolution did not affect the bulk density (not indicated in the table).  The sodium tungstate solution obtained by anodic dissolution contains 0.5 to 0.75 M of sodium tungstate and 1.5 M of sodium hydroxide. The major portion of free sodium hydroxide was separated by electrodialysis so as to reduce the consumption of hydrochloric acid used for neutralization in the later stage of the process. The sodium hydroxide generated was reused for anodic dissolution. Electrical energy consumption for producing NaOH in this process is higher than that achieved in NaCl electrolysis (2.25 kWh/kg NaOH) in modern membrane cells. The energy could be reduced if cascading system and hydrogen consuming anode are employed as in the case of sodium sulphate electrolysis (  It could be inferred that APT prepared via sodium hydroxide is almost at par with the commercial APT. X-ray diffraction patterns of the APT prepared from the scrap showed it was essentially identical to commercial APT tetrahydrate. Anodic dissolution could advantageously be employed for dissolving tungsten from tungsten alloy scrap. The energy consumption for dissolution in NaOH electrolyte is approx. 2 kWh/kg. The addition of NaCl to NaOH electrolyte is not advantageous in the dissolution. Recycling of NaOH obtained through electrodialysis is possible. The APT prepared was of commercially acceptable quality. The authors thank Prof. A.K. Shukla, Director, CECRI, Karaikudi, for his keen interest in this work and Department of Mines, New Delhi for their financial support.