Hydrogen and carbon monoxide mixtures are main reducing agents for gaseous direct reduction (DR) processes. In the present study, volume change of pellet reduced in H2–CO mixtures at 800–1000°C was examined with a novel consecutive imaging method. Results showed that pellet expansion intensified with temperature and CO content in atmosphere and it reached the maximum at reduction degree of 20%–40% due to the formation of massive wüstite phase. Pellet in H2 rich atmospheres passed the wüstite stage rapidly and swelling consequently weakened. Iron whiskers that formed in the later reduction stage led to persistent swelling as pellet reduced by CO. However, pellets contracted obviously in H2 containing atmospheres for the collection of iron phase in the later. Compressive strength of pellets during reduction dropped to be the lowest in 10–20min. And the time for pellets remained in the “low strength zone” (<500N/P) prolonged with temperature and CO proportion in reducing gas, which showed good correlation with their swelling behavior.Volume swelling of iron ore pellets accompanied with strength decrease appears commonly during reduction. In order to ensure permeability and operation in shaft furnace smelting processes, the maximum swelling index of pellet is always required to be no more than 20% Edstrom tried to figure out the volume change and cause as well as the reduction degree of pellet firstly and concluded that swelling would, in any case, occur during the reduction process of hematite and the expansion would continue to the formation of wüstite. The volume change of pure hematite along with reduction can be described as Fe Swelling of iron ore pellets was proved to be influenced by many factors of reducing gas, temperature, reduction degree, raw material composition, etc. A. A. El-Geassy It can be noticed that only few researchers studied swelling of iron oxide during reduction with H Iron ore pellet sample supplied by a domestic pelletizing plant (China) was used in this work. The elemental composition of iron ore pellets is shown in  High purity (99.99%) H Swelling behavior of pellet during reduction process was examined in a custom made horizontal tube furnace as shown in The volume swelling indexes (SI) during reduction process were calculated based on the frontal cross-sectional area change, which can be expressed by Eq. Compressive strength of reduced pellet was tested by the following procedure. Firstly, pellets were reduced for a certain time and then were cooled to room temperature in nitrogen atmosphere. The cooled pellet samples were measured via a material testing machine to obtain their compressive strength change with time during reduction. The morphology of reduced sample was observed by optical microscopy (Leica DMRXP), Scanning Electron Microscope (FEI Quanta-200) equipped with EDS. Phase transformation of iron oxides during reduction was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (RIGAKU, D/Max 2500). And compressive strength (unit: N/P) of the reduced pellet samples was measured with a universal material testing machine (KL-WS). The volume change of pellet during reduction with different reducing gases at 800–1000 From In XRD analysis was carried out to determine the iron oxide phase composition of the maximum swelled pellets in different reducing gases as shown in It is noteworthy that the contraction of pellets in the late reduction stage differed widely with reducing gas. As shown in The SEM image in The volume change of pellet during reduction at different temperatures was given in Effect of temperature on the maximum swelling index of pellet and its reduction degree was shown in The maximum swelled pellets that formed at 800 The compressive strength of pellets during reduction process was shown in It is worth noting that there were two differences in pellet strength change with the variation of atmosphere. To be first, the strength of pellet reduced by CO was always lower than that of H Effect of reducing gas and temperature on the volume swelling behavior of pellet was examined. Compressive strength of pellet during reduction was also tested. Optical microscope, SEM and XRD analyses were carried out to understand the volume change mechanism of pellet along with reduction process. The following conclusions can be drawn from this work: Volume swelling of pellet intensifies with temperature and the CO content in atmosphere and it reaches the maximum at reduction degree range of 20%–40%. Formation of massive wüstite phase during reduction causes the volume swelling. But pellet passes the wüstite stage rapidly and swelling consequently weakens in H Due to the formation of iron whiskers pellet keeps expansion state in the later stage as reduced by CO. However, pellets contract obviously in H Compressive strength of pellets drops to be the lowest in 10–20 The authors would like to express thanks to the