An environmentally friendly approach for the treatment of an acid effluent was proposed in this study, and the comprehensive treatment of an acid effluent containing antimony and arsenic was initiated by selective reduction and evaporative crystallization. Antimony was selectively recovered from the effluent by reduction using iron powder as reductant. The effects of temperature, iron dosage, and stirring speed on the reduction process were investigated, and the mechanism of antimony reduction prior to arsenic reduction was also studied from the viewpoints of thermodynamics and kinetics. The changes in potential during the reduction process and the cyclic voltammetry of the effluent demonstrated that reduction of H3AsO4 to HAsO2 occurred more easily than that of the other components of the effluent. The comparative assessment of reduction by nano iron powder and the SEM-EDS analysis of reduction product indicated that the kinetics of arsenic reduction were poor. Therefore, antimony was reduced faster than arsenic and recovered prior to arsenic. The effluent after antimony removal was disposed by evaporative crystallization. After evaporative crystallization, most of the hydrochloric acid was recycled and arsenic in the effluent was crystallized.Arsenic is generally associated with sulfide ores in nature and acts as a harmful element in production ( The comprehensive treatment of acid effluent was investigated in this study. The mechanism of selective reduction of antimony from arsenic by iron powder was investigated, and the effluent after antimony removal was treated by evaporative crystallization. The acid effluent, obtained from the Cleaner Metallurgical Engineering Research Center based in Central South University, was used as raw material in this study, the concentrations of the main metallic ions in this effluent were detected by inductive coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES, PS-6, Baird, USA). Besides, the pH value and potential of the effluent were measured by a potential-pH meter (PHS-3E, INESA, China). The composition of the acid effluent is listed in Reagents used in our experiment were iron powder (AR, Xilong Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, China) and nano iron powder (AR, Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd, China). The equipment used for the experiment included a thermostat water bath (DF-101B, YUHUA, China), constant speed stirrer (JJ-1B-200w, Jintan Xunsheng Instrument, China), and other auxiliary devices. The main reactions in this study were integrated and shown in the superimposed Eh-pH diagrams for Sb-H The effluent (200 mL) was added to a beaker and stirred at 500 rpm by the constant speed stirrer. When the desired temperature was reached, the given amount of iron powder was added into the beaker, where the dosage of iron powder added was calculated by the equation In this section, the effects of iron dosage (ID =3.14 g, 3.77 g, 4.40 g, and 5.03 g), system temperature (ST=25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, and 85 °C) and stirring speed (SS=200 rpm, 400 rpm, 600 rpm, and 800 rpm,) on the reduction process are discussed. The experimental results are shown in From the results shown in The surface of the product particles obtained at 25 °C was comparatively smooth, while the surface of particles obtained at 85 °C was fluffy. The product layers did not attach themselves to the surface of iron particles and were easily peeled off at high temperature. Consequently, the reduction process was not blocked physically ( The products obtained at different reduction times under specific conditions, including iron dosage =4.40 g, stirring speed=400 rpm, and temperature=25 °C, were analyzed by the ICP-AES. The trends of Sb, Fe and As contents in the products are listed in In order to study why the reduction of antimony prior to that of arsenic, the partial density of states (PDOS) of these reactants was studied by Materials Studio. The structures of the HAsO PDOS analysis indicated that the peak locations of the outer orbits (s, p and d) of HAsO The potential of the effluent, which could indicate the reactions occurring in the reduction process, can be used to analyze the process. The potential was detected at set intervals in the experiment under the following specific conditions: iron dosage =4.40 g, stirring speed=400 rpm and temperature=25 °C. Pt-sheet was employed as the counter electrode, and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was used as the reference electrode, the potential vs saturated hydrogen electrode (SHE) was equaled to potential (vs SCE) adding 0.244V. Electrochemical tests were carried out in the two-electrode system using an electrochemical workstation (Autolab, PGSTAT302N, Metrohm). The potential and concentrations of antimony and arsenic in the reduction process are shown in The cyclic voltammetry (CV) of the effluent could reflect the electrochemical property of the effluent. For analyzing the effluent using CV, two Pt-sheets were employed as the counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode was used as the reference electrode. Different scan rates were used in the range of -0.3-1.0 V (vs SHE), and the corresponding curves are shown in From the above-mentioned results, it could be concluded that antimony was reduced and separated from the effluent, while the concentration of arsenic remained stable. Overall, when combining the results related to the changes in potential and the CV of the effluent, it can be referred that the reactions of Sb/SbCl To further investigate the mechanism of selective reduction of antimony, the comparative assessment of reduction by iron powder and nano iron powder was conducted under the following specific conditions: iron dosage =4.40 g, stirring speed=400 rpm and temperature=25 °C. The nano iron powder had a larger specific surface area than the common iron powder, as seen in  From the above-mentioned results, it can be concluded that the kinetics of arsenic reduction by iron powder were poorer than that of antimony. Consequently, antimony can be selectively recovered from the effluent by reduction using the iron powder. After the reduction of antinomy by the iron powder under certain conditions, there existed 1.3 g/L of arsenic, 9.7 g/L of iron, and 9.9 g/L of sulfur left in the effluent. Therefore, the effluent needed to be treated further. The iron powder was added into the effluent to recover arsenic for cost consideration. The effect of the ID, ST, and SS on the reduction process were studied. In consideration of the electrochemistry and potential of the effluent, arsenic was present in the form of HAsO According to The acid concentration of the effluent after antimony removal was 3.16 mol/L. If neutralization had been adopted, a large amount of alkali would have been needed while the hydrochloric acid in effluent would have been wasted. Evaporative crystallization would be a rational method, because hydrochloric acid can be easily volatilized when heated, and the arsenic and iron can be crystallized by vaporizing the solvent. For the evaporative crystallization of the effluent, a certain volume of the effluent was placed in a round-bottom flask, which was heated in a constant temperature oil bath (370 K). Above the round-bottom flask there was a reflux condensing tube linked to the mouth of the flask. The other mouth of the reflux condensing tube was linked to one of the mouths of the three-necked flask, which was used for collecting hydrochloric acid that vaporized from the round-bottom flask and cooled in the reflux condensing tube. In case the hydrochloric acid and arsenic escaped in the form of AsCl By evaporative crystallization, the recovery ratio of hydrochloric acid was more than 92.8%, and the best crystallization ratios of iron and sulfur were 95.36% and 93.86%, respectively. The crystallization ratio of arsenic was relatively low, only 91.30%. Except the rational error, arsenic is easily volatilized and a small amount of arsenic was vaporized in the evaporative crystallization process. The crystals collected from the evaporative crystallization process were iron carbonate hydroxide (Fe Overall，the effluent was first treated using iron powder as the reductant for antimony recovery, and then subjected to evaporative crystallization for the recycling of hydrochloric acid and the crystallization of arsenic, iron and sulfur. The material flow analysis of main elements is presented in It can be observed that 99.5% antimony was recovered from the first process, and the remaining amount was present in the effluent. There were 5.9% arsenic and 22.9% iron in the reduction product, which needed further treatment. Besides, 49.2% iron, referred to the iron in effluent, was added into the effluent in the form of the iron powder. There were 94.1% arsenic and 127.3% iron present in the effluent after the reduction by the iron powder. After evaporative crystallization, 85.9% arsenic and 127.2% iron were enriched in the crystals, and 92.8% hydrochloric acid was recycled. Due to rational error and volatilization, 7.9% arsenic, 7.2% hydrochloric acid, and 5.6% iron were lost.  An environmentally friendly approach for the treatment of acid effluents was proposed in this study. An acid effluent was treated by reduction and evaporative crystallization for comprehensive utilization. Antimony was first recovered from the effluent by reduction. Subsequently, the effluent was treated by evaporative crystallization for hydrochloric acid recycling and arsenic crystallization. Antimony was recovered from the effluent in the form of metal prior to arsenic due to the difference in kinetics of reduction by iron powder. The reduction rate of antimony by iron powder was higher than that of arsenic. Besides, temperature had a significant effect on the reduction of antimony and arsenic by iron powder. The particles of the reduction product obtained at a low temperature were smooth, while the particles obtained at a high temperature were fluffy and loose. More than 99% antimony recovery with less than 5.9% arsenic was obtained at certain conditions. The changes in potential during the reduction process, CV of the effluent, PDOS of the reacting molecules, and SEM-EDS of the product, were studied to investigate the mechanism of reduction process from the viewpoints of thermodynamics and kinetics. The conclusions drawn from these analyses proved that the antimony was reduced first by iron powder. The effluent after antimony removal was treated by evaporative crystallization. More than 92.8% hydrochloric acid was recycled. Arsenic, iron and sulfur were crystallized in the forms of iron carbonate hydroxide (Fe This work was carried out with the financial support of the