The paper presents results of investigations into production of perrhenic acid from aqueous solutions of ammonium perrhenate of concentration 25 g/L by solvent extraction method. It was demonstrated that perrhenic acid can be obtained by extraction of ReO4
                     − with 50% tributyl phosphate (TBP) solution in toluene from aqueous solution of ammonium perrhenate acidified with sulphuric(VI) acid to pH of 1.0 and further stripping of ReO4
                     − from organic phase by water of temperature 80 °C. Complete separation of rhenium from ammonium ions was possible after repeated extraction and repeated stripping. In the result perrhenic acid of concentration about 70 g/L Re was obtained, which then was concentrated to reach the level of 300 g/L Re. Thus produced perrhenic acid of concentration 300 g/L Re contained no more than 0.01 g/L of impurities composed of metal (sodium, potassium, magnesium) and ammonium ions.Rhenium is one of the rarest elements in nature ( The objective of this study was to obtain high purity perrhenic acid of rhenium concentration above 300 g/L by solvent extraction method. The idea was to check whether it is possible to obtain perrhenic acid by selective extraction of rhenium (in a form of ReO Within the scope of the investigations seven organic extractants were tested. Their selection was based on literature data ( The rhenium stripping was conducted with: hot water, 15–30% ultra pure hydrogen peroxide (manufactured by POCh, Gliwice), 10–15% ultra pure hydrochloric acid (manufactured by POCh, Gliwice), ultra pure 10–15% sulphuric(VI) acid (manufactured by POCh, Gliwice) and ultra pure 10–65% nitric(V) acid (manufactured by POCh, Gliwice). All the tests were conducted with application of synthetic aqueous ammonium perrhenate solutions, which were obtained by dissolving 99.99% purity NH Investigations into selection of an extractant for ReO The method used in experiments was as follows: 50 mL of extractant was added to 50 mL of synthetic ammonium perrhenate solution, and the whole volume was intensely stirred for 30 min at room temperature. The mixture was then poured into separation funnel and after several minutes delaminated phases were separated and their volume was measured. Organic phases were collected (for stripping studies), and aqueous phases were analyzed for rhenium and ammonium ions content. The investigations into influence of individual parameters on efficiency of rhenium and ammonium ions extraction were conducted with selected in preliminary investigations extractants (50% solutions of TBP and Aliquat 336 in toluene) only. The range of examined pH was 1 to 5. Acidification of NH In the investigations into influence of ammonium perrhenate solutions concentration on efficiency of rhenium and ammonium ions extraction, the solutions preliminarily acidified with sulphuric(VI) acid to pH of 1.0 were used. Examinations of ammonium perrhenate concentration influence on extraction efficiency were performed at concentrations of ammonium perrhenate solutions from 5.0 to 50.0 g/L and temperature of 60 °C. The investigations into influence of aqueous/organic (A/O) volumetric ratio on extraction of rhenium and ammonium ions were conducted using ammonium perrhenate solution of concentration 25 g/L, acidified with sulphuric(VI) acid to pH For all obtained results (with respect to rhenium and ammonium ion concentrations in aqueous phase) rhenium and ammonium extraction coefficients were calculated, as well as their extraction efficiencies and rhenium versus ammonium selectivity coefficients. In the tests the first organic phase originated from ammonium perrhenate solution extraction by 50% TBP solution and the second one by 50% Aliquat 336 solution. Before extraction the ammonium perrhenate solution (25 g/L) was acidified with sulphuric(VI) acid to pH of 1.0. The extraction was conducted at temperature 60 °C, and volumetric ratio of aqueous to organic phase was 1:1. The samples of the subjected to stripping organic phases had the composition as presented in The investigation was carried out according to the following procedure: 100 mL of 50% TBP in toluene was added to 100 mL of 25 g/L ammonium perrhenate solution and acidified with sulphuric(VI) acid to pH All analyses were carried out in Analytical Chemistry Department of Institute of Non-Ferrous Metals. Rhenium was determined gravimetrically ( The results obtained from preliminary investigations into rhenium and ammonium ions extraction from aqueous ammonium perrhenate solutions using various extractants are presented in Comparative tests of various extractants has shown that the highest rhenium recovery (above 99.9%) was reached for 50% Aliquat 336 solution in toluene. Slightly lower results were reached with Cyphosil 164 (99.4%). This extractant, however, extracted also ammonium ions with high efficiency (93.7%). Significantly lower rhenium extraction efficiencies were obtained when trioctylamine, methyl ethyl ketone, and Cyanex 923 were used. As it turned out, the most selective extractant of rhenium with respect to ammonium ions is 50% Aliquat 336 solution in toluene. It extracted ammonium ions with extraction efficiency of 1.6%, while rhenium was extracted with efficiency of 99.9%. Promising results were also obtained with TBP — in a pure form and in a form of solutions in toluene. Rhenium extraction efficiencies with TBP were high (79.1 and 80.1% for pure form and for toluene solution, respectively), and Re/NH 50% (vol.) Aliquat 336, because of the highest rhenium extraction efficiency and very high coefficient of extraction selectivity of rhenium versus ammonium ions; 50% (vol.) TBP, because of relatively high rhenium extraction efficiency and satisfying selectivity coefficients. In the next investigations the most advantageous pH for conducting efficient rhenium extraction was examined. Results of studies into influence of pH on efficiency and selectivity of rhenium extraction with 50% solutions of TBP and Aliquat 336 in toluene are presented in High rhenium extraction recovery was reached for toluene solution of Aliquat 336, which extracted rhenium at the level of 99.9%, from solutions acidified with sulphuric(VI) acid, hydrochloric acid and nitric(V) acid — in the whole analyzed pH range. That extractant presented also high selectivity coefficient of extraction of rhenium versus ammonium ions. However, ammonium ions extraction efficiency and, as a consequence, Re/NH For 50% TBP solution in toluene, high rhenium extraction recovery (99.9%) was reached and at the same time the highest selectivity coefficient of rhenium versus ammonium ions obtained (about 10,000), when the extraction was conducted from NH The next tests were aimed for determination of influence of ammonium perrhenate solution concentration on extraction efficiency. The results of investigations into rhenium extraction when 50% TBP solution in toluene was used are presented in High rhenium extraction recoveries were reached for TBP and Aliquat 336 in the whole examined range of NH Extractions were conducted with 50% TBP and 50% Aliquat 336 in toluene. The results of the studies into influence of phases ratio on extraction efficiency for 50% TBP solution in toluene are presented in High rhenium extraction efficiencies (99.9%) were obtained when the ratio of aqueous phase volume to the volume of organic phase was in the range from 1:2 to 1:1. When the ratio of those phases was 3:2 rhenium extraction degree went down to 84.1%. Similar tendency was observed for 50% Aliquat 336 solution in toluene — 99.9% rhenium extraction degree was reached at the ratio of aqueous phase volume to the volume of organic phase varying from 1:2 to 3:2. Decrease of rhenium recovery to 88.4% was observed when the ratio was 4:2. Therefore extraction of rhenium from NH The objective of this part of the study was to determine conditions for stripping of rhenium from the extractants, i.e. 50% toluene solutions of TBP and Aliquat 336, to aqueous phases. The stripping operation should produce aqueous perrhenic acid solution of the possibly highest rhenium concentration and the lowest ammonium ions content. Therefore the stripping should not only be effective (efficient, quantitative if possible), but also selective (the point is mainly to avoid transfer of ammonium ions do aqueous phase). The results of investigations into stripping of rhenium and ammonium ions with various agents to aqueous phase are presented in From the obtained results it can be observed that stripping of rhenium (from 50% TBP solution in toluene) to aqueous phase was efficient when hot water was used and when hydrogen peroxide or hydrochloric acid were applied. The rhenium stripping efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 100%. Unfortunately, in those conditions also intensive ammonium ions stripping was observed. For practical reasons it was decided to conduct the stripping from toluene TBP solutions with hot water, since when using that agent the lowest degree of ammonium ions stripping was reached (8.3%). In fact, hydrogen peroxide solutions were slightly more efficient but brought slow degradation of the extractant. Application of HCl solutions was also not especially advantageous — it was not possible to obtain high purity perrhenic acid free from chloride ions. When 50% Aliquat 336 solution in toluene was used, stripping of rhenium from organic phase to aqueous phase was not possible at all. The best result was obtained when 65% nitric(V) acid was used. However, even in those conditions only 30% of the rhenium present was recovered. Application of more concentrated HNO Previous results showed that complete separation of rhenium from ammonium ions in the process of single extraction and stripping is not possible. Therefore investigations into possibility of obtaining pure perrhenic acid (containing less than 0.001 g/L of ammonium ions) by repeated extraction – hot water stripping process using tributyl phosphate – were conducted. The results of the performed tests show that repeated extraction with 50% solution of TBP in toluene and stripping with hot water makes complete separation of rhenium from ammonium ions possible. Application of the procedure presented in Within the scope of the study new extractive method for obtaining perrhenic acid from aqueous ammonium perrhenate solutions was developed. It was established that when applying repeated extraction of rhenium with 50% tributyl phosphate in toluene from aqueous ammonium perrhenate solution acidified with sulphuric acid to pH of 1.0, and stripping of rhenium from organic phase at temperature of 80 °C it is possible to obtain perrhenic acid of rhenium concentration 70 g/L. Thus obtained acid was about fourfold concentrated to obtain perrhenic acid of concentration 300 g/L Re, which contained no more than 100 ppm of impurities composed of metal (sodium, potassium, magnesium) and ammonium ions. This work was supported by The State Committee for Scientific Research, Project No. 3T 08 A 049 28.