In hydrometallurgy and in nuclear industry several methods are commonly used for the extraction of metal ions from waste water. These methods include inter alia solvent extraction [ IFF is an ion-extraction process, first reviewed by Sebba in 1959 [ AKYPO was used in previous works to generate foams under continuous bubbling during several hours as a good collector for IFF and to separate dissimilar ions at fixed Monocharged cations, such as Li Surfactants with strong ion-chelating polar heads, such the diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) [ A similar approach proposed by Warr et al. was to use mixtures of foaming surfactants and chelating agents, such as crown ethers that show ion complex selectivity towards monovalent cation depending on the size of the crown cavity [ In the present work the main definitions of flotation parameters such as the transport, pollution, recovery and enrichment factors are reminded and for some of them reformulated compared to expressions found in the literature. Many of these parameters have been previously described such as those described by Ion foam flotation with AKYPO® was also investigated for two applications depending on the range of metal ion concentration: (i) metal ion extraction for high metal ion concentrations, i.e. in the millimolar and submillimolar range, and (ii) waste water treatment for low metal ion concentrations in the range of traces and ultra-traces (micromolar range). Depending on the application concerned, the pertinent efficiency parameters to be discussed are different: (i) transport and interfacial recovery factors for metal ion extraction and (ii) pollution factor and the final bulk metal ion concentration for waste water treatment. AKYPO® RO 90 VG (nonaoxyethylene oleylether carboxylic acid, R-O-(CH Neodymium nitrate (Nd(NO The setup for For the electrode calibration, 50 mL of ultrapure water (18 MΩ) measured with a glass pipette were placed into the thermostated reactor at 20 °C. The reactor was then closed with its glass lid. For the thermodynamic constants determination (acidic and complexation constants) the global setup stays the same. Sodium hydroxide increments become 10 μL and the composition of the initial solution can varies from surfactant alone, neodymium alone or mixture of both at different ratios. Thermodynamic constants were then determined using Hyperquad software. All titration curves were performed with an initial volume of titrated solution of 50 mL. Precise concentration of the acidic solution was determined using analytical sodium hydroxide solution (0.1 M NaOH Fixanal, Fluka Analytical). Speciation diagrams were computing using the thermodynamic constants with the The apparent logarithmic acid dissociation constant for the surfactant, Note that the critical micelle concentration of AKYPO ranges from 2.7 to 17 μM depending on Surfactant concentration was checked by Total Organic carbon titration [ Neodymium concentrations were determined by Ionised Coupled Plasma analysis [ The analysis of foam structures was performed using a Foamscan instrument (Teclis, Longessaigne France) and the attached analysis software. For this instrument, optical and conductometric measurements allows to characterize the foam formation and large scale structure, the drainage of the liquid and the stability of the foam. The sample cell is a square glass column of 625 mm Foaming solutions were prepared by dissolving the industrial surfactant AKYPO® RO 90 VG in ultrapure water (18 MΩ) to reach a concentration of 0.5 mM (initial Flotation solutions were prepared by dissolving (i) the industrial surfactant AKYPO® RO 90 VG at a concentration of 0.5 mM in ultrapure water (18 MΩ) and (ii) neodymium nitrate at two different concentrations, namely 0.166 mM and 0.5 mM, to be respectively in stoichiometric [ For a semi-batch flotation experiment where foam is retrieved continuously until the solution stops foaming, the overall volume balance is given by: The overall mass balance for a solute The quantity transferred from the solution to the foam ( The term The term The extraction of a solute Substituting Eq. Then replacing Eq. The recovery efficiency appears here as the sum of two other efficiency parameters (both positive and inferior to 1): the first term, While It is important to note here that Eqs. The first condition (i) has been verified by two complementary methods. On the one hand, it has been shown previously by neutron scattering that the stationary state for AKYPO foams is reached within 15 min, after starting the foaming process, which is negligible compared to the duration of a flotation experiment, around 6 h [ The second condition (ii) is satisfied for high surfactant/ion association constants and a metal ion concentration in bulk of at least 1/3 of the surfactant concentration. In the following work the experiments were conducted within the validity limits: AKYPO®/Nd association constants are high (see below in In the specific removal of toxic metal ions from aqueous liquid wastes, a decontamination factor The inverse of the decontamination factor can be called pollution factor This factor is sometimes called flotation recovery, extent of removal, residual factor or removal rate [ Another important efficiency parameter is the enrichment factor  During a flotation experiment, solutes and a part of the water are extracted from the foaming solution within the foam. This is quantified by a transport factor This factor gives important information on the mechanisms and the effectiveness of extraction and concentration. This factor is closely linked to the liquid fraction of the foam ( The use of all the efficiency factors defined above allows to completely characterize a flotation experiment. These factors are interdependant and a generalised flotation equation can then be established: This equation allows to rationalise the ion foam flotation process underlining the interrelationship of the extraction parameters. The efficiency of the extraction process by flotation is then characterized by: (i) a good decontamination of the initial solution (1 − The extraction mechanism of a cationic metal by an anionic surfactant using ion flotation can be described by an adsorption equilibrium at the liquid-air interface. In the case of neodymium cation, this equilibrium can be expressed: An average interfacial molar ratio We mentioned above that surface excess of the surfactant Γ The average interfacial stoichiometric factor Consequently All the factors described here will be discussed to characterize the Nd foam flotation using the AKYPO® RO 90 VG surfactant as a function of Neodymium flotation with AKYPO® in either stoichiometric conditions ([AKYPO®] = 3[Nd] = 0.5 mM) or equimolar conditions ([AKYPO®] = [Nd] = 0.5 mM) were performed. After measuring the concentration of each species at the beginning and at the end of the semi-batch experiments, the results of the various efficiency factors (R, T, 1-P) for the AKYPO® as well as for the neodymium were calculated as a function of In the stoichiometric condition, the recovery of the foaming agent (black triangles) is nearly 90% (see On the other hand, the recovery of neodymium is strongly dependant on the The efficiency factors for the flotation of neodymium by AKYPO® were also determined by varying First, in order to estimate the AKYPO®/neodymium complexation constants, Between The self-ionisation of water, In a first step, the (i) At least two complexation constants have to be considered to fit the experimental data. With only one constant the experimental data cannot be fitted properly. (ii) If three constants are considered ( Nevertheless the log In a second step, speciation diagrams of neodymium in the presence of the surfactant were produced by taking into account the sets of constants determined in the previous section, (see Fig. S11). These diagrams show that in solution neodymium is predominantly as Nd Although the Surfactant/Nd complexation constants cannot be precisely determined, all the complexes (NdS For stoichiometric conditions ([S] = 3[Nd] = 0.5 mM) the interfacial recovery factor of neodymium as a function of The average interfacial molar ratio The equimolar conditions ([S] = [Nd] = 0.5 mM) change strongly the speciation diagram in solution (see The average interfacial stoichiometric factor Nevertheless, the position of the bell-shape observed in the speciation diagrams ( In summary the main mechanism of neodymium extraction in our experiment is the cation adsorption by electrostatic interactions at the water/air interface within the foam with the surfactant that tends to a complexation in the form of NdS The results described above have demonstrated the feasibility of using AKYPO® RO 90 VG as a foaming collector in order to extract Neodymium(III), in the concentration range of traces ([Nd3+] < 100 mg/L), into a dry foam. The optimum extraction conditions were found in stoichiometric molar ratio (3:1) for A series of flotation experiments was performed to determine the lowest accessible concentration that can be reached in the retentate solution at the end of the flotation process with AKYPO®. A first flotation step in the optimum extraction conditions was performed (stoichiometric conditions: [Nd These results underline the feasibility of using the ion foam flotation process for the recovery of hazardous or precious elements at very low concentrations. Furthermore, in the flotation steps, the transport factor does not exceed 10% which highlights an efficient decontamination of water solution and a production of low volumes of secondary waste. In order to make the ion foam flotation an economical and ecological process it is essential to separate the surfactant from the valuable metal, here neodymium, at the end of the process in the collapsed foam solution. Doyle et al. have previously proposed four different methods for separating metal-surfactant complexes, especially metal-dodecylsulfate complexes, generated by ion flotation [ We have shown that whatever the initial ratio of foaming agent over Nd in the solution and within the working conditions of the IFF described in the methods, we always end up with a concentrate characterized by a 3:1 stoichiometry. Then by diluting this concentrate in 80 mL of acidic solution at Finally, these two processes, extraction of neodymium ultra-traces and surfactant recycling, can be included in a global semi-continuous extraction/separation process (see An attempt was made here to define and clarify the efficiency factors of ion foam flotation (IFF) process with the aim to obtain relevant information on the mechanisms at the molecular level. Four parameters characterizing the flotation efficiency were pointed out: the recovery factor We demonstrate that this kind of process can be applied to selectively extract tricharge cations (Nd We are grateful for the valuable help of S. Faure, M. Dunand, D. Morel, G. Serve and V. Fremy at CEA/LPSD for their help on foam measurements, ICP analysis and This work was supported by the  Figure S1 shows the technical representation of the