Time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) was used to analyse the surface of two different types of pyrochlore, high Fe pyrochlore and low Fe pyrochlore, from Niobec Saint-Honore mine deposit. Pyrochlore grains were analysed in order to identify a potential relationship between pyrochlore matrix composition, the corresponding surface expression and the related effect on cationic collector adsorption. TOF-SIMS analyses of pyrochlore surfaces from a conditioning test show that the species indicative of the cationic collector, favour the surface of Fe poor pyrochlore relative to the Fe rich variety. Lower collector signals on the surface of the Fe-pyrochlore are matched by higher relative intensities of Fe, OH, O and FeOH. The TOF-SIMS results illustrate a negative relationship between a cationic collector adsorption and the presence of Fe and Fe oxidation species on the surface of pyrochlore grains, and supports previous work which identified a negative correlation between matrix Fe content and pyrochlore floatability. The surface analysis illustrates the link between pyrochlore matrix chemistry, the expression of surface species and their effect on collector adsorption.Pyrochlore, the most abundant niobium containing mineral ( Flotation is the preferred and most cost-effective method for pyrochlore recovery ( Numerous experiments were performed on the influence of surfactants and type of water to optimise pyrochlore recovery and grade during flotation ( Recent mineralogical investigations on samples from the rougher banks at the Niobec plant have shown that pyrochlore grains with high Fe content appear to be less recoverable than those with a lower Fe content. The analysis identified that the flotation response is related to matrix (structural) Fe rather than Fe occurring as inclusions within the pyrochlore and suggest that poor floatability is linked to matrix composition ( Surface chemistry is the principal determinant for selective separation of the various mineral phases. With a rise in the complexity of the ores processed by flotation, understanding the reactivity of mineral surfaces in this context is becoming increasingly more important. Advanced surface analytical tools are unique in that they have the capacity to link mineral surface characteristics, to process parameters in order to better understand a flotation response ( The purpose of this study is to investigate the surface chemical factors affecting the adsorption of the cationic collector tallow diamine on both high iron (Fe-pyrochlore) and low iron pyrochlore (pyrochlore). The investigation is a follow-up to previous work where flotation recovery was linked to matrix Fe content. TOF-SIMS was used to explore the possible factors affecting reagent absorption on the pyrochlores. These investigations will potentially aide in modelling molecular interactions of the collector and the pyrochlore surface under specific conditions. The results may be used to select the most suitable commercial reagents to optimise selectivity and recovery, or help to design reagents particularly suited to the mineral in this flotation context. Samples (Fe-pyrochlore and pyrochlore) were obtained from the Niobec mine. In order to evaluate collector adsorption variability and potential causes for identified differences, samples of both high and low Fe pyrochlore were freshly fractured and conditioned with tallow diamine at plant operating conditions. Test conditions were as follows; agitation of the minerals for 10 The instrument used in this work is an ION-TOF, TOF SIMS IV secondary ion mass spectrometer. This technique allows for the analysis of the outermost atomic layers of a surface by mass spectrometry. An isotopically enriched Ion source: 25 Current: ∼0.3 Pulse: 1 Beam spot size: ∼ 1 Raster area: generally 300 Mass range: 1–850 Mass resolution: 10,000 Sample charging was neutralised with an electron flood gun. Prior to analysis of the test samples, TOF-SIMS mass spectra of unconditioned freshly fractured high and low Fe pyrochlore grains, and tallow diamine were obtained. All raw spectra were processed using the IONTOF software. Peaks in the calibrated spectra were assigned to specific isotopes in accordance with their atomic mass unit (amu) and similarly peaks reflecting molecular species of the collector were assigned mass positions. The corrected ion intensity for each mass position, measured as the integrated area under each peak corrected for dead times can be related to abundance of the particular specie. In order to compare intensities between areas of different dimensions, corrected intensities were normalised to the total number of counts for the areas examined. The analytical approach was to conduct comparative surface analyses of the different pyrochlore grains in order to determine statistically significant differences in the surface composition of species particularly related to collector adsorption and potential factors affecting adsorption. The analysis provides a comprehensive survey of the surface species on the mineral grains. Samples (Fe-pyrochlore and pyrochlore) were obtained from the Niobec mine. The elemental composition of these samples, determined with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) is shown in TOF-SIMS spectra in the specified mass position representative of the collector, pyrochlore and Fe-pyrochlore, without conditioning, and after conditioning with tallow diamine are given in The correlation between two variables reflects the degree to which the variables are related. The most common measure of correlation is the Pearson Product Moment Correlation (called Pearson’s correlation). The value for a Pearson’s correlation can fall between 0 (no correlation) and 1 (perfect correlation). In order to evaluate the relationship between species identified on the surface of pyrochlore grains Pearson correlations were performed on the species intensity data. Inter-correlations between selected ions on the surface of treated pyrochlore and Fe-pyrochlore grains are given in While the linear correlation data suggests that there is no relationship between collectors and Fe intensity, the relationship is clearly illustrated graphically where intensities of various species on the surface of the pyrochlore grain are compared. A comparison of the normalised intensities of NH The data suggest that Fe-pyrochlore had, on average, less tallow diamine on their surfaces when compared to the low iron content pyrochlore. Moreover, Fe-pyrochlore grains have more Fe along with FeOH, OH and O on their surface, potentially indicative of preferential oxidation or at the very least, a greater proportion of surface oxidation species. These results are in agreement with the previous studies, suggesting that iron oxide/hydroxide can cover the surface of pyrochlore, thereby interfering with collector adsorption ( From this study, it is evident that the surface of Fe-pyrochlore grains contains a greater intensity of species indicative of oxidation relative to the low Fe pyrochlore. In oxide minerals, the magnitude of the negative surface charge is determined by the density of the structural (matrix compound) or adsorbed potential-determining negative ions (i.e. N From these analyses better flotation performance by the low Fe pyrochlore grains is likely in response to the greater proportion of cationic collectors attached to their surface. Their preference for attachment may be related to a higher proportion of near surface negatively charged matrix ions effectively increasing the negative surface charge. Poor collector attachment to the Fe-pyrochlore grain surface may be related to the presence of oxidative species ( Surface composition controls the surface reactivity and consequently plays an important role in determining flotation behaviour of minerals. Surface analysis techniques such as TOF-SIMS allow for a direct ex situ determination of the degree of collector adsorption on the surface of minerals. The present study utilises the TOF-SIMS technique to investigate the adsorption of the cationic collector, tallow diamine, on the surface of different types of pyrochlore (high iron and low iron content). The TOF-SIMS results verify a relationship between pryochlore surface reactivity and Fe content in the mineral matrix. It was demonstrated that the intensity of the oxidative species O, OH and FeOH was greater on the surface of high Fe pyrochlore particles in comparison with low Fe pyrochlore particles. Furthermore the intensity of collector species was significantly higher on the surface of the Fe poor pyrochlore. The link between surface and matrix chemistry is identified. The results from these tests at least partially explain the flotation selectivity of low Fe pyrochlore grains relative to high Fe pyrochlore grains, where preferential surface oxidation favours the high Fe pyrochlores resulting in diminished collector attachment and poor recovery. This work was partially completed with funding provided by the