Extractive recovery of palladium(II) from a hydrochloric acid solution with quaternary phosphonium salt: trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinate (Cyphos®IL 104) as a novel reagent in the presence of toluene has been investigated. Extraction data indicate that Cyphos®IL 104 is a very efficient and fast extractant. The increase in HCl concentration has negative influence on the extraction and 96 and 52% of palladium(II) ions can be effectively extracted with Cyphos®IL 104 from 0.1 and 3.0M HCl, respectively. The equilibrium of palladium(II) extraction from aqueous 0.1 and 3.0M HCl with this phosphonium ionic liquid is achieved after 5min. Extraction of palladium(II) with Cyphos®IL 104 proceeds at the interface according to the anion-exchange mechanism. The best stripping solution from among the studied ones is 0.5M NH4OH. The feasibility of reuse Cyphos®IL 104 in several cycles of extraction-stripping process was also examined. Increase in temperature from 20 to 70°C causes a negligible decrease in the palladium(II) extraction. The calculated values of ΔH°, ΔS° and ΔG° evidence that the extraction of palladium(II) with Cyphos®IL 104/toluene mixture is an exothermic reaction both from 0.1 and 3.0M HCl solutions.In recent years there is a notable increase in the interest in noble metals, especially platinum group metals (PGMs), such as palladium(II), rhodium(III) and platinum(IV) because of a wide range of their industrial applications. They are used as catalysts in organic technology processes, as value added components in metal alloys and as vehicle catalytic converter systems, in jewellery making and also in the chemical, pharmaceutical, petroleum and electronic industries. A gap between the demand and the abundance of limited natural resources must be replenished by recycling of spent materials containing these precious metals ( Recently solvent extraction has become a suitable method for removal of PGMs from low concentrated sources, because it offers a number of advantages such as: high selectivity and metal purity. Besides, more efficient removal of metals is possible by the use of multi-stage extraction ( In recent years, many publications and patents have appeared on synthesis and applications of ionic liquids (ILs). Thanks to their many attractive properties, ILs are used for example as solvents and catalysts in organic reactions, electrolyte in alternate sources of energy, as solvents for extraction of organic compounds and metals ( Up to now trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bis-2,4,4-trimethylpentylphosphinate (Cyphos®IL 104) has been used as a reagent for lactic acid extraction ( Looking for an extractant making fast extraction of palladium(II) ions possible, we have used a mixture of phosphonium ionic liquid and toluene. The aim of this study was to extract palladium(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions of various concentrations with trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bis-2,4,4-trimethylpentylphosphinate (Cyphos®IL 104). Commercially available pure phosphonium ionic liquid produced by Cytec Industries Inc. (Canada) was mixed with toluene (analytically pure, Chempur, Poland) and used as an extractant: Toluene was applied to overcome some drawbacks caused by the high viscosity of IL. Commercial palladium(II) chloride (99%, Aldrich, Switzerland), hydrochloric acid (35–38%, Chempur, Poland), sulphuric acid (98%, ATA Torun, Poland) and ammonia (25%, PPH, POCH SA, Gliwice, Poland) were used to prepare aqueous solutions. In order to examine the stability of Cyphos®IL 104, 5.0 Extraction of palladium(II) was carried out in a typical procedure with 1.0–8.0 Distribution coefficient ( The volumes of phases did not change. Synthesis of palladium(II) complex with extractant Cyphos®IL 104 was proceeded by preparing a weighed portion of 1 The organic phases before and after stirring with hydrochloric acid solution were analyzed using liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry method (HPLC/MS). Mass spectra obtained were similar and prove that Cyphos®IL 104 was stable in the experimental conditions in which palladium(II) extraction was examined ( The of palladium(II) extraction was studied by contacting the aqueous solution containing 5.0 The palladium(II) ions transfer to Cyphos®IL 104 as the organic phase is very fast and the equilibrium is achieved in 5 Extraction of palladium(II) ions from model solutions containing 1.0–8.0 Deterioration of the efficiency of palladium(II) extraction is caused by an increase in palladium(II) content in the feed due to a decrease in the molar ratio of 5.0 Extraction of palladium(II) ions from 0.1 and 3.0 The presented equilibrium data prove that the molar ratios of Cyphos®IL 104 to palladium(II) in ionic pairs formed are different. Palladium(II) is extracted to the IL phase in the form of ionic pairs with a molar ratio extractant/palladium(II) of 1:1 and 2:1 for 0.1 and 3 According to the stability constant data and the results of calculations in the Medusa program, in the acidic system Pd(II) various chlorocomplexes can form, depending on HCl concentration. The major species in the acidic solution containing 0.1 In order to describe the mechanism of palladium(II) extraction with Cyphos®IL 104, the synthesized complex of palladium(II) and extractant was analyzed by at 0.1 at 3.0 The extraction of palladium(II) from the feed containing 0.1 and 3.0 The standard molar enthalpy Δ Simple stripping of palladium(II) with water is not possible due to very strong ionic bonds in the IL phase. Therefore, another stripping solution, forming complexes with palladium(II) strong enough to attract them from IL, should be used. On the basis of the results obtained, 0.5 The ability to regenerate spent IL phases and their reuse in next cycles of palladium(II) extraction is an important ecological as well as economical issue. The successful recovery of palladium(II) with 0.5 The results presented here prove that Cyphos®IL 104/toluene mixture can be successfully used as an extractant for palladium(II) removal from chloride media. Extraction of palladium(II) from chloride media is fast, effective and depends upon hydrochloric acid concentration. Efficiency of palladium(II) extraction amounts to 96 and 52% from 1.0 and 3.0 We thank Cytec Industries Inc. for presenting us with free samples of Cyphos®IL 104. The work was supported with