The electrochemistry of dithiophosphinate (DTPI) adsorption on pyrite was investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transformation (DRIFT) spectroscopy at oxidizing potentials under acid, neutral, and alkaline conditions. CV study showed that the mineral surface was covered by porous ferric oxyhydroxide species. Irreversible DTPI adsorption on the pyrite surface and inhibition of electron transfer to some extent were also observed from electrochemical work. Major collector species were determined from DRIFT spectroscopy study as adsorbed collector compound, DTPI°, and dimer of dithiophosphinate, (DTPI)2. Maximum adsorption density of DTPI was obtained in acid solution. It decreased sharply under neutral and alkaline conditions due to heavy surface oxidation at higher pH.Pyrite is one of the most abundant sulfide minerals in the earth's crust and has semiconducting properties. It is the major gangue of complex sulfide ores as well as coal. It is rejected from the associated sulfides or coal to minimize its contamination of the valuable mineral concentrate or to reduce SO The superficial oxidation of pyrite leads to exposure of sulfur-rich surface, and preferential release of Fe Thiol-type collectors are generally used in sulfide ore flotation. Xanthate is the most abundantly used thiol. It is a powerful collector; however, its selectivity against iron sulfides, such as pyrite, is low. Dialkyl dithiophosphinate (DTPI) is an important collector: it satisfies selectivity against iron sulfides and sphalerite in the flotation of complex sulfide ores such as dithiophosphates (DTP), while it has a strong collecting power similar to that of xanthate This research work was performed to contribute to knowledge on the electrochemical interaction between DTPI and pyrite and to define the adsorbed collector species on mineral surface at high oxidizing potential. Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transformation (DRIFT) spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry (CV) were the tools to establish the surface composition of pyrite. High-purity pyrite crystals (>96% FeS CV study was conducted between the potential ranges of 0 and 1000 mV at a 50 mV/s scan rate, while polarization of the pyrite sample for DRIFT spectroscopy was done at 700 mV using a conventional three-electrode system electrochemical cell ( The working electrode for the CV study was made from a pyrite crystal. The mineral sample was shaped using a silicon carbide wet grinding paper to a rectangular cross section. Then it was mounted in a glass tube with an electrochemically inert epoxy resin. The electrode was connected to the potentiostat using a copper wire. Electrical conductivity between the mineral electrode and the Cu wire was satisfied with Hg. The electrode surface was polished wet using 800-grit silicon carbide paper and then 1-μm diamond paste just before each run to obtain a fresh mineral surface. In the DRIFT spectroscopy study, a platinum spiral electrode of 45 cm length and 0.5 mm diameter was used as a working electrode. The Pt working electrode was connected to the potentiostat with platinum wire. The pyrite sample was ground in an agate mortar and pestle immediately before each polarization work. A 200-mg sample was polarized for 15 min at 700 mV vs SHE in the presence of 10 Electrochemical spectra of pyrite were obtained in the absence and presence of DTPI at pH 9.2 ( H A cyclic voltammogram was also obtained after 15 min polarization at rest potential (215 mV at pH 9.2) to elucidate the effect of polarization on the redox behavior of pyrite ( DTPI did not result in a redox peak over the scanned potential range, as shown in Güler et al. DRIFT spectra of pyrite polarized with 10  The dimer of DTPI was also prepared chemically using I  Large differences are perceived below 900 cm Clear splitting of P DRIFT spectra obtained at pH 9.2 (  Interaction of pyrite with DTPI was investigated at oxidizing potentials by CV and DRIFT spectroscopy. CV exhibited that polarization at rest potential did not affect the electrochemical behavior of pyrite possibly due to formation of a porous ferric oxyhydroxide layer at pH 9.2. DTPI adsorbed irreversibly on pyrite by an electrochemical mechanism and caused passive layer formation. Major surface compounds were found from DRIFT spectroscopy study to be adsorbed collector compound, DTPI°, and dimer of dithiophosphinate, (DTPI)