This paper presents the results of an experimental study together with the first finite element (FE) model for the compressive behavior of fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP)-confined steel fiber-reinforced concrete (SFRC). 73 existing experimental test results of FRP-confined and actively confined SFRC specimens tested under axial compression were initially assembled. Additional axial compression tests were conducted on 16 actively confined SFRC specimens to address the gaps in the existing test database to compile a reliable database for the FE modeling of FRP-confined SFRCs. The analysis of experimental test results revealed that the compressive behavior of FRP-confined SFRCs is influenced by the steel fiber volume fraction and aspect ratio. New expressions were developed for the hoop rupture strain of the FRP jacket, axial strain-lateral strain relationship of FRP-confined and actively confined SFRC, and relationship between the confining pressure and the compressive strength of actively confined SFRC by considering the influences of the volume fraction and aspect ratio of internal steel fibers. A recently developed concrete damage-plasticity model, which was shown to be the most accurate currently available model for confined plain concrete, was adopted for the prediction of the compressive behavior of FRP-confined SFRC. The failure surface and flow rule of the model were modified based on the results from actively and FRP-confined SFRC. The results show that model predictions of the axial stress-axial strain, lateral strain-axial strain, axial stress-volumetric strain, plastic volumetric strain-axial plastic strain, and plastic dilation angle-axial plastic strain relationships are in good agreement with the experimental results of FRP-confined SFRC. The new model provides improved accuracy over the best performing existing models of FRP-confined plain concrete in predicting the behavior of FRP-confined SFRC.The addition of internal steel fibers to concrete is a popular technique that is used for improving the inherent brittle behavior of plain concrete A number of experimental studies have been performed recently to understand the mechanical behavior of FRP-confined SFRCs Finite element (FE) method has been extensively used to accurately model the mechanical behavior of confined plain concrete. Although a relatively large number of studies have been reported on the FE modeling of FRP-confined plain concrete This paper presents the first study on FE modeling of FRP-confined SFRC. Existing experimental test results of FRP-confined and actively confined SFRC specimens tested under axial compression were initially assembled and additional axial compression tests were conducted on actively confined SFRC specimens to address the gaps in the existing test database to provide a reliable database for the constitutive behavior of FRP-confined SFRCs. The new concrete damage-plasticity model with developed failure surface and flow rule is implemented in a FE program ABAQUS The databases of FRP-confined and actively confined SFRCs were assembled based on the results available in the open literature. The FRP-confined SFRC database is composed of specimens confined by three types of FRP materials: carbon FRP (CFRP), glass FRP (GFRP), and aramid FRP (AFRP). FRP confinement was provided by manual wet lay-up technique in the hoop direction. The FRP-confined SFRC database presented in To extend the existing database of actively confined SFRC, four different batches of SFRCs were prepared and confined under hydraulic pressure applied by a Hoek cell. The geometry of the cylindrical specimens was prescribed by the geometry of the Hoek cell (i.e. 63 × 126 mm). Ultra high-strength micro steel fibers with Constant confining pressures ( In specimen labels in  As discussed in detail in Xie and Ozbakkaloglu The expression proposed by Ozbakkaloglu and Lim  Analysis of the test databases of FRP-confined and actively confined SFRC revealed that the steel fiber parameters of  Through the unifying confining pressure gradient concept introduced by Lim and Ozbakkaloglu   As was discussed in Refs.  The FRP-confined SFRC specimens were modeled in FE program ABAQUS using the proposed constitutive model. As was done previously in Refs. As can be seen in   This paper has presented the first FE model to predict the compressive behavior of FRP-confined SFRCs in circular sections. A test database containing 73 datasets from axial compression tests of FRP-confined and actively confined SFRC was assembled based on the results available in the literature. Additional axial compression tests were conducted on 16 actively confined SFRC specimens to address the gaps in the existing test database. The analysis of the experimental test results indicated that the compressive behavior of FRP-confined SFRC is influenced by the steel fiber volume fraction and aspect ratio. Therefore, the model by Lim and Ozbakkaloglu, which was proposed for FRP-confined plain concretes, was extended to predict the compressive behavior of FRP-confined SFRCs by considering the influences of steel fiber volume fraction and aspect ratio. In the proposed model, the hoop rupture strain of the FRP jacket, dilation relationship between axial strain and lateral strain of actively confined and FRP-confined SFRC, and relationship between the confining pressure and the compressive strength of actively confined SFRC were established by modifying the previously proposed models for confined plain concrete. The improved failure surface and flow rule of the concrete damage-plasticity model were achieved by incorporating the effects of steel fiber volume fraction and aspect ratio into the accurate failure surface and flow rule models given for plain concrete in Refs. Because of the influence of the steel fiber parameters on the mechanical behavior of FRP-confined SFRC, the application of the models of FRP-confined plain concrete to predict the behavior of FRP-confined SFRC is not recommended. Therefore, additional targeted studies are recommended on the FRP-confined and actively confined SFRC columns to expand the existing test database to enable the development of additional models for FRP-confined SFRCs with a broader range of applicability, such as those for square and rectangular columns. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the The script code used for the concrete material behavior based on the developed damage-plasticity model. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  This section presents the details of the concrete damage-plasticity method used in this study. The failure surface of the concrete damage-plasticity method is presented by Eq. where Parameter of in which Eq. The non-associated potential flow rule with the plastic potential function ( in which For calculating