Heat and mass transfer to and from a single solution droplet is studied in this work. A new theoretical model to predict the evaporation behaviour of solid containing water droplets is presented. The model, implemented in MATLAB, is used to predict the process of droplet evaporation with prediction results successfully validated against data from the literature. Also, an experimental study was performed to study the evaporation of a single droplet containing NaCl and water. To investigate the influence of concentration, tests were performed with droplet having initial radiuses of approximately 0.5mm and initial mass concentrations of 3% and 5%. Results obtained from the developed model were found to be in good agreement with our experimental data. Finally, it was shown that the current model, allowing for a smooth transition from surface evaporation to crystallisation, is able to simulate the process more accurately compared to existing models in the literature which lead to a, less realistic, sharp transition.surface area Spalding number concentration specific heat vapour diffusion coefficient heat transfer coefficient specific heat of evaporation Knudsen number thermal conductivity mass mass transfer rate molecular weight Nusselt number pressure Prandtl number radial space coordinate radius universal gas constant Reynolds number Schmidt number Sherwood number time temperature volume thermal diffusivity empirical power coefficient volume fraction crust porosity molecular mean free path density crust droplet gas pore solid vapour water wet-core initial condition free stream Liquid sprays are widely applied in engineering applications with cooling towers, evaporators, condensers, and chemical reactors as some examples. The benefit of using these liquid sprays is increasing the contact area to obtain higher total heat and mass transfer between liquid and air. Applying this technique in arid areas, however, faces an obvious challenge of providing pure water. Hence, saline water is being used as an alternative in the spray-assisted dry (hybrid) cooling towers. Heat exchanger surfaces are in exposure of corrosion and deposit formation due to using saline water because of large amount of corrosive ions in water. Therefore, contact of solid containing water droplets in a hybrid cooling tower to the heat exchanger surfaces should be avoided. In other words, evaporation of the droplets should be completed before they reach the heat exchanger surfaces. Beginning to evaporate, the evaporation rate of a solid-containing droplet is the same as that of pure water droplet. However, when the average concentration (mass fraction of the solid divided by the total mass of the droplet) reaches that of saturation, solid formation occurs leading to an increase in the droplet temperature There are models in the literature that assume two stages for droplet evaporation. According to those models, during the first stage of evaporation the main component of the droplet is assumed to be water. The second stage begins when the solid content of the droplet increases, due to water evaporation, and goes beyond a critical concentration value Applying a two-stage model, Abuaf and Staub simulated the latter stage by assuming the droplet as a porous solid crust around a wet core at the centre On top of two-stage models, some researchers showed that three different stages occur during evaporation of a solution droplet Three-stage models assume that the droplet temperature remains constant beyond the wet-bulb temperature. This isothermal stage is then followed by a sharp rise in the droplet temperature to reach the ambient air temperature. Also, a Dalmaz et al. assumed that there is a pure water layer around spherical mixture of water and solid particles It is known that after the third stage, first solid particles form at the bottom of the droplet Recent experimental studies on single droplet have been performed using thin filaments to hold the droplet. The temperature measurements of the droplet was done by using two thermocouples made of two different metals in the experimental study by Qi Lin and Chen The available theoretical models in the literature divide the evaporation of a solid containing droplet into two stages  In view of the above, a process similar to that described by After start of evaporation, depending on the initial temperature of a solid-containing water droplet it stars to heat up or cool down to reach the wet-bulb temperature. Size change in this stage is small compared to the second stage. At this point, the second stage starts and the droplet shrinks gradually. Water content of the droplet evaporates during an approximately isothermal process with a (nearly) constant evaporation rate. As the mass of the droplet decreases the solid concentration increases. This trend continues until the droplet reaches its critical concentration. The critical concentration is different for each solution depending on the properties of the dissolved solid in the droplet. Due to the axisymmetric nature of the droplet and as directional forces (e.g. gravity) are small In order to calculate the heat and mass transfer coefficients at the gas–liquid interface when gas is forced to flow over (and around) the droplet, the correlation suggested by Ranz and Marshall for the case of a solid-containing water droplet may be used The droplet is assumed to be homogenous and, the mean properties for the droplet should be determined in each time-step. The specific heat of the droplet may be evaluated as Assuming that the droplet temperature during the second stage remains constant, as latent heat is dominant compared to sensible heat, the energy balance equation is simplified to For the first and second stage, the governing equations are solved using a Lagrangian formulation of the flow field. A grid with 64 cells in the radial direction is implemented and a fixed time step of 0.5 The fourth stage is characterised by formation of a crust on the surface. The crust is modelled as a porous medium allowing the transfer of water vapour through the pores. While the crust is being thickened, the water content of the droplet continues to evaporate via diffusion through the pores. During the fourth stage, the droplet temperature rises due to formation of the crust and evaporation continues from the shrinking wet core until complete drying. The thermal energy balance for the crust is With In order to consider Stefan’s flow in the pores of the crust, Levi-Hevroni et al. As evaporation continues, the wet-core shrinks while the crust is being thickened. Hence, interface of the crust and the wet-core will move from the surface to the core. In this stage, the described ghost cell approach by Udaykumar et al. A uniform grid distribution with size of 4 During the second stage, which is assumed as an isothermal stage, the water content of the droplet evaporates. As the droplet mass decreases, the solid concentration increases to reach the critical value. Then, the very first solid particles begin to form at the bottom of the droplet To accurately capture the transient crust formation, a weighting factor “ In our modelling, the third stage is divided into two one-dimensional ones which are blended by the weighting factor as illustrated by. Initially, with high  The simulation results were validated through comparison to the experimental results of Nešić and Vodnic The input parameters for their experiment, using colloidal silica droplets, are shown in   In this section, the experimental results for water droplets containing NaCl are presented and compared with those from the 4-stage model. A glass filament which had a spherical knob at the very end was used to hold the droplet. The experiments were conducted in an air-conditioned room. The droplet and the filament were covered using a box to control the air flow rate (which was measured using a hotwire velocity metre) and accurately monitor the effect on the evaporation rate. The droplets were generated with initial concentrations of 3% and 5%. A micropipette with the accuracy of 0.01 As can be seen in the schematic diagram of the test rig ( By using the splitter and the reflector to make sure that the LED light rays passing the droplet are parallel and, thus, the droplet diameter was being recorded correctly. In addition, if after solidification some light beams get scattered away, due to non-spherical shape of the droplet, there are definitely some light beams scattered off the surface. Images were recorded in 10 The images were processed using MATLAB to extract droplet dimensions. Droplet dimensions were determined by fitting an ellipse to the droplet outline. The true liquid volume was determined by subtracting the filament volume from that of the ellipsoid. Our experimental results show that approaching the critical concentration a solid cap starts to form at the bottom of the droplet (as shown in The experimental tests for each initial concentration were repeated three times. The results fell within the respective uncertainty bounds, thereby demonstrating that our laboratory studies are repeatable with a high level of reliability. Following the procedure recommended by Moffat Initial state of the droplet and the ambient air conditions are illustrated in The measured and predicted particle radiuses are shown in As can be seen in Volume of the droplet is shown in  Initial conditions of the tests for 5% initial concentration are stated in  Volume of the droplet for 5% of initial concentration of the salt is plotted in  Three sets of laboratory tests were performed for 3% and 5% initial concentration of NaCl in water using an optical measurement technique. These mass fractions of salt are relevant to evaporation of saline water with the application of spray – assisted dry cooling towers. Also, an advanced theoretical model to predict the evaporation behaviour of single droplets containing dissolved solids has been developed and presented in this study. Single droplets were held in still air using a glass filament to monitor the size change. The advanced model includes an extra stage that simulates the formation of a crust that partially covers the liquid droplet. After verifying the model with available data in the literature as well as the current experimental studies, it was shown that adding this extra stage results in a more realistic simulation of the process. In addition, the numerical results compare better to the experimental data. In the future works, different ambient air temperatures and ambient air velocities relative to the droplet will be considered. None declared. This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI), a project supported by the Australian Government, through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA).