In the current research, a heat pump fluidized bed dryer a with PID temperature control was designed. Drying air temperature was determined as 40°C and it was controlled through this system with ±0.36°C uncertainty. The designed and manufactured PID controlled heat pump dryer was analyzed by drying the plants of mint, parsley and basil. These analyses included the energy analysis, energy utilization ratio, exergy analysis and uncertainty analysis. In this system, drying air velocity was changed depending on the set temperature. As the set temperature increased, drying air velocity decreased as well. Drying air velocity varied from min 1.01 to max 7.4m/s. Therefore, energy utilization ratio (EUR) in the fluidized bed dryer was changed during the drying period between 16% and 90%. The whole system heating coefficient of performance (COPws) was calculated as an average of 1.91.specific heat, kJ/kgK average specific heat, kJ/kgK mass flow rate, kg/s heat delivered in the condenser, kJ/s heat used during moisture extraction in fluidized bed dryer, kJ/s temperature, K heat pump dryer energy utilization, kJ/s specific humidity, g/g velocity, m/s density, kg/m power input to compressor, kW power input the fans, kW entalpy, kJ/kg heating coefficient of performance for whole system specific moisture extraction rate for whole system drying amount, g/h exergy, kJ/kg specific entropy, kJ/kgK volumetric flow rate of air, m moisture content, g water / g dry matter initial wet weight, g final dry weight, g water inlet water evaporation water outlet inlet outlet air whole system fluidized bed dryer inlet air moisture product Drying is one of the oldest and most prevalent industrial methods. It is widely used in the chemical, agricultural, pulp and paper, mineral processing and wood processing industries A great many studies have been carried out for the heat pump drying systems in the literature. Ceylan and Aktaş Over 400 types of dryers have been reported up to now, whereas more than 100 distinct types are commonly available. In this study, we designed a heat pump fluidized bed dryer to use in industrial applications. The PID controlled heat pump fluidized bed dryer was designed and experimentally analyzed to dry mint, parsley and basil. An ordinary fluidized bed drying system consists of a blower, a heater, a dehumidifier (optional), a fluidized bedchamber, and a cyclone, whereas an ordinary heat pump drying system consists of an evaporator, a compressor, a condenser, and an expansion valve. By combining fluidized bed and heat pump drying systems, where the evaporator acts as a dehumidifier and the condenser is used as a heater, a heat pump fluidized bed dryer is formed The advantages offered by a heat pump fluidized bed dryer are as follows: low energy consumption due to high specific moisture extraction rate (SMER), high coefficient of performance (COP), wide range of drying temperature (−20 to 110 The PID controlled heat pump fluidized bed dryer is shown in Before the experiments of drying mint, parsley and basil, following preparations were made. Stems of mint, parsley and basil were extracted from leaves. Crops were washed, and then the water on the crops were evaporated in ambient air temperature. Before the drying process, the initial moisture content of the mint, parsley and basil was determined by drying them in a kiln which had been preheated to 105±1 Three different crops (parsley, mint, basil) were placed on the shelf then the drying process started. The moisture contents and moisture ratios were calculated using the following equations General equation of mass conservation of drying air The whole system COP Exergy is very important for the evaluation of drying equipment. For this reason, exergy inlet, exergy outlet, exergy loss and exergy efficiency of the drying process can be calculated by the following Equations Exergy inlet to the fluidized bed dryer: If Eq. The quantity of the exergy loss is calculated by applying Eqs. An uncertainty analysis was performed to assign credible limits to the accuracy of the reported values. Measured data uncertainty was calculated by using following Eq. The variation of drying air temperature in terms of the drying time is shown in The variation of moisture content and moisture ratio versus the drying time were calculated from the eqs. Heat delivered in the condenser was changed according to air velocity in the fluidized bed dryer. As the air velocity increased, the heat delivered in the condenser increased and vice versa. This variation is shown Energy utilization ratio in the fluidized bed dryer was changed depending on the moisture content in the crops. Both energy utilization ratio and moisture ratio were decreased during the drying period. The variation of energy utilization ratio versus the drying time is shown The coefficient of the heating performance of the whole system (COP Exergy directly dependent on temperature changed in the dryer. As the moisture content decreased, the exhaust air temperature increased and similarly exergy efficiency increased. While the exergy loss increased, the exergy efficiency decreased as shown in In this research, PID controlled heat pump system was connected with the fluidized bed chamfer. As a result, the PID controlled heat pump fluidized bed dryer was manufactured after an experimental analysis of drying with mint, parley and basil. Experimental results discussed are as follows: In the current study, velocity of evaporator fan was adjusted instead of recirculation air using. Three different crops were dried in fluidization at the same time. Heating coefficient of performance of the whole heat pump system was obtained as 1.91. Drying temperature was controlled with a sensitivity of 0.36 The best exergy efficiently was calculated as 70%.