A gas–solid fluidized bed was used for dry dense medium separation of lump iron ore particles based on their floating and sinking in the fluidized bed. The density of the bed was adjusted to different values using mixtures of zircon sand and iron powder as the fluidized media. Float–sink experiments using 30mm diameter density adjusted spheres in the range of 2100–4500kg/m3 in density increments of 100kg/m3 were carried out to determine the partition curves, the density of the bed and the probable error (Ep). It was found that the density could be adjusted in the range of 2500–4200kg/m3, when the bulk volume fraction of iron powder and the fluidizing air velocity were varied. The Ep values were less than or equal to 0.05, if suitable fluidizing air velocities were chosen. The density of the bed determined using the spheres floating–sinking corresponds to that measured using the height of the fluidized bed. The float–sink performance of lump iron ore particles in the size range of +25–31.5mm agrees well with the spheres’ float–sink performance. The partition curves, separation density and the Ep values were determined for the lump iron ore particles. The Ep value for the ore particle separation was around 0.03. The theoretical Fe-grade recovery (washability) curve for the ore was determined for separation densities between 2500 and 4200kg/m3 from the density distribution and Fe content of the lump iron ore particles. The actual Fe-grade and recovery were calculated from the partition curves of the ore particle separation and compared to the theoretical maximum obtainable Fe-grade and recovery.Fe content (wt.%) probable error sink efficiency of spheres and ore particles mean value of maximum height and minimum height of the fluidized bed (mm) superficial air velocity (cm/s) minimum fluidized air velocity (cm/s) bulk volume percentage of iron powder (%) weight of ore particle (kg) maximum density of ore particles at which 50% of the ore particles sink (kg/m minimum density of the fluidized bed measured using the fluidized bed height (kg/m density of the fluidized bed determined by spheres’ float–sink (kg/m ore density determined with ore weight measured in water immediately (kg/m ore density determined with the equilibrium weight in water (kg/m separation density (kg/m density of density adjusted spheres (kg/m Run-of-mine ores are separated into valuable minerals and waste gangue by mineral processing to produce high grade minerals for industrial use ( One of the possibilities is to use a gas–solid fluidized bed, which has liquid-like properties such as density and viscosity ( Zircon sand of bulk density The apparatus used previously ( Density adjusted spheres of diameter Typical run-of-mine Australian iron ore, screened into different size fractions of +6.3–10 Twenty five ore particles were selected from the 62 ore particles of +25–31.5 The float–sink experiments were carried out varying The float–sink experiments were carried out varying The float–sink experiments were carried out using the lump iron ore particles of +25–31.5 The maximum possible theoretical Fe-grade and recovery of +25–31.5 The Fe-grade, Fe-recovery and ore-recovery as a function of In summary, the density of a gas–solid fluidized bed was adjusted over the range of 2500–4200 This study was supported by Industrial Technology Research Grant Program in 2008 from the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) of Japan, the Core-to-Core Program promoted by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (Project No. 18004) and the Australian Research Council, AMIRA International, BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, Orica, Anglo Platinum, Xstrata, Freeport McMoran and AREVA NC through the Australian Minerals Science Research Institute (AMSRI) (LP0667828). Thanks to BHP Billiton for supplying the iron ore. Thanks to Muhamad Firdaus for help with finding some literature and background information. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 