An element-based finite-volume approach in conjunction with unstructured grids for heterogeneous and anisotropic compositional simulation is presented. This approach adds flexibility to map complex features of the reservoir such as irregular boundaries, discrete fractures, faults, inclined and distorted wells. The mesh, for two dimensional domains, can be built of triangles, quadrilaterals or a mix of these elements. According to the number of vertex, each element is divided into sub-elements and then mass balance equations for each component are integrated along each interface of these sub-elements. The finite-volume conservation equations are assembled from the contribution of all the elements that share a vertex creating a cell vertex approach. The results for several compositional reservoir simulation case studies are presented to demonstrate the application of the method.Unstructured meshes present an important step in reservoir simulation since there is no line or surface restriction similar to that found in structured meshes. Unstructured meshes based on the finite-volume method have been used for a long time in petroleum reservoir simulation ( The approach used by  Isothermal, multi-component, multiphase fluid flow in a porous medium can be described using three types of equations: the component-material balance equation, phase equilibrium equation, and equation for constraining phase saturations and component concentrations ( The material balance equation for the In Eq. The first partial derivative of the total Gibbs free energy with respect to the independent variables gives the equality of component fugacities among all phases, In Eq. In the EbFVM, each element is divided into sub-elements. These sub-elements will be called sub-control volumes. The conservation equation, Eq. To evaluate the first and second terms of Eq. Using the shape functions any physical properties or positions can be evaluated inside an element as To evaluate the gradients, it is necessary to obtain the derivatives of shape functions relative to Further details of the expressions given by Eq. Substituting Eqs. By inspecting Eq. Inserting Eqs. Eq. This section presents four simulation case studies using the EbFVM approach. The first two cases studies were used to validate the present formulation with another in-house petroleum reservoir simulator called UTCOMP ( The second case study also refers to gas injection in a quarter-of-five spot, but now the reservoir contains oil that has been characterized using six hydrocarbon components. Except for the initial global molar fraction, all of the previous data presented for case 1 were used. For this case, the components and global molar fractions are the following: C The third case study again refers to a gas injection in a quarter-of-five spot and the reservoir fluid again was characterized by the same 3 hydrocarbon components used in case 1, but now the effect of a homogenous and anisotropic tensor is accounted for. For this case, the following values of K̿ were used: The last case study refers to a quarter-of-five spot, but now we have considered an isotropic and heterogeneous reservoir.  The results in terms of volumetric rates of oil and gas rates at standard conditions obtained for case study 2 are shown in The results for case study 3, the homogeneous anisotropic reservoir, in terms of volumetric rates at standard conditions of oil and gas obtained with two quadrilateral meshes and one triangular mesh are shown in From  An element-based finite-volume approach for compositional reservoir simulation using unstructured grids based on triangular and quadrilateral elements was presented. The results for the gas flooding simulation using triangular and quadrilateral elements were compared to the results obtained using an in-house simulator called UTCOMP in conjunction with Cartesian meshes. The results of UTCOMP using fine meshes were close to that ones obtained using the EbFVM approach implemented and tested in the present work. Grid orientation effects observed in the simulation results presented using EbFVM method were small. When these results were compared to the ones obtained using GPAS with full tensor Cartesian grids, it was observed that the simulation using Cartesian grids requires many more gridblocks than the EbFVM approach. For instance, the results obtained using quadrilateral and triangular elements with 619 and 319 control volumes, respectively were very close. However, the results using a Cartesian 64 This work was conducted with the support of the Reservoir Simulation Joint Industry Project, a consortium of operating and service companies at the Center for Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering at