The geological strength index (GSI) system, widely used for the design and practice of mining process, is a unique rock mass classification system related to the rock mass strength and deformation parameters based on the generalized Hoek-Brown and Mohr-Coulomb failure criteria. The GSI can be estimated using standard chart and field observations of rock mass blockiness and discontinuity surface conditions. The GSI value gives a numerical representation of the overall geotechnical quality of the rock mass. In this study, we propose a method to determine the GSI quantitatively using photographic images of in situ jointed rock mass with image processing technology, fractal theory and artificial neural network (ANN). We employ the GSI system to characterize the jointed rock mass around the working in a coal mine. The relative error between the proposed value and the given value in the GSI chart is less than 3.6%.Generally, knowledge on the mechanical properties of rock mass is a prerequisite for the numerical simulation and the design of the underground structure, opening-up of mineral deposits and mining processes. Since the early 1990s, many scholars (e.g. The best outcomes can be achieved only by collaboration between experienced engineering geologists and geotechnical engineers. Quantifying estimates of GSI may provide a means of reducing inadvertent errors and inconsistencies by inexperienced practitioners in classifying a rock mass.   In recent years, several authors such as Many researchers (e.g. The digital rock mass rating (DRMR) developed by In this paper, we propose a method to quantitatively determine the GSI by first detecting the joints in two-dimensional (2D) photographs of a rock mass surface using the image processing technology, then determining the fractal dimension, and finally predicting the GSI using artificial neural network (ANN). The applicability of the method proposed is verified through stability analysis of the working in a coal mine.  Converting the color image of rock mass to black and white one To detect the joints on the image of jointed rock mass, the contrast of the image should be analyzed. We convert the natural color image to black and white one using the gray level conversion function as follows ( Smoothing and sharpening To emphasize the joints, the image needs to be smoothed and sharpened using the corresponding masks. Smoothing and sharpening can be performed by image enhancement technique using following equation ( In Eq. Binary encoding To detect the emphasized joints, a binary encoding is conducted by discrimination analysis, so that the joints and background of the image are separated from each other. Because the brightness distributions of different rock masses and joints in images are varied, we perform a binary encoding by discrimination analysis to determine the threshold that rationally separates pixels into two types, based on the concentration histogram. We separate image of rock masses into joint and background pixels by introducing the following group separation coefficient where From Eqs. Noise removal An image may be influenced by noise and interference from several sources, including electrical sensor noise, photographic grain noise and especially blast-induced cracks. Therefore, corrosion and swelling operations in automatic and manual procedures must be performed for the binary images in order to remove unnecessary noise which may cause errors in joint detection. Particularly, the manual procedure removes the blast-induced cracks on the joint trace maps, while comparing the results of automatic detection with those of in situ survey. Detection of the joints After removing the unnecessary noise, we detect the joints remained on the binary image. Generally, edge and line locations on the binary track map can be easily found from the distribution of white pixels under black background. For implementation, we use two major classes of specific edge and line detection: first- and second-order derivatives. The details are explained in Here, we automatically collect properties of the joint set, such as trace length, joint intensity, joint spacing and roughness, from the discontinuity trace maps for 4 sides (left and right walls, face and roof) in underground mine working. However, in the middle section of the existing operation working, which has already been driven, we collect the properties for only three sides (left and right walls, and roof). In recent years, many researchers including  On the basis of above researches, joints in rock masses may be treated in some cases as statistically self-similar (fractal property), and therefore can be characterized using their fractal dimension. The fractal dimension of a 2D rock mass surface can be calculated with the following equation ( Since joints of rock mass surface generally lie on a 2D plane, it is natural to consider the problem using 2D model of fractal dimension, rather than three-dimensional (3D) model. When determining the fractal dimension for joint on rock mass surface, the study area is subsequently subdivided by mesh, the size of which is chosen between 1/64 and 1/2 along the column and row. We first divide the image into 2 As shown in The development of ANN started as an attempt to understand the operation of the human brain and mimic its assessment capabilities, in other words, to be able to decide and act under uncertainty or even deal with situations having limited previous experience. ANNs are mathematic models consisting of interconnected processing nodes (neurons) under a pre-specified topology (layers). As shown in Recently, ANN is widely used in engineering practice. For example, back-propagation (BP) ANN is used to predict deformation modulus and GSI of jointed rock mass ( The BP networks consist of an input layer, one or more hidden layers and an output layer. Each layer is composed of different processing units (also called neurons), connected to the units of the next layer. A transfer function processes input data that reach the corresponding neuron. To differentiate between different processing units, values called biases are introduced in the transfer functions. These biases are referred to as the temperature of a neuron. During training of the network, data are processed through the network, until they reach the output layer (forward pass). In this layer, the output is compared to the GSI value (the “true” output) obtained from We have used 3-layer BP ANN for predicting the GSI of the surface of jointed rock mass. In 3-layer BP network, output signal On the basis of GSI chart, we establish an ANN model, in which the input neurons are the fractal dimension and surface condition index (i.e. roughness and weathering condition), and the output neuron is a GSI value ( Here, the number of neurons of hidden layer is first set to three and it is finally determined via learning procedure to establish the most effective ANN structure. As a result of learning with one by one increasing the neurons number of hidden layer, the learning error is minimized at 13 neurons, when the highest accuracy of ANN learning is reached. The transfer function between input layer and hidden one is tansigmoid and that between hidden layer and output one is purelin. In general, the output vector, containing all Learning dataset involves 310 data made according to the rock mass classification and surface conditions of rock mass in GSI chart (  As a result, we set up the mean square error as 10  We present an example for determining the GSI value of rock mass around the working at Kangdong Coal Mine Complex in Korean Peninsula. The Coal Mine Complex is exploiting anthracite seam, formed during the Permian period, upper Paleozoic era. The considered working, as main haulage drift, is driven into relatively stable rock mass, which mainly consists of sandstone as a footwall of the target coal seam. The rock mass is slightly weathered with one or two groups of joint sets, and the uniaxial compressive strength of rock samples is approximately 88 MPa, which corresponds to the class I rock according to rock mass classification determined from total ratings ( Images of rock mass in a working of about 800 m long are taken every 10 m spacing. In total, we have taken 240 images on rock mass for left and right walls, and roof side. Results of determining the GSI value for every section are listed in In this study, we propose a method to quantitatively determine the GSI using images of in situ jointed rock mass. An application example is given to verify the applicability of the method. Conclusions are drawn as follows: The GSI chart of jointed rock mass given by The proposed method is comparably objective and does not need rich experience. This method must be further improved, so that it can be applied to loose and soft rock mass. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We are very grateful to the engineer Mr. Zongha Ri in Kangdong Coal Mine Complex. The authors express sincere thanks, for the English revision, to Prof. Kangsob Kim in Kim Chaek University of Technology, Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The authors would like to thank all reviewers for their valuable comments. The authors also thank the Editors and Editor-in-Chief of this journal for their guidance and suggestions.