Biological samples can be acid-digested using open or closed reaction vessels. Each one has advantages and limitations related to sample mass, contamination, operational temperature range, and losses of analytes. The latter may be critical when working with thermolabile chemical compounds. In the present work, focused-microwave and cavity-microwave ovens were employed for acid digestion of marine invertebrate samples (oyster, mussel and clam). The aim of this study was to evaluate losses of volatile species containing As, Cd, Pb, Se, and Zn, in both microwave systems, after an acid digestion procedure using nitric and sulfuric concentrated acids. The elemental determinations were performed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP OES) with axially viewed configuration. Using a focused-oven, losses of volatile elements were always higher than 12%, when compared to cavity-microwave oven. High losses were observed for Pb and Cd, while Zn was not affected by volatilization in marine invertebrate samples. Standard reference material (Oyster tissue, NIST SRM 1566b) was used to check the accuracy.Microwave-assisted digestion procedures are well established and accepted as a fast alternative for sample preparation. Procedures are carried out using especially designed cavity- or focused-microwave ovens with respective reaction vessels ( The cavity-microwave oven uses high-pressure closed vessels and is suitable for procedures dealing with organic sample masses typically lower than 0.5 However, for the digestion of large masses of organic samples, the use of focused-ovens is attractive. The focused-microwave oven employs open vessels, and digestion is carried out at atmospheric pressure. Microwave radiation is focused in the bottom part of the vessel containing the sample and the reagents. The system is advantageous due to its capacity to allow the removal of gases generated during the digestion process. According to the literature, e.g. Despite the more frequent use of cavity-microwave ovens, the application of focused-microwave ovens is also usual and many procedures based on these systems have been developed ( Recent applications of focused-ovens emphasized vapor-phase digestions ( Losses of volatile elements when applying focused-ovens may occur as a result of the reaction vessel design. These vessels usually contain an air condenser at the top. Moreover, microwave radiation only interacts with the lower part of the vessel containing the sample (approx. 8 The possibility of losses by volatilization of compounds containing As, Cd, Pb, Se, and Zn in marine invertebrate samples was evaluated using cavity- and focused-microwave ovens employing acid digestion procedures. The choice of invertebrate marine samples for this study is based on the fact that many species are rich in As, Se and Pb compounds and these are prone to losses by volatilization. Invertebrate marine samples present large quantities of As, mainly as arsenobetaine, while Se is accumulated in soft tissues as seleniumcysteine. Concentrations of these elements may be used as indicators of contaminants in the surrounding water, based on the assumption that these metals accumulated in marine invertebrate tissues ( An inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer with axially viewed configuration (ICP OES, VISTA PRO, Varian, Mulgrave, Australia) was used for As, Cd, Pb, Se, and Zn determination. The sample introduction system employed comprises a concentric nebulizer and a cyclonic spray chamber. The operational parameters employed are described in A focused-microwave oven with two cavities (Star System 2, CEM, Matthews, NC, USA) was employed for acid digestion of the samples. The heating program is shown in A cavity-microwave oven (Milestone, Sorisole, Italy) was used for closed vessel acid digestion of the samples. A 100 All solutions were prepared using deionized water. Hydrogen peroxide 30% v For this study, three species of marine invertebrate samples (i.e. mussel – A mass of about 250 About 250 Results from focused-microwave oven were compared with those obtained after cavity-microwave oven ( The results indicated that losses by volatilization of some elements can be important for complex matrixes, such as marine invertebrates. As mentioned by In Marine invertebrate samples were digested in a focused-microwave-oven using 2.5 It must be mentioned that considering the maximum temperature adopted in the focused-microwave acid digestion heating program, volatilization losses are expected for volatile elements and their compounds in marine invertebrate samples. However, tailored procedures could be employed for overcoming these problems. In a recent review ( It was demonstrated that depending on the adopted digestion conditions, a focused-microwave oven operated at atmospheric pressure is prone to losses of volatile elements and compounds. The highest losses, up to 88%, were observed for Pb, and the lowest losses were observed for Zn. The main recommendation derived from this study is the need to carefully consider the use of focused-microwave-assisted digestion taking into account the behavior of sample constituents, especially volatile elements. Losses and contaminations are critical aspects that must be fully evaluated when working with environmental samples. The authors are grateful for research funds and fellowships provided by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP), Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado da Bahia (FAPESB), PRONEX/CNPq/FAPESB (Proc. No 40/03), and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP).