A new approach to recover microalgae from aqueous medium using a bio-flotation method is reported. The method involves utilizing a Moringa protein extract – oil emulsion (MPOE) for flotation removal of Nannochloropsis sp. The effect of various factors has been assessed using this method, including operating parameters such as pH, MPOE dose, algae concentration and mixing time. A maximum flotation efficiency of 86.5% was achieved without changing the pH condition of algal medium. Moreover, zeta potential analysis showed a marked difference in the zeta potential values when increase the MPOE dose concentration. An optimum condition of MPOE dosage of 50ml/L, pH 8, mixing time 4min, and a flotation efficiency of greater than 86% was accomplished. The morphology of algal flocs produced by protein-oil emulsion flocculant were characterized by microscopy. This flotation method is not only simple, but also an efficient method for harvesting microalgae from culture medium.Microalgae have been used as potential candidates for feed stock for biofuel and other bioproducts such as, high value human health food products and aquaculture feed ( Concentration and separation of microalgae from their aqueous medium is a critical step as they typically are very small and in low concentration, which accounts for up to 30% of the total biomass production cost ( Biological flocculation approaches are emerging using bioflocculants such as chitosan, cationic starch from wheat, potato, and corn, The marine microalga  Kjeldhal method (FOSS equipment; Kjeltec 2300™ with semi-automatic digestion system) was initially used to determine the total protein content from The influence of various parameters on flotation efficiency was studied using a measuring cyclinder test. Briefly, a fixed concentration of microalgal suspension (100 At the end of the flotation tests, samples were taken from the surface of the cylinder in order to make microscopic pictures of the formed microalgal flocs using an Olympus microscope and camera. The influence of pH and flocculant dose on zeta potential of the microalgae was studied using a Malvern Zetasizer 90 analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd, USA). Zeta potential analysis was done before and after the addition of flocculants into the alga medium. The data were analyzed in triplicate and the mean values were taken. From the analysis, the results showed that the total protein content in Prior to a flotation/flocculation study of microalgae using flocculant, it is essential to study the zeta potential of the microalgae in natural conditions as pH is one of the most important factors in the microalgae harvest. The influence of pH on zeta potential of In the flotation process, pH is consider to be a very important parameter (  Flocculant dose is a significant parameter in flotation/flocculation removal process. It is needed not only to evaluate the optimum dose for higher removal of microalgae but also to prevent overdosing of flocculant during the algal recovery. In order to determine the optimum dosage required for flotation removal of microalgae, a series of preliminary experiments was undertaken. The effect of different concentrations of MPOE on flotation removal of To evaluate the effect of mixing time on flotation efficiency of MPOE (20 Microlagae cells are negative charged moieties due to dissociation of functional groups on thier surface. Addition of flocculant which has positive a charge can help to neutralize the negative surface charge and aid algal flocs. Bio-flotation was found to be a very effective method for removal and concentrating of This research project was financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 