The thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique was used to determine the surface forces in foam films stabilized with flotation frothers such as n-pentanol, n-octanol, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), and polypropylene glycol (PPG). The results were compared with the foam stabilities measured experimentally and the film elasticities calculated using a model developed by Wang and Yoon [Wang, L., Yoon, R.-H., 2006a. Role of hydrophobic force in the thinning of foam films containing a nonionic surfactant. Colloids Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects, 282–283, 84–91.]. It was found that foam stabilities are controlled by both film elasticity and disjoining pressure, the relative contributions from each changing with frother type and concentration. At relatively low concentrations, frother dampens the hydrophobic force, an attractive component of the disjoining pressure, that destabilizes foams. At higher concentrations, elasticity plays a more important role in stabilizing foams.Control of foam stability plays an important role in many different applications such as flotation, dust control, fire control, tertiary oil recovery, drilling, food processing, personal care products, foam materials, The stability of foam is affected by various factors such as surface tension, surface rheological properties, film elasticity, and surface forces ( Elasticity, by definition, is the ratio of stress to strain, and represents a measure of propensity to restore the initial state following deformation. Therefore, the elasticity of a foam film is sometimes considered as a “self-healing” capacity against external disturbance. The Gibbs elasticity ( Recently, The drainage and rupture of foam films are also affected by the surface forces (or disjoining pressure) between the two air/water interfaces facing each other in a foam film. In general, a positive (repulsive) disjoining pressure ( In the present work, different types of common flotation frothers were used to stabilize the foams. Film elasticities were calculated using the model of  The stability of three-dimensional foams was measured using the method known as ‘shake test’, which is widely used for determining static foam stabilities ( The thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique was used to measure the equilibrium thicknesses of single foam films under controlled capillary pressures (   In using Eq. As shown in Note also that film elasticity ( In There must be other factors affecting foam stability. In order to illustrate this point further, the foam stability data given in According to the DLVO theory, the disjoining pressure ( It has been shown, however, that hydrophobic force may also exist in foam films particularly at low surfactant concentrations ( At equilibrium, the disjoining pressure in a foam film should be equal to the capillary pressure (  It may be of interest to compare the role of PPG-400 and MIBC in stabilizing foams at relatively low concentrations. As shown in The difference between MIBC and PPG-400 may be illustrated more clearly by  To have a better understanding of the role of the hydrophobic force in controlling the stability of foam films, the kinetics of film thinning has been studied with MIBC as frother. Many investigators studied the kinetics of film thinning using the Reynolds equation ( In the present work, the Hamaker constant,    Note here that the The Reynolds equation (Eq.  The critical pressures at which single-foam films rupture are plotted The data presented in this communication suggest that at low frother concentrations hydrophobic force is a major destabilizing force in foam films. This conclusion may be supported by the vibrational sum frequency (VSF) spectrum of the air/water interface, which exhibited a sharp peak at 3680 cm The TFPB studies conducted with the foam films stabilized by sodium dodecylsulfate also suggested the presence of hydrophobic force at low surfactant concentrations ( Factors affecting foam stabilities were studied in the presence of common flotation frothers, Of the various frothers tested, PPG-400 is most effective in lowering surface tension and increasing film elasticity. Further, it gave the lowest slope in the foam stability The thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique was used to study the kinetics of film thinning and determine the critical film rupture thickness ( The authors express sincere gratitude to Dr. H.J. Müller and his co-workers for their help with the experimental set-up and training. They are also thankful for Dr. L.G. Cascão Pereira and Prof. C. J. Radke for kindly providing the bike-wheel microcell and sharing information on related experimental details. They gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the U.S. Department of Energy (Grant DE-FC26-02NT41607).