Batch elutriation of a metallurgical-grade silicon powder with a wide particle size distribution in a laboratory scale fluidized bed was studied, highlighting the influence of carryover polydispersity. The smallest elutriable fines, namely superfines (<10μm), whose terminal velocity U
                     
                        t
                      is far lower than the superficial gas velocity U
                     
                        g
                      are entrained first, while the largest elutriable particles (U
                     
                        t
                     
                     ≈
                     U
                     
                        g
                     ) begin to be entrained with a delay that is as long as the time required for the superfines to leave the bed, thus inducing sequential elutriation. When no superfines were present, the entrainment was not delayed. This peculiar phenomenon was observed at all of the tested gas velocities (0.05–0.2ms−1) and for different wide particle size distributions belonging overall to the Geldart group A. The superfines thus seem to strongly limit the elutriation of the larger elutriable particles. In addition, the elutriation rate constants were found to increase with increasing superficial gas velocity and with decreasing particle size. When superfines were present, the elutriation rate constant leveled off under a critical size. Increasing the superfine particle content appears to reduce the elutriation rate constant of all of the elutriable particles. These phenomena are related to interparticle interactions within the bed and/or the freeboard and confirm the importance of polydispersity in the elutriation behavior.Fluidized bed reactors are widely used in the chemical industry in fields as various as catalytic reactions, coal and biomass gasification, fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) in the petroleum industry, mineral processing, and other solid processing industries Most of entrainment studies use the elutriation rate constant approach, whose theory is developed in part 2 of the present paper. The determination of the elutriation rate constant is mainly empirical, with experimental work relying on pilot fluidization columns of various scales and with various designs, especially running batchwise (unsteady-state system) or recycling the entrained fines back to the bed (steady-state recirculating system) The present work investigates the influence of the polydispersity of the entrained flux (or carryover) on entrainment by experimentally studying the entrainment out of a powder bed run batchwise with a wide PSD, ranging from group C to group B. The powder is metallurgical-grade silicon (MG-Si), obtained by comminution of silicon The freeboard is the section of the fluidization column between the bed surface and the column outlet. Bubbles bursting at the bed surface spray particles in the freeboard: coarse particles (with Entrainment studies are usually conducted with a freeboard height higher than the TDH, for the sake of reproducibility and because industrial applications generally attempt to minimize the carryover. The total entrainment flux In other words, a bed composed of particles with size Nevertheless, as mentioned in the Starting from the definition in Eq. In Eq. The elutriation rate constant The initial condition for the above integration relies on the hypothesis that every particle entrained after a long time was already present in the bed at the beginning of the experiment. This fact is not obvious, since particles can actually be created during fluidization. Colakyan and Levenspiel first presented a model accounting for elutriable particles created during batch experiments by interparticle abrasion  A convenient representation is the entrained fraction If no interparticle abrasion or deagglomeration occur, then Eqs. The fluidization set-up is schematically represented in For each experiment, 2 Experimental data have were fitted using the non-linear fitting algorithm of Matlab2014a to obtain the values of the parameters in Eqs. The experimental total cumulative entrained weight Nevertheless, closer examination of these curves reveals counterintuitive facts. Because of more intense mixing and interparticle contact in the bed, the abrasion rate should be more intense at higher superficial gas velocities At each sampling time, the PSD of the entrained flux was determined. Hence, the cumulative entrained weight by size interval The sum of the fits on each size interval without attrition provides an excellent fit for the total cumulative entrained weight For PSD-1 at 0.075 The elutriation rate constants were determined by fitting Eq. Nevertheless, common trends arise: the elutriation rate constant was often found to level off or even decrease under a critical size The general trend and order of magnitude of the elutriation rate constant versus particle size is similar to the results or correlations obtained by several authors To confirm that the finest particles are the cause for the delayed entrainment peak, PSD-1b was studied. As is obvious in The elutriation rate constants for PSD-1 and PSD-1b are compared in The same batch experiments were performed on PSD-2 which has a much smaller Sauter mean diameter (see Batch elutriation of MG-Si powder appears to be sequential, in that the smallest elutriable fines ( Several authors have already provided conclusions regarding the influence of the fine and superfine proportion in the bed on the elutriation of the larger size fractions. Baeyens et al. found the elutriation rate constant of group A particles to be reduced when the weight fraction of group C particles was increased Given this somewhat contradictory background, several explanations are worth considering. Four hypotheses are proposed below: they locate the grounds of the phenomenon inside the bed for The very fine particles promote interparticle adhesion inside the bed, thus forming agglomerates, which involve these particles, larger elutriable fines and/or coarse particles. These agglomerates are less likely to be ejected in the freeboard than the individual particles, which limits the rate of elutriation of agglomerated particles. When superfines are removed, a gradual liberation of particles from the agglomerates occurs, causing the rate of entrainment of larger elutriable particles to increase. The gradual change of the bed PSD (Sauter mean diameter shifting toward higher values) causes a change in the fluidization regime from bubbling to slugging. In the latter regime, particles would be ejected faster so that the elutriation increases. As in the first hypothesis, superfine-promoted agglomerates of superfines are formed in the bed and ejected in the freeboard or directly formed in the freeboard. Such agglomerates may comprise superfines only or both superfines and larger elutriable fines. The size of the agglomerate rather than that of individual particles has thus to be considered to state whether entrainment occurs. On the one hand, the apparent terminal velocity of agglomerates composed of superfines only still verify (a) Fine particles induce an upward force on slightly larger particles due to momentum transfer in the freeboard, but not on far larger particles. Thus, particles of a given size interval help the upper interval to be entrained and so on, resulting in the sequential elutriation. Yet, this argument can be reversed as follows: (b) when the smallest elutriable fines ( Note that the agglomerates mentioned in The latter Among batch entrainment measurements, qualitative electrostatic measurements were performed, with the results indicating that strong electrostatic voltages build in the fluidization column, in correlation with entrainment. Because dry nitrogen was used to fluidize the powder, implying low relative humidity, electrostatic effects are expected to be dominant Batch entrainment tests were performed on metallurgical-grade silicon powder fluidized by dry nitrogen at superficial gas velocities ranging from 0.05 to 0.2