The leaching of a sphalerite concentrate with high indium and iron content in sulfuric acid–oxygen media has been studied in the present paper. The variables considered in the study were particle size, concentration of sulfuric acid, partial pressure of oxygen, leaching temperature, and leaching time. The experimental data indicated that under the conditions employed up to 99% zinc and 90% indium extraction were achieved. The mineralogical analysis of the residue showed that the main minerals are elemental sulphur, unreacted pyrite and quartz, the amount of sulphide sulphur oxidized to sulphate during leaching is 81%.The direct pressure oxidation of zinc sulphide concentrates in sulfuric acid medium has been promoted by Sherritt for more than 30 During the leaching of sphalerite the iron content of the feed is of particular importance. Iron is required for the production of ferric ion which oxidizes the zinc sulphide. Oxidation of zinc sulphide directly by oxygen is very slow. Little has been published on the pressure leaching of sphalerite contain indium and the behavior of indium in pressure leaching process. The main objective of this paper is to determine the optimum conditions to extract the zinc and indium rapidly from a sphalerite concentrate. The sphalerite concentrate with high indium and iron content used in the present study was from Guangxi Province of China. The chemical composition is shown in The main mineralogical phases in sphalerite concentrate, are zinc suphide [ZnS] , pyrrhotite [FeS], pyrite [FeS In all the leaching experiments we employed analytical grade sulfuric acid with a weight concentration of 98%. The addition of sodium lignosulfonate lignin used as a dispersant was 500 100 The main variables studied were the particle size of mineral, concentration of sulfuric acid in the leaching solution, partial pressure of oxygen (600 to 1600 The effect of particle size on the extraction of zinc, indium and iron from sphalerite concentrate is shown in The effect of sulphuric acid on the leaching of sphalerite concentrate was studied in the range 110  Sulphalerite concentrate was leached at temperatures varying from 100 The effect of reactive time on the leaching of sphalerite concentrate with high indium and iron was studied in the range of 30 Experiments were carried out under conditions of particle size 48–42 As we can see from A partially reacted sample, obtained under conditions of particle size 48–42  In the overall framework of leaching of zinc concentrate in autoclave in sulfuric acid–oxygen system is one alternative that effectively extracts zinc and indium from the zinc concentrate at 150 From the results presented the following can be concluded: The main mineralogical phases in zinc concentrate from Guangxi Province of China are zinc suphide [ZnS], pyrrhotite [FeS], pyrite [FeS Experiments data indicated that under the conditions with particle size of 48–42 After leaching at 150 The oxidative pressure leaching of zinc concentrate in sulfuric acid medium is a viable process that effectively extracts zinc and indium into solution and most iron exist as solid. The authors gratefully acknowledge the