Efficient destabilization of colloidal dispersions is the top challenge facing solid-liquid separation processes. In this study, an in-house synthesized environmentally friendly graft copolymer, chitosan-graft-polyacrylamide (chi-g-PAM), was investigated as a potential flocculant of fine kaolin dispersions. Chi-g-PAM was successfully prepared by combining the properties of synthetic monomer (acrylamide) and natural polymer (chitosan) using ceric ammonium nitrate as an initiator. The physical and chemical characteristics of the copolymer were analyzed using Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and Zetasizer Nano ZS in order to identify the active adsorption sites in the polymer structure.The performance of chi-g-PAM as a flocculant was evaluated by treating 5wt% kaolin despersion (d50 and mean diameter of 6.63 and 9.24μm, respectively) with different dosages of the polymer and calculating the initial settling rates (ISR). The flocculation mechanism and the adsorption capacity were investigated using zeta potential and total organic carbon (TOC) measurements. Results showed that ISR increased with increasing chi-g-PAM dosages before reaching maximum values at corresponding optimal ones; then, the settling rate slightly decreased. Chi-g-PAM showed a better flocculation and settling behavior (ISR 24.84m/h) as compared to chitosan (ISR of 7.2m/h) at optimun dosages and performed similar to commercial PAM (ISR of 25.92m/h). Reliable correlation of zeta potential measurement and adsorption isotherms obtained from TOC mesaurements demonstrated that bridging and charge neutralization were the dominant adsorption mechanisms involved. The experimental adsorption data were analyzed using Langmuir and Freundlich models. The best fit was obtained using the Langmuir isotherm model with a correlation coefficient value of 0.991 as compared with 0.895 for the Freundlich model. The TOC method has proven to be suitable and feasible for explaining the adsorption mechanism and determination of the adsorbed amount of chi-g-PAM on kaolin.Controlling the stability of colloidal dispersions is critical from an application perspective. For example, fully dispersed solid particles are needed for heterogeneous catalysis and heat transfer fluids, while controlled aggregation is needed for gel formation in sensitized solar cells ( This study investigates the potential of in-house synthesized chi- Three different polymers were used as flocculants in this study. These include commercial polyacrylamide (PAM) and chitosan polymers and in-house synthesized chitosan- Chitosan- Attenuated Total Reflectance FTIR (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy was used to ascertain and compare the structural transformations for the successful synthesis of chi- A scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S-4700 FESEM, USA) under 5-kV electron acceleration voltage was used to take enhanced images of the chitosan and chi- To further elucidate the successful copolymerization of acrylamide on chitosan, X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) spectra were collected using a wide-angle diffractometer, the XRD PANalytical X'Pert Pro Multipurpose Diffractometer (purchased in MA, USA) using a Cuα filtered radiation (λ The zeta potential of the chi- Molar mass of chi- Acid-washed kaolin clay powder was used in this study. Kaolin was chosen in this work due to its extended application in different fields including papermaking as well as manufacturing of polymer nanocomposites and ceramics. Kaolin is also rich in kaolinite, which is an aluminosilicate clay mineral that is found in soil and sediments and a common waste material found in the tailings streams produced from mineral processing, coal preparation and oil sands extraction plants. The desired amount of kaolin was added to distilled water to prepare a 5 The flocculation and settling tests of kaolin followed a procedure reported elsewhere (Shiqing To quantify the amount of chitosan- This testing setup required a 680 The observed value of TOC was assumed to be proportional to the equilibrium chi- The linearized Langmuir isotherm equation used to estimate the maximum adsorption capacity corresponding to the kaolin surface saturation was determined by transforming the Langmuir Eq. The FTIR spectra of PAM, chitosan and chi- The scanning electron micrographs of pure chitosan and chitosan- The change of chitosan crystalline structure before and after graft polymerization of polyacrylamide was examined by XRD. PAM and chitosan revealed different crystalline reflections compared to that of chi- Knowledge of the electrical characteristics of flocculants at solid-liquid interfaces is essential for the development of robust flocculation-based solid-liquid separation processes as it exerts great influence on the flocculants' performance and can be used to predict and control the stability of colloidal dispersion ( Molar mass of chi-g-PAM was measured using a Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments Ltd., USA). The system employs static light scattering to measure the intensities of the scattered light of the polymer sample and automatically calculates the molar mass by applying the Rayleigh Eq. Therefore, a plot of Flocculation is one the most important technologies applied in the solid-liquid separation processes, such as sludge dewatering and water clarification. The process is known to be affected by a variety of external parameters including flocculant type, flocculant dosage, molar mass and charge density of the flocculants, as well as the hydrodynamics in the flocculation cell. In this study, the effect of chi- The initial settling rates (ISR) as a function of chi- Further increase in the dosage of 500 Optimum polymer dosages for each stock solution were established and the maximum ISR values of each were plotted against dosage ( Flocculation behavior of kaolin dispersion using chi- Electrokinetic studies have been previously used to understand the interaction mechanism between particles in dispersions during flocculation process. The zeta potential data provides useful indirect information on the amount of polymer adsorbed as well as mechanisms of destabilization of suspension by polymers. In this study, the relative change in the zeta potential values of kaolin particles remaining in supernatant before and after kaolin flocculation using chitosan, chi- The observed experimental adsorption data are presented in Further insights into the flocculation and the adsorption mechanics of chi- In general, the adsorption of grafted polymer chains at clay/water interface is more appropriately explained by loops-train-tail model. This model was derived from the assumptions that the conformation of long chain flexible polymers adsorbed at a solid/liquid interfaces can be explained by segments (“trains”) that attach to the surface, free “loops” extend away from the surface and two free dangling “tails” protrude into the solution. This adsorption mode results in what is called the train-loop-tail structure ( To characterize the equilibrium of adsorption of chi- The experimental data within the concentration range studied, fitted very well with Langmuir isotherm, which was basically developed for systems with monolayer adsorption on adsorbent surface with the assumption of having equivalent adsorption sites and negligible interaction between the adsorbate molecules. However, the fact that the adsorbed equilibrium amount of the polymer continued to increase with increasing the polymer dosage without reaching a stable plateau indicated that the multilayer adsorption mode and deviation from Langmuir model may become dominant at higher concentration range which was not covered in this study. In this work, an in-house synthesized highly efficient and environmentally friendly graft copolymer (chi- The authors would like to acknowledge the Environmental Research Center at the