Natural stones are generally used as building materials for construction and decoration. Determining the deteriorations of stones after freeze–thaw cycles is important subject for natural building stones used in cold regions exposed excessive freezing and thawing during the year. Freeze–thaw test is conducted for determining the deteriorations of stones due to freeze–thaw cycling. The percentage loss in uniaxial compression strength is an important parameter indicating these deteriorations. However, it is extremely laborious and time consuming tests. Because of this, predicting the percentage loss values in uniaxial compression strengths from intact rock properties was the purpose of this paper. Freeze–thaw tests were applied on nine limestone samples selected from different cold regions of Turkey. All of them except two samples were found to be suitable for use in cold regions. A statistical model was developed for predicting the percentage loss values in uniaxial compression strength from intact tests of impact strength, modulus of elasticity and water absorption. This model equation is very reliable (R
                     2
                     =0.95) and can be very useful for predetermination of uniaxial compression strengths of limestones after freeze–thaw test without testing.Natural stones satisfy certain qualitative requirements and refer to any rock that is capable of being quarried in large blocks and being processed into specified or indicated shapes or sizes for specific applications. It includes many different origins of rock types such as marble, limestone, and andesite, which are widely used as building materials for construction and decoration purposes especially for outdoor applications such as paving, flooring and cladding. The most important issue in outdoor applications of natural stones is how long a stone endure and maintains its essential and distinctive characteristics of strength and appearance with relation to climate and environmental conditions ( The physical, mechanical, chemical and petrographical properties of stones are very important to select the materials used as paving, flooring and cladding. The mechanical strength (uniaxial compression strength) of stones is one of the important parameters which affect their usages in cold regions. Natural stones used in cold regions are exposed to at least one freezing and thawing cycle every year. In the freezing period, the stone is frozen and water in micropores expands about 9% of the original volume. This expansion induces tensile stress concentration and damages the micropores; when the rock is thawed, water flows through the fractured micropores which increase the damage. Rock damage in cold regions is the result of the number of freeze–thaw cycle, temperature, rock type, applied stress and moisture content ( Many researchers studied freezing and thawing of various materials by using a number of laboratory tests. Most of them were related to the determination of the effects of freeze–thaw on the properties of natural stones such as strength, compressibility, porosity, pore size distribution, permeability and the mineral content. The freeze–thaw test method is extremely laborious and time consuming. The prediction of the percentage loss in uniaxial compression strength from intact rock properties provides the convenience of predetermination of uniaxial compression strengths after freeze–thaw without testing. The main objective of this study is to predict the percentage loss in uniaxial compression strength after freeze–thaw cycles from intact rock properties of limestones. It was not found in previous studies related to predict the percentage loss in uniaxial compression strength. In this study, the percentage losses in uniaxial compression strengths of limestone samples were determined after freeze–thaw test and statistically correlated with intact rock properties. The statistical model was developed for estimating the uniaxial compression strength losses of natural stones used as building materials for outdoor applications. A number of limestone samples were subjected to repetition of freeze–thaw cycles under same conditions. The percentage losses in uniaxial compression strengths for limestone samples were determined. The relationships between the loss values and intact rock properties were investigated and most suitable statistical model was developed for predicting the percentage losses in uniaxial compression strengths. The methodology of the study is given in Nine limestone samples were collected from various cold regions in Turkey ( Uniaxial compression strength, Brazilian tensile strength and modulus of elasticity (Young's modulus) tests were conducted on core samples having a diameter of 54 The freeze–thaw tests were carried out according to Turkish Standard TS 699. Five intact core samples without visible fractures were prepared from each stone for freeze–thaw tests. The samples were saturated under atmospheric pressure. The saturated samples were frozen in a deep-freezer and conditioned at − The percentage loss in uniaxial compression strength should be less than 20% for building materials. If the loss value of natural stone is more than 20%, it should not be used in cold regions ( The percentage loss in uniaxial compressive strength was correlated statistically with the 7 intact rock properties, uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, flexural strength, etc., as shown in Best subsets regression identifies the best-fitting regression models that can be constructed with the predictor variables. The procedure to calculate best subsets regression would be very long and tedious to do by hand, so it is not advisable to try without the aide of a statistical software package like Minitab. The most used criteria for the best-fitting regression model are the adjusted Mallows' Multiple regression is a flexible method of data analysis that may be appropriate whenever a quantitative variable (dependent variable) is to be examined in relationship to any other factors (independent or predictor variables). In this study, the multiple linear regression model was used. This model can be defined theoretically as follows: The data obtained from this study were analyzed using Minitab 15 statistical software. The descriptive statistics of the data used in the analysis are given in The selection of variables for the most suitable statistical model was carried out using best subsets regression. Best subsets regression is an efficient way to identify models that achieve goals with as few predictors as possible. The “adjusted A best fit will have the highest The multiple regression equation according to The coefficient of determination ( The relationship between the measured percentage loss in uniaxial compressive strength and values calculated from Eq. It can be seen from The freeze–thaw test is a well-known test for the determination of the loss in uniaxial compressive strength after freeze–thaw cycles, for construction rocks and building stones. However, this test is very laborious and there was no statistical model for predicting the loss in uniaxial compression strength from intact rock properties until this study. In this paper statistical analyses were carried out for predicting the loss in uniaxial compressive strength. The results that can be drawn from this study can be summarized as: The limestone samples used in this study can be used in cold regions as building materials for outdoor applications such as paving, flooring and cladding except those from Kulp Beige and Verde Antico. Different subsets of the intact rock properties were tried and the best fit was found to be with the three variables: impact strength, modulus of elasticity and water absorption. The developed statistical model is highly reliable ( This developed Eq. The author is very grateful to the editor and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable contribution and constructive attitude.