Packing materials play a key role in the performance of bioreactors for waste gas treatment and particularly in biofilter applications. In this work, the performance of four differently packed biofilters operated in parallel for the treatment of relatively high inlet concentration of toluene was studied. The reactors were compared for determining the suitability of coconut fiber, digested sludge compost from a waste water treatment plant, peat and pine leaves as packing materials for biofiltration of toluene. A deep characterisation of materials was carried out. Biological activity and packing capabilities related to toluene removal were determined throughout 240 days of operation under different conditions of nutrients addition and watering regime. Also, biofilters recovering after a short shutdown was investigated. Nutrient addition resulted in improved removal efficiencies (RE) and elimination capacities (EC) of biofilters reaching maximum ECs between 75 and 95gm−3
                     h−1 of toluene. In the first 80 days, the pH decreased progressively within the reactors, causing a population change from bacteria to fungi, which were the predominant decontaminant microorganisms thereafter. All reactors were found to recover the RE rapidly after a 5 days shutdown and, in a maximum of 7 days, all reactors had been completely recuperated. These results point out that fungal biofilters are a suitable choice to treat high loads of toluene. In general, coconut fiber and compost biofilters exhibited a better performance in terms of elimination capacity and long-term stability.Currently, toluene is one of the most released pollutants due to its extensive use in fuel and solvents facilities and due to its usage as raw material for the production of a wide range of chemicals. Thus, it has been widely used as a characteristic volatile organic compound (VOC) in previous biofiltration studies ( Nature and characteristics of packing materials have a high influence on biofilters efficiency. Proper packing material selection is a key factor in the reactor performance and stability. Main characteristics to consider upon the selection of an appropriate packing material are its specific surface area, density, porosity, pH, water holding capacity, buffering capacity and elemental composition ( Various materials have already been studied such as compost, soil, peat, wood chips and polystyrene spheres ( Nutrient content also plays an important role on the biofilter performance. In general, the packing material offers the necessary nutrients to maintain a proper microbial population ( This paper focuses on the startup and long-term operation of four biofilters operated in parallel for determining the suitability of coconut fiber, peat, compost from digested sludge of a waste water treatment plant and pine leaves as packing materials for gaseous toluene treatment. Physical and chemical characteristics of packing materials besides the treatment capacity determination under different operating conditions, including the effect of watering and nutrients addition, are the main objectives of this study. Furthermore, the effect of a temporary shutdown on biofilters performance was studied. Experiments were carried out in a lab-scale plant ( A structured control system with a PLC (Siemens, S7-314 Gas samples were collected from sampling ports using Tedlar Packing material porosity and specific surface area were determined in an external laboratory (Serveis Cientı´fico-tècnics, UB) by BET absorption isotherms in a Micromeritics ASAP 2000 porosimeter. Materials density was measured in a helium picnometer (Serveis Cientı´fico-tècnics, UB). Elementary analysis for C, N, H, P and S content of the packing material were also performed in an external laboratory (Serveid’Anàlisi, UAB) by combustion in an elemental analyzer EA1108 (Carlo Erba). Media samples were collected periodically in order to measure moisture, organic matter content and pH of the biofilter media according to standard methods ( A complete characterization of the packing materials used in the present study was performed prior to setting up the four biofilters. In addition, the four biofilters were characterized for typical parameters such as bed porosity or water content right before inoculation. Other parameters shown in In order to assess the effect of nutrients, bed moisture, empty bed residence time (EBRT) and temporary shutdowns on biofilters performance, biofilters were undergone to different operating conditions right after start-up. Prior to this, all biofilters were inoculated with 1 An overview of the long-term performance for the four biofilters during the whole experimental period is reported in Phase 1 corresponds to the biofilters startup phase, in which biofilters were watered with tap water. At the end of Phase 1 (day 45), quasi-steady REs ranged from 10% for peat to 35% for compost. These low REs compared to other biofilters ( In Phase 4 (days 150–169), the effect of a temporary shutdown was assessed. Watering and toluene feed were interrupted and after 5 To further assess the watering effect, neither water nor nutrients were added to the biofilters during Phase 5, which led to a significant decrease in RE of all reactors. Due to the absence of leachate, pH could not be assessed during this period. Finally, all the reactors were watered again during Phase 6, and a rapid restoration of the RE was observed in all reactors. Although organic packing materials may provide the necessary nutrients for biomass growth, several authors have found that performance of toluene-degrading biofilters improves when an extra source of ammonium and phosphate is provided to the reactor ( This can be clearly seen in The increased performance of biofilters due to a higher supply of nutrients was coupled to a progressive pH drop to acidic pH values in almost all reactors ( From this point, fungi were progressively colonizing all biofilters and becoming the predominant degrading microorganisms coupled to the low pH values reached in the reactors. It is hypothesized that the breakthrough of the buffering capacity of each biofilter was due to the production of acidic by-products such as benzoic acid, which arise from toluene degradation ( At this stage, two fungal genus were morphologically recognised by optical microscopy as Biofilter watering is an important operational parameter since it directly influences the water content and the pH value on the filter media and contributes to the pressure drop across the filter material. Pressure drop is the key factor that influences the operational costs due to blower energy consumption in biofilters ( In one side, Right after coconut fiber and compost biofilters re-packing on day 44, pressure drop sharply decreased to normal pressure drop values of biofilters ( On the other side, assessment of the influence of watering was further tested during Phases 3, 5 and 6. Therefore, watering flow-rate was reduced in Phase 3 to test its effect on toluene degrading biofilters. A completely different behaviour was observed in all four biofilter. In terms of pressure drop, Robustness of fungal biofilters in terms of resistance to mid-term periods of no watering was tested in Phase 5. In the industries that generate toluene as an off-gas directly produced by their manufacturing processes, the possibility of having a shutdown should be considered. The interruption in pollutant generation may occasionally occur due to either electrical or mechanical failures, for tool maintenance, as well as for holiday breaks. To test the impact of a temporary shutdown of pollutant load, gas and nutrient solution feeding were interrupted for 5 The response of the biofilters to a shutdown period depends on several factors such as the microbial population, duration of starvation period, the characteristics of the packing material and the pollutant supplied and its degradation rate ( In summary, the results presented and discussed in this paper show that biofiltration of toluene at relatively high loads proved to be very effective and robust for sustained toluene treatment. Differences arising from the nature of organic packing materials and how these materials are packed in the reactor lead to find different behaviours on the long run of the biofilters. Even if organic materials may naturally provide nutrients for biomass growth, nutrients supply proved to be useful for increasing reactors performance. Also, a change in the microorganisms population from bacteria to fungi when nutrients were added proved to increase toluene elimination capacities up to 95 and 90 Bed density linked to the watering regime was found to be a key factor regarding the pressure drop across the biolfiter. In this sense, coconut fiber and compost showed the lowest pressure drop on the long-run (usually below 1 Further, all biofilters recovered quickly their previous toluene treatment capabilities after a shutdown. Compost and pine leaves biofilters were not significantly affected by a 5 days shutdown, which demonstrated a better capacity to face short shutdown periods compared to coconut fiber and peat biofilters. In general terms, all four packing materials showed a proper performance for toluene treatment showing high elimination capacities. In any case, coconut fiber and compost biofilters exhibited a better performance in terms of elimination capacity, pressure drop and long-term stability. This work was supported by the Spanish CICYT project PPQ2003 – 02482. J.P. Maestre received a predoctoral fellowship from the M.E.C. (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia).