Background
                  Fracture neck talus is a rare fracture represents about 1% of all fractures and usually due to high energy trauma. These fractures are usually associated with compromised soft tissues, concomitant skeletal fractures, or life threatening injuries. Talus has a tenuous blood supply which is affected by fracture displacement. Urgent fracture reduction±fracture fixation is mandatory. The associated injuries may make the conventional open reduction and internal fixation is impossible to be done in urgent base as it may impacts the already tenuous blood supply of talus increasing the risk of AVN and non union. Percutaneous fracture reduction and fixation can overcome this problem, and decrease complications associated with conventional open reduction and internal fixation.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Between 2006 and 2008, 16 patients with talar neck fractures were operated on by percutaneous reduction of fracture and percutaneous fixation with 3.5mm cannulated screws. Injuries were classified according to modified Hawkins classification system. Patients were followed up over an average of 48 months.
               
                  Results
                  87.5% of the patients were satisfied and resumed their preoperative activities. The mean AOFAS Hind Foot Scale was 89.25 points (range: 74–100) and no poor outcomes.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Although the number of patients in this study is small, the results showed that, percutaneous reduction and fixation is a good treatment modality in treatment of fracture neck talus, especially in cases with increased risk of soft tissue complications and open reduction should be resort only when percutaneous reduction was failed.Fractures of the talar neck represent about 1% of all skeletal fractures, 3% of foot fractures and 50% of all talar fractures Owing to unique structure of the talus with characteristic tenuous blood supply, a displaced talar neck fracture predisposes talar body to avascular necrosis (AVN). Blood supply of talus comes from extraosseous and intraosseous sources. The extraosseous source comes from three main arteries and their branches. These arteries, in order of significance, are posterior tibial, anterior tibial and perforating peroneal arteries. The branches are, artery of the tarsal canal (a branch of the posterior tibial artery) and the artery of the sinus tarsi (a branch of the perforating peroneal artery), these two discrete vessels form an anastomotic sling inferior to the talus from which branches arise and enter the talar neck area. The tarsal canal artery supply most of the talar body via branches penetrates the inferior talar neck and gives off an additional branch that penetrates the deltoid ligament to supply the medial talar wall. The posterior part of the talus is supplied by branches of the posterior tibial artery via calcaneal branches that enter through the posterior tubercle. The head and neck are supplied by the dorsalis pedis and the sinus tarsi arteries. Extensive intraosseous anastomoses are present throughout the talus and are responsible for the survival of the talus in severe injuries. Initial fracture displacement, timing of reduction and soft-tissue handling are all factors that can potentially affect the integrity of the talar blood supply Hawkins classified these fractures into groups I–III and in 1978, Canale and Kelly added one more type (type IV). Type I fractures are nondisplaced. Theoretically, only one of the three major blood supply sources is disrupted (the one entering through the anterolateral portion of the neck). Type II fractures combine a fracture of talar neck with subluxation or dislocation of subtalar joint. In type II fractures, two of the main sources of blood supply to the talus are injured (the vessels entering the neck and proceeding proximally to the body and the vessels entering the foramina in the sinus tarsi and tarsal canal). The third source of blood supply, entering through the foramina on the medial surface of the body, is usually spared, but can be injured. Type III injuries are characterized by a fracture of the neck with displacement of the body from the subtalar and ankle joints. The body of the talus may be extruded posteriorly and medially and located between the posterior surface of the tibia and Achilles tendon. All three sources of blood supply to the talus are usually disrupted with this injury. In type IV injuries, fracture of talar neck is associated with dislocation of the body from the ankle and subtalar joints with additional dislocation or subluxation of the head of the talus from the talonavicular joint Treatment options of talar neck fractures evolved from closed reduction and immobilization, to limited fixation, and currently, open reduction and internal fixation being performed on most talar neck fractures Radiologic criteria for assessing the reduction are: (A) talar axis: this was checked by measuring the talar-first metatarsal angle which should be nearly parallel on the AP and lateral radiograph (±4°) In assessment of fracture healing, although CT scans have been found to provide a more accurate method, their application is limited by higher costs and greater radiation dosage compared with conventional radiographs, so plain radiography remains the most common method of fracture union assessment. The most common radiographic criteria to define fracture union are obliteration of the fracture line and bridging of the fracture by callus Early complications such as skin necrosis, wound dehiscence, and infection have occurred in as many as 77% of cases of talar neck fracture Reports of late complications such as osteonecrosis, posttraumatic arthritis, and osteomyelitis also are common Post traumatic arthrosis may be a consequence of joint injury at the time of trauma with articular cartilage damage, or it may arise through changes to the joint biomechanics, secondary to defective consolidation of the talar neck The aim of this study is to assess the results of minimal invasive surgery in the form of percutaneous reduction and fixation of fracture in treatment of fracture neck talus. From 2006 to 2008, 16 patients with fracture neck talus were operated on by closed reduction and percutaneous screw fixation in the Al-Razi orthopedic hospital in Kuwait. All cases were performed by the same surgeon (the author). The mean age of the patients was 33 years (range, 14–53 years). The mechanism of injury was motor vehicle accident in 6 cases, fall from height in 5 cases, sport injury in 3 cases, fall from stairs in one case and simple fall in one case. Associated injuries were found in 7 patients. In all cases, the injury was closed. Regarding the time of surgery, 10 patients were operated on within 1st day of the injury, two patients in the 3rd day, one patient in the 4th day, one patient in the 5th day, one patient operated on 11 days post-injury and one patient 14 days post-injury ( Injuries were classified according to modified Hawkins classification system ( With the patient in supine position under general or spinal anesthesia and under fluoroscopic guidance without use of tourniquet, reduction was done as follow. For reduction of subluxed or dislocated fragments within subtalar joint (Hawkins type II); closed reduction was tried first by plantar flexion of the foot together with forefoot and midfoot varus or valgus stress in relation to hind foot to correct angular deformity. If reduction was not achieved by closed method, then two Schanz screws with T handle were inserted into the body and the head fragment and used as Joy stick to adjust talar rotation and fracture angulation. K-wires were used for temporary fixation and the reduction was checked in A.P and lateral C-arm image views. The criteria used to assess the reduction are: (1) mid-axis of talus and that of 1st metatarsal are almost parallel in A.P and lateral image views, (2) congruent ankle, subtalar and talonavicular joints in A.P and lateral image views. Reduction of subluxed or dislocated talar body within ankle joint (Hawkins type III) was achieved by Insertion of Schanz screw with T handle into the body fragment directed from postero- lateral to antero-medial direction and using it as a Joy stick. With gentle rotary movements to release any soft tissue interposition, the body fragment was pushed inside the joint in its reduced position. Ankle joint distraction using a calcanean Steinmann pin and traction bow with counter traction through the leg greatly facilitated the reduction Reduction of subluxed or dislocated talar head within talonavicular joint (Hawkins type IV) was achieved by Insertion of Schanz screw with T handle into the head fragment from antero-medial to postero-lateral direction and using it as a Joy stick. With gentle rotary movements to release any soft tissue interposition, the head fragment was pushed inside the talonavicular joint. Talonavicular joint distraction to facilitate the reduction can be achieved by insertion of two medium sized retractors through one and half centimeter wounds, one to retract the navicular bone and other retracted talar body fragment ( Fracture was temporary fixed with K wires and reduction was assessed in AP and lateral intra-operative fluoroscopic or X-rays for talar-1st metatarsal angle and joints congruity. Fracture was percutaneously fixed by two 3.5 partially threaded cannulated screws to insure interfragmentary compression. Cannulated screws were inserted from anteromedial to posterolateral direction. Since, the neck talus has a narrow caliber, using of 2.0 Patients were followed up initially at 2-week intervals up to 6 weeks, then every 6 weeks for 3 months, every 3 months for one year, and then every 6 months. Weight bearing was allowed only when fracture became fully consolidated in follow up X-ray. Since the talus is an irregular bone with little periosteal envelop we consider the fracture fully united when: (1) obliteration of fracture line Results were evaluated using AOFAS Hind Foot Scale of American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society ( Osteoarthrosis was assessed radiographically using Paley and Hall scoring system with, Grade 0 Normal joint space with no evidence of degenerative cysts or subchondral sclerosis Grade 1 Osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis, and cysts without joint space narrowing Grade 2 Joint space narrowing Grade 3 Complete loss of joint space After a mean follow up period of 48 months (range: 36–60 months), 87.5% of the patients were satisfied and resumed their preoperative activities. The mean AOFAS Hind Foot Score was 89.25 points (range: 74–100) and no poor outcomes ( 60% of patients with type II injury achieved excellent results, while 75% of patients with type III injury achieved good results ( Ankle movements both dorsiflexion and plantarflextion were the same in the operated and nonoperated foot in 14 patients. One case showed 5° limitation for both dorsiflexion and planterflextion in comparison with healthy foot and one case showed 10° limited plantarflexion and 5° limited dorsiflexion when compared with non operated foot. Sub-talar joint movements (eversion and inversion) of operated foot were identical to the healthy side except two cases. In these two cases there was associated bilateral fracture os calcis and mild subtalar movement restriction was noticed in the foot with fracture talar neck and os calcis more than the foot with isolated os calcis fracture ( No early complications were detected in all patients. Two cases with late complications (12.5%) were reported. One case developed delayed and malunion, in which the fracture became fully consolidated after 9 months. In this patient, arthritic changes in subtalar joint were seen in follow up started to appear at the end of 3rd postoperative year. The second case showed partial AVN localized to anterior half of the body, which improved within one year without arthritis of ankle joint. No secondary sub-talar arthrodesis had been performed. See Fracture neck talus is a rare fracture characterized by high complication rate due to the high energy nature of the causative trauma and the special anatomic features of the talus. High energy trauma may lead to: (a) local effects like, fracture displacement, comminution, and soft tissue injury. (b) Skeletal effects include concomitant fractures either in the same foot or involve other bones. (c) Systemic effects like head injury, chest or abdominal trauma. These effects have a direct impact on treatment strategy and increase the risk of negative final outcome. The special anatomic features of the talus include: (a) peculiar blood supply with the main blood supply of the talar body comes from branches entering the undersurface of the talar neck, so displaced neck fracture jeopardizes the blood supply of talar body and increase the risk of AVN. (b) Tenuous soft tissue envelope without adequate muscle covering, increasing the rate of soft tissue complications. Associated complications with talar neck fracture include early complications such as, skin necrosis, wound dehiscence, and infection and late complications as osteonecrosis and posttraumatic arthritis. The early complications can be minimized by achieving urgent fracture reduction through either closed or percutaneous manipulation, and resort open reduction only when the fracture is not reducible through closed means Percutaneous reduction and screws fixation of talar neck fractures gives the advantage of early minimally invasive fracture reduction and fixation with easier patient care, rapid rehabilitation, and avoid patient exposure to two surgeries one for reduction and one for fixation. This study reported low complication rate associated with percutaneous reduction and fixation of talar neck fracture. No early complications were reported. Regarding the late complications; although a high incidence rates of AVN were reported in the literature which may reaches 100% in types III and IV talar neck fracture, this study reported only one case of partial AVN representing 6.25% of all patients and 50% of type IV patients with no AVN was reported in type II or III patients. The reported incidence of non-union of the talar neck fracture in the literatures ranges between 2.5% and 12% Regarding the functional outcome using AOFAS Hind Foot Score we achieved satisfactory results (excellent and good) in 87.5% of cases. One of the two cases with fair outcome was type IV fracture who developed partial AVN localized to anterior half of the body and AVN healed within one year with moderate restriction of both ankle and subtalar R.O.M and without arthritis of ankle or subtalar joints. The 2nd case was female patient with morbid obesity started to put weight on her fractured foot in the 3rd postoperative day due to her inability to use the crutches. After long absence (7 months) due to weight reduction surgeries, she returned back to follow up with delayed maluniting fracture. Patient refused surgical intervention and after 2 months of non weight bearing on walker frame using below knee brace fracture united with the end result was subtalar OA. Although, four of our cases were associated with ipsilateral intra-articular fracture os calcis with increased risk of subtalar arthritis, only one case revealed OA changes of subtalar joint with narrowing of joint space comparing with the uninjured side and after 38 months of follow up his clinical outcome still good (AOFAS score). Regarding the secondary reconstructive surgery, Sander said in 2004 In conclusion, the results of minimal invasive surgery in talar neck fractures in this paper showed no early soft tissue complications, low incidence of late complications and satisfactory overall outcome. So, percutaneous reduction and fixation is a promising treatment modality of fracture neck talus, especially in: cases with increased risk of soft tissue complications, cases with associated ipsilateral foot fracture and cases in which there is a delay in reduction of fracture due to associated life threatening injuries. None declared. We would like to thank Dr. Tamer Assy, and Dr. Mohamed Abdelhay for their help during surgeries. Also, We would like to extend our appreciation to Mr. Barae Abdurazak, administrator of packs in radiology department who contributed his time and experience in preparation of X-rays included in this article.