A new concept of powder atomization based on the venturi phenomenon is presented in the current work. In the proposed method, the working gas speeds-up while flowing into the venturi nozzle. Under the low static pressure developing at the narrow part of the venturi, liquid metal is sucked and mixed perfectly with the gas. By controlling the operating parameters, metal powder of different sizes and shapes can be produced. Carbon dioxide and pure aluminum were mixed in the nozzle and the effect of different operating gas pressures on the produced particle size and shape were thoroughly investigated. Most of the particles were found to average to almost 150 μm, however, even sub-micron aluminum particles were produced at low mass fractions. With the increase of the gas pressure from 0.5 bar to 4 bar, finer aluminum particles are produced. One of the most attractive features of the proposed method is the low gas pressure required to cause melt atomization, which in certain cases may be up to 30 times lower compared to current industrial atomization methods.density of the atomizing gas, kg/m distribution range Δ inlet pressure of the working gas, bar gas velocity, m/sec acceleration of gravity, 9.81 m/s the elevation of the point above a reference plane, m particle diameter corresponding to mass cumulative fraction 10%, μm particle diameter corresponding to mass cumulative fraction 50%, μm particle diameter corresponding to mass cumulative fraction 90%, μm   percentile reduction of diameter of peripheral venturi tube, m As the powder-metallurgical manufactured parts are improving their cost-efficiency and enhance their properties gaining a bigger market share In typical gas atomization methods, gases such as air, nitrogen or argon are mixed in diverse ways with molten metals to produce metal powder The experimental set-up was designed and manufactured such a way to allow flexibility in selecting operating conditions like pressure and temperature of the gas, temperature of the venturi nozzle and of the molten metal, as well as the opening speed of the gas valve. To avoid solidification of the molten metal before atomization, a superheat of 150 °C was selected for the pure aluminum As the pressurized gas is flowing from the inlet to the position of the smaller diameter of the venturi nozzle (see Once the test rig was designed and tested for its consistency, a large experimentation was scheduled to examine the efficiency of the developed method in developing Al particles. The set of experimental parameters selected for the current investigation is given in The size and morphology of the aluminum particles obtained by the low-pressure horizontal atomization process, were analyzed using an optical stereomicroscope (LEICA MS5) and a scanning electron microscope (JEOL 840A). The aluminum particles generated from this low-pressure atomization method were first observed by optical stereomicroscopy and the pictures of the atomized powders are presented in With the increase of the carbon dioxide pressure, the roundness and size scattering of the atomized aluminum powder are significantly improved. SEM observations were performed to offer a closer look at the shape and the morphology of the aluminum particles produced. In most of the cases, the produced particles are nearly spherical and smooth. The particle shape becomes more even as the size gets smaller and the shape tends to become more spherical. The shape of atomized powder depends on balling and solidification time of atomized droplets. When the solidification time is shorter than balling time, particles with irregular shape are produced. The opposite, when solidification time is longer than the balling time, the generated particles get a more spherical shape and smoother surface The larger the atomized droplets, the longer the solidification time required. This could cause incomplete solidification within the flight time from the venturi atomizer to the collection area. As a result, atomized droplets will deform further while they impact on the collector or on other particles already formed. An additional reason for the irregular atomized particles is the fact that aluminum is prone to form oxide films. For particles with very small diameter, an almost ideal spherical shape is attained as illustrated in A sieving analysis was performed to measure the particle size distribution of the produced aluminum powder. For each experimental case, five experiments were performed, with the deviation of the measured average diameter not exceeding 7%. A sensitivity analysis was preceded, concluding to perform five experiments per test-case. It involved the conduct of 3, 5 and 10 measurements in the 1 bar gas pressure case, followed by the measurement of the size distribution of the produced powder. The outcome of this analysis showed that 5 measurements per test case were adequately enough to capture the differences in the average size distribution depending on the applied gas pressure. The weight of the samples was measured between 20.3 and 25.2 gr employing an analytical balance with resolution of 10 The atomized powder produced with the developed method (as measured with the first set of sieves) follows almost lognormal distribution, as typically occurs in most of the atomization methods  Τhe values The The pressure variation has a strong influence on the statistical parameters of the mass median diameter The experiments confirm a nearly linear decrease of the median diameter The By increasing gas atomization pressure, finer particles are produced. The developed device has a pressure limit of 5 bar as highlighted in To the best of our knowledge, the low-pressure atomization method presented in the current investigation is a simple, effective and environmentally friendly atomization method with high potential for industrial exploitation. A simple prototype gas atomizing device working with very low working atomizing pressure, was developed. For the first time, molten metal was atomized successfully with such a small atomizing pressure. The sieving analysis shows a trend of the device to produce particles with median diameter ( The work has been internally funded by the Physical Metallurgy Laboratory, Mechanical Engineering Department,