Long-chain amines, used in potash ore flotation as collectors, are insoluble in NaCl–KCl saturated brine. In commercial applications, these amines are melted at 70–90 °C, dispersed in acidic solution of hydrochloric or acetic acids, and such emulsions are then introduced to the flotation pulp.
                  To model the commercial potash ore flotation process, dodecyl amine, used in this study, was melted at 70 °C, dispersed in hydrochloric acid aqueous solution and was added to a KCl–NaCl saturated brine at room temperature. This results in the precipitation of the amine. The present study summarizes the influence of the conditions on the particle size and morphology of the precipitating amine particles. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), common frother in flotation processes, was shown to affect amine dispersion when added into a hot amine emulsion prior to mixing with a saturated brine. This study demonstrates that the precipitating amine particles are selectively abstracted by KCl particles, but not by NaCl particles.Sylvite (KCl) and halite (NaCl), two main components of sylvinite (potash) ores, are commonly separated by flotation. Since both these minerals are soluble in water the process is carried out in NaCl–KCl saturated brine. Long-chain primary amines are utilized as a collector to float selectively sylvite. Since potash ores also contain a few percent of water-insoluble minerals, which in this process appear in the form of slimes, the process critically depends on desliming. At 20 °C, 1.450 kg of the NaCl–KCl saturated solution contains about 0.300 kg of NaCl and 0.150 kg of KCl and 1 kg of water ( There is a huge amount of evidence that indicates that collector selective adsorption is a main reason for selectivity of flotation. However, these results come from the research carried out with the low ionic strength systems. But even in such systems a quite different mechanism is also possible. In the emulsion flotation, in which “oily” water-insoluble collectors are utilized, the selectivity of the process depends on the selective attachment of the oil droplets to mineral surfaces ( The fact that wettability of different water-soluble minerals in brines can be different was already taken into consideration by As indicated by In commercial flotation operations, C16–C22 long-chain primary amines are melted by heating up to 70–90 °C and neutralized with hydrochloric or acetic acids. This converts the amine to an ammonium salt. The resulting hot emulsion/dispersion is introduced to the flotation pulp (which in Saskatchewan is at a temperature of 24–32 °C). Once added to the flotation pulp (where the flotation medium is saturated brine) the hot amine dispersion rapidly cools down to a temperature far below the Krafft point ( As the discussed pieces of evidence indicate the nature of the species that render KCl surfaces hydrophobic in the cationic flotation of potash ores is not known at all. The objective of this study is to investigate the dispersion system which long chain amine forms when it is introduced into a KCl–NaCl saturated brine, and the abstraction of the species formed in such systems by KCl and NaCl particles. The amine used in this study was 98% pure dodecyl amine (DDA), supplied by Dachat Chemicals Inc. In order to prepare 2 wt.% dispersions of DDA in water, DDA was heated up to 70 °C. Once the solid melted, it was mixed with 100 ml of distilled water containing HCl (also at 70 °C). The quantity of HCl was calculated to achieve a 1:1 molar ratio of DDA to HCl, as indicated in Eq. For the sake of convenience, it is still referred to as “amine” or “DDA” throughout the text. In some cases (see next section), MIBC was added to the hot solution of distilled water and HCl to obtain 2:1 molar ratio between amine and MIBC. Saturated brine was prepared by dissolving an excess amount of potash ore (provided by the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation) containing both sylvite and halite minerals in tap water. The ore/water mixture was allowed to equilibrate for 3 days and thereafter filtered to remove any insoluble impurities and un-dissolved salt particles.  With MIBC added to the 2 wt.% DDA emulsion. The amine/brine dispersions were prepared by adding 10 ml of the 2 wt.% dispersions of DDA to 100 ml of saturated brine. Three types of dispersions were prepared. With MIBC added to saturated brine. Without MIBC. In the first case, MIBC was added directly to the hot solution of amine in distilled water, as described in Section 2.1.1. In the second case, the equivalent amount of MIBC was added to the 100 ml of saturated brine prior to mixing with the 2 wt.% amine dispersion. In the last case, no MIBC was added to the system. Two further variations of the above mentioned dispersions were prepared following either fast cooling or slow cooling. In the former case, the hot 2 wt.% amine dispersions were added to saturated brine at room temperature. This resulted in a rapid cooling of the amine dispersions, simulating the industrial flotation process. In the latter case, the saturated brine was heated up to 70 °C prior to mixing with the hot amine dispersion, and the final mixture was allowed to slowly cool overnight. A flowchart summarising all the different dispersion types is given in Optical microscopy images were obtained using the Olympus BX600 microscope, which was fitted with a digital camera (Olympus U PMTVC). Samples of the dispersions were placed on a glass slide using a pipette and positioned in the microscope stage and viewed in transmitted light. To ensure reproducibility, over twenty images were collected per condition. All the images were in the .JPG format, 2560 Visual analysis of the optical microscopy images suggested that image analysis methods would be suitable for determining particle size information. The samples fell into two categories, those which could be easily segmented using simple thresholding techniques (see As mentioned, visual inspection of the dataset containing images of small, opaque particles suggested that simple thresholding could be used to segment the individual particles in the optical microscopy images. To achieve this, the images where converted from colour to greyscale images. Otsu's method ( The nature of these images was such that they did not lend themselves to be segmented using a simple greyscale thresholding. Visual inspection of the images showed that the particles in the images were typically different from the background colour, but sometimes the particles appeared translucent. The approach to segmenting these images was as follows: It was assumed that for each of the images, the majority of the image pixels where in fact background pixels of similar colour. So, by analysing the distribution of the colours in the image, it should be possible to identify the background areas of the images, and thereby identify the foreground areas (particles) as well. In order to segment according to the colour of the particles, the RGB images where transformed to the HSV (hue, saturation and value) colour space. For each of the H, S and V layers, histograms were determined, and the maximal location of the histogram identified. The maximum location in the histogram is indicative of the most common (probable) value for a pixel, and is therefore representative of the background colour. A user-specified parameter was used to specify how similar to the most probable background value a pixel should be, to be considered a background pixel. This method was utilized to identify background and foregrounds for each of the H,S, and V layers. A binary OR operation was then used to combine these results into a single binary image. Visual inspection of the results showed that while they were mostly accurate, at times single large particles would be incorrectly over-segmented, and occasionally clusters of tiny particles were under-segmented. Due to the relatively small size of the data set, it was possible to manually improve the segmentation of these over- and under-segmented particles by manipulation of the output binary images in image editing software. The results of this process are shown in It should be noted, that in the case of both opaque and transparent particles, all the segmented regions containing fewer than five pixels were automatically removed. This was done because it was impossible to tell from a visual inspection whether or not the segmentation represented a real particle or an arbitrary artefact of the image. Once the individual particles have been identified, it is a trivial task to calculate the area of each particle, initially in pixels, and then converted into μm The turbidity measurements were performed using HATCH 2100AN turbidimeter. The measurements were performed in triplicate, using 10 ml samples. The dispersions of amine were not stable, as the particles have a tendency to aggregate at the air/solution interface. Due to this, there was a substantial amount of drift within the turbidity measurements with time. For this reason, the turbidity measurement was consistently taken after 60 s have elapsed. FTIR spectra were determined using a PerkinElmer System 2000 FT-IR spectrometer. Polished KCl and NaCl plates, obtained from Xymotech Labs, were used for the measurements, with the plates being placed directly in the beam path. The background spectra were obtained using both KCl and NaCl plates which were first rinsed in saturated brine. After rinsing, the plates were placed edge-on on glass slides and allowed to dry overnight. In order to determine whether or not amine adsorption takes place on the plate surfaces, the plates were first rinsed in brine then immediately brought into contact with the amine dispersions using a pair of tweezers. The plates were swirled around in the dispersions for the duration of 1 min, making sure they came into frequent contact with the air interface. After 1 min, the plates were removed from the amine suspension and gently rinsed in fresh saturated brine. After rinsing, the plates were placed edge-on on glass slides and allowed to dry overnight. The DDA/brine dispersions, prepared under a variety of conditions, were viewed under an optical microscope in order to examine the size and morphology of the resulting DDA particles. Examples of the obtained images are shown in As it is seen in the images, the solid particles are present in these systems. This confirms that DDA precipitates in saturated brine and forms a colloidal system. Furthermore, it can be seen that the addition of MIBC to the hot DDA emulsion ( It is also clear from Another interesting observation that can be drawn from Finally, it can be observed from In order to obtain a quantitative comparison of the particle sizes in the DDA dispersions, the images were digitally analysed in a manner described in The results clearly demonstrate the size range of solidified amine particles. The particles range in size between circa 3 and 800 µm. These numbers should be considered with caution, specifically in the case of the larger crystal-like particles, as they represent two-dimensional rather than 3 dimensional shapes. The tendency of amine to aggregate at the air–water interface results in the formation of thin flat planes, rather than spheroids. The results also confirm the visual observations ( In addition, In order to further confirm the findings of the measurements obtained using microscopic images of DDA/brine solutions, the same solutions were subjected to turbidity measurements. Turbidity measurements are strongly indicative of the degree of aggregation/dispersion as well as a good gauge of particle size differences. The precipitating amine colloidal particles tend to aggregate at the air/brine interface. It follows that the particles with the lowest volume (and hence the smallest size) would rise to the surface a lot slower and result in higher solution turbidity. The turbidity results for the DDA/brine dispersions are presented in Once again, the results clearly confirm the findings described in the previous sections. The turbidity of the dispersions where MIBC was present in the DDA emulsion show turbidity levels more than double those of the remainder of the dispersions. This confirms that the colloidal system formed under this condition exhibits both smaller particle size and a greater degree of dispersion. The results presented in Unlike the size analysis results, the turbidity results show substantial differences between slow cooling and rapidly cooling conditions. The conditions were dispersions were cooled rapidly exhibit higher levels of turbidity than the slow cooling conditions, indicating a smaller particle size and a greater degree of dispersion. The differences are small, but significant on a 99% confidence interval. As discussed in the previous sections, the method of preparation of amine/brine dispersion affects the size, dispersion degree and the morphology of the resulting DDA particles. However, the rate at which the dispersions were cooled down played only a small role in determining the size of the particles. Similarly, only a very insignificant effect of MIBC was observed when MIBC was added to brine as compared with the effect of MIBC when added to a hot DDA emulsion. In lieu of these findings, the next section of the paper focuses on only two conditions: absence of MIBC and the presence of MIBC in the DDA emulsion. For all the results that follow, the amine/brine dispersions were prepared by the slow cooling method. This section of the paper aims at determining whether large amine aggregates and crystals are able to selectively attach to the surface of KCl plates. This was achieved by contacting polished NaCl and KCl plates with the amine/brine dispersions and analysing the resulting surfaces using both microscopy and FTIR spectroscopy. In order to establish an FTIR spectrum for DDA (more specifically the ammonium salt of dodecylamine), the concentrated DDA dispersion was placed directly onto the surfaces of KCl and NaCl particles and allowed to dry. The resulting spectra are presented in The figure shows spectra in the wavelength number range between 2700 and 3100 cm Once the spectra corresponding to DDA were established, the attachment characteristics and selectivity of solid amine particles could be investigated. First, the attachment behaviour of DDA on sodium chloride was tested. The plates were analysed using FTIR spectroscopy as well as viewed under an optical microscope to examine the visual effect of amine attachment on the plate's surface.  In order to confirm that no attachment of DDA particles occur on the NaCl surface, the FTIR spectrum was obtained for these NaCl plates. Spectrum A ( Similar tests were preformed using sylvite, or KCl plates.  In order to confirm that the attached particles, seen in Spectra B and C represent the measurements on the KCl plates brought into contact with DDA/brine dispersions both in the presence and absence of MIBC (corresponding to A number of experimental techniques were used to study the factors that may affect the precipitation of dodecyl amine in saturated brine. Several conclusions are evident from the presented data: Solidified particles are formed when aqueous dispersion of hot dodecyl amine is added to brine at room temperature. These particles can vary significantly in size, between circa 30 and 800 µm. The morphology of these particles can also vary between small, amorphous colloidal particles and large, transparent crystals — depending on the conditions of the suspension preparation process. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) acts as a strong dispersing agent, affecting both the size of the amine particles and their aggregation. However, MIBC only acts efficiently as a dispersant when added to a hot DDA/distilled water emulsion prior to mixing with saturated brine. The presence of MIBC, when added to saturated brine at room temperature had no significant effect on either size or morphology of DDA particles (compared to the conditions without MIBC). The rate of cooling of DDA/brine dispersions had a marginal effect on the size and aggregation of DDA particles. Rapidly cooling dispersion produced slightly finer particles with a greater degree of dispersion. However this effect could only be observed using turbidity measurements. Neither visual observations nor particle size analysis with image processing techniques could detect such effects. The selectivity of attachment of DDA particles was tested using both microscopy and FTIR spectroscopy methods. The following conclusions can be drawn: DDA particles attach to the surfaces of polished KCl plates as evidenced by images obtained via an optical microscope. This finding is confirmed by analysing the KCl plates using FTIR spectra which exhibit peaks characteristic for DDA. The attachment of DDA particles to the surface of KCl and NaCl is selective as no attachment took place on the surfaces of NaCl plates. The results indicate that precipitating amine particles when hot amine dispersions are added to cold brine are selectively abstracted by KCl particles in the potash flotation process.