Ceria nanoparticles were facilely synthesized by a molten NaOH–KOH hydroxide flux method with the precursor of Ce(NO3)3·6H2O under different conditions in alumina crucibles or Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. The XRD patterns and TEM images show that both the crystal and particle sizes of synthesized nanoceria are around 10 nm. XPS results reveal that the nanoceria obtained in alumina crucible has a Ce3+ fraction of 17.1% which is higher than that of ceria synthesized in the Teflon vessel, the FTIR spectra of nanoceria prepared in alumina crucible show a stronger intensity of O–H stretching mode. UV-DRS and PL spectra results show that the nanoceria synthesized in alumina crucible with a calculated band gap of 2.9 eV has a wider responding light wavelength and a lower photogenerated electron–hole recombination rate, due to a higher concentration of oxygen vacancies (Ce3+ %). The photocatalytic results show that the degradation ratio and rate of the Rhodamine B (RhB) solution with the nanoceria synthesized in alumina crucible are 98.39% and 0.02919 min−1, both of which are larger than those of the ceria obtained from Teflon vessel. This method proves to be a simple and scalable way to synthesize nanoceria with rich oxygen vacancies and high photocatalytic activity.Cerium is the most abundant rare earth element, it has an electron structure of Xe 4f However, ceria has a large band gap (2.7–3.4 eV) The techniques for synthesizing nanoceria particles were reported as precipitation, Normally, precursors have an influence on the size and morphology of synthesized nanoceria. So in this work, we synthesized nanoceria by a molten NaOH–KOH hydroxide flux with different amounts of Ce(NO All the chemicals were purchased from Aladdin Chemistry Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). To obtain the nanoceria, Ce(NO The synthesized powders were subjected to several analyses. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) pattern was recorded by using X-Pert Powder (Panalytical, the Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation ( The photocatalytic properties were tested by a photochemical reactor, which consisted of a glass vessel and a 250 W mercury lamp. 150 mL Rhodamine B (RhB) solution with a concentrate of 10 mg/L was used for simulating the waste dye solution, and 10 mg nanoceria was added into the reactor. After 30 min of absorption, the lamp was turned on and the catalyst reacted with the RhB under a light facula, and 5 mL solution was sampled for each 30 min in the next 2 h. The sampled solution was centrifuged firstly with a speed of 10000 r/min for 5 min and then the RhB concentration was measured by a spectrophotometer. The degradation ratio can be calculated by the following formula: The XRD patterns of produced nanoceria under various conditions are shown in From According to the XRD results, the corresponding crystal information is shown in From The TEM images of synthesized powders are shown in  From all the TEM images, we can find that the nanoparticles synthesized with the precursor of Ce(NO The XPS spectra results of ceria synthesized in Teflon vessel and alumina crucible are shown in  The Ce The Ce  The nanoceria synthesized in alumina crucible and Teflon vessel were subjected to FTIR analysis, and the results are shown in UV-visible DRS results are shown in The PL spectra of the nanoceria synthesized in alumina crucible and Teflon vessel are presented in The photocatalytic properties of the samples synthesized in the alumina crucible and the Teflon vessel are shown in The photocatalytic reaction kinetics in general follows the Langmuir-Hinshelwood (L-H) equation which is given as At a low concentration of RhB and weak adsorption ( So the integration of Eq.    Based on the literature Electrons are excited from the valence band to the conduction band when the energy of light irradiated is equal to or greater than the photocatalyst and holes are created in valence band. The h According to the XPS, UV-DRS and PL spectra results, the mechanism of the enhancement of oxygen vacancies on ceria photocatalytic properties can be summarized as shown in Moreover, we analyzed the BET surface of synthesized nanoceria. It is found that the BET surface of the ceria synthesized in the alumina crucible and in the Teflon vessel was 110.23 and 82.34 m In this work we investigated the nanoceria synthesized by a molten NaOH-KOH hydroxide flux method with the precursor of Ce(NO The authors appreciate Dr. Qi Sun from Metallurgical Analysis Center of Guizhou University for assistance with the TEM analyses.