Amines (alkylamines–ether amines) are employed on a large scale to separate iron ores by reverse flotation of the gangue particles (mostly quartz and silicates). Quartz gangue particles coated with amine collector are dumped in tailings dams as concentrated pulps. Then, the fraction of the amines that detach from the surfaces and the portion that is soluble in water, contaminate surface and ground-water supplies. This work presents a novel flotation technique to remove decyl-trimethyl-ether-amine (collector employed in Brazilian iron mines) from water. This amine forms precipitates at pH>10.5 which are removed by flotation with microbubbles (MBs: 30–100μm) and nanobubbles (NBs: 150–800nm). Bubbles were generated simultaneously by depressurization of air-saturated water (P
                     sat of 66.1psi during 25min) forced through a flow constrictor (needle valve). The flotation by these bubbles is known as DAF-dissolved air flotation, one of the most efficient separation technologies in water and wastewater treatment. Herein, best results (80% amine removal) were obtained only after selective separation of the MBs from the NBs exploring the fact that while the NBs remain dispersed in water, the MBs rise leaving the system. The MBs, because of their buoyancy, rise too rapidly and do not collide and adhere appropriately at the amine colloids/water interface, even causing some precipitates breakage. It was found that the “isolated” NBs attach onto the amine precipitates; aggregate (flocculate) them and entrain inside the flocs before rising by flotation. Because of the low residual amine concentration in water (6mgL−1), it is believed that this flotation technique have potential in this particular treatment of residual amine-bearing effluents.Amines are organic compounds widely used in the industry. The consumption of these reagents as flotation agents (collectors) in iron and potassium mining is growing fast in Brazil ( It is estimated that approximately 5500 The use of amines in mining industry has been a matter of concern because of various environmental problems involved; amines are accumulated in large quantities in tailings dams and present incomplete degradation ( High levels of fatty amines can be harmful and cannot be directly disposed into aquatic bodies (  DAF-dissolved air flotation is a well-known separation technology for removing colloids, precipitates, flocs, oily drops, fine pollutants and ultra-fines solids ( The amines are precipitated in alkaline medium, after a decrease of their solubility at pH This work is a continuation of a series on flotation of pollutants which also explores the properties of nanobubbles (NBs) on flotation systems ( Solutions (2–500 Solutions of pre-polymerized coagulant Acquafloc 18 (Al A buffer solution, composed of bromocresol green, potassium biphthalate and 0.1 The residual turbidity (NTU) of solutions was measured with a nephelometer (Hach® 2100N) in order to follow the precipitation of the amine Flotigam EDA 3B at pH 10.8. Measurements (triplicated runs) were performed at different amine concentrations and pH 10.8 (standard deviations were <1%). The higher the turbidity, the greater the concentration of the colloidal precipitates. The amine precipitates were characterized by their size and zeta potential. The particle size distribution and the zeta potential of the nano sized amine precipitates were determined using a Zeta Sizer Nano ZS (red badge) – ZEN3600 – Malvern® Instrument. The particle size distribution of the micrometric precipitates was determined by laser diffraction (Cilas® 1064). The ZetaSizer Nano employs a Laser Doppler Micro-electrophoresis technique whereby an electric field is applied to the precipitates migrating at a velocity that is dependent on zeta potential. This velocity is measured by laser interferometry-M3-PALS (phase analysis light scattering), which enables the calculation of the electrophoretic mobilities, then converted to zeta potential (millivolts) using Smoluchowski’s equation ( The experiments were performed in duplicate with three runs of analysis for each sample and the mean values were calculated with associated errors corresponding to the standard deviation of the data. These studies were carried out in Jar Test® equipment (0.6 The resulting suspension was submitted to a rapid stirring (120 Here, DAF will refer to conventional flotation with MBs and NBs and F-NBs will refer to flotation with only NBs, after separation of the MBs. MBs have been measured in our laboratory as having Sauter diameters varying between 30 and 100 Flotation studies were carried out using the same setup shown as in The saturation of pure deionized water in air was achieved in a stainless steel vessel with a height of 15 The flotation of the precipitate flocs followed, using 150  The separation of the bubbles proceeded simply letting the MBs rise (about 4 In both studies (DAF and F-NBs), the flotation lasted 2 The residual concentration of the Flotigam EDA 3B was determined using a colorimetric method, by placing in a separating funnel 25 Standard solutions of 5, 10, 15 and 25 Optical microphotographs of amine precipitates in aqueous dispersion were taken in the presence and absence of NBs. An optical microscope Olympus® model BX41 was employed with an objective magnification of 400× and 1000× coupled to a Microscope Digital Camera of high-performance, Olympus DP73 (17.28 megapixel of resolution). In this procedure, the amine precipitates were conditioned with NBs aqueous dispersion, produced and separated from MBs as described before (Section  Validation of these data was performed here by monitoring turbidity measurements as a function of concentration of the ether amine, at pH 10.8 ( These insoluble species of amines have a wide particle-size distribution, from visible precipitates (mm), colloidal precipitates (microns) and invisible nanoparticles (nanometers).   It is believed that, in the presence of MBs, which present faster rising velocities, the contact time (microbubble/precipitates) is rather short for bubble attachment. Also, some precipitate breakage was observed visually. Conversely, the NBs are known to interact with hydrophobic surfaces and a number of authors ( The results obtained in this study are unique and to our knowledge not a single paper of flotation of precipitated particles by NBs has been published. Thus, these NBs appear to interact with the amine precipitates (or flocs) as follows: i. Attachment (adhesion) at the precipitates (flocs)/solution interface; ii. Aggregation of the precipitates (flocs); iii. Entrainment or entrapment of the NBs followed by flotation of the aggregates. According to The formation of toxic compounds such as nitrosamines (carcinogenic) through reactions between precursor amines and oxidants such as nitrites ( The amine-based carbon capture facilities that drain amines to the surface and underground waters constitute a new problem ( However, there is still no specific legislation for the emission standards for amine compounds and studies report that a high rate of biodegradability (by bacteria) of alkylamines is associated with its concentration. Thus, values of amine concentration above 10 A number of recent studies have reported some advantages in mineral flotation in the presence of NBs and this work also shows benefits in the removal of a pollutant. Authors from Kentucky State University (USA) claim that NBs increase the contact angles at the bubble–mineral particle interface and, subsequently, enhance the probability of bubble–particle attachment and stability ( More, NBs would also enhance particle flotation recoveries at lower collector and frother dosages and at high kinetic flotation rate ( Because of the novelty and efficiency on the removal of the toxic amines by flotation with NBs, this work will continue including the validation of the results at pilot scale in a column-like flotation cell, searching for the possibility of amine reuse and evaluation of general costs. A parallel contribution would be to assist environmental agencies in establishing emissions standard limits in ore mining operations. Another challenge, important from an engineering viewpoint, is the sustainable generation of NBs at a high rate; this may be possible by optimizing the depressurization technique and exploring power acoustic or ultrasonic cavitation; blowing gas through turbulent flow (shearing) in cavitation tubes or fluidic oscillators, among others ( Decyl-trimethyl-ether amine, employed on a large scale in the iron ore industry, precipitates at pH The authors would like to thank all the Brazilian Institutes supporting this research, namely