A series of Se- and Te-doped skutterudite Co4Sb11.9-xTexSe0.1 (x = 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6) samples are prepared by a process encompassing rapid microwave synthesis for 5 min and spark plasma sintering for 5 min and their microstructure and thermoelectric properties are studied. Nearly single-phase Co4Sb11.9-xTexSe0.1 ingots are produced by the microwave synthesis and matrix grains appear after the microwave treatment. The influence of the dopant concentration on the thermoelectric properties is discussed. The largest dimensionless thermoelectric figure of merit of 0.81 is observed from Co4Sb11.5Te0.4Se0.1 at 773 K in addition to a thermal conductivity of 2.8 Wm−1K−1. The preparation technique presented here has many advantages compared to conventional methods especially the efficiency.Thermoelectric materials which can convert heat energy into electric energy directly without pollution or noise have excellent reliability and portability [ Skutterudite-based materials have attracted attention for potential thermoelectric applications in power generation at intermediate temperature. Skutterudite compounds have the general formula of MX In general, preparation of skutterudite compounds is quite difficult and complicated. In the conventional method, long-time melting/solid-state/high pressure synthesis is performed in vacuum-sealed quartz. After quenching, annealing, crushing, and sintering, the materials are prepared by spark plasma sintering (SPS) or hot press sintering (HPS) [ In this study, a series of Se- and Te-doped skutterudite Co Cobalt (∼48 μm, 99.99%), antimony (∼20 μm, 99.9%), tellurium (∼75 μm, 99.99%), and selenium (∼75 μm, 99.9%) powders were weighed to yield the desirable compositions of Co The phase composition was determined on a Bruker/D8-ADVANCE diffractometer and the microstructure was examined using the FEI/Nano-SEM430. The Seebeck coefficients and electrical resistivity were measured using the JouleYacht/Namicro-3 system. The Hall coefficients, carrier concentrations, and mobility were determined on the JouleYacht/HET system and the thermal diffusivity was monitored by the Netzsch/LFA-427 laser flash thermal analyzer. The electronic thermal conductivity was calculated as The XRD patterns of the as-synthesized ingots and sintered samples are presented in The densities of the Co The carrier concentration The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity, Seebeck coefficient, and power factor of Co The temperature dependence of the electronic thermal conductivity, lattice thermal conductivity, and total thermal conductivity of Co The thermoelectric figure of merits (ZT) of the Co A series of Se- and Te-doped skutterudite Co This work was jointly supported by