The leaching behaviour of three Fe-containing sphalerite minerals (0.45, 11.40, and 12.90 wt.% Fe) was investigated at pH 1 in O2-purged HClO4 from 25 to 85 °C. For all three sphalerite samples, the leach data closely fitted a rate expression which incorporates both a shrinking sphere term and rate control via diffusion through a reacted surface layer. The leach rate increased with increasing Fe content of the sphalerite. At 85 °C after 168 h of leaching, 0.89 of the Zn had been leached from the 12.90 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite while, over the same period of time, 0.49 of the Zn had leached from the 0.45 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite.
                  The activation energies for leaching decreased with increasing Fe content of the sphalerite (i.e. for Zn leaching 63±6, 50±7 and 39±2 kJ mol−1 for the 0.45, 11.40 and 12.90 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite samples, respectively). The activation energy of leaching of Fe and Zn was within experimental error for the 11.40 and 12.90 wt.% sphalerite samples. The solution Fe content was not measured reliably for the 0.45 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite.
                  The leaching mechanisms have been interpreted as a function of surface speciation, which was analysed using time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) for samples leached at 85 °C. The decrease in Zn dissolution rate on leaching is attributed to the formation and growth of a polysulfide surface layer, which forms during the initial rapid leach period. The formation of elemental sulfur during the subsequent slow leach period does not further affect the leach rates. The concentrations of polysulfide and elemental sulfur that form increase with increasing Fe concentration as expected from the higher leach rates. The formation of polysulfide and elemental sulfur on the ZnS surface consumes H+ (via conversion to H2O) thus decreasing solution acidity.The control of surface oxidation during the separation of valuable ore components by flotation, mineral leaching for metal recovery and acid mine drainage The majority of sphalerite dissolution studies have focused either on the application of strong oxidants (particularly Fe The leaching of a 0.45 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite proceeds via an initial rapid leach stage followed by a slow leach stage The sphalerite leaching rate The S 2p To date a systematic study comparing leach kinetics and surface layer speciation for a range of Fe-containing sphalerite minerals over long leach periods has not been carried out. By correlating surface speciation with the leach rate data, we have been able to interpret the differences in leach rates observed for sphalerite minerals containing different concentrations of Fe. Three sphalerite minerals with bulk Fe concentrations of 0.45 wt.% (Cartharge Tennessee, USA), 11.40 wt.% (Broken Hill, New South Wales) and 12.90 wt.% (Emmaville, New South Wales) were exposed to O Bulk chemical analysis for each sphalerite mineral (size fraction 38–75 μm) is shown in A further comparative leach experiment has been carried out using a pyrite (Haunzala, Peru) sample. The pyrite bulk analysis for the 38–75 μm size fraction is given in The leach data was modelled through the application of It is necessary to incorporate a term to account for the effective change in surface area over the period of the leach as, for example, on leaching of the 12.90 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite approximately 0.88 of the Zn was leached over 168 h. This was not done in the leach analysis reported in Solid samples were collected periodically during the leach experiments carried out at 85 °C. Samples for XPS and ToF-SIMS analysis were collected and prepared using the same methodology as described previously To investigate and measure changes in pH as a function of mineral composition and leach time, pyrite and two of the Fe-containing sphalerite mineral samples (0.45 and 11.40 wt.% Fe) were leached (O Two examples of leach profiles are given in The Zn and Fe leach rate constants for the various temperatures for the Fe-containing sphalerite minerals are reported in The calculated activation energies ( Solid samples of the Fe-containing sphalerite minerals were collected at various intervals during the leach experiments carried out at 85 °C. A ratio of the crystalline elemental sulfur, S Samples were freshly ground and leached at 85 °C (O A shift from S It is apparent in ToF-SIMS analysis was carried out after leaching of the 0.45, 11.40 and 12.90 wt.% Fe sphalerite minerals for 1, 3, 8, 18, and 144 h at 85 °C. The ToF-SIMS spectra from 21 particles were normalised (to total ion yield) and statistically analysed according to the method described in The ToF-SIMS surface analysis For the 0.45 wt.% Fe-containing sample, an increase in polymeric sulfur species (S SEM was used to image the surface microstructure for the 11.40 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite over the 144 h leach period at 85 °C The nature of and inhomogeneity in the polymeric S species was further investigated using ToF-SIMS. Surfaces of the fresh and 144 h leached 12.90 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite were compared. ToF-SIMS secondary ion images of the freshly ground particles The pH behaviour of the solutions used to leach pyrite and the 0.45 and 11.40 wt.% Fe sphalerite minerals are shown in An additional experiment was performed on the 11.40 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite sample using anoxic conditions (Ar gas purge). In this case, only a slight increase in pH from 2.9 to 3.1 occurred in the first hour. The pH remained constant thereafter. It is apparent that O The well-known overall equation for the oxidation (by O It is not possible to write an equivalent sequence for oxidation and dissolution of pure sphalerite (or other monosulfide minerals). In contrast, the equivalent expression for sphalerite gives an overall reaction of: The addition of these three steps (divided through by 2) gives the overall equation. However, the pH increases on dissolution of Fe-containing sphalerite as shown in One H The higher the sphalerite Fe concentration, the greater the surface concentration and degree of oxidation of S species after a given period of leaching, due to the increased leach rate. A higher solution pH results, as the production of polysulfide species (and elemental S) consumes solution H For all three Fe-containing sphalerite minerals, the leach data are commensurate with a model incorporating a shrinking sphere term with the reaction rate controlled via diffusion through a solid surface layer, in this case polysulfide, formed as a product of the leaching process. The rates of Zn and Fe release are dependent on Fe concentration with higher leach rates being observed for the sphalerite samples containing greater concentrations of Fe. The greater the concentration of Fe in the sphalerite, the greater the surface concentration of oxidised sulfur species observed. This is a consequence of the higher leach rates of the 11.40 and 12.90 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite minerals as compared to the 0.45 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite. No passivation or reduction in leach rate was observed for the 0.45, 11.40 and 12.90 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite minerals as a function of the increased proportion of elemental sulfur observed both as a function of time and as a function of Fe content. It appears likely that the elemental sulfur formed remains highly porous thus allowing the reactants and products to diffuse through or between the localised regions without significant diffusion control. The activation energies are consistent with a solid diffusion-controlled leach reaction rate. The activation energies for both Zn and Fe dissolution are dependent on the sphalerite Fe concentration and decrease with increasing Fe concentration. However for any given sphalerite, the Zn and Fe leach activation energies are the same within experimental error. (Fe leach rates were not reliably measured for the 0.45 wt.% Fe-containing sphalerite.) On leaching of the sphalerite minerals in a solution initially at pH 2.9, the pH of the leach solution either remains relatively stable or shifts to more alkaline pH suggesting that H