ZnO nanorods were synthesized by direct precipitation method from zinc ammonium chloride solutions. Firstly, the Taguchi method based on orthogonal array design (OAD) was used to maximize zinc extraction from zinc cathode melting furnace slags (ZCMFSs). The optimum conditions for the preparation of precursor were found to be t
                     4: 70min, T
                     5: 80°C, (S/L)2: 40g/L, R
                     3: 500rpm, and C
                     4: 25wt% and thus, the dissolution percentage of Zn in ammonium chloride media was obtained 94.61%.
                  Dilution and cooling precipitation methods were used to synthesize ZnO nanorods. Productions were characterized by XRD, FESEM and UV–Vis spectroscopy to evaluate phases, crystalline size and optical properties of nanorods. Particle sizes were found 68 and 113nm in diameter for dilution and cooling precipitation methods, respectively. BET method was used to determine specific surface area of the nanorods which achieved 17.85 and 9m2/g for dilution and cooling precipitation methods, respectively.Among the nonferrous metals, zinc is one of the most commonly used metals. It is recovered from primary sulphide concentrates, zinc ash, zinc dross, flue dusts of electric arc furnace and brass smelting, automobile shredder scrap, rayon industry sludge, etc. which contain different level of impurities. Recently, there has been an increasing interest in developing processes for the recovery of zinc from secondaries/wastes. The hydrometallurgical processes are more environmentally suitable and economical to treat even low zinc containing materials on small scale In recent years, a lot of researches have been done on nanostructure materials due to their unique properties and quantum nature which have an influence on the material solid state properties. Zinc oxide (ZnO) as a metal oxide nanoparticle and an n-type semiconductor has drawn attention toward itself due to specific properties such as wide band gap (3.37 Different methods were used to synthesize ZnO such as combustion The shape and morphology of ZnO nanoparticles have an effect on its properties and applications. There are ZnO with different structure such as nanosheets Taguchi design method which is a combination of mathematical and statistical techniques was introduced and used in this work. This method is economical in characterization of a multivariable processes since uses fewer experiments for optimization of the levels of various parameters. It can determine the experimental condition having the least variability, which can be expressed by signal to noise (S/N) ratio, as the optimum condition. Also, this method is utilized to evaluate the relationship between one or more response variables and a set of quantitative experimental variables or factors This research is part of a continuing effort to recovery valuable materials from zinc cathode melting furnace slags (ZCMFSs) and hereby, ZnO nanorods were synthesized by direct precipitation method from prepared solution. Since it is easy to precipitate most impurities from chloride solution, we have carried out our research based on chloride solution. The optimum condition for leaching and preparation of suitable solution from ZCMFSs containing Zn Zinc cathode melting furnace slags (ZCMFSs) was obtained from the Zanjan Zinc Khales sazan Industries Company located at Zanjan, Iran. The slag's mineralogical structure was identified by X-ray diffraction analysis. Major and trace elements were analyzed using Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS) (Varian model AA 240). Zinc analysis in the leach liquor was performed by complexometric titration, using ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) as the titrant and Xylenol orange as the indicator. The leaching experiments were performed in a 2-L beaker in thermostatically controlled water bath equipped with mechanical agitator and temperature was controlled using a digital controller with the accuracy of ±1 The technique of defining and investigating all possible conditions in an experiment involving multiple factors is known as the design of experiments To use the S/N ratio (with performance characteristics of the higher, the better) for optimal dissolution performance, SNL calculation was performed to maximize zinc recovery in leach liquor solution. This performance characteristic was evaluated using the following equation: In Taguchi method, the experiment corresponding to optimum working conditions might not have been done during the whole period of the experimental stage. In such cases, the performance value corresponding to optimum working conditions can be predicted by utilizing the balanced characteristic of OA. Under these conditions, the following additive model may be used: A verification experiment is a powerful tool for detecting the presence of interactions among the control parameters. If the predicted response under the optimum conditions does not match the observed response, then it implies the fact that the interactions are important. If the predicted response matches the observed response, then it implies the fact that the interactions are probably not important and that the additive model is a good approximation Two direct precipitation methods were used: (a) dilution and (b) cooling. Dilution method is one of the easiest ways to control and make saturated solution for precipitation step. When solution is diluted by distilled water, concentration of solvent will be declined and precipitation of zinc compounds (precursor) from super saturated solution will be occurred. In order to fabricate pure nanostructure with high crystalinity, dilution was carried out at the temperature of 80 Since solubility of ZnO in ammonium chloride solution is decreased by reducing temperature, so another way for fabrication of precursor and ZnO nanostructure can be cooling method. In cooling precipitation method, proper amount of solution was filtered and poured in 2-L beaker which was stirring by the speed of 200 In order to characterize synthesied materials, following methods were used:      X-ray diffraction of the slag is given in The collected data were analyzed by software to evaluate the effect of each parameter on the optimization criteria. The maximum amount of zinc extraction was defined as optimization criterion. Leaching efficiencies and corresponding calculated Statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to check whether the process parameters were statistically significant or not. The The results of ANOVA for zinc extraction have been given in Another method to determine the significant factors is by The influences of parameters on the performance characteristics are presented in It was verified that pulp density is conversely proportional to mean response. According to the graphs illustrated in In the presence of higher amount of ammonium chloride concentrations, formation of soluble zinc amine complexes increases. Also, the dissolution of zinc increases by increasing the reaction temperature ( As it can be seen from the graphs ( In order to maximize zinc extraction in the leaching of slag, the following parameters were achieved by Taguchi design: Finally, confirmation experiment was performed to verify the results drawn based on Taguchi. The confirmation leaching experiments were carried out twice at the same working conditions. The experimental results under these conditions were 93.71% and 95.50% for zinc leaching. As it can be seen, there is a good agreement between the predicted and the experimental results, and these experimental results are within the 90% significance level confidence intervals. The experimental results confirmed the validity of the applied technique for optimizing the zinc extraction parameters. Thus, it is possible to increase zinc extraction percentage significantly using the proposed statistical technique. In order to compare dilution and cooling precipitation methods and clarify benefits of each methods, achieved precursors were characterized by X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS).  After washing of the precursors with hot distilled water and dried in oven, ZnO nanorods were obtained and characterized as follows: X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) of ZnO nanorods which were prepared by dilution and cooling precipitation methods are shown in The shape and preferential orientation of the ZnO nano-structures was anticipated by calculating the relative texture coefficient (TC) using the following equation The general morphology of the synthesized ZnO nano-structures which were prepared by dilution and cooling precipitation method of ammonium chloride solution is shown in Specific surface areas of the ZnO nanorods were measured by BET method. Moreover, average particle size of the products was calculated by following equation UV–Vis spectroscopy was carried out to investigate optical properties of synthesized ZnO nanorods. Nowadays, hydrometallurgy in ammonium chloride solution has been considered as a prospective medium for extracting nonferrous metals In general, zinc and zinc hydrate dissolve in water meaningfully. Moreover, solubility of zinc oxide (ZnO) and diamino zinc dichloride (Zn(NH Totally, nucleation and growth steps affect on size and morphology of the final products. Additionally, other factors such as pH, temperature, super saturated solution, time of crystallization and concentration of reactants have important role. In the case of preparation of zinc oxide from ammonium chloride solution, pH was fixed at 6 and temperature was applied at 80 Then, DZC will be converted to ZnO by washing precipitation with distilled water and drying in oven at the temperature more than 100 Also, in high temperature around 80 This complex will be changed to ZnO, ammonia and water molecules by increasing the temperature of the solution: In addition, there are hydroxide (OH Since solubility of zinc oxide (ZnO) is less than zinc hydroxide (Zn(OH) As the solubility of zinc oxide is less than complexes, ZnO precipitation will be formed in aqueous solution: Up to now, ZnO nucleuses have been formed in solution and they will play as a core of zinc oxide nanostructure for the formation of hexagonal shaped. As the crystal structure of zinc oxide behaves as a polar crystal, it is gradually constructed by hydroxide ions. In this condition, preferential growth axis is the c-axis and ZnO crystal will grow along [0 As it was mentioned above, different parameters affect on rod-like morphology which in this study, changes of temperature from 80 The amount of zinc and other impurities such as Ni, Pb, Cd and Fe in final products was measured by complex titration and atomic absorption spectroscopy, respectively ( The aim of this study is recovery of zinc oxide nanostructure from zinc cathode melting furnace slags which were solved in ammonium chloride solution. The effect of process parameters including reaction time ( X-ray diffraction pattern of the precursor prepared by dilution precipitation method shows that it consisted of two phases namely diamino zinc dichloride (DZC) and zinc oxide, while in the case of cooling precipitation method, diamino zinc dichloride (DZC) is the main phase in XRD pattern. Additionally, EDS elemental analysis results taken from precursors confirms XRD results as well. ZnO nanorods have been successfully synthesized by dilution and cooling precipitation method. Phases, morphology and size of ZnO nanostructures were investigated by XRD and FESEM. Furthermore, optical properties of prepared nanorods were characterized by UV–Vis spectroscopy. Specific surface area of synthesized ZnO nanorods was measured by BET analysis. The results show that dilution precipitation method led to fabrication of nanorods with higher aspect ratio in comparison to cooling precipitation method. Indeed, in precipitation method, temperature has an important role in size and morphology of the synthesized ZnO nanostructures which permits ions to achieve suitable mobility and participate in nucleation and growth steps. Moreover, XRD patters taken from precursors reveal the fact that the purity of final product is higher in the case of dilution precipitation method. Finally, a possible method for fabrication of rod-like structure for zinc oxide is proposed. The authors would like to thank the Department of Materials Engineering in Sahand University of Technology. We would also like to acknowledge the support of The Iran Nanotechnology Initiative Council (INIC). We acknowledge the support of Zanjan Zinc Khales Sazan Industries Company for making available the samples used in this investigation.