This chapter discusses the process of direct-to-copper smelting that is the smelting of concentrate directly to molten copper in one furnace. In 2011, it was practiced in three smelters: Olympic Dam (Australia), Glogo´w II (Poland), and Chingola (Zambia). All of these plants use an Outotec flash furnace. The main advantage of the process is its restriction of SO2 evolution to a single, continuous source of high SO2-strength gas. In principal, the energy, operating, and capital costs of producing metallic copper are also minimized by the single-furnace process. Metallic copper is obtained in a flash furnace by setting the ratio of oxygen input in the blast to concentrate feed rate to the point where all the Fe and S in the input concentrate are oxidized. The ratio must be precisely controlled to avoid the production of Cu2S or Cu2O. Avoiding formation of a molten Cu2S layer in the furnace is critical. Reactions between Cu2S layers and oxidizing slag may cause rapid SO2 evolution and slag foaming. Direct-to-copper flash smelting has proven effective for SO2 capture. However, about 25% of the Cu in the input concentrate is oxidized, ending up as copper oxide dissolved in slag. This copper oxide must be reduced back to metallic copper, usually with coke. The expense of recovering Cu from slag will probably restrict future direct-to-copper smelting to concentrates that produce little slag. Chalcopyrite concentrates will probably continue to be treated by multi-furnace processes, either by conventional smelting and converting or by continuous multi-furnace processing.20% SiO 6% Al 6% CaO 4% MgO K Previous chapters show that coppermaking from sulfide concentrates entails two major steps: Olympic Dam, Australia ( Glogów II, Poland ( Chingola, Zambia ( The Glogów smelting complex is planning a second direct-to-copper flash furnace. It will replace their existing blast furnaces, which are environmentally difficult.  The principal advantages of combining smelting and converting are: Isolation of SO Minimization of energy consumption; Minimization of capital and operating costs. This chapter describes direct-to-copper smelting. The above three advantages have been achieved. Current disadvantages of the process are that (a) about 25% of the Cu entering a direct-to-copper smelting furnace ends up dissolved in the slag (compared with <10% in traditional Peirce–Smith converting; see   The process is continuous and autothermal. With highly oxygen-enriched (low-N The remainder of this chapter indicates how close the process has come to this ideality. In 2011, single furnace direct-to-copper smelting is done by only one process: Outotec (formerly Outokumpu) flash smelting ( The products of direct-to-copper flash smelting ( The O Direct-to-copper smelting takes place by the schematic (unbalanced) reaction: Just enough O In practice, the flash furnace reaction shaft product is a mixture of over-oxidized (oxide) and under-oxidized (sulfide) materials. Individual particles may be over-oxidized on the outside and under-oxidized on the inside. The over- and under-oxidized components react to give metallic copper, as shown in the reactions below: Industrially, the overall extent of Reaction  The process at Glogów produces a lower copper slag because its composition is essentially a Ca–Al–Mg–K–Na silicate slag ( Conventional smelting/converting smelters produce ∼2.5 t slag per tonne of copper production, about the same as Glogów. However, the slags contain much less Cu (1–2% for smelting; 4–8% for converting, some it entrained rather than dissolved). Cu removal from these slags is quicker and cheaper than from the direct-to-copper smelting slags. Operating details of two direct-to-copper flash furnaces are given in The hearths are deeply bowl-shaped to prevent molten copper from contacting the furnace sidewalls The hearths are more radically arched and compressed to prevent their refractory from being floated by the dense (7.8 t/m The furnace walls are extensively water-cooled and the hearth extensively air-cooled to prevent metallic copper from seeping too far into the refractories The bottom refractories are monolithic to prevent molten copper from seeping under the bricks, solidifying, and lifting them The copper tapholes are designed to prevent the out-flowing molten copper from enlarging the taphole to the point where molten copper contacts cooling water At Olympic Dam, molten copper passes through magnesite–chrome brick (inside) and a silicon carbide insert and graphite insert (outside) ( The compositions of the industrial furnace products are controlled by adjusting the ratios of oxygen in the blast to concentrate feed rate and flux/concentrate feed rate. The temperatures of the products are controlled by adjusting the oxygen-enrichment level of the blast (as represented by the N Industrial direct-to-copper furnaces are operated with O Foaming is particularly favored if the input O The foaming problem is avoided by ensuring that the O An unfortunate side-effect of the above no-matte-layer strategy is a high Cu content in the slag, mainly as dissolved Cu Simply stated, direct-to-copper smelting is operated in a slightly over-oxidizing mode to prevent the foaming described in All direct-to-copper smelters recover Cu from their slag in an electric slag-cleaning furnace. The slag flows from the direct-to-blister furnace directly into an electric furnace where it is settled for about 10 h under a 0.25 m blanket of metallurgical coke ( Magnetite (molten and solid) is also reduced: The resulting Fe joins the newly reduced copper. The Cu content of the Glogów direct-to-copper slag is lowered from ∼14% Cu to ∼0.6% Cu in an 25 000 kVA electric furnace. The molten product analyzes 70–80% Cu, 5% Fe, and 15–25% Pb, from Pb in the concentrate ( The Pb and Fe are oxidized in a Hoboken converter ( Olympic Dam lowers its direct-to-copper slag from 24% to ∼4% Cu in its 15 000 kVA electric furnace ( The principal advantage of direct-to-copper smelting is isolation of SO Direct-to-copper smelting will probably not be suitable for most chalcopyrite concentrates. These concentrates produce about 2.5 t slag per tonne of Cu, and the energy requirement and cost of recovering Cu from their slag are considerable. Only about 60% of new Cu in the concentrate would report directly to copper; the other 40% would wind up in the slag.  The compositions of the anode copper produced by the direct-to-copper smelters are given in Impurities do not seem, therefore, to be a problem in the three existing direct-to-copper smelters. However, metallic copper is always present in the direct-to-copper furnace, ready to absorb impurities. For this reason, concentrates destined for direct-to-copper smelting should always be carefully tested in a pilot furnace before being accepted by the smelter. Direct-to-copper smelting is the smelting of concentrate directly to molten copper in one furnace. In 2011, it is practiced in three smelters: Olympic Dam (Australia), Glogów II (Poland), and Chingola (Zambia). All of these plants use an Outotec flash furnace. The main advantage of the process is its restriction of SO Metallic copper is obtained in a flash furnace by setting the ratio of oxygen input in the blast to concentrate feed rate to the point where all the Fe and S in the input concentrate are oxidized. The ratio must be precisely controlled to avoid the production of Cu Direct-to-copper flash smelting has proven effective for SO