The present work demonstrates the manufacture of spherical millimeter sized macro-spheres of Ni–Ti–Fe shape memory alloy (SMA) for self-seizing bearing application through rotating electrode process (REP) through a set of optimized REP parameters and subsequent characterization. Image analysis has revealed that these macro-spheres follow a bimodal size distribution with larger mass fraction is about 1.5mm and that of smaller mass fraction has a mean value of 0.4mm. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and compressive load–deformation behaviour confirm that both chemical and mechanical properties are consistent before and after REP. Microstructural characterization was carried out using high-resolution scanning electron microscope with electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) technique. Process evaluation shows that there spheres form through the liquid ligament breakdown mechanism.Rotating electrode process (REP) is a well-known atomization route for metal powder generation Depending on the material and the process parameters the typical size of REP powder particles usually falls within the range of 50–300 The important parameters of REP that influence the particle size are the rotational speed, the feed rod diameter, the feed rate and the intrinsic properties of the metals/alloys; such as surface tension, viscosity and density. Other parameters that matter are the helium gas pressure, the distance between electrodes and the DC current The Ti–47at%Ni–3at%Fe SMA was prepared using vacuum induction melting followed by consumable vacuum arc melting. The cast billet was then cut and forged to a ‘brick’ of nominal length, width and breadth of 200 Size distribution of the macro-spheres in as fabricated condition was determined using ImageJ software developed by Rasband  The mechanism by which liquid droplet forms during REP is determined by the process parameters (electrode diameter, electrode rotation speed and rate of melting) and the physical properties of the liquid metal (density, surface tension, and viscosity). As illustrated in In all practical cases the value 3.46 To predict the droplet formation mechanism Eq. It is known that a bimodal size distribution of the particle is to be expected in case of DDF dominant regime. However, in DDF regime the final particle should be of primary in nature unlike the present case where the individual macro-sphere are made of a large number of individual primary particles (∼100 In the simplest case, where the liquid ligament is considered infinite in length and has zero viscosity, any disturbance wave length greater than the diameter of the liquid stream will cause instability Cross sectional microstructures are presented in Electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD) based crystallographic orientation analysis was performed on the diametrical cross section of the sphere. The inverse pole figure (IPF) is presented in The present work demonstrates the manufacture of millimeter sized Ni–Ti–Fe SMA spheres through the REP route with higher yield. The mechanism of macro-sphere formation is essentially ligament disintegration type; where the disintegration takes place due to the inherent axial instability of the liquid ligament. Both chemical and mechanical properties were found to be consistent before and after REP; supported by DSC, microstructural analysis and compression testing. EBSD results show that grains in these macrospheres are randomly oriented ensuring uniformity in the mechanical and physical properties for a given set of macrospheres. Such findings ensure the possibility of large scale manufacturing of macro-spheres from special alloys (e.g. SMA) for bearing and other applications. Authors sincerely thank Dr. B. Maji, GAMD, BARC for the EDM machining and compression testing and due thanks to Mr. R. Hatwar for accomplishing the difficult threading operation on the SMA rod.