Various methods of surgical treatment for displaced proximal humeral fractures have been introduced. Amongst them, the clinical outcomes of proximal humeral fractures after open plate fixation have improved rapidly with the development of the angular stable locking plate. However, open reduction and plating through the traditional deltopectoral approach may lead to several concerns, including nonunion from extensile soft tissue stripping, deltoid muscle injury, or infection. The minimal invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) technique was developed to achieve biologic fixation and minimize the complications of an open reduction. The application of the MIPO technique has recently been extended to proximal humeral fractures as an alternative to open reduction and internal fixation. Although several studies reported excellent clinical results after the MIPO technique in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures, few studies have analyzed the clinical and radiological outcomes according to the fracture pattern in patients with proximal humeral fractures treated using the MIPO technique. The purpose of this study was to evaluate functional results prospectively and to analyze the clinical and radiological outcomes according to the type of fracture in patients with proximal humeral fractures treated using the MIPO technique. This is a prospective case-series of 62 patients with proximal humeral fractures treated with the MIPO technique. There were 23 men and 39 women with an average age of 57 years (range, 29-85 years). All of the fractures were classified according to the Neer classification: 27 patients were two-part (44%), 24 were three-part (39%), and 11 were four-part fractures (17%). In all patients, a 3.5-mm proximal humerus anatomical locking plate was used. Clinical outcomes were assessed at the final follow-up visit using the active range of motion of the shoulder joint and the Constant score. Radiographic evaluations were performed at 2 weeks, and every 2 months thereafter until union was obtained. Under an image intensifier, closed reduction was attempted with a longitudinal and a varus or valgus force to the humeral shaft and two or three 2.0 mm Kirschner wires were inserted for temporary fixation. The proximal skin incision for deltoid splitting approach started from the anterolateral corner of the acromion and extended to approximately 4 cm distally. Tuberosity fragments were reduced using sutures. The axillary nerve could be palpated blindly by the index finger approximately 2-3 cm below the inferior margin of the proximal window. While an index finger protected the axillary nerve, a sub-deltoid extraperiosteal tunnel was made with blunt dissection using a periosteal elevator. The plate was inserted from the proximal window distally while protecting the axillary nerve. The location of the distal incision, which usually started from the oblong-shaped combi-hole for the positional cortical screw and extended to the last hole of the plate, was determined using an image intensifier. The distal portion of the plate was easily found when the interval between the deltoid and biceps muscles was developed. A cortical screw was inserted in the combi-hole in order to reduce the displaced neck-shaft angle indirectly along the anatomical shape of the plate. Four 3.5 mm locking screws were inserted in the proximal holes of plate in the head of humerus. If a patient had medial metaphysis comminution combined with poor bone quality in the proximal humerus, additional procedures using either a long inferomedial screw insertion in the third or fourth row of the plate or fibular strut bone allograft were performed to maintain proper reduction. No patients were converted to open reduction during the MIPO procedure in this study. The clinical outcomes such as time to union and satisfaction for the operation showed no statistical difference between the 3 fracture types. However, statistically significant differences were found in the Constant score for four-part fractures compared with three-part fractures (p=0.041). At final follow-up, the neck-shaft angle was measured at 129°±3° (range, 122° to 133°), 129°±9° (range, 110° to 147°), and 121°±10° (range, 110° to 135°) in two-, three-, and four-part fractures, respectively. The neck-shaft angle in four-part fractures at final follow-up was significantly lower compared with other fracture types (p=0.036 with two-part and p=0.031 with three-part). Complication rates (72.7%) of four-part fractures were significantly higher than other fracture types (two-part; 7.4%, three-part; 20.8%, p=0.001). Sixteen fractures were fixed using an additional inferomedial screw and 3 patients underwent fibular allograft. Satisfactory clinical and radiological outcomes in terms of bony union and anatomical restoration of the proximal humerus were obtained using the MIPO technique in patients with displaced proximal humeral fractures. Additionally, medial cortical support might be considered using an inferomedial screw or fibular strut allograft augmentation in the MIPO technique. However, the MIPO technique for four-part fractures of the proximal humerus showed relatively unsatisfactory clinical and radiological outcomes compared with two- and three-part fractures. Conversion to open plating is also considered, if adequate reduction such as neck-shaft angle over 120° is not able to be obtained in MIPO technique for four-part fractures of the proximal humerus.