Zinc(II) was recovered from dilute ammoniacal media through an integrated process combining solvent extraction and electrolysis with ammonia stripping. Zinc ions were firstly enriched into organic phase at pH 7.56 through synergistic extraction between β-diketone and TBP or Cyanex 923. The concentration of extracted zinc(II) increased at pH < 7.56, but clearly decreased at pH 7.56–9.98. The extracted zinc species could be effectively stripped from the loaded organic phase using ammoniacal liquor at pH 9.5, because the ammonia stripping process followed an trend opposite to the extraction process. The extraction and ammonia stripping isotherms verified that Zn(II) concentration can be increased from 1.3 g/L to >56 g/L by using β-diketone and Cyanex 923. Metallic zinc can be obtained by direct electrolysis from the ammoniacal stripping solution. The presence of small amounts of the dissolved extractant molecules can improve the crystallization of zinc deposits. A gelatin additive was used to smoothen the morphology of zinc deposits and refine their crystalline structure. These results indicate that the proposed integrated process will facilitate the recovery of various zinc-bearing primary and secondary resources in ammoniacal media.Due to the continuous growth in zinc demand, low-grade ores, complex tailings, and waste residues serve as the main sources of zinc metallurgy ( After ammoniacal leaching, typical processes such as impurity removal, concentration, crystallization, and electrodeposition are typically required for zinc recovery ( At present, because a sulfuric acid medium is widely used for metal electrolysis in hydrometallurgy, the zinc loaded in the organic phase needs to be enriched through H In the proposed process, zinc ions in dilute ammoniacal media were extracted to obtain a loaded organic phase, where 4-ethyl-1-phenyl-1,3- octadione was used as the extractant and tributyl phosphate or trialkyl phosphine oxides were used as the synergists. Thereafter, zinc was stripped from the loaded organic solution with ammoniacal liquors to obtain a concentrated zinc-bearing solution, which was directly used for zinc electrolysis. The effect of pH, total ammonia concentration, and temperature on the extraction and stripping of zinc(II) were investigated. The extraction and stripping isotherms were obtained to verify the feasibility of zinc enrichment from and into ammoniacal media. Zinc was subsequently recovered by direct electrolysis from the stripping solution. The effects of the presence of dissolved extractant and the gelatin additive on the electrolytic process of zinc were discussed. The β-diketone ligand of 4-ethyl-1-phenyl-1,3-octadione (HA) was used as extractant. Neutral tributyl phosphate (TBP) or trialkyl phosphine oxides (Cyanex 923) were used as the synergists. Sulfonated kerosene was used as the diluent. All other chemicals were of analytical grade and used as received. A feed solution containing 1.3 g/L Zn(II) was prepared by dissolving zinc sulfate into ammoniacal solution whose pH was regulated with NaOH and H The extraction of zinc(II) was carried out by mixing the organic and feed solutions at a phase ratio of 1:1. The temperature was maintained at 25 ± 0.2 °C. The extraction equilibrium time was set at 15 min. After phase separation, the Zn(II) concentration in the aqueous solution was measured by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Perkin Elmer 5300DV). The zinc concentration in the loaded organic phase was calculated by mass balance before and after extraction. The aqueous pH was determined with a Rex-3C digital pH meter. To obtain extraction isotherms, the organic solutions were equilibrated with the feed solution at the different phase ratios. The zinc-loaded organic solutions for ammonia stripping were prepared by the above-mentioned extraction procedure. The ammonium sulfate solutions at the desired pH were used as the zinc-free stripping solutions. The ammonia stripping of zinc were performed by mixing the loaded organic and stripping solutions at a phase ratio of 1:1. The stripping isotherms were obtained by equilibrating the loaded organic solutions with ammoniacal solution at the different phase ratios. An ammoniacal solution containing 40 g/L zinc(II) and 6 mol/L total ammonia was electrolyzed to evaluate the effect of the dissolved extractant molecules and the additives on zinc electrodeposits. A zinc-free electrolyte containing 6 mol/L total ammonia was prepared and equilibrated with the organic phases. The desired amount of the zinc salt was then added to the extractant-containing electrolyte. The total organic carbon (TOC) content in the stripping solutions was measured using a TOC-VCPH analyzer, and the average triplicate values was considered. To eliminate the influence of the dissolved extractants, activated carbon (5 g/L) was added to remove the residual organics in the zinc-containing stripping solutions. Cyclic voltammetry tests were performed with a glassy carbon electrode as the working electrode, a platinum plate as the counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode. At 25 ± 0.5 °C, the sweep rate is 50 mV/s and the potential range is from −1.65 to −0.3 V. Zinc electrolysis was performed in the ammoniacal electrolyte where a stainless steel plate (2 × 2 cm) and a graphite plate were used as the cathode and anode, respectively. The distance between the cathode and anode was 2 cm. The measured amounts of the gelatin additive were added to improve the quality of zinc deposits. Electrolysis was performed at 30 °C, and a current density of 200 A/m For the integrated process, free ammonia concentration is crucial for the effective extraction and stripping of zinc, which are mainly dependent on aqueous pH. The effect of feed solution pH on zinc extraction is shown in The ability of the organic phase to enrich zinc from the ammoniacal solution was further investigated. The composition of the organic phase was changed to 1 mol/L HA in the presence of 0.5 mol/L TBP or 0.5 mol/L Cyanex 923 to increase the loaded zinc capacity, respectively. According to the results in Based on the extraction behavior of zinc in Stripping isotherms of zinc were obtained by varying the volumetric ratio between the zinc-loaded organic phase and the stripping phase (O/A). As shown in To investigate the possible dissolution of the HA, TBP, and Cyanex 923 ligands in the stripping solutions, the electrochemical behavior of the electrolyte in the presence of the extractant molecules was analyzed. Based on the ammonia stripping results for both extractant systems, the ammoniacal solution containing 40 g/L zinc(II) and 6 mol/L total ammonia was used as the electrolyte to evaluate the effect of the dissolved extractant molecules on zinc electrolysis. The chemical oxygen demand values of the electrolytes in the presence of HA + TBP or HA + Cyanex 923 were 36.2 and 40.8 mg/L, respectively. The cyclic voltammetry curves in  To improve the quality of the zinc deposits, after removing the dissolved extractant in the stripping solution by adding 5 g/L of activated carbon, measured amounts of gelatin were added to the electrolyte. As shown in  Through an integrated process based on ammonia stripping, zinc ions in dilute ammoniacal media were directly enriched and recovered by solvent extraction and electrolysis. By using the mixtures of β-diketone with TBP or Cyanex 923, the extraction efficiency of 75.26% and 99.35% were obtained at pH 7.56, respectively. The extraction behavior of zinc(II) follows a unique phenomenon where the extraction efficiency decreases at pH 7.56–9.98, but it increases with increase in pH > 9.98. At A/O = 12:1, the zinc concentration in the loaded organic phase increased to 8.29 g/L for the HA + TBP system, and to 15.11 g/L for the HA + Cyanex 923 system. Zinc species in the loaded organic phase can be effectively stripped with an ammoniacal liquor, and the ammonia stripping behavior of zinc followed a trend opposite to that of the zinc extraction behavior. The maximum stripping efficiency of zinc at pH 9.5 and 2 mo/L total ammonia was 95.1% for the HA + TBP system and 36.3% for the HA + Cyanex 923 system, which could be further enhanced by increasing total ammonia concentration. At O/A = 8:1 and 6 mol/L total ammonia, the zinc concentration in the stripping solution increased to 37.46 g/L for the HA + TBP system, and to 56.23 g/L for the HA + Cyanex 923 system. Small amounts of dissolved extractant molecules have a slight inhibitory effect on the zinc electrolysis from the stripping solution, but the addition of gelatin can significantly smoothen the surface morphology and refine the crystal structure of zinc deposits. These results indicate that the proposed method will facilitate the recovery of various zinc-bearing primary and secondary resources using ammoniacal media. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the