Cyanidation tests on two ore samples from two different gold deposits are reported. The first sample contained 10.5ppm gold with high arsenic and antimony. The second sample had a low gold content (2.5ppm) but a high silver content (160ppm). The first series of test work focused on the determination of conditions for extracting gold from the samples ground to −75μm. The optimum parameters were 4000mg/L for cyanide concentration, pH=11.1 and 24-h cyanidation time for the first sample; and 2500mg/L, pH=10.5 and 24h for the second sample. Silver and gold recoveries were 94.91% and 28.2% respectively for the first sample and 92.5% and 93.5% for the second sample.
                  In the second series of test work, H2O2 (0.015M), air (0.15L/min) and a mixture of H2O2 and air were used as oxidizing agents to improve the gold extraction kinetics of the first sample. It was found that gold leaching recovery followed first order kinetics and that the injection of air had the maximum beneficial effect on the leaching kinetics. In the third series of test work, acid pretreatment (HNO3 and HCl) and roasting (600–1000°C) from 0.5 to 2h were carried out before cyanidation. Acid pretreatment reduced cyanide consumption by 340 and 210mg/L respectively and the corresponding gold recoveries increased to 98.87% and 95.11%. Cyanidation results on roasted samples showed that cyanide consumption was drastically reduced by 1150mg/L and gold recovery increased by 5.2%. Furthermore, arsenic, antimony, cadmium and mercury contents were considerably reduced in the roasted sample (2h at 1000°C).Early studies on the dissolution of gold in cyanide solution in the presence of sulfide minerals have shown that heavy metal components, such as Cu, Fe and Zn, significantly increase the consumption of both cyanide and oxygen ( M M The presence of galena, as well as both sulfide and added lead(II), also improved the rate of gold dissolution. The dissolution rate was found to be affected by ions such as lead(II), sulfide, and iron(III) released by the sulfide mineral. The significant decrease in the rate of electrochemical and chemical dissolution of gold caused by chalcopyrite, pyrite, and pyrrhotite has been related to the various films formed on the gold surface as well as the galvanic interaction ( The refractoriness of gold ores can result primarily from the inherent mineralogical features with particular reference to the mode of presence and association of gold, and to the presence of carbonaceous matter ( Cyanidation has been used for over 100 The initial rate of gold dissolution is largely controlled by the factors such as cyanide and oxygen concentrations, pH, solid–liquid interface, Eh of the slurry, alkalies, particle size and temperature. The presence of other catalytic ions in solution and salinity of water also affect the rate of leaching ( In this study, main cyanidation parameters for two different gold samples (grade and mineralogy) were compared. The studied samples were from two different gold deposits in Iran. The first sample (high gold grade) was taken from “Hirad gold deposit”, situated in Southern Khorasan province, and the second one (low gold grade) was provided from “Latala gold deposit”, located in Kerman province ( Two representative samples were supplied by using a systematic sampling procedure and about 400 For ore characterization, optical mineralogy, using the prepared polished and thin sections, X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies were performed to define the main and the trace minerals and their interlocking, as well. The results of the XRD analysis and optical mineralogy of the primary two gold samples are presented in The major phases of minerals were quartz, clay minerals (illite), gypsum, hematite, arsenopyrite, feldspar and calcite for the first sample and quartz, goethite, calcite and feldspar for the second one. Microscopic analysis confirmed the existence of the phases detected by XRD method. In addition, arsenopyrite was reported in the optical mineralogy studies for the first sample which due to low amount of arsenopyrite, was not detected in XRD analysis. The samples were analyzed qualitatively by using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) technique in which its result is presented in Due to the presence of feldspar and clay minerals in first sample, the amount of K The analysis of gold, silver, arsenic, lead, zinc and copper were carried out by using atomic adsorption, inductivity coupled plasma and optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) techniques in which results are given in It is seen that in the first sample, gold and arsenic content are much higher than the second one (by 4 and 32 times respectively), whereas the second sample contains silver much higher than the first one (80 times). Mineralogical studies were carried out by optical microscope in order to determine gold liberation size and evaluation of various mineral interlocking in different size fractions including + The major minerals were quartz, clay minerals, gypsum, hematite, arsenopyrite, feldspar and calcite whereas the minor ones were galena, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, pyrite, malachite, azurite and celestite. The relationships between gold and sulfide minerals e.g. pyrite, sphalerite and galena are shown in For further identification of first sample characterization, scanning electron microscope (SEM) method was used and its results are presented as particles photos and its component histogram in As it can be seen in After separation by heavy liquid, heavy minerals were analyzed by optical microscope and as it can be seen in The second sample is categorized as oxide gold ore, because the main part of its pyrite minerals was changed to iron oxide and hydroxide such as goethite and lepidocrosite which are presented in In addition, the presence of a high amount of silver in free and sulfide forms and also the low content of other sulfide minerals such as base metal sulfides is a remarkable point of these studies. In order to prepare and grind samples for cyanidation process, a Denver ball mill was used. The cyanidation experiments were carried out in a 5-l plastic container equipped with the Ika mechanical mixer (Ika-RW20, Germany) with a manual controller unit and stainless steel impeller with a 9.85 To control pH, a pH meter (744 Metrohm) was utilized and hydrated lime and hydrochloric acid (5%) were used to set the pulp pH. In cyanidation, sodium cyanide was the lixiviant with injected air to pulp by sparger and hydrogen peroxide as oxidizing reagents. Solution and solids were analyzed by atomic adsorptions, inductivity coupled plasma and optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). Cyanidation experiments were conducted to determine the most suitable conditions for two samples of different origins. These parameters included grinding time, sodium cyanide concentration, pH and leaching time. In order to increase the process recovery and reduce cyanide consumption, diagnostic leaching techniques as “pretreatment procedure”, which included acidic leaching by hydrochloric, nitric acid and roasting, were implemented to eliminate the detrimental elements such as arsenic, antimony and carbonaceous matter for the first sample ( The effect of different grinding times, to reach the sought particle size, 75 In these experiments, other parameters were kept constant at 4000 Different cyanidation tests with various cyanide concentrations were performed, to determine the best cyanide concentration. It is noteworthy that within these tests the other parameters were constant at 35 and 55 According to the obtained results that are demonstrated in Cyanidation tests were conducted at different incremental pHs from 9.5 to 12 (with approximately 0.5 interval step). To find out the best cyanidation time, a 48 The results are presented in Various types of oxidizing reagent such as air, hydrogen peroxide and a combination of air and H For each experiment, two curves are presented, the first one is related to actual data which are obtained from experiments, and the second curve is the modeled one, using first order equation as According to the results, roasting in 1000 It can be concluded that by increasing of roasting temperature and time, the amount of arsenic, bismuth and mercury decreased, but this trend for antimony and cadmium has a little difference which may be relevant to the boiling point of these elements in which their trends are illustrated in By increasing of grinding time, cyanide consumption increased for both sample whereas 2910 Increase of cyanide concentration in leaching pulp caused high cyanide consumption due to the presence of cyanicides and did not improve gold recovery. With increasing pH, the value of free cyanide was definitely increased, whereas the concentration of free cyanide was increased from 120 to 240 For leaching time, the curve slope in The introduction of air during leaching was more effective in kinetics rate increase (1.75 By using of HCl and HNO In this study, two different types of gold samples were investigated in various cyanidation experiments. The first sample was a high grade ore and its gold and arsenic grades were 10.5 and 16676.5 Type of detrimental minerals and their values caused to sophisticate the optimized conditions for the gold's processing circuit. Moreover detrimental matters in cyanidation process for the first sample were high amounts of arsenic, antimony, mercury, carbonaceous matters (calcite) and clay minerals (illite) which had negative effects on the process. The effects of toxic materials were caused by lower grinding time and a high amount of cyanide consumption. Ultimately the intensive effect of oxidizer on kinetic and final recovery was remarkable and optimized pH value for first sample was more than the second one, 10.5 against 11.1. Various pretreatment leaching under acidic condition, HNO Cyanidation test was carried out using roasted sample, 2 Different oxidizing reagents such as hydrogen peroxide (0.015 The authors would like to thank the Director of Mineral Processing Division in the