Due to the increasing environmental and public concerns associated with cyanide leaching of gold, much of the current research in gold hydrometallurgy is focussed on alternative systems, such as thiosulfate. One of the major problems with the thiosulfate leaching system is the undesirable reaction between thiosulfate and copper(II). The current paper presents a study on the effect of various anions on the rate of this reaction. It will be shown that the presence of anions such as sulfate, chloride and phosphate significantly reduce the rate at which copper(II) is reduced by thiosulfate. The presence of other oxysulfur species such as sulfite, tetrathionate and trithionate were also studied. These species were found to be readily oxidised by copper(II) and hence greatly increased the rate of copper(II) reduction. The rate of copper(II) reduction by tetrathionate is relatively unaffected by the addition of anions; however, anion addition was found to significantly influence the rate of copper(II) reduction by sulfite and trithionate. Based on these results, inner sphere mechanisms were proposed for the reaction of copper(II) with thiosulfate, sulfite and trithionate. The kinetics of copper(II) reduction is thus very complex and can be represented by a number of parallel-series reaction sequences.Since the early 1900s, cyanide has been used by the mining industry for the recovery of gold from ores. However, due to a number of recently publicised environmental incidents, there has become growing environmental and public concern over the continued use of cyanide as a lixiviant for gold. Of the alternative lixiviants, thiosulfate appears to be the most promising with a large number of papers published, and many patents filed around the world in the past three decades. From this research it has become evident that the presence of copper(II) is required in order to achieve acceptable gold leach rates and recoveries, and it has been shown that the concentration of copper(II) has a significant effect on the gold leach rate Given the importance of the copper(II)–thiosulfate reaction to the thiosulfate leach system, it is surprising that there has been little fundamental research conducted on the chemistry of the thiosulfate, copper and ammonia leach system. During the 1970s, The importance of the leach chemistry has been clearly identified by the Newmont mining company who concluded that the solution chemistry was very complicated, having piloted heap leaching for a number of years without commercial success Despite the fact that polythionates are only metastable, eventually being oxidised to sulfate, the effect any of these species or other intermediate species has on the kinetics of copper(II) reduction is yet to be studied in detail. Polythionates are known to be important in the overall process, as the resin adsorption of gold thiosulfate is significantly affected by the concentration of both tetrathionate and trithionate In the work conducted in the absence of oxygen by All experiments were carried out in the absence of oxygen using solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and distilled water. Trithionate was prepared by the equimolar addition of sulfite to tetrathionate; the formation of trithionate and thiosulfate as reaction products is known to be quantitative It has been suggested previously that the kinetics of copper(II) reduction in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions under argon is pseudo-first order with respect to copper(II) concentration (thiosulfate is in excess and hence remains relatively constant) During the thiosulfate leaching of gold, the continual recycling of the thiosulfate leach solution will increase the concentration of sulfate due to the continual oxidation of thiosulfate. Thus it was decided to perform a more thorough study on the effect of sulfate on copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate. Clearly shown in Useful information concerning the effect of sulfate on the rate of copper(II) reduction can be obtained by plotting the log of initial reaction rate against the log of sulfate concentration. The initial rate was obtained by extrapolating the second-order fit to To help elucidate the mechanism for the effect of sulfate on the rate of copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate, an experiment was carried out whereby thiosulfate was injected into a solution containing copper, ammonia and sulfate, instead of the standard procedure of injecting copper(II) with ammonia into a thiosulfate solution containing sulfate. Prior to injection of thiosulfate, the copper(II) was allowed to equilibrate with the ammonia and sulfate for 15 min. For solutions containing 10 mM copper(II) and 0.4 M ammonia, the copper(II) is predominantly complexed as the copper(II) tetra-ammine species with the two axial coordinate sites remaining unoccupied by ammonia; ammonia concentrations greater than 3 M are required before the copper(II) penta-ammine becomes the dominant species It is believed that the reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate almost certainly occurs via a complexation first of the thiosulfate to the copper(II) at an axial coordination site. This is known as an inner sphere reaction. However, the presence of sulfate in solution increases the competition with the thiosulfate anions to complex with the copper(II) at the axial coordinate sites. The initial copper(II) absorbance was observed to decrease as the concentration of sulfate in solution increased, which is consistent with this mechanism. In the instance where the experiment was performed by adding the thiosulfate to the copper(II)/ammonia/sulfate solution, the sulfate was able to substitute into the inner coordination sphere of copper(II) prior to the addition of thiosulfate. This results in a very low initial rate of reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate, as thiosulfate must displace sulfate before the reaction can occur. A similar dependence of reaction rate on the way solutions are mixed has been reported for the chloride substitution in the inner sphere reaction between Fe It has been observed that the addition of other anions also decreases the rate of copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate. The results from these experiments are shown in Many of the gold leaching studies have been conducted using ammonium thiosulfate. In substituting ammonium ions for sodium ions in the thiosulfate salt used, the solution pH changes according to the equilibrium shown in Clearly, the concentrations of ammonia and ammonium ions in solution influence the hydroxide ion concentration and hence the solution pH; the addition of ammonium ions will reduce the hydroxide ion concentration and hence pH. In solutions prepared using 0.4 M ammonia and 0.1 M sodium thiosulfate, the pH is 11.4 (the free [OH An interesting aspect to the effect of pH on the rate of copper(II) reduction is that at the lower pH values the kinetics of copper(II) reduction deviates from second order. It is well recognised that tetrathionate is a product of copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate in the absence of oxygen Interpretation of the results shown in In the absence of tetrathionate, the concentration of tetrathionate will slowly increase due to the reaction of thiosulfate with copper(II). Whilst this is occurring, the rate of the decomposition and oxidation of tetrathionate is also increasing due to the increase in tetrathionate concentration. It can be readily demonstrated that for the reaction sequence shown in The effect of sulfate on the rate of copper(II) reduction by tetrathionate in the presence of thiosulfate has also been studied. Shown in Another interesting aspect of the data shown in Trithionate is likely to be formed in thiosulfate leach solutions and has been identified in oxygenated solutions A number of researchers have advocated the use of sulfite as an additive either to minimise thiosulfate oxidation Another important finding that can be inferred from the results for the solution containing 2 mM sulfite is the stoichiometry of the reaction between sulfite and copper(II). The oxidation of sulfite is known to produce either sulfate or dithionate (S The results shown in The oxidation of sulfite by copper(II) in the presence of sulfate was also investigated, and the results are shown in The reduction of copper(II) in thiosulfate solutions was studied in detail, and it was shown that the reaction is more complex than previously thought. Not only was copper(II) reduced by thiosulfate, but tetrathionate and other oxysulfur reaction products were also found to reduce copper(II). The reduction of copper(II) by thiosulfate was shown to be rate-limited by a second-order reaction step in the presence of anions. Evidence was presented that the anions compete with thiosulfate in complexing to copper(II) at the axial sites, thus reducing the rate of copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate. This is consistent with the mechanism for copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate being an inner sphere reaction. Phosphate was shown to be a very effective anion in that the rate of copper(II) reduction almost ceased with the addition of 0.1 M phosphate. The oxidation of tetrathionate and trithionate by copper(II) was also studied, and it was shown that both of these species are more reactive towards copper(II) than thiosulfate. The addition of sulfite was also shown to rapidly reduce copper(II) via an inner sphere reaction mechanism.