The surface charge densities of the silica face surface and the alumina face surface of kaolinite particles, recently determined from surface force measurements using atomic force microscopy, show a distinct dependence on the pH of the system. The silica face was found to be negatively charged at pH>4, whereas the alumina face surface was found to be positively charged at pH<6, and negatively charged at pH>8. The surface charge densities of the silica face and the alumina face were utilized in this study to determine the interaction energies between different surfaces of kaolinite particles.
                  Results indicate that the silica face–alumina face interaction is dominant for kaolinite particle aggregation at low pH. This face–face association increases the stacking of kaolinite layers, and thereby promotes the edge–face (edge–silica face and edge–alumina face) and face–face (silica face–alumina face) associations with increasing pH, and hence the maximum shear-yield stress at pH 5–5.5. With further increase in pH, the face–face and edge–face association decreases due to increasing surface charge density on the silica face and the edge surfaces, and decreasing surface charge density on the alumina face. At high pH, all kaolinite surfaces become negatively charged, kaolinite particles are dispersed, and the suspension is stabilized. The face–face association at low pH has been confirmed from cryo-SEM images of kaolinite aggregates taken from suspension which show that the particles are mostly organized in a face–face and edge–face manner. At higher pH conditions, the cryo-SEM images of the kaolinite aggregates reveal a lower degree of consolidation and the edge–edge association is evident.The rheological properties of concentrated suspensions of clay minerals such as kaolinite [Al It is traditionally believed that the 0 The assumption that both basal planes carry a fixed negative charge has only recently been examined experimentally through surface force measurements using atomic force microscopy (AFM) Several researchers have examined images of flocculated kaolinite suspensions using electron microscopy to determine the aggregate structure, and relate these observations to rheological properties. The earliest significant discussion of clay fabric was given by Terzaghi in 1925 (see O’Brien It is the objective of this paper to utilize the surface charge information on the face surfaces and edge surfaces of kaolinite in order to understand the structure of kaolinite suspensions and corresponding rheological behavior. Furthermore, the influence of particle aspect ratio and electrical double layer thickness is investigated with regard to the aggregation behavior of kaolinite particles. Finally, cryo-SEM images were used to examine the modes of particle association (face–face, edge–face, and edge–edge). A clean English Kaolin (Imerys Inc., UK) was obtained from the St Austell area in Cornwall, UK. The sample was cleaned with water only using elutriation to achieve classification at a size of less than 2 X-ray diffraction (Bruker AXS, Inc., Madison, WI, USA) analysis conducted on the kaolinite sample confirmed that kaolinite is the dominant mineral phase. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (FEI, Hillsboro, Oregon, USA) analysis of the kaolinite sample showed nearly 1:1 atomic distribution of aluminum (7.98%) and silicon (7.95%) with trace amounts of potassium (0.35%), calcium (0.08%) and iron (0.15%). Other details about the purity of kaolinite are provided elsewhere The kaolinite particles with a median diameter of 600 The aggregate size of kaolinite particles in suspension at desired pH values was determined using photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS). In a PCS experiment, the fluctuation of scattered light from the particles by their Brownian motion is collected at a scattering angle of 90° by an optical fiber, and detected by a photo-electric detector. The amplified signal from the photo-electric detector is fed into an autocorrelator for computing the intensity autocorrelation function. This autocorrelation function is used to determine the relaxation of intensity fluctuations, which in turn is related to translational diffusion coefficient of the particles. Particle size (equivalent spherical diameter) is then determined from the diffusion coefficient of the particles. Kaolinite suspensions (4%) were prepared in 1 Kaolinite suspensions (1%) were prepared in 1 Interactions between kaolinite particles were characterized by the Deryaguin Landau Vervey Overebeek (DLVO) model, which considers the sum of electrostatic and van der Waals forces. An appropriate form for the van der Waals interaction energy per unit area ( The electrical double layer interaction energy per unit area ( For cases when the surfaces potential of the two planar surfaces are similar, i.e., The resulting DLVO interaction energy is given as: The rheological behavior of a suspension is essentially determined by the forces that control the spatial arrangement and dynamics of the suspended particles. In a suspension under the predominant influence of repulsive electrostatic energies the particles tend to take up positions as far from each other as possible. This may lead to a regular arrangement of the particles, i.e., to the development of the spatial order in the suspension. Clusters of particles, or aggregate structures, form in a suspension when the particle interactions are dominated by attractive energies. The aggregate structure or flocs will immobilize the suspending medium, and give rise to increasing viscosity and yield strength of the suspension. The particle characteristics such as morphology, size, surface area, etc. will also greatly affect the suspension viscosity, and the strength of the aggregate structure. The aggregate structure plays a major part in the flow behavior of clay suspensions. The rate and mechanism of formation of such aggregate structures and the characteristics of the aggregate structures are therefore important parameters to describe the rheological characteristics of such suspensions. In this study, we will discuss the formation of aggregate structures of kaolinite and their validation by cryo-SEM in the following and subsequent sections. As mentioned previously, the surface chemistry and rheology of kaolinite particles is complicated greatly by the non-uniform surface charge densities on edge and face surfaces. It was realized that electrophoretic measurements of kaolinite particles do not give detailed information about surface charge characteristics, and therefore information on electrophoretic mobility is not used in this analysis With this information the surface charge densities of the edge surface of kaolinite were determined, and the results are presented in Considering the surface charge data provided for the different faces of kaolinite, the net interaction energy between different surfaces of kaolinite was determined and is shown in  It is evident that the silica face–silica face interaction is repulsive in the pH range of 4–10 due to the strong electrostatic repulsion between negatively charged silica faces (see On the basis of these different interactions shown in O’Brien In contrast to our results, Johnson et al. The influence of aspect ratio (ratio of particle diameter to thickness) on the different surface interactions is shown in  In a suspension of clay particles, three different modes of particle association or aggregate structure may occur: face–face, edge–face, and edge–edge Face–face associations will lead to thicker and possibly larger aggregates, whereas edge–face and edge–edge associations will form three-dimensional voluminous card-house structures The SEM micrographs of kaolinite aggregates under cryogenic conditions at pH 3, 5, 7, and 9 are shown in At pH 7, the particles are mostly associated in an edge–edge manner and edge–face manner (edge–silica face) ( The cryogenic-SEM images showed the kaolinite aggregate structure for a 4% kaolinite suspension. This concentration may well be above the gelation point The aggregate structure of kaolinite suspensions at different pH values as revealed by cryo-SEM are also supported by further experiments conducted using photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) to estimate the particle size of such aggregates. In our analysis, we estimated the equivalent sphere diameter of aggregate structures for kaolinite suspensions. These aggregate structures for kaolinite suspensions are three-dimensional networks of particles forming an arbitrary shape or so called “card-house” structure The mechanical properties of kaolinite suspensions particularly the shear-yield stress is explained based on the aggregate structure of the kaolinite particles. A new analysis based on the surface charge densities of the silica face, alumina face and edge surfaces demonstrates the role of pair-wise interactions in controlling the rheology of kaolinite particulate suspensions. The maximum shear-yield stress of kaolinite suspensions is indicative of the significant role played by particle organization in the formation of aggregates as governed by edge–edge, edge–silica face, edge–alumina face, silica face–alumina face, silica face–silica face, and alumina face–alumina face interaction energies. The results indicate that the face–face (silica face–alumina face) is the dominant particle interaction at low pH values, which promotes edge–face (edge–silica face and edge–alumina face) and face–face (silica face–alumina face) interaction at intermediate pH values, justifying the maximum shear-yield stress at pH 5–5.5. This conclusion is also confirmed by cryo-SEM analysis of kaolinite aggregate structures and photon correlation spectroscopy. At a higher pH (pH The influences of particle aspect ratio and electrical double layer thickness were also examined to determine their effect on interaction energies. The findings show that the edge surface–silica face interactions become favorable at a low aspect ratio, whereas the silica face–alumina face and alumina face–alumina face interactions are increased at high ionic strength conditions. These different interactions and their relative significance, provide the basis for a more detailed explanation of the rheological behavior of kaolinite suspensions as well as an improved foundation for the modification of kaolinite interactions and control of rheological properties. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of Grant DE-FG-03-93-ER14315 from DOE Basic Sciences and Grant DP0663688 from the Australian Research Council, and the CMM at the University of Queensland for the use of the cryogenic SEM. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 