The effect of high energy ball milling on the NiO reduction by zinc powder has been studied. XRD analysis on the as-milled mixtures of NiO–Zn with stoichiometric composition indicated that the traces of nickel phase observed after 30min milling and the NiO reduction reaction by Zn progressed gradually during milling procedure. DTA analysis on the raw mixture (un-milled sample) with stoichiometric ratio under high pure argon atmosphere showed that the reduction of NiO by Zn occurred at about 630°C. The final products in both as-milled and isothermally heated of un-milled samples were mainly the mixtures of ZnO and Ni0.6Zn0.4O phases.High energy ball milling has been known to activate the solid–solid chemical reactions during milling. Since the mechanical energy supplied during milling is utilized for the chemical reactions it has been called mechanochemical synthesis The solid state reaction of nickel oxide and a solid-metallic reducing agent has been studied before. Matteazzi and Le Care have initially investigated the solid state reaction of NiO–Al using planetary ball mill to produce Ni/Al In another research paper, the effect of mechanical activation on NiO–Al reaction using toluene as a process controlling agent has been studied. The reduction reaction progress gradually during milling process and after heating the milled samples at 1000 NiAl–Al Zinc oxide (ZnO) has the particular properties including specific electrical, optical and mechanical properties, high thermal stability and large Seebeck coefficient There is no report about effect of ball milling on the reduction reaction of nickel oxide by zinc powder. It is however interesting to study the mechanochemical reaction of NiO–Zn system with high-energy ball milling in order to elucidate the products of the reaction and the mode of the reaction (self-propagation combustion reaction or gradual reaction). In the present approach, the solid state reduction reaction of NiO by Zn with stoichiometric composition has been investigated in a planetary ball mill and the phase transformations in milling have been studied. The un-milled mixtures of NiO-Zn with stoichiometric composition were also prepared and the results have been compared with milled samples. The results were examined using differential thermal analysis (DTA), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and thermodynamic analysis. Mixtures of nickel oxide (Merck, 100782) and zinc powder (Merck, 108774) with stoichiometric composition were prepared based on reaction All mixtures of raw materials (based on reaction 1) were milled under vacuum in a planetary ball mill (Farapazhouhesh, Iran, FP2 model) for different times. Preliminary experiments indicated that the following conditions were suitable: 600 Differential thermal analysis (DTA) were carried out for both un-milled (Raw mixture) and milled mixtures at the heating rate of 10 Isothermal runs were undertaken in a tube furnace (Lenton, LFT, 16-180) with the sample being held at different temperatures for one hour and then allowed to cool to room temperature all under a flow of high pure argon atmosphere. The phases present in the products were analysed using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips Analytical, Co Kα radiation, 40 Thermodynamic calculations  Ni The crystallite size of ZnO in the final products of the as-milled samples (The XRD patterns of As it is seen in The XRD patterns in The DTA analysis on the un-milled Zn–NiO mixture with stoichiometric composition (reaction 1) under flowing high pure argon atmosphere was done. The DTA result of un-milled Zn–NiO powder mixture ( The first endothermic peak at about 290 In order to precious study the transformation process responsible for the all exothermic peaks in As it can be seen in   The previous research indicated that the final products in NiO–Al system were mainly mixtures of Ni–Al The results shows that it is possible to prepare nickel zinc oxide structure (Ni The mechanochemical reaction of stoichiometric ratio of Zn–NiO mixtures was studied using high energy ball milling. The results showed that NiO reduction occurred after 30 This work was supported by