Foams are low-density cellular materials, formed by introducing gas bubbles into liquids through physical or chemical means. They are encountered daily in food, beverage, personal care, and household items, and are used in firefighting, mineral processing, and petroleum recovery, all of which illustrate the broad range of materials and applications that motivates the development of foam science and technology ( This article focuses on the structure and rheology of soap foams under quasistatic conditions. Dry soap foams consist of polyhedral gas bubbles separated by thin liquid films. They can be modeled as networks of minimal surfaces. Even though these foams are composed primarily of two Newtonian fluids—water and air—they behave like soft solids because the cells are jammed together. Elastic response occurs when the foam is strained and the network of thin films deforms without changing topology; strain energy is stored as increased surface area. Plastic response occurs when the film network loses stability as it deforms, which provokes irreversible cascades of topological transitions that release energy. The foam stress and energy density scale as σ/ Under static conditions, the local geometry of dry soap foams satisfies Plateau’s laws: (i) each face on a polyhedron is a minimal surface with uniform mean curvature that balances the pressure difference between neighboring cells; (ii) three faces meet at each cell edge, a degenerate Plateau border, at equal dihedral angles of 120°; (iii) four edges meet at each cell vertex at equal tetrahedral angles of cos The Kelvin cell shown in Ordered foams are useful models of three-dimensional structure but real foams are disordered. The Surface Evolver can be used to deform spatially periodic foams, compute the minimal structures, and evaluate the stress. The Elastic–plastic behavior occurs when a dry foam is subjected to quasistatic simple shearing flow. Gas diffusion between cells causes foam coarsening, a prevalent destabilizing mechanism related to Ostwald ripening. A scaling argument suggests that Unlike the dry limit, a perfectly ordered wet foam can have different structure besides a wet Kelvin cell, e.g., the wet rhombic dodecahedron associated with f.c.c. packing (see This brief survey of static foam structure and rheology from a micromechanics point of view reveals a firm theoretical foundation for developing structure–property–processing relationships for foamed materials. The interplay between viscosity and surface tension and its influence on foam microrheology exemplifies further challenge and opportunity in modeling foam processing. The fluid mechanics of bubbles growing and deforming in a viscous fluid provides a link to the micromechanics of cellular solids by setting microstructure. 