The paper presents techno-economic analyses and life cycle assessments (LCA) of the two major gasification processes for producing hydrogen from biomass: fluidized bed (FB) gasification, and entrained flow (EF) gasification. Results indicate that the thermal efficiency of the EF-based option (56%, LHV) is 11% higher than that of the FB-based option (45%), and the minimum hydrogen selling price of the FB-based option is $0.3 per kg H2 lower than that of the EF-based option. When a carbon capture and liquefaction system is incorporated, the efficiencies of the EF- and FB-based processes decrease to 50% and 41%, respectively. The techno-economic analysis shows that at a biomass price of $100 per tonne, either a minimum price of $115/tonne CO2e or a minimum natural gas price of $5/GJ is required to make the minimum hydrogen selling price of biomass-based plants equivalent to that of commercial natural gas-based steam methane reforming plants. Furthermore, the LCA shows that, biomass as a carbon-neutral feedstock, negative life cycle GHG emissions are achievable in all biomass-based options.Hydrogen is a useful chemical with extensive applications in crude oil refining and upgrading, the production of methanol, ammonia and other chemicals. Hydrogen also continues to attract attention as a carbon-free fuel option for the transportation sector. Although commercial H Biomass is a renewable energy resource that can be used instead of fossil fuels for hydrogen production. Unlike conventional processes for hydrogen production from natural gas, the hydrogen from biomass is a clean energy carrier Koroneos et al. Despite considerable reported environmental benefits of biomass utilization for hydrogen production, there remain some barriers in the commercialization of these systems Several gasification systems have been developed for syngas production from solid feedstocks. Fixed/moving-bed downdraft or updraft configurations have a simple construction compared to other types of gasification systems. However, these types of gasifiers require a high residence time Indirect circulating FB gasification is a novel option that has been developed to avoid product syngas combustion inside the gasification reactor and also to avoid syngas nitrogen dilution, without use of high purity oxygen Extensive work has been aimed at overcoming the above noted challenges and improving gasification performance and biomass conversion. Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe and Future Energy developed a biomass gasification pilot plant using EF gasification technology Another advantage of EF gasifiers is their relatively high carbon conversion in a short residence time (a few seconds in most EF gasifiers, compared to a few minutes in other types of gasifiers Despite the impact of the gasification technology on the capital cost and financial performance of biomass-based plants, to the best of our knowledge, no techno-economic comparisons of hydrogen production from biomass through different gasification technologies have been presented in the literature. Detailed assessments and comparison of these technologies are needed to determine the suitability of different options when hydrogen is the desired final product. The main objective of this paper is to evaluate and compare the impact of gasification technology on the techno-economic and life cycle environmental performance of hydrogen production from biomass. Two hydrogen production processes from biomass are designed and analyzed: 1) an atmospheric-pressure, air blown, FB gasifier, (indirect fired system), and 2) a high pressure, oxygen-blown EF gasifier (direct fired system). For each design option, rigorous simulation and techno-economic analysis are performed to evaluate the process efficiency and financial performance under various market conditions, with comparison of the results to those of a traditional natural gas-based hydrogen plant. The impact of including a CO The simplified block diagrams of the FB gasification and EF gasification processes, with and without carbon capture and liquefaction, are in Simulation of all systems was performed using Aspen Plus version 8.6. The Peng-Robinson Boston Mathias (PR-BM) equation of state was selected for the simulation of the gasification, water gas shift, sulfur removal, and pressure swing adsorption (PSA) units. The electrolyte-nonrandom, two-liquid (Elec-NRTL) activity coefficient model was also used to model the amine units The properties of the selected biomass (Canadian Pine wood) and composition of natural gas feedstocks are listed in In this design, biomass is fed to a low pressure circulating FB gasifier, which is indirectly heated by circulation of olivine. A simplified process flow diagram of the FB gasification system is in In this system, after milling the biomass into powder, it is pressurized and sent to the gasifier using a pneumatic feeder that uses CO After sulfur removal, high-temperature and low-temperature shift reactors are utilized to convert CO to hydrogen using high pressure steam (details are in Ref. Unconverted gases from the PSA units are used as fuel for electricity and steam generation. The main prices, cost parameters and assumptions for the financial analysis of each design scenario are shown in The biomass feedstock price is a parameter that can influence the financial performance of the proposed hydrogen production facilities. Thus, a sensitivity analysis is carried out to evaluate the impact of feedstock price on the minimum hydrogen selling price for each process option. The selling price of liquefied CO In addition to calculations of thermal efficiency and on-site CO To compare the biomass-based hydrogen results with the performance of commercial hydrogen production plants, our analyses include the results of a techno-economic analysis of the two major natural gas-based hydrogen processes: steam methane reforming (SMR) and auto-thermal reforming (ATR) (based on our prior work  The biomass gasification unit represents the highest contribution to the total capital cost of the plants. Although the biomass consumption of the EF systems is 20% less than that of the FB systems, the capital cost of the FB gasification unit is less than half that of the EF gasification unit. The higher capital cost of the EF system is due to the higher temperature and pressure of the EF gasifiers and their more complex construction  The thermal efficiency of the EF process is 9–11% higher than the efficiency of the FB process, depending upon the carbon capture option. The natural gas-based processes generally have higher thermal efficiency than the biomass options, although the SMR with carbon capture process efficiency is lower than the efficiency of the EF process.  The minimum selling price of biomass-based hydrogen is approximately $1.30 to $2.40 per kg higher than the price of hydrogen from the natural gas-based systems, depending upon the reforming and gasification technology, and whether a carbon capture system is incorporated. This is primarily due to the higher feedstock cost (per GJ) of biomass-based options, higher capital cost of syngas production and treatment unit (biomass gasification and H The direct CO The biomass consumption of the EF system is lower than that of the FB system ( The feedstock prices assumed for the biomass and natural gas H The impact of the natural gas price on the minimum hydrogen selling price of natural gas-based and biomass-based processes is illustrated in Incorporation of a carbon capture and liquefaction unit in the biomass hydrogen production plants results in systems with minimum GHG emissions, and provides a potential opportunity to earn revenue from selling liquefied CO The life cycle results for the EF and FB based hydrogen production technologies are shown in Compared to natural gas-based processes, biomass processes have lower GHG emissions in systems both without and with carbon capture. However, the natural gas-based processes generally have lower total energy use (fossil fuels + non-fossil fuels), except for the SMR system with carbon capture, which has higher energy use than the EF process. Unlike GHG emissions, the sulfur oxides and black carbon emissions of the biomass-based processes are higher than those of the natural gas-based options (except black carbon emission of the SMR with carbon capture). Since a sulfur removal unit (LO-CAT unit) has already been used prior to syngas upgrading in the water gas shift reactors, further reduction in the life cycle sulfur oxide emissions of the biomass-based processes can only be achieved by utilizing some control technologies and improvements Biomass has the potential to play an important role in the production of low-GHG intensity commercial-scale hydrogen. In this work, the simulation, techno-economic analysis, and LCA of two major technologies that convert biomass into hydrogen were carried out. Furthermore, the impact of including carbon capture and liquefaction units on the techno-economic and life cycle performance of each process technology was investigated. Our results indicate that although the EF-based process can achieve higher thermal efficiency than the FB-based process, its minimum hydrogen selling price is $0.07 to $0.33 per kg H Although the life cycle GHG emissions of the EF and FB processes are both negative, the LCA shows that the EF-based system can have lower GHG emissions (global warming potential) only when the carbon capture option is used. The main advantage of the EF-based system is its lower life cycle energy use, which is 20% less than that of the FB-based system. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the  Air separation unit Auto-thermal reforming Boiler feed water Carbon capture Chemical engineering plant cost index Entrained flow Electrolyte-nonrandom, two-liquid Fluidized bed Greenhouse gas High pressure steam Lower heating value Natural gas National Bureau of Standards/National Research Council Net present value Nonrandom-two-liquid Peng Robinson Boston Mathias Pressure swing adsorption Steam methane reforming Volatile organic compound Water gas shift