A series of shear tests and shake table sliding tests are performed on a 1.5 m high concrete gravity dam model with a smooth concrete–concrete frictional interface corresponding to a cold lift joint. The shear tests are performed with the sliding crack (a) in dry, (b) in wet, and (c) in pressurized conditions with peak water uplift pressures, 
                        
                           
                              P
                           
                           
                              0
                           
                        
                     , equal to 15 kPa, 30 kPa, and 45 kPa. For the pressurized condition, water was fed from a 12.5 mm hole reaching the interface. Monotonic shear tests indicate that the dry dynamic friction coefficient was approximately 15% smaller than the dry static friction coefficient. A reduction of 6 degrees is obtained between the wet and dry friction angles. However, there is a more significant 32% reduction between the wet static friction coefficients versus the wet dynamic friction coefficient. In the presence of a pressurized concrete–concrete interface, the sliding motions are initiated suddenly in a stick-slip mode as compared to wet and dry interfaces. Moreover, the high sliding velocity at the initiation of motion also promotes a reduction in friction coefficient, as explained by tribology in the presence of a thin water film at the sliding interface. The applications of sinusoidal pulse and earthquake ground motions have shown that residual sliding is larger for low frequency content signal (2 Hz) than for high frequency content signal (10 Hz). The uplift pressures reduce the vertical force resultant promoting sliding. The friction coefficients and related residual displacements are found to be sensitive to the sliding interface conditions. Uncertainties in the selection of the static and dynamic friction coefficients must be accounted for to develop a high confidence level in estimating residual sliding displacements that could take place for dams subjected to strong ground motions often of larger intensities than those used in the original design many years ago.Review of dam safety guidelines indicates that the assumption regarding uplift pressure intensity during crack or lift joint opening in an earthquake may vary from full reservoir pressure to zero pressure, and nothing is said about the sliding mode This paper presents the results of a series of experimental shake table sliding tests of a small concrete dam model (1.5 m in height) with a smooth lift joint and with a specially design water-pressurized joint allowing motions at the base joint (  The friction coefficient is a function of the contacting surface asperities but also of the presence of fluid that lubricates the surfaces. According to Olsson Seismic analyses of gravity dams most often use hydrodynamic pressures computed from Westergaard added mass model. In that case, the intensity of hydrodynamic pressures is proportional to the imposed ground motion accelerations. Kanatani et al. Katani et al. results The objectives of the experimental program are (1) to develop a water tight lateral joint system that do not restrain unduly sliding displacements of the dam model, (2) to develop a simple system to apply known uplift pressures, (3) to perform three types of monotonic tests with dry, wet and pressurized concrete–concrete interfaces to evaluate friction coefficients, and (4) to perform shake table tests to quantify residual siding displacements in the presence of water. Systematic tests are performed for dry, wet, and pressurized interface conditions with different sinusoidal and seismic excitation frequencies (sliding velocities). Water pressure is adjusted through a pipe reaching the joint plane (  A system made of steel cables, a pulley, and a hanging mass is used to apply a horizontal load to the dam 150 mm above the sliding joint ( In the pressurized condition, water under controlled pressure is applied to the interface by a 12.5 mm hole. Seeping flow along the joint allows uplift pressure to build up. A series of tests are performed to evaluate the friction coefficients of the concrete–concrete interface. For these tests, the steel cable with the suspended mass was attached to ground. The shake table was then used to apply the displacement time history corresponding to a 5 mm/s sliding velocity as shown in When the surfaces are pressurized, there is a sudden sliding of the order of 7 mm to 15 mm at a high velocity (≈50 mm/s).  For pressurized surfaces ( An explanation for the reduction in friction coefficient as sliding is initiated could be inferred from tribology. If sliding is taking place at a significant velocity we could have temporarily reached the mix regime (  To investigate the wet and pressurized dam sliding responses during earthquakes, two different input ground motions are considered. The first ground motion used is an Eastern Canadian record from the 1988 Saguenay earthquake, and the second record is a typical Western North America record, from the 1940 El Centro earthquake. Eastern records have typically high-frequency contents (near 10 Hz) compared with the Western North America records (near 2 Hz). These two records were scaled to progressively increase the peak ground acceleration (PGA). Monotonic shear tests and shake table tests with sinusoidal as well as actual ground motions records were performed to obtain experimental data on the sliding response of a 1.5 m high concrete gravity dam model with a smooth construction lift joint. The originality of the tests comes from the concrete–concrete interface conditions that were dry, wet or pressurized. At this stage no attempt was made to make a correlation with a hydro-mechanical constitutive model using rigid body motions or other formulations. This is because the experimental setup favored wide variations in uplift pressures with sliding motions, that should be theoretically modeled accordingly. This is an aspect to improve in future tests. Nevertheless several conclusions, useful to better understand and practically quantify the seismic sliding response of gravity, could be drawn from this study: • Monotonic shear tests of relatively smooth concrete–concrete interface indicate that the dry dynamic friction coefficient was approximately 15% smaller than the dry static friction coefficient. A reduction of 6 degrees is obtained between the wet and dry friction angles. However, there was a more significant 32% reduction between the wet static friction coefficients versus the wet dynamic friction coefficient. • The concrete–concrete friction dynamic coefficient, • In the presence of a pressurized concrete–concrete interface, the sliding motions are initiated very suddenly as compared to wet and dry interfaces. The applications of sinusoidal pulse and earthquake ground motions have shown that residual sliding is larger for the low frequency content signal (2 Hz) than for the high frequency content signal (10 Hz). The uplift pressures reduce the resultant vertical force, promoting sliding displacements. Moreover the high sliding velocity at the initiation of motion also promotes a reduction in friction coefficient, as explained by tribology in the presence of a thin water film at the sliding interface. The friction coefficients and related residual displacements are found to be very sensitive to the surface conditions. The results of this study have direct applications in practice because dam safety guidelines do not discuss the effect of potential sliding interface conditions (wet, dry, pressurized) on the selection of appropriate friction coefficients. There is now a trend to move towards performance based seismic reassessment of existing gravity dams designed years ago with seismic excitation of lower intensity, rather than the current requirements. The approach is to allow limited, controlled, residual sliding displacements. It is shown in this study that the presence of water, and related uncertainties, in the selection of the static and dynamic friction coefficients must be accounted for to develop a high confidence level on predicted seismic residual sliding displacements. The authors would like to thank the National Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and the Quebec Funds for Research on New Technologies (FQRNT) for financial support.