The modification of flotation method for the examination of diarrhoeic piglet faeces for the detection of Isospora suis oocysts was elaborated. The method was based on removing fractions of fat from the sample of faeces by centrifugation with a 25% Percoll solution. The investigations were carried out in comparison to the McMaster method. From five variants of the Percoll flotation method, the best results were obtained when 2ml of flotation liquid per 1g of faeces were used. The limit of detection in the Percoll flotation method was 160 oocysts per 1g, and was better than with the McMaster method. The efficacy of the modified method was confirmed by results obtained in the examination of the I. suis infected piglets. From all faecal samples, positive samples in the Percoll flotation method were double the results than that of the routine method. Oocysts were first detected by the Percoll flotation method on day 4 post-invasion, i.e. one-day earlier than with the McMaster method. During the experiment (except for 3 days), the extensity of I. suis invasion in the litter examined by the Percoll flotation method was higher than that with the McMaster method. The obtained results show that the modified flotation method with the use of Percoll could be applied in the diagnostics of suckling piglet isosporosis.Diarrhoea of suckling piglets is often observed in pig farms. One of the main reasons for this is A laboratory examination for the detection of Problems connected with high content of fat in diarrhoeal faeces were solved in different ways. Because these diagnostic difficulties were exposed generally in the flotation methods, the examination of direct smears of faeces was proposed as an alternative method, but was only effective during massive shedding of oocysts. On the other hand, the detectability in fatty faeces was significantly increased by using autofluorescence of oocysts in UV light ( In our investigation, attention was focused on a modified method in which the sample was submitted to the flotation process just after the removal fractions of fat. Partially, such an assumption was fulfilled in the method used by The investigations connected with the efficacy of modified flotation method with the use of Percoll were carried out in comparison to the McMaster method in Raynaud's modification ( The weighed faecal sample was mixed with 25% water solution of Percoll (Amersham Biosciences) to a proportion of about 1:10 and then sieved. The obtained suspension was poured into a tube and centrifuged (1700 The weighed faecal sample was mixed with saturated NaCl solution supplemented with sugar (1 The investigations were carried out in two phases. The first phase (I) concerned the analysis of the sensitivity of the modified flotation method with the use of Percoll, and selection of the optimal variant of this method. The second phase (II) concerned the evaluation of the efficacy of the modified flotation method in examination of faeces from The sensitivity of the method was estimated by the examination of faecal samples enriched with Thirty-six one-gram samples were prepared. They were enriched with All samples were examined by the flotation method with the use of the Percoll and McMaster method in Raynaud's modification. Percoll flotation was used in five variants with different proportions of flotation solution volume to the weight of sample ( Six suckling piglets from one litter were used in the experiment. Three-day-old piglets were infected  Distinct separation of fat fraction from the sediment occurred after centrifugation with Percoll solution. There were observed significant differences in the quality of the examined microscopic field between samples prepared according to the modified flotation method and the McMaster method. The suspension obtained with the use of the Percoll flotation method was much more transparent than that prepared according to the McMaster method, where most of microscopic field was covered by fat molecules, making oocysts detection difficult. It must be stressed that such a bad visibility obtained in the McMaster method occurred despite the use of a special flotation solution dedicated for diarrhoeal faeces—saturated NaCl solution supplemented with sugar ( Our results show that removing the fat fraction with Percoll enabled using a several times lower volume of flotation solution without losing the quality of microscopic view. Results concerning the frequency of oocysts detection with the Percoll flotation and McMaster methods are presented in The mean numbers of oocysts detected by particular methods and variants are presented in The results show that the sensitivity of the modified method increased together with the reduction of dilution of the sample, but only to the optimal point—2 According to results obtained in phase I, the optimal variant (P2) of the modified flotation method was used for examination of piglet faeces. When the examination was made with the McMaster method, 26.7% of all faecal samples were In our investigation, among 30 samples positive in both methods, in 24 samples (80%) more oocysts were detected using the Percoll flotation method, in one sample (3.3%) equal numbers of oocysts were detected in both methods, and in five samples (16.7%) less oocysts were found with the Percoll flotation method. The first oocysts were detected in piglet faeces on the fourth and fifth DPI with the Percoll flotation and the McMaster methods, respectively ( New methods are still being sought in order to improve the diagnostics of piglet isosporosis. Great expectations are set on the investigations of