Introduction
                  Ankle fractures represent the third most common fracture in elderly patients, after hip and wrist fractures. Distal fibula fractures in this population are closely related to osteoporosis, which renders commonly used methods of internal fixation technically demanding and prone to failure. Currently there is a tendency to fix osteoporotic metaphyseal and epiphyseal fractures with locking plates. However, published accounts about the use of this technology in osteoporotic distal fibula fractures are scarce. In this study we compare the results of two groups of patients who underwent surgery for these types of fracture, one group received locking and the other non-locking screws, both using one-third tubular plates.
               
                  Methods
                  Sixty-two patients, aged over 64 years, underwent surgery for osteoporotic distal fibula fractures between 2011 and 2014. Forty-five of them were stabilized with a non-locking plate and the remaining 17 with a locking plate fixation. Follow-up was performed at 4, 8, 12, 26, and 52 weeks. Results were assessed according to the AOFAS Ankle-Hindfoot Score and radiological criteria for consolidation.
               
                  Results
                  Average time to union and AOFAS scores at 6 and 12 months were similar in both groups, including for the individual categories: function, pain, mobility, and alignment. Only time until partial weight bearing was significantly lower in the locking plate group (4.69 ± 2.63 vs 7.77 ± 4.30, p = 0.03). The most common complications were wound dehiscence and superficial infection (two cases of both).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Both locking and conventional non-locking plates achieved similar treatment outcomes in this group of osteoporotic patients aged over 64. However, locking plates may offer more benefits in cases that have to take into account immobilization time and concomitant soft-tissue damage.Ankle fractures represent the third most common fracture in elderly patients, following hip and wrist fractures, with an incidence of 184 cases per 100,000 people/year The correct treatment of ankle fractures must take into account a decisive factor regarding osteosynthesis: the presence of osteoporosis A number of factors are believed to contribute to the poor outcomes observed for internal fixation in the elderly. The soft tissue is usually in poor condition and this is worsened dramatically given the additional damage caused by the fracture. The state of the soft tissue is a key factor when deciding on a standard surgical treatment, that is, an open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), as surgical wound complications are common in these patients The aim of this study was to compare the results for locking versus unlocking screws implanted on the same type of plate system in osteoporotic patients aged over 64 with a distal fibula fracture, in terms of: (1) global functionality according to the AOFAS Ankle-Hindfoot Score This research was a retrospective, cohort, single-surgical team, single-center study. The local Ethics Committee approved the study and patients granted their prerequisite informed consent before participating (the study was conducted within the principles set out in the Declaration of Helsinki). Sixty-two patients who underwent surgery for osteoporotic distal fibula fractures between January 2012 and December 2014 were included. Based on the different implants used, patients were divided into two groups: Group A ( The eligibility criteria were: (1) isolated distal fibula fracture, classed as a Weber B or C fracture with at least 2 There were no significant differences between demographic and patient characteristics in terms of age, sex, smoking habit, diabetes, and fracture mechanism and type according to the Danis-Weber classification Informed consent for surgery was obtained from all patients. The same surgeon carried out all the operations (MHP). Surgery was performed with intradural anesthesia, antibiotic prophylaxis (preoperative, intravenous administration of cefazolin 2 Postoperatively, all patients were discharged with a short, lower leg and non-weight-bearing splint and the aid of two crutches. They took low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) for four weeks. At three weeks post-surgery, the sutures were removed and the patients were referred to physiotherapy. Partial weight bearing was allowed between 3 and 8 weeks after surgery, as long as there were no signs of pain during the physical examination. The criteria for bony union were defined as the presence of a bridging bone in 3 out of 4 cortices on two orthogonal X-ray images and full weight bearing without pain. According to Morshed Patients attended follow-ups at 4, 8, 12, 26, and 52 weeks, with a total minimum follow-up period of 52 weeks (range 12–25 months). Clinical and radiological assessment was carried out routinely and the AOFAS Ankle-Hindfoot Score Statistical analysis was carried out with SPSS v. 17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). The variables gender, personal background, smoking status, previous medical treatments, AO classification, complications, need for a lag screw, surgical reintervention, and rehabilitation are expressed in frequencies and percentages, and their proportions were compared with the chi-squared test or Fisher’s exact test as appropriate. Age, surgical delay, time with splint, total weight-bearing time, partial weight-bearing time, time to bone union, and AOFAS score are expressed as means and standard deviations. A Mann–Whitney test was used to compare the two groups. All patients were treated with ORIF except two cases in which a minimally invasive technique was performed due to the very poor condition of the soft tissue. Mean time from injury to surgery was 3.8 days (range 2–10 days) with no differences between groups. Associated comorbidities were frequent, yet no correlation with complications was observed: diabetes was present in 30 patients of our series (49%), but without any difference in the prevalence between locking or non-locking groups ( The most frequent complications were wound breakdown (two cases in Group B) and superficial infection (two cases in Group A). Both were successfully treated with local wound care and oral antibiotics for 14 days. The plate length and number of screws used were similar in both groups but an additional lag screw was required in 31 cases (68.9%) in the non-locking group and 7 cases (41.2%) in the locking group ( Radiographic assessment showed that all the fractures healed ( Ankle fracture fixation continues to be of interest to the scientific community The results of the current study suggest that there is no clinical advantage to using locking versus non-locking one-third tubular plates in osteoporotic distal fibula fractures, a finding that agrees with the outcomes reported by other authors Several references outline the biomechanical advantages of locking implants ( There are several studies that address the clinical effectiveness of using locking plates in distal fibula fractures, but none of them specifically compare the use of locking versus non-locking, one-third tubular plates. Tsukada Complications are very important factors to be considered in this age group. In our study there were no significant differences between the groups, wound dehiscence being the most frequent. Lynde Wound complications and skin irritation are associated with the shape and thickness of the implant Immobilization time in a cast was slightly shorter in the locking plate group of our series (4.5 Lag screws were used in significantly fewer cases in our locking plate group. The surgeon also determined this subjectively, this time during the operation, based on the trace of fracture and the construct’s apparent stability. The clinical implications of its use should therefore be considered with caution. Moreover, a recent biomechanical study has suggested that the intrinsic stiffness of the locking plate construct itself was likely to be minimally affected by the addition of a lag screw There are some limitations to this work. It is a retrospective study and the patients were not randomized for treatment with the two types of fixation. The overall number of patients was relatively small since we only selected osteoporotic subjects aged over 64 with distal fibula fractures. The number of patients in the locking plate group is substantially fewer than the non-locking group and this could have influenced some of the statistical results. Our study shows that the AOFAS scores at 6 and 12 months did not differ between the two groups. However, although differences in time until radiological fracture consolidation were insignificant (12.5 Treatment of Weber Type B and C distal fibula fractures with one-third tubular plates provides similar results regardless of whether using locking or non-locking screws, based on radiological consolidation criteria and the AOFAS Ankle-Hindfoot Score. However, in this study, the use of locking plates resulted in a shorter period of postoperative immobilization in a cast and less non weight-bearing time. Based on these results, we recommend the use of one-third tubular locking plates when treating especially frail osteoporotic elderly patients whose soft tissue is in a poor condition and who cannot tolerate prolonged immobilization. Clinical studies with a greater number of cases and long-term follow-up are necessary to confirm the clinical benefits of locking implants in these types of fractures. The authors declare no conflict of interest in any way.