Microwave-assisted mechanical excavation has been considered as a promising rock breakage method and is widely studied in recent years. Heating characteristics of minerals are the basis of research on the weakening effect of microwave irradiation on rock. In this paper, 14 igneous rock-forming minerals were microwave heated. The influences of microwave power, mineral group/sub-group, element content and water on the heating characteristics of these minerals were analyzed. The results show that the microwave sensitivities of these minerals can be categorized into different levels according to their heating rates. As the microwave power increases, the microwave sensitivity of minerals remains unchanged. Mineral group has the greatest influence on their microwave sensitivities, followed by crystal structure and iron content. In addition, different kinds of water contained in minerals greatly influence their heating characteristics.Currently, mechanical excavation is widely used in rock projects due to its advantages of high mechanization degree, low disturbance to the surrounding rock and high construction efficiency. However, low efficiency and excessive cutter wear take place when tunneling/excavating through rocks with high strength, causing an unfavorable increase in construction cost and duration. Microwave is a kind of electromagnetic wave with a frequency ranging from 300 MHz to 300 GHz. It has been widely used in the fields of broadcast, communication, television, remote sensing, etc. since 1936 when the waveguide transmission test was successfully conducted in the U.S. It was found that microwave could cause heating effect during its application, thereupon people started the researches on microwave heating technique. Studies have shown that, after rock is microwave heated, weakening is induced mainly by different expansion of minerals with different absorption to microwave, or physical and chemical changes of certain minerals. Ford and Pei The foregoing studies were based on the need of mineral engineering, whereas rock encountered in the field of civil engineering is mainly composed of rock-forming minerals. The heating characteristics of rock-forming minerals were specifically studied by some researchers. Lu et al. Igneous rock is the most widespread rock type in lithosphere, accounting for 66% of the total volume. According to igneous petrology, common igneous rock-forming minerals can be divided into seven groups, i.e. olivine group, pyroxene group, amphibole group, mica group, feldspar group, feldspathoid group and quartz group. In this paper, 14 igneous rock-forming minerals and two ore minerals were selected for microwave heating tests. Subsequently, the microwave sensitivities of these minerals were classified according to their heating rates. Moreover, the influences of microwave power, mineral group/sub-group, element content and water on the heating characteristics of minerals were analyzed. A 2.45 GHz multi-mode microwave oven with an output power range of 0–2 kW was used in the present study. An optical fiber and a thermocouple were applied for measuring the internal temperature of mineral powder. When the sample temperature is lower than 180 °C, the optical fiber is used for continuous temperature measurement. Once the sample temperature exceeds 180 °C, the thermocouple (up to 750 °C) is used for measuring the final heating temperature. The present study collected 14 common basic forming minerals of igneous rock, including quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase, biotite (#1, #2, #3), muscovite, hornblende (#1, #2), hypersthene, hedenbergite (#1, #2), diopside and forsterite. Meanwhile, magnetite and hematite, which are ore minerals and usually exist in igneous rock as accessory minerals, were also selected to compare their heating effects with rock-forming minerals. Electron probe microanalysis was conducted to determine the elemental compositions of the minerals, and the results are presented in  Sensitive minerals. Minerals in this level can be heated rapidly with a rate of above 20 °C/min. Biotite #3 of the mica group, hornblende #2 of the amphibole group and hypersthene of the pyroxene group belong to this level. Medium-sensitive minerals. Minerals in this level can absorb some microwave energy in a certain time and be heated with a rate of 16–19 °C/min. Hedenbergite #1 and #2 of the pyroxene group, biotite #1 and #2 of the mica group belong to this level. (3) Insensitive minerals. Minerals in this level are heated slowly with a rate below 10 °C/min. Quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase, muscovite, forsterite, diopside and hornblende #1 fall into this level. It is demonstrated that most leucocratic minerals such as quartz, orthoclase, muscovite are insensitive and have a low heating rate under microwave irradiation, while some melanocratic minerals such as biotite, hornblende, pyroxene are sensitive to microwave. In order to compare the heating characteristics of ore minerals and rock-forming minerals, 2 ore minerals were also heated at 500 W for 3 min. It is found that the magnetite and hematite can be heated to extremely high temperatures of 750 °C and 250 °C, with heating rates of 247 °C/min and 80 °C/min, respectively. Their heating rates are much higher than those of rock-forming minerals. This finding is in good agreement with the previous studies, i.e. ore minerals are much more sensitive to microwave than rock-forming minerals. Based on the sensitivity classification used in this paper, they should fall into the extremely sensitive level.  The previous studies show a positive correlation between the microwave sensitivity and the iron content of minerals. As mentioned in Introduction, minerals in the same group can be further divided into different sub-groups according to their crystal structure or chemical composition. The mineral groups with more sub-groups in the present study (mica group and pyroxene group) are chosen for detailed analysis. Among the 4 pyroxene group minerals in the present study, diopside, hedenbergite #1, hedenbergite #2 belong to the clinopyroxene sub-group, and hypersthene belongs to the orthopyroxene sub-group. These 2 sub-groups have different crystal structures, which are monoclinic system and orthorhombic system, respectively. Among the 4 mica group minerals in the present study, muscovite belongs to the muscovite sub-group, and biotite #1, #2 and #3 belong to the phlogopite sub-group. These 2 sub-groups have the same crystal structure but different chemical compositions. According to the above analysis, it can be concluded that, for minerals in the same group, the sensitivity is primarily governed by their crystal structure, while for minerals in the same group and with the same crystal structure, the sensitivity is determined by their iron content. Apart from pyroxene group and mica group, there are 2 amphibole group minerals selected in the present study which both belong to the clinoamphibole sub-group. Their heating characteristics also accord with the above law ( Water is an extremely strong absorbing material with a loss factor of 12.04 at room temperature, According to mineralogy, water in minerals includes hydroscopic water, interlayer water, confined water, micro-porous water, crystalline water and constitution water. However, sensitive minerals can be easily heated to a high temperature under microwave irradiation, causing the escape of other kinds of water. Among the 3 sensitive minerals used in the present study, biotite #3 is a layered silicate which contains more kinds and amount of water. Therefore, biotite #3 was chosen to study the effect of water on the heating rate of mineral. The previous studies show that dehydroxylations of biotite take place at about 600 °C and 800–1000 °C, leading to the breakage of Mg–OH bond and Fe–OH bond respectively, during which the constitution water escapes from the mineral. It is found that, between 110-500 °C, the mass of the sample decreases by 1.6%. Meanwhile, the heating rate decreases from 34 °C/min to 28.64 °C/min. Since the temperature is not high enough for constitution water to escape from the sample, the reduction of microwave sensitivity is caused by the escape of confined water and micro-porous water (Biotite is more prone to weathering in nature. So, the biotite samples obtained in the present study are more or less weathered). The mass and sensitivities of the samples continue to decrease between 500-900 °C, during which constitution water, accounting for 48.7% of the total escaped water, gradually escapes from the samples and change the structure of mineral lattice. Therefore, the reduction of microwave sensitivity between 500-900 °C is caused by both the escape of constitution water and structure change. In this paper, 14 igneous rock-forming minerals were treated under microwave irradiation. The microwave sensitivities of these minerals were classified according to their heating rates. Moreover, the influences of microwave power, mineral group/sub-group, element content and water on the heating characteristics of minerals were analyzed. The main conclusions are as follows: The 14 kinds of rock-forming minerals have different microwave sensitivities which can be divided into 3 levels according to their heating rates. Hypersthene, hornblende #2 and biotite #3 are sensitive minerals. Hedenbergite #1 and #2, biotite #1 and #2 are medium-sensitive minerals. Quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase, muscovite, forsterite, diopside and hornblende #1 are insensitive minerals. Compared to the rock-forming minerals, the ore minerals, magnetite and hematite, can be classified into extremely sensitive minerals. In addition, the heating rates of rock-forming minerals increase with microwave power, while their microwave sensitivities do not change. The heating characteristics of minerals are related to the mineral group/sub-group and chemical composition (mainly iron content). Mineral group has the greatest influence on its microwave sensitivity. Generally, melanocratic minerals are more sensitive than leucocratic minerals; For minerals in the same group, the sensitivity is primarily governed by their crystal structure; For minerals in the same group and with the same crystal structure, the sensitivity is determined by their iron content. Water has a much higher loss factor than rock-forming minerals and can greatly influence these minerals' heating characteristics. Different kinds of water existing in minerals have different binding energies and loss factors, and will escape at different temperatures. The escape of these kinds of water can change the heating characteristics of minerals. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was funded by the