In the present work, a collision model is established and combined with a hydrodynamic model, 3D collision trajectory, Coriolis force model and drag force model to build a hybrid model for predicting the position of the pile surface in a blast furnace with parallel type hoppers. The described model is then validated by test data and scene photos of the worn chute. According to this model, different gas flow profiles are formed at different development stages after the burden distribution is finished. During the "initial stage" which accounts for 30% of the total time of gas flow development, the development of gas flow is mainly influenced by the burden surface of ore. During the "intermediate stage" which accounts for 40% of the total time, the development of gas flow is influenced by both the burden surface of ore and the burden surface of coke. During the "late stage" which accounts for 30% of the total time, the development of gas flow is mainly influenced by the burden surface of coke. The "snakelike" segregation in the burden surface of blast furnace with parallel hoppers is caused by the variation in Coriolis force on the burden flow at the chute exit during one revolution of the chute (the range in total Coriolis acceleration for chute inclination angle of 42.5° is 1.36–3.01m/s2 for ore and 0.36–4.40m/s2 for coke). The model can provide real time guidance for burden distribution in a blast furnace. The segregation in the burden surface can be reduced by adding a center discharge valve.Acceleration of the burden with respect to the Y tube (m/s Acceleration of the burden with respect to the longitudinal direction of the chute (m/s Acceleration of the burden with respect to the tangential direction of the chute (m/s Acceleration of the burden with respect to the freeboard (m/s Maximum cross-sectional area of the burden (m Half-width of the projection of the throttle valve opening (m) Gas resistance coefficient of the burden in the freeboard Diameter of the throttle valve opening (m) Diameter of the centering tube (m) Equivalent spherical diameter (ESD) of the particle, taking the average particle diameter Average particle diameter (m) Chute tilting distance, i.e. the vertical distance between the chute tilting axis and the chute bottom face (m) Elastic modulus of burden material (Gpa) Elastic modulus of centering tube material (Gpa) Gas resistance of the burden in the freeboard (N) Inertial centrifugal force (N) Coriolis force (N) Gravitational force (N) Frictional force between the burden particle and the Y tube (N) Frictional force between the burden particle and the chute (N) Local gravitational acceleration (m/s Height of the vertical position of the chute over the impact point on the burden surface (m) Height of the end of the chute bottom surface over the impact point on the burden surface (m) Height of the stock line (m) Stock line height difference, i.e. the distance from the vertical position of the chute to the zero point of the stock line (m) Drop height of the burden (m) Distance from the last collision point of the burden and the centering tube to the centering tube entrance (m) Distance from the last collision point of the burden and the centering tube to the centering tube exit (m) Distance from the chute suspension point to the stock line zero point (m) Length of the centering tube (m) Distance from the chute suspension point to the centering tube exit (m) Gas resistance per unit mass of burden per unit velocity in the freeboard (1/s) Side length of the projection of the throttle valve opening (m) Side length of the Y tube (m) Displacement of the burden particle along the axial direction of the chute Design length of the chute (m) Effective length of the chute, i.e. the actual moving length of the burden on the chute (m) Mass of the burden particle (kg) Mass of the burden, calculated from the equivalent diameter of the burden stream (kg) Number of collisions of the burden on the centering tube Reaction force of the chute on the particle (N) Supporting force of the internal curved chute surface per unit mass of the burden (N/kg) Discharging flow through the throttle valve (kg/s) Semi-major axis of the big oval in the horizontal projection (m) Semi-minor axis of the small oval in the horizontal projection (m) Semi-minor axis of the big oval in the horizontal projection (m) Semi-major axis of the small oval in the horizontal projection (m) Radius of the inner arc of the chute (m) Radius of the burden impact point (m) Rotation radius of the inner valve plate of the throttle valve Reynolds number of the burden in the freeboard Projected area of the throttle valve (m Moving time of the burden particle on the chute (s) Total moving time of the burden particle in the Y tube (s) Total moving time of the burden particle in the centering tube before the last collision (s) Time elapsed from the last collision between the burden particle and the centering tube to the contact between the particle and the chute (s) Moving time of the burden particle on the chute (s) Moving time of the burden particle in the centering tube (s) Moving time of the burden particle in the freeboard (s) Vertical velocity of the burden upon contact with the chute (m/s) Burden collision velocity (m/s) Horizontal velocity of the burden upon contact with the chute (m/s) Horizontal velocity of the burden stream during the last collision with the centering tube (m/s) Horizontal velocity of the burden stream during the first, second ... nth collision with the centering tube (m/s) Equal in magnitude but opposite in directions to Vertical velocity of the burden stream during the last collision with the centering tube (m/s) Velocity of the burden particle in the freeboard (m/s) Velocity of burden stream at the throttle valve opening (m/s) Velocity of burden flowing out of the Y tube (m/s) Velocity of the burden upon contact with the chute (m/s) Initial velocity of the burden in the chute (m/s) Velocity of the burden at the chute exit (m/s) Gas flow rate at the furnace top, 0 (m/s) for charging before blowing-in Velocity of the burden along the chute direction (m/s) Tangential velocity of the burden along the chute arc (m/s) Total elastic vibration energy of the burden during the collision process (J) Coordinate direction Distance from position M where the particle leaves the chute to the furnace centerline Displacement of the particle in the Chute angle (rad) Inclination angle of the Y tube, Degree of opening of the throttle valve (°) Poisson's ratio of the burden Poisson's ratio of the centering tube material Maximum deformation occurring when the burden collides with the centering tube Collision dissipation factor of the burden Viscosity coefficient of gas (Pa· Circumferential angle of the burden particle moving along the internal curved surface of the chute, i.e. eccentric angle of the burden (rad) Rotation angle of the chute at Angle of the burden impact point below the Oxy plane (rad) Energy loss of the burden Coefficient of friction between the chute and the burden Coefficient of friction between the Y tube and the burden Bulk density of the burden (kg/m Density of the burden (kg/m Density of wall material (kg/m Gas density during smooth BF operation, 0.81 Apparent density of the burden particle (kg/m Shape factor of the particle (sphericity) Rotation speed of the chute (r/s) Acute angle between the ox′ axis and the ox axis (rad) Burden distribution plays an extremely important role in blast furnace operation. In a given burden distribution system, the burden surface formed at the furnace throat will not only determine gas permeability, gas flow distribution and CO utilization, but will also have a great impact on energy saving, efficiency, emission reduction, yield and quality of molten iron and safety, stability and durability of the blast furnace. Currently, parallel hoppers are still used by a considerable number of the blast furnaces for burden distribution due to their simple operation, easy maintenance and strong overcharging capacity. The burden surface profile and gas flow distribution for the blast furnace with parallel hoppers have always been a challenge and center of attention for metallurgy researchers. The existing models for burden surface cannot properly predict the actual surface and gas flow distribution. Therefore, it is of great practical significance to establish a model which accurately reflects the burden surface distribution and gas flow distribution for a blast furnace with parallel hoppers. Various scholars have studied burden distribution modeling and burden surface distribution modeling for a blast furnace with parallel hoppers The burden movement in a blast furnace with parallel hoppers is shown in Qiu et al. The structure of the throttle valve opening is shown in The projection of the throttle valve opening is similar to a square. In the present research, the projection area of the opening  A three dimensional Cartesian coordinate system is established in The velocity of burden flowing out of the Y tube, After the burden flows out of the throttle valve and before the burden leaves the Y tube, the elapsed time As shown in The time parameter Du et al. Energy dissipation occurs when the burden collides with the tube wall. Assume there is no plastic deformation in both the burden and the tube wall and no adhesion between burden particles, then the energy loss of the burden With the above analysis and solution of the energy dissipation factor, the horizontal velocity of the burden after The time elapsed from the burden leaving the Y tube to the last collision between the burden stream and the centering tube, The number of collisions After the burden leaves the Y tube and before the last collision with the centering tube, the displacement Increment During the last collision with the centering tube, the vertical velocity During the last collision with the centering tube, the horizontal velocity First, a moving coordinate system After the direction is changed due to the collision with the centering tube, the burden enters the rotary chute. The longest semi-axis and the shortest semi-axis from the three-dimensional collision trajectory are shown in Since   In When the burden is in contact with the chute, the horizontal velocity is The state of stress of a burden particle is shown in Through the force analysis of the burden particle, the following differential equations of motion are set up: Solve the differential The downward projectile movement of the burden after leaving the chute end is shown in When the burden is at the end of the chute, the three components of its velocity As shown in When moving in the freeboard, the burden is subject to a gas drag force in addition to the force of gravity Under the effect of the gas drag force, the accelerations of burden moving along  Perform numerical integration on The angle of the impact point below the The mathematical model for burden distribution in blast furnace with parallel hoppers, which is a hybrid model integrating a collision model calculating the energy dissipation coefficient of particles by simulation, hydrodynamic model, 3D collision trajectory, Coriolis force model and drag force model, is used in combination with the specifications and material properties et al. (  Please refer to  It is known from In The major axis length of the small ellipse of the worn chute is 0.66 The minor axis length of the small ellipse of the worn chute is 0.4 It can be concluded from the above discussion that the three-dimensional collision trajectory of the burden in the present model is consistent with the actual situation. First, the BF production process is a continuous and dynamic process. The video captured by the infrared camera on blast furnace top reflects the development trend of the gas flow. The infrared images extracted from the infrared video directly reflect: ① temperature distribution on the burden surface; ② temperature distribution of the gas flow; ③ distribution of the gas flow (distribution of CO and CO According to the principle of heat transfer, there are three basic methods of heat transfer, namely conduction, convection and radiation. The heat of the burden surface comes from forced convection, conduction and radiation. ① Forced convection is performed by the gas flow. According to the metallurgical principles of blast furnace, the gas flow, driven by the bottom blower, passes the heat generated by the furnace upward until the heat leaves the whole burden layer from the surface. ② Conduction occurs between the burden layers. The burden surface continues to receive the heat from the lower layers. ③ Radiation occurs between the burden surface and the wall of furnace throat. Since the burden surface is hotter than the furnace wall, the radiation direction is from the burden surface to the furnace wall. The influence of this radiation on the burden surface temperature can be ignored. When the balance is reached, there shall not be heat transfer in the gas flow from the burden surface and the corresponding spot. Therefore, under a balanced state, it can be deemed that the burden surface temperature is equal to the temperature of the gas flow from the corresponding spot. The grayscale images captured by the infrared camera on the blast furnace top store the temperature information of burden surface in the form of pixel grayscale. The pixel grayscale value will be larger (i.e. brightness is higher) at the spot with higher burden surface temperature. Therefore, the gas flow temperature will also be higher, and vice versa. According to the analysis of BF production process, the further the gas flow is evolved, the higher the gas flow temperature is, the higher the CO content and the lower the CO The infrared images can not only reflect the temperature field inside the furnace, but also indirectly reflect the shape information. According to the analysis of BF production process, the temperature information is the gas distribution information. According to the experience of BF operation, the gas flow distribution is determined by the pattern of the burden distribution inside the furnace. Therefore, the infrared images directly reflect the temperature distribution on the burden surface; temperature distribution of the gas flow; distribution of the gas flow (distribution of CO and CO Second, the infrared images referenced in the paper do not include the images captured during the burden distribution. The explanation is as follows:  Finally, the gas flow, gas flow development trend and gas flow development processes are all continuous and dynamic processes during BF production and can be seen in the video captured by the infrared camera. The gas flow distribution is reflected by the static infrared image at a certain moment. However, the gas flow mentioned in the paper include the burden distribution process, and the gas flow development and the gas flow distribution do not include the burden distribution process. It can be known from the validation section of the above-mentioned burden distribution model that the theoretical shape of the burden surface is close to the actual shape of the burden surface in this paper. Therefore, in the following discussion section, we will discuss the influence of the theoretical shape of the burden surface on the infrared images (gas flow distribution). In order for the infrared images to reflect the gas flow distribution accurately, this paper extracts the infrared images from the infrared video and then processes the infrared images. An infrared image acquisition model is established based on software decoding. The infrared video data is acquired for Baotou Steel's 2500 m A mean filtering model with time scale based on image recognition. Since the video images acquired are large in quantity (a month-long video contains 64,800,000 frames) and complex with noises, it is necessary to overlay and filter the images. In order to keep the consistency of the images, the 25 frames from the same second are overlaid by image recognition to produce a single image, so that mean filtering with time scale can be achieved as shown in In the actual operation of blast furnace, in order to reduce the wear of the hoppers and reduce the surface segregation, the ore hopper and the coke hopper need to be swapped on a regular basis. Reloading operation refers to the operation with coke in the left hopper and ore in the right hopper. Discharging operation refers to the operation with ore in the left hopper and coke in the right hopper. According to the charging programs (      During the BF production process, discharging distribution can reduce the burden segregation to a certain extent but cannot completely solve the center offset of burden surface and the "snakelike" segregation caused by the tangential Coriolis force. Therefore, the following improvement measures are presented: Add a center discharge valve between the Y tube and the centering tube to effectively solve the center offset of burden surface and the "snakelike" segregation, as shown in A mathematical model for burden distribution in blast furnace with parallel hoppers, which is a hybrid model integrating a collision model calculating the energy dissipation coefficient of particles by simulation, hydrodynamic model, 3D collision trajectory, Coriolis force model and drag force model, is validated with test data of actual blast furnace with parallel hoppers before blowing-in and scene photos of the worn chute. The model is validated with model and drag force model, is validated with test data of actual blast furnace with parallel hoppers (such as burden impact point and worn chute). The results show that the model predicts the radius of impact point with a high accuracy and the predictions agrees with the actual BF operation and field situation. The model is able to provide real-time guidance for BF burden distribution. Different gas flow profiles are formed at different development stages after the burden distribution is finished. During the "initial stage" which accounts for 30% of the total time of gas flow development, the development of gas flow is mainly influenced by the burden surface of ore. During the "intermediate stage" which accounts for 40% of the total time, the development of gas flow is influenced by both the burden surface of ore and the burden surface of coke. During the "late stage" which accounts for 30% of the total time, the development of gas flow is mainly influenced by the burden surface of coke. The main reason causing the "snakelike" segregation in the burden surface of bell-less top with parallel hoppers is: the three-dimensional collision trajectory caused a significant change in the Coriolis acceleration of the burden flow under different rotation angles of the chute (the range in total Coriolis acceleration for chute inclination angle of 42.5° is 1.36–3.01